PALO ALTO MUNICIPAL CODE
Supp. No. 76 - 2025 contains:
Local legislation current through Ordinance No. 5681 passed October 20, 2025,
effective November 20, 2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
(800) 445-5588
www.amlegal.com
CHARTER
OF THE
CITY OF PALO ALTO
COUNTY OF SANTA CLARA
STATE OF CALIFORNIA
   Incorporated April 23, 1894
1950 Charter
   Adopted by Stats. 1950, Ch. 7
   As Amended
      Stats. 1909, p. 1175
   Amended:
      Stats. 1911, p. 2040
      Stats. 1917, p. 1859
      Stats. 1921, p. 2167
      Stats. 1933, p. 2746
      Stats. 1950, Ch. 7
      Stats. 1951, Ch. 40
      Stats. 1961, Ch. 190
      Stats. 1965, Ch. 25, ACR 20
      Stats. 1965, Ch. 136, ACR 161
      Stats. 1967, Ch. 103, ACR 106
      Stats. 1968, Ch. 163, ACR 143
      Stats. 1969, Ch. 223, ACR 192
      Stats. 1972, Ch. 71, ACR 117
      Filed with Secretary of State, July 1, 1976
      Filed with Secretary of State, November 26, 1976
      Filed with Secretary of State, July 17, 1978
      Filed with Secretary of State, May 30, 1979
      Filed with Secretary of State, December 12, 1979
      Filed with Secretary of State, December 10, 1982
      Filed with Secretary of State, December 9, 1983
   Note: This is the 1950 Charter adopted by Stats. 1950, Ch. 7. All changes
since 1950 are indicated. Catchlines have been supplied as the original had no
catchlines.
   OFFICE OF THE CITY ATTORNEY
   August 2, 1965
   CHARTER
   OF THE
   CITY OF PALO ALTO
Article I. Boundaries of the City
   The boundaries of the city of Palo Alto shall contain that territory within
its present borders. The territory embraced therein may be added to or
diminished in accordance with the laws of the state of California governing the
annexation and exclusion of territory by municipalities.
Article II. Powers
   The city of Palo Alto, by and through its council and other officials, shall
have and may exercise all powers necessary and appropriate to a municipal
corporation and the general welfare of its inhabitants which are not prohibited
by the Constitution of the State of California or by this charter, and which it
would be competent for this charter to set forth specifically, and the
specification herein of any particular powers shall not be held to be exclusive
of, or any limitation upon, the general grant of powers heretofore or hereafter
granted to municipal corporations by the Constitution or general laws.
Article III. Council
Sec. 1.   Powers.
   All powers herein granted to and vested in the city of Palo Alto shall,
except as herein otherwise provided, be exercised by a council to be designated
the council of the city of Palo Alto; and said council shall, except as herein
otherwise provided, have the power to fix and establish the method and manner
in which such powers shall be exercised.
Sec. 2.   Number - Term.
   Commencing January 1, 2019, said council shall be composed of seven members,
each of whom shall be an elector and shall have been a resident of the city of
Palo Alto for at least thirty days next preceding the final filing date for
nomination papers for such office. The members of said council shall be known
as councilmen, councilwomen, or council members and their terms of office shall
be four years, commencing on the first day of January next succeeding their
election. The terms of council members who took office on July 1, 1977, shall
expire on December 31, 1981. Commencing January 1, 1992, no person shall be
eligible to serve consecutively in more than two full terms of office as a
member of the council. Any partial term of office longer than two years shall
be deemed a full term. Terms of office commenced before January 1, 1992, shall
not be counted when determining eligibility under this section.
(Amended by Stats. 1965, ACR No. 20 and by Stats. 1965, ACR No. 161 and by
Stats. 1972, Ch. 71, 7-7-72, and by amendment filed with Secretary of State,
July 1, 1976 and by amendment filed with Secretary of State, December 12, 1979
and by amendment filed with the Secretary of State, January 21, 1992, and
amendment passed by electorate November 4, 2014)
Sec. 3.   Time of election.
   A regular election shall be held in the city of Palo Alto on the first
Tuesday after the first Monday in November of each even-numbered year,
commencing with the year 2012, and the same shall be known as the general
municipal election. All other municipal elections that may be called under the
authority of this charter, or by the general laws, shall be known as special
elections.
   Notwithstanding four-year city council member term limit set forth in
Article III, section 2 of this charter, any city council members whose term of
office would have expired prior to 2012 shall continue in their offices until
December 31, 2012 or until their successors are elected and qualified.
   Notwithstanding four-year city council member term limit set forth in
Article III, section 2 of this charter, any city council members whose term of
office would have expired prior to 2014 shall continue in their offices until
December 31, 2014, or their successors are elected and qualified.
(Amendment filed with Secretary of State, December 12, 1979 and amendment
passed by electorate November 2, 2010)
Sec. 4.   Elections.
   All elections called and held in said city shall be held and conducted in
manner and form as required by the general laws of the state governing
elections within municipalities, provided that the council may by ordinance
determine the manner of holding elections, the number of voting precincts, the
naming of election officers, and shall act as a canvassing board to canvass the
results of such elections.
Sec. 5.   Council to fix time and place of meetings.
   Said council shall fix a time and place for its regular meetings and may
adopt rules to govern its proceedings.
Sec. 6.   Quorum - Absent members - Fines.
   A majority of the council shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of
business; but a less number may adjourn from time to time and compel the
attendance of absent members, and impose such fines as it may deem proper upon
members refusing or neglecting to attend such meetings.
(Amended by Stats. 1965, ACR No. 20)
Sec. 7.   Majority vote necessary.
   No ordinance or resolution shall be passed, no appointment made, no officer
removed, and no contract shall be awarded without the affirmative vote of a
majority of the council.
(Amended by Stats. 1965, ACR No. 20)
Sec. 8.   Mayor - Election - Duties.
   The council shall, at its first meeting in January, elect one of its number
as its presiding officer, who shall have the title of mayor, and one of its
number to be vice-mayor, who shall serve for one year after their election, and
until their successors are elected and qualified. The mayor and vice-mayor
shall serve until election and qualification of their successors. The mayor
shall preside at all meetings of the council, shall sign all official documents
when the signature of the council or mayor is required by law, and shall act as
official head of the city on public or ceremonial occasions. The mayor shall
not have any regular administrative duties but may act as ex officio member of
all boards, commissions, and committees. The mayor shall vote as other members
of the council, but shall have no power of veto. The mayor shall have the power
to administer the oaths and affirmations. The mayor shall perform such other
duties as from time to time are assigned by the council. When the mayor is
absent from any meeting of the council or incapable of performing his or her
duties, the vice-mayor shall, during such time, have the full powers of the
mayor. A vacancy in the positions of mayor or vice-mayor shall be filled by the
council for the unexpired term.
(Amended by Stats. 1972, Ch. 71, 7-7-72 and by amendment filed with Secretary
of State, December 12, 1979 and by amendment filed with the Secretary of State,
January 21, 1992)
Sec. 9.   Officers appointed by council - Boards, committees, and commissions.
   The council shall appoint a city manager, clerk, attorney, and auditor, and,
except as otherwise provided, may by ordinance or otherwise create or abolish
offices, boards, committees, or commissions, and provide for their manner of
appointment, their tenure, and the duties which they shall perform.
(Amended by Stats. 1965, Ch. 25, 2-19-65 and by Stats. 1968, Ch. 163, 7-8-68
and by Stats. 1972, Ch. 71, 7-7-72 and by amendment filed with the Secretary of
State, December 9, 1983)
Sec. 10.   Vacancy on council.
   A vacancy on the council may be filled by a majority of the remaining
members of the council, and the appointee shall hold office until the first day
of January succeeding the next election at which council members are to be
elected. At the next election succeeding any vacancy a council member shall be
elected to serve for the unexpired term. If the council fails to fill such
vacancy within 60 days of such vacancy or the council chooses to fill such
vacancy by election, it shall forthwith call a special election, at which a
council member shall be elected to serve for the unexpired term.
(Amended by Stats. 1972, Ch. 71, 7-7-72 and by amendment filed with the
Secretary of State, December 12, 1979)
Sec. 11.   Levy of taxes - Rate - Increase in levy.
   The council shall by ordinance provide for the assessment of city property
for city taxes, the equalization and correction of the assessment, the
collection, payment and enforcement of the taxes, including delinquent taxes,
and the redemption of property from sale or other penalty for nonpayment of
city taxes. On or before September first in each year, it shall levy such tax
as may be necessary to raise revenue for the maintenance and operation of the
city and the several departments during the fiscal year, but such tax levy for
all municipal purposes, except for the payment of interest and principal of the
bonded debt and the contribution of the city to employees' retirement, shall
not exceed the sum of one hundred twenty-five cents upon each one hundred
dollars of assessed valuation as the same appears upon the assessment roll. If
in the judgment of a majority of the council it should be necessary to provide
a revenue in excess of the sum realized from the levy herein provided, the
question of the levy of an additional property tax shall be submitted to the
electors, and a special election may be held for that purpose. The additional
sum or rate required to be raised by such additional tax levy shall be
expressed upon the ballot. If a majority of the votes cast upon such
proposition shall be in favor of authorizing the council to levy such
additional rate, then the council may levy the additional tax so authorized for
one fiscal year only.
(Amended by Stats. 1968, Ch. 163, 7-8-68)
Sec. 12.   Budget contents - Transfer of funds.
   It shall be the duty of the council, upon the recommendation of the city
manager, to consider and, after a public hearing, adopt a budget for each
fiscal year. After the adoption of a budget, transfers of appropriations from
one department to another may be made only by a majority vote of the council.
This budget shall include the estimated receipts and expenditures of all public
funds, except those which are trust funds, from whatever source they are
derived. All expenditures made on behalf of the city, directly or through any
agency, except those required to be made by state law, must be made in
accordance with the authorization contained in the appropriation ordinance. The
form in which this budget is adopted shall determine the method to be followed
in all accounting by all representatives and administrative agents of the city.
The council shall set all salary and wage scales, determine the procedure for
the payment of all demands against the city, and the duties of the city's
several officers in respect thereto. Additional appropriations of receipts in
excess of the total appropriations made by the budget may be made by a two-
thirds vote of the council.
Sec. 13.   Council to establish utility rates.
   The council shall establish rates for all revenue producing utilities owned,
controlled, or operated by the city.
Sec. 14.   Ordaining clause.
   The ordaining clause of all ordinances adopted by the council shall be, "The
council of the city of Palo Alto does ordain as follows," and the ordaining
clause of all ordinances adopted in accordance with the provisions of Article
VI shall be, "The people of the city of Palo Alto do ordain as follows."
Sec. 15.   Franchises granted by electors - Exception, term.
   Except for any franchise or franchises which the city council may grant for
the provision of cable television services, no other franchise for any other
purpose shall be granted by the council, but may be granted by the electors by
ordinances proposed and adopted as provided in Section 2 of Article VI of this
charter, provided that the petition therefor shall be signed by qualified and
registered voters equal in number to at least twelve percentum of the number of
registered voters at the last preceding general municipal election; and
provided further, that no franchise shall be granted for a longer term than
twenty-five years.
(Amended by Stats. 1969, Ch. 223, 6-26-69 and by amendment filed with the
Secretary of State, December 9, 1983)
Sec. 16.   Annual report.
   The council shall publish annually a financial report of the city which
shall be available to taxpayers.
Sec. 17.   Salary of council members - Council members barred from other city
office.
   No member of the council shall hold any other office or employment the
compensation for which is paid out of the moneys of this city. No member of the
council shall be elected or appointed to any city office for which compensation
is paid until one year after the termination of membership in the council,
either by resignation or expiration of such council member's term. Compensation
may be paid council members in amounts not to exceed those provided by general
law.
(Amended by Stats. 1969, Ch. 223, 6-26-69 and by Stats. 1972, Ch. 71, 7-7-72)
Sec. 18.   Administrative code - Contents.
   Within six months after the adoption of this amended charter, the council
shall adopt by ordinance an administrative code providing for a complete plan
of administrative organization of the city government, which will cover all
matters concerning the powers, duties, term of office, procedure of all the
officers, boards and commissions and employees of the city; provided however,
that the provisions of said code shall not be in conflict with any of the
provisions of this charter. This administrative code will cover all rules and
regulations relating to fiscal operations, personnel management, election
procedure, and other matters concerning the operation of the functions of the
city government.
Sec. 19.   Contract with state retirement system.
   The council is empowered to enter into a contract with the Board of
Administration of the California State Employees' Retirement System, making the
employees of the city members of said system, and for this purpose may levy a
tax sufficient to pay costs and expenses of the share which the city must
contribute to maintain employee participation. It is provided, however, that
the council may terminate this contract only upon authority granted by an
ordinance adopted by a majority vote of the electors of the city voting on such
a proposition at an election at which such proposition to discontinue the
contract is presented.
Sec. 20.   Assignment of officers' duties.
   The council may, by ordinance, assign additional duties and powers to
officers, departments, commissions, and boards provided in this charter, or may
reassign functions from one office to another, or may combine in one office the
powers and duties of another office, provided that the offices of city manager
and auditor may not be combined and that an office to which the manager makes
the appointment shall not be combined with one to which the appointment is made
by the council.
(Amended by amendment filed with the Secretary of State, December 9, 1983)
Sec. 21.   Bonds - Deputies and assistants.
   The council may require any of the city officers and deputies to give
official bonds in such sums as it may deem proper, and the city shall pay all
premiums upon surety bonds when such bonds are given. It may provide for the
appointment of such deputies and assistants as may be required, and shall fix
the compensation of such officers, deputies, and assistants in the annual
appropriation ordinance. All officers shall perform such services as the
council may require.
Sec. 22.   Board of compensation referees - Cable television board - Other
boards advisory only.
   The council may appoint a board of compensation referees to act upon all
claims against the city arising under the workmen's compensation provisions of
the Labor Code of the State of California. The council may also appoint an
independent board or boards for cable television matters. All other boards,
commissions, and committees appointed by the council or by any officer of the
city under the provisions of this charter or under any ordinance adopted by the
council shall be advisory only and shall exercise no governmental or
administrative powers.
(Amended by amendment filed with the Secretary of State, December 9, 1983)
Sec. 23.   Continuation of government - Disaster.
   The council may by ordinance or resolution, provide for the preservation and
continuation of government in the event of disaster which renders unavailable a
majority of the council.
(Amended by Stats. 1961, Ch. 190, 6-7-61)
Article IV. Duties of Officers
Sec. 1.   Council appointed officers.
   The council shall appoint the city manager, clerk, attorney and auditor, who
shall serve at its pleasure.
(Amended by Stats. 1965, Ch. 25, 2-19-65 and by Stats. 1968, Ch. 163, 7-8-68
and by amendment filed with the Secretary of State, December 9, 1983)
Sec. 2.   Qualifications of city manager.
   The city manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the city and
shall be chosen without regard to political consideration and solely with
reference to executive and administrative qualifications. The city manager
shall be a citizen of the United States, but need not be a resident of the
state of California or of the city at the time of appointment, but promptly
thereafter shall become and thereafter remain, during his or her incumbency, an
actual resident of the city. Members of the council shall not be eligible to
hold the position of city manager during their terms of office or for one year
after.
(Amended by amendment filed with the Secretary of State, January 21, 1992)
Sec. 3.   Appointment and removal of city manager.
   The city manager shall be appointed for an indefinite term by a majority
vote of the council, and may be removed by resolution at the pleasure of the
council, by a two-thirds vote thereof. Before being removed, the city manager
shall upon demand be given a written statement of the reasons for removal and
the right to be heard publicly thereon at a meeting of the council prior to the
final vote on the removal resolution, but pending and during such hearing the
council may suspend him or her from office. The action of the council in
suspending or removing the city manager shall be final and conclusive. Upon any
vacancy occurring in the office of the city manager subsequent to the first
appointment hereunder, the council shall, without delay, adopt a resolution of
its intention to appoint a city manager, which resolution shall be published
once in the official newspaper of the city. No appointment shall be made in
less than thirty days after such publications. This provision, however, shall
not affect the appointment of a city manager pro tem as herein provided.
(Amended by amendment filed with the Secretary of State, January 21, 1992)
Sec. 4.   Bond of city manager.
   The city manager shall, before taking office, file with the city clerk an
official bond, payable to the city, for the faithful performance of duty. The
amount of this bond shall be fixed by the council and shall be not less than
five thousand dollars, the premium for which shall be paid by the city.
(Amended by amendment filed with the Secretary of State, January 21, 1992)
Sec. 5.   Salary of city manager.
   The city manager shall be paid a salary commensurate with the duties and
responsibilities of the chief administrative officer of the city.
(Amended by amendment filed with the Secretary of State, January 21, 1992)
Sec. 6.   Duties of city manager.
   It shall be the duty of the city manager to:
   (a)   Devote his entire time to the discharge of the duties of the office.
   (b)   See that all ordinances are enforced.
   (c)   Appoint all officers, heads of departments and employees of the
departments under his or her control, and remove the same for cause, and have
general supervision and control over the same, subject to rules and regulations
established by the council for a merit system of appointments and promotions;
provided, however, that the appointment of all officers and heads of
departments shall be subject to the approval of the council. The city manager
may, with the approval of the council, act as head or assume the executive
position of any department of the city under his or her control for which he or
she is qualified by training and experience.
   (d)   Attend all meetings of the council unless excused therefrom by the
council.
   (e)   Act as ex officio member of all boards and commissions.
   (f)   Keep the council advised on the needs of the city.
   (g)   Prepare and submit to the council an annual budget estimate for all
departments reporting to the city manager, together with the budget estimates
prepared by the heads of the several other departments, and such reports as the
council may require, including the annual reports of all departments of the
city.
   (h)   Prepare, or cause to be prepared, plans and specifications for work
the council may order; and to provide such plans and specifications in
sufficient number and in ample time to give full opportunity for all
contractors who desire to bid thereon to do so.
   (i)   To have general control of all public utilities owned or operated by
the city.
   (j)   Exercise general supervision over all privately owned utilities
operated within the city so far as the same are subject to municipal control.
   (k)   See that the provisions of all franchises, leases, contracts, permits,
and privileges, granted by the city, are fully observed, and to report to the
council any violation thereof.
   (l)   Have general supervision over all city property and equipment and its
use for the public or by city employees.
   (m)   Coordinate the work of personnel administration in the departments
under his or her control, subject to the rules and regulations of the council
for the establishment and operation of a merit system.
   (n)   From time to time, in order to facilitate the prompt, economical, and
efficient dispatch of city business, the city manager may organize the work of
the departments under his or her control, assign assistants, deputies, and
employees from any office or department of the city government under his or her
control to perform work or service in connection with any other offices or
department thereof, or to work in more than one of said offices or departments.
   (o)   Examine, or cause to be examined, without notice, the official conduct
of any officer, assistant, deputy, or employee in any of the departments of the
city government, except of the council or the officers appointed by it.
   (p)   Coordinate the purchase for all departments of the city. No purchase
shall be made without the approval of the city manager.
   (q)   Appoint committees deemed desirable to advise and assist him or her,
provided the members of such committees shall serve without compensation.
   (r)   Perform such other duties as may be required by this charter or as the
council may require.
(Amended by Stats. 1969, Ch. 223, 6-26-69 and by amendment filed with the
Secretary of State, December 9, 1983 and by amendment filed with the Secretary
of State, January 21, 1992)
Sec. 7.   City manager right of discussion - No vote.
   The city manager and such other officers of the city as may be designated by
vote of the council, shall be entitled to seats with the council, but shall
have no vote therein. The city manager shall have the right to take part in the
discussion of all matters coming before the council.
Sec. 8.   Assistant city manager.
   The council may provide for the appointment of an assistant city manager. In
such case he or she shall be appointed by the city manager with the approval of
the council and shall be under the supervision and direction of the city
manager.
(Amended by amendment filed with the Secretary of State, January 21, 1992)
Sec. 9.   City manager pro tem.
   In the absence or temporary disability of the city manager and the assistant
city manager, if one is appointed, the council shall appoint a city manager pro
tem who shall possess the powers and discharge the duties of the city manager
during such absence or disability; provided, however, that a city manager pro
tem shall have no authority to appoint or remove any city officer or employee
except with the two-thirds vote of the council, or as provided in the
administrative code.
(Amended by amendment filed with the Secretary of State, January 21, 1992)
Sec. 10.   Coercion by council members - Campaign funds.
   No member of the council shall in any manner, directly or indirectly, by
suggestion or otherwise, attempt to influence or coerce the city manager in the
making of any appointment or removal, or in the purchase of supplies, or
attempt to exact any promise relative to any appointment from any candidate for
city manager, or discuss, directly or indirectly, with any such candidate, the
matter of appointments to any city office or employment. Any violation of the
foregoing provisions of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall
work a forfeiture of the office of the offending member of the council, who may
be removed therefrom by the council or by any court of competent jurisdiction.
Neither the city manager nor any person in the employ of the city shall take
part in securing or shall contribute any money toward the nomination or
election of any candidate for a municipal office.
(Amended by Stats. 1972, Ch. 71, 7-7-72)
Sec. 11.   Manager's kin disqualified.
   No person related to the city manager by consanguinity or affinity within
the third degree shall hold any appointive office or employment with the city.
Sec. 12.   Duties of appointive officers.
   The duties of the city clerk and attorney shall be those normally exercised
by such officers as provided in this charter and in the administrative code.
   It shall be the duty of the city auditor to ensure that the city departments
and officers responsible for accounting and financial management activities
comply with statutory requirements and accounting standards. It shall be the
duty of the auditor to conduct internal audits of all the fiscal transactions
of the city including, but not limited to, the examination and analysis of
fiscal procedures and the examination, checking, and verification of accounts
and expenditures; and the city auditor shall provide other analyses of
financial and operating data as directed by the city council. The city auditor
shall conduct internal audits in accordance with a schedule approved by the
city council and may conduct unscheduled audits from time to time. The results
of these audits shall be reported in writing to the city council and the city
manager. In addition, the auditor shall have such other duties as the council
may by ordinance direct.
(Amended by Stats. 1968, Ch. 163, 7-8-68 and by amendment filed with the
Secretary of State, December 9, 1983)
Sec. 13.   Audits.
   In addition to the audits conducted by the city auditor, the city council
shall engage an independent certified public accounting firm to conduct an
annual external audit and report the results of this audit in writing to the
city council. The city auditor shall coordinate the annual external audit.
(Amended by amendment filed with the Secretary of State, December 9, 1983)
Article V. Compulsory Arbitration for Fire and Police Department Employee
Disputes
Sec. 1.   Declaration of policy.
   It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city of Palo Alto that strikes
by firefighters and police officers are not in the public interest and should
be prohibited, and that a method should be adopted for peacefully and equitably
resolving disputes that might otherwise lead to such strikes.
Sec. 2.   Prohibition against strikes.
   If any firefighter or peace officer employed by the city of Palo Alto
wilfully engages in a strike against the city, said employee shall be dismissed
from his or her employment and may not be reinstated or returned to city
employment except as a new employee. No officer, board, council or commission
shall have the power to grant amnesty to any employee charged with engaging in
a strike against the city.
Sec. 3.   Obligation to negotiate in good faith.
   The city, through its duly authorized representatives, shall negotiate in
good faith with the recognized fire and police department employee
organizations on all matters relating to the wages, hours, and other terms and
conditions of city employment, including the establishment of procedures for
the resolution of grievances submitted by either employee organization over the
interpretation or application of any negotiated agreement including a provision
for binding arbitration of those grievances. Unless and until agreement is
reached through negotiations between the city and the recognized employee
organization for the fire or police department or a determination is made
through the arbitration procedure hereinafter provided, no existing benefit or
condition of employment for the members of the fire department or police
department bargaining unit shall be eliminated or changed.
Sec. 4.   Impasse resolution procedures.
   All disputes or controversies pertaining to wages, hours, or terms and
conditions of employment which remain unresolved after good faith negotiations
between the city and either the fire or police department employee organization
shall be submitted to a three- member board of arbitrators upon the declaration
of an impasse by the city or by the recognized employee organization involved
in the dispute.
   Representatives designated by the city and representatives of the recognized
employee organization involved in the dispute, controversy or grievance shall
each select one arbitrator to the board of arbitrators within three days after
either party has notified the other, in writing, that it desires to proceed to
arbitration. The third member of the arbitration board shall be selected by
agreement between the two arbitrators selected by the city and the employee
organization, and shall serve as the neutral arbitrator and chairman of the
board. In the event that the arbitrators selected by the city and the employee
organization cannot agree upon the selection of the third arbitrator within ten
days from the date that either party has notified the other that it has
declared an impasse, then either party may request the State of California
Conciliation Service to provide a list of seven persons who are qualified and
experienced as labor arbitrators. If the arbitrators selected by the city and
the employee organization cannot agree within three days after receipt of such
list on one of seven to act as the third arbitrator, they shall alternately
strike names from the list of nominees until only one name remains and that
person shall then become the third arbitrator and chairman of the arbitration
board.
   Any arbitration convened pursuant to this article shall be conducted in
conformance with, subject to, and governed by Title 9 of Part 3 of the
California Code of Civil Procedure.
   At the conclusion of the arbitration hearings, the arbitration board shall
direct each of the parties to submit, within such time limit as the board may
establish, a last offer of settlement on each of the issues in dispute. The
arbitration board shall decide each issue by majority vote by selecting
whichever last offer of settlement on that issue it finds most nearly conforms
with those factors traditionally taken into consideration in the determination
of wages, hours, and other terms and conditions of public and private
employment, including, but not limited to, changes in the average consumer
price index for goods and services, the wages, hours, and other terms and
conditions of employment of other employees performing similar services, and
the financial condition of the city and its ability to meet the cost of the
award.
   After reaching a decision, the arbitration board shall mail or otherwise
deliver a true copy of its decision to the parties. The decision of the
arbitration board shall not be publicly disclosed and shall not be binding
until ten days after it is delivered to the parties. During that ten-day period
the parties may meet privately, attempt to resolve their differences, and by
mutual agreement amend or modify any of the decisions of the arbitration board.
At the conclusion of the ten-day period, which may be extended by mutual
agreement between the parties, the decision of the arbitration board together
with any amendments or modifications agreed to by the parties shall be publicly
disclosed and shall be binding upon the parties. The city and the recognized
employee organization shall take whatever action is necessary to carry out and
effectuate the award.
   The expense of any arbitration convened pursuant to this article, including
the fee for the services of the chairman of the arbitration board, shall be
borne equally by the parties. All other expenses which the parties may incur
individually are to be borne by the party incurring such expenses.
(Added by amendment filed with the city clerk, July 17, 1978)
Article VI. The Recall, Initiative and Referendum
Sec. 1.   Recall.
   Proceedings may be commenced for recall of any council member by the
service, filing and publication of a notice of intention to circulate a recall
petition. Proceedings may not be commenced unless, at the time of commencement,
such council member has held office for at least six months and no recall
petition has been filed against such council member within the preceding six
months.
   The petition demanding the recall of the council member sought to be
recalled, signed by registered voters equal in number to at least twelve
percentum of the number of registered voters at the last general municipal
election, shall be filed with the clerk. One election is sufficient for the
recall of one or more council members, but a separate petition is necessary to
propose the recall of each council member.
   No signature may be affixed to the petition until the proponents have
served, filed and published a notice of intention to circulate a recall
petition, containing the name of the council member sought to be recalled, a
statement in not more than five hundred words of the grounds on which the
recall is sought, and the name and address of at least one proponent. The
notice of intention shall be served, personally or by certified mail, on the
council member sought to be recalled, and a copy thereof with a certificate of
the time and manner of service shall be filed with the clerk. A separate notice
of intention shall be filed for each council member sought to be recalled.
   Within seven days after the filing of the notice of intention, the council
member sought to be recalled may file with the clerk an answer in not more than
five hundred words to the statement of the proponents and, if an answer is
filed, shall serve a copy thereof, personally or by certified mail, on one of
the proponents named in the notice of intention. The statement and answer are
intended solely for the information of the voters and no insufficiency in the
form or substance thereof shall affect the validity of the election or
proceedings. The notice, statement and answer, if any, shall then be published
in a newspaper of general circulation by the city clerk.
   No signature may be affixed to a recall petition until the county registrar
of voters has received two blank copies of the petition and has advised the
proponents in writing that the form and wording are in order.
   Seven days after the publication of the notice, statement and answer, if
any, by the city clerk and provided all the requirements of this section re
Notice of Intention, answers, and form of petition have been met, the recall
petition may be circulated and signed. The petition shall bear a copy of the
notice of intention, statement and answer, if any. If the council member has
not answered, the petition shall so state. Signatures shall be secured and the
petition filed within ninety days from the filing of the notice of intention.
If such petition is not filed within the time permitted by this section, the
same shall be void for all purposes.
   The signatures to the petition need not all be appended to one paper, but
said petition may be presented in sections. The number of signatures to each
section shall be at the pleasure of the person soliciting signatures to the
same. Any qualified voter of the municipality shall be competent to solicit
said signatures. Unless and until it be proven otherwise by official
investigation, it shall be presumed that the petition presented contains the
signatures of the requisite number of qualified voters. Each signer of said
petition shall at the time of signing the petition include his printed name and
his place of residence, giving street and number, and if no street or number
exists, then a designation of his place of residence which will enable the
location to be readily ascertained and the name of the city. A place at least
one-inch wide shall be left blank after each name for the use of the clerk in
verifying the petition.
   Each section of the petition shall have attached to it a declaration signed
by the circulator of that section of the petition, setting forth all of the
following:
   (a)   The printed name of the circulator.
   (b)   The residence address of the circulator, giving street and number, or
if no street or number exists, adequate designation of residence so that the
location may be readily ascertained.
   (c)   That the circulator circulated that section and saw the appended
signatures being written.
   (d)   That according to the best information and belief of the circulator,
each signature is the genuine signature of the person whose name it purports to
be.
   (e)   That the circulator is a registered voter of the electoral
jurisdiction of the officer sought to be recalled.
   (f)   The dates between which all the signatures to the petition were
obtained.
   (g)   The circulator shall certify to the content of the declaration as to
its truth and correctness, under penalty of perjury, with the signature of his
name at length, including given name, middle name or initial, or initial and
middle name. The circulator shall date the declaration immediately following
his signature.
   Within fifteen business days from the date of filing such petition, the
clerk shall examine and ascertain from the records of registration whether or
not said petition is signed by the requisite number of electors entitled to
vote, and if necessary the council shall allow the clerk extra help for that
purpose, and the clerk shall attach to said petition his certificate showing
the result of said examination. If, by the said certificate, the petition is
shown to be insufficient, it may be amended by additional signatures within ten
days from the date of said certificate. The clerk shall, within fifteen
business days after such amendment, make like examination of the amended
petition, and if his certificate shall show the same to be insufficient, it
shall be returned to the person filing the same, without prejudice, however, to
the filing of a new petition to the same effect.
   If the petition shall be found to be sufficient, the clerk shall submit the
same to the council without delay, and the council shall thereupon order and
fix a date for holding the said election within the time set by the general
laws of the state of California. Candidates for this election shall file with
the city clerk within the nomination period set by the general laws of the
state of California.
   At least ten days prior to the recall election, the clerk shall mail to each
voter a sample ballot and a separate printed copy of the statement of the
proponents and of the answer, if any, of the council member sought to be
recalled. If the recall of more than one council member is sought, the
statement and answer for each shall be printed together and shall be clearly
distinguished from those of any other council member.
   There shall be printed on the recall ballot, as to each council member whose
recall is to be voted on, the question: "Shall (name of person) be recalled
from the office of council member?" followed by the words "yes" and "no." If a
majority of those voting on any question voted in favor of the removal of an
incumbent, such incumbent shall be deemed removed from office upon the
qualification of the successor.
   On the recall ballot, under each question, there shall be printed the names
of those persons who have been nominated in the manner provided herein as
candidates to succeed the incumbent if such incumbent is recalled. No vote cast
shall be counted for any candidate for the office unless the voter also voted
on the question of the recall of the person sought to be recalled from that
office. The name of the person against whom the petition is filed shall not
appear on the ballot as a candidate for the office. If the vote recalls the
council member, the candidate who has received the highest number of votes for
the office shall be declared elected for the unexpired term of the former
incumbent. If the person who received the highest number of votes fails to
qualify within ten days after receiving the certificate of election the office
shall become vacant. Said election shall be conducted, returned, and the
results thereof declared, in all respects as are all other municipal elections;
provided, that if there be any conflict of provisions this charter shall
control.
Sec. 2.   Initiative.
   Any proposed ordinance may be submitted to the council by a petition signed
by qualified and registered electors of the city equal in number to the
percentage hereinafter required. The petition shall set forth a copy of the
proposed ordinance.
   An initiative petition, in order to be valid, must meet the following
requirements:
   (a)   A notice of intention to circulate an initiative petition must be
published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city once prior to the
affixing of any signature to any petition and shall be substantially in the
following form:
   Notice of Intent to Circulate Initiative Petition
   Notice is hereby given of the intention of the persons whose names appear
hereon to circulate an initiative petition within the city of Palo Alto for the
purpose of ________. A statement of the reasons of the proposed action as
contemplated in said petition is as follows:
   (b)   A copy of the notice of intention, together with an affidavit of
publication, shall be filed with the clerk prior to the affixing of any
signature to any petition.
   (c)   Immediately after the publication and filing of the notice of
intention to circulate, the initiative petition may be circulated and filed.
   The signatures to the petition need not all be appended to one paper, but
said petition may be presented in sections. Each section of the petition shall
contain a copy of the notice of intention to circulate and a copy of the
proposed ordinance. The number of signatures to each section shall be at the
pleasure of the person soliciting signatures to the same. Any qualified voter
of the municipality shall be competent to solicit said signatures. Unless and
until it be proven otherwise by official investigation, it shall be presumed
that the petition presented contains the signatures of the requisite number of
qualified voters.
   Each signer of said petition shall at the time of signing the petition
include his printed name and place of residence, giving street and number, and
if no street or number exists, then a designation of his place of residence
which will enable the location to be readily ascertained and the name of the
city. A place of at least one-inch wide shall be left blank after each name for
the use of the clerk in verifying the petition.
   In addition to the requirements specified above, each section shall have
attached thereto the affidavit of the person soliciting the signatures stating:
   (1)   The name and address of the circulator and a statement that he or she
is a qualified registered voter.
   (2)   That all the signatures affixed to the section were made in his or her
presence.
   (3)   That to the best of his or her knowledge and belief, each signature is
the genuine signature of the person whose name it purports to be.
   (4)   The dates between which all signatures were obtained.
   (5)   The signature of the circulator. No other affidavit thereto shall be
required.
   Within fifteen business days from the date of filing such petition, the
clerk shall examine and ascertain from the records of registration whether or
not said petition is signed by the requisite number of electors entitled to
vote, and if necessary the council shall allow the clerk extra help for that
purpose, and the clerk shall attach to said petition his certificate showing
the result of said examination.
   If the petition accompanying the proposed ordinance be signed by qualified
and registered electors equal in number of six percentum of the number of
registered voters at the last general municipal election the council must
either pass such ordinance without alteration or submit the same to the
electorate at the next general municipal election that shall occur at any time
not less than eighty-eight days from the date of the clerk's certificate of
sufficiency. But if such petition is signed by qualified and registered
electors equal in number to twelve percentum of said number of registered
voters at the last general municipal election and contains a request that such
ordinance be submitted to a vote of the people at a special election, then the
council must either pass the ordinance without alteration or submit the same to
the electorate at a special election to be called within the period provided by
the general laws of the state of California.
   If the clerk's certification shows that the petition is insufficient by
reason of the failure to obtain sufficient valid signatures thereon, a
supplemental petition, in form a duplicate of the original petition, bearing
new additional signatures may be filed within ten days of the mailing of the
certificate of insufficiency to the proponents of the initiative. Supplemental
petitions shall be processed by the clerk in the same manner as set forth
herein with respect to original petitions.
   The ballots used when voting upon such proposed ordinance shall contain the
words "For the Ordinance," and "Against the Ordinance" (stating the nature of
the proposed ordinance). If a majority of the qualified electors voting on said
proposed ordinance shall vote in favor thereof, such ordinance shall become a
valid and binding ordinance of the city. The council may at such election
submit any amendment thereto that it may deem proper, and the ballots used at
such election shall contain the words "For the Amendment," or "Against the
Amendment," or ordinance (naming the ordinance), and also stating the nature of
the proposed amendment. If a majority of the qualified electors voting on said
proposed amendment shall vote in favor thereof, such ordinance shall thereupon
be deemed amended in accordance therewith. The council may also propose and
submit any ordinance to the electors, and such ordinance, upon receiving a
majority of the votes of the electors voting thereon, shall be deemed to have
been adopted and shall be a valid and binding ordinance of the city. Such
ordinances shall be considered as adopted upon the date the council conducts
the official canvass of the election and shall go into effect ten days after
that date. Any ordinance adopted by the electors under the provisions of this
section cannot be repealed or amended, except by a vote of the people obtained
in the manner hereinabove stated, unless such ordinance shall otherwise
provide.
   Any number of proposed ordinances may be voted upon at the same election in
accordance with the provisions of this section: provided, that there shall not
be held under this section of the charter more than one special election in any
period of twelve months.
Sec. 3.   Referendum.
   Any ordinance, other than such as may be required to be passed at a
particular time or for the purpose of complying with a charter or general law,
and excepting such ordinances or measures for the immediate preservation of the
public peace, health, or safety, shall be subject to a referendum as herein
provided. Provided further that the petition for such referendum be filed
within thirty days from the final passage of such ordinance, and the same shall
not be effective during said period during which the same is subject to
referendum.
   The council may, of its own motion, submit any ordinance or question of
policy to a referendum.
   A referendum petition asking that a particular ordinance named therein be
submitted to a vote of the electorate, in order to be valid, must meet the
following requirements:
   (a)   A notice of intention to circulate a referendum petition must be
published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city once prior to the
affixing of any signature to any petition and shall be substantially in the
following form:
   Notice of Intent to Circulate Referendum Petition
   Notice is hereby given of the intention of the persons whose names appear
hereon to circulate a referendum petition within the city of Palo Alto for the
purpose of ________. A statement of the reasons of the proposed action as
contemplated in said petition is as follows:
   (b)   The notice of intention shall be filed with the clerk prior to the
affixing of any signature to any petition.
   (c)   Immediately after the publication and filing of the notice of
intention to circulate the referendum petition may be circulated and filed. The
petition shall bear a copy of the notice of intention to circulate. Signatures
shall be secured and the petition filed within thirty days of the date of the
adoption or passage of the ordinance filed with the clerk. If such petition is
not filed within the time required by this section, the same shall be void for
all purposes.
   The signatures to the petition need not all be appended to one paper, but
said petition may be presented in sections. Each section shall contain the
number and title of the ordinance proposed to be referended and a statement
that the purpose of the petition is to referend such ordinance. The number of
signatures to each section shall be at the pleasure of the person soliciting
signatures to the same. Any qualified voter of the municipality shall be
competent to solicit said signatures. Each signer of said petition shall at the
time of signing the petition include his printed name and place of residence,
giving street and number, and if no street or number exists, then a designation
of his place of residence which will enable the location to be readily
ascertained and the name of the city. A place of at least one-inch wide shall
be left blank after each name for the use of the clerk in verifying the
petition.
   Each section shall have attached thereto the affidavit of the person
soliciting signatures to the same stating:
   (1)   The name and address of the circulator and a statement that he or she
is a registered voter of Palo Alto.
   (2)   That all the signatures affixed to the section were made in his or her
presence.
   (3)   That to the best of his or her knowledge and belief, each signature is
the genuine signature of the person whose name it purports to be.
   (4)   The dates between which all signatures were obtained.
   (5)   The signature of the circulator. No other affidavit thereto shall be
required.
   Unless and until it be proven otherwise by official investigation, it shall
be presumed that the petition presented contains the signatures of the
requisite number of qualified voters.
   Within fifteen business days from the date of filing such petition, the
clerk shall examine and ascertain from the records of registration whether or
not said petition is signed by the requisite number of electors entitled to
vote, and if necessary the council shall allow the clerk extra help for that
purpose, and the clerk shall attach to said petition his certificate showing
the result of said examination. If the clerk's certification shows that the
petition is insufficient by reason of the failure to obtain sufficient valid
signatures thereon, a supplemental petition, in form a duplicate of the
original petition, bearing new additional signatures may be filed within ten
days of the mailing of the certificate of insufficiency to the proponents of
the referendum. Supplemental petitions shall be processed by the clerk in the
same manner as set forth herein with respect to original petitions. If the
petition is signed by qualified and registered electors equal in number to six
percentum of the number of registered voters at the last general municipal
election and the petition shall be found to be sufficient, the clerk shall
submit the same to the council without delay and it shall be the duty of the
council to reconsider such ordinance. If the council fails to entirely repeal
such ordinance, it shall be the duty of the council to submit the question of
the approval or rejection of such ordinance to the electors at the next general
municipal election or a special election that shall be held not less than
eighty-eight days from the date of the clerk's certificate of sufficiency and,
until such election is held and the ordinance approved by the electors, such
ordinance shall be suspended and inoperative.
   The ballots used when voting upon such ordinance shall contain the words
"For the Ordinance" and "Against the Ordinance" (stating the nature of the
proposed ordinance). If a majority of the qualified electors voting on said
proposed ordinance shall vote in favor thereof, such ordinance shall become a
valid and binding ordinance on the city.
   If the ordinance voted upon is approved, it shall have the same force and
effect of any other ordinance adopted by council and may be amended at any time
as though no election were held. If the ordinance voted upon is disapproved,
the council may not adopt a substantially similar ordinance for a period of at
least one year from the date of election.
(Amended by Stats. 1972, Ch. 71, 7-7-72 and by Stats. 1982, Ch. 30, 12-10-82)
Article VII. Miscellaneous
Sec. 1.   Interest of officers in contracts.
   No officer of the city shall be interested in any contract entered into by
the city, and the general laws of the state forbidding city officials to be so
interested are hereby made a part of this charter.
Sec. 2.   Public utilities revenue.
   The revenue of each public utility shall be kept in a separate fund from all
other receipts and shall be used for the purposes and in the order as follows:
   (a)   For the payment of the operating and maintenance expenses of such
utility, including the necessary contribution to retirement of its employees.
   (b)   For the payment of interest on the bonded debt incurred for the
construction or acquisition of such utility.
   (c)   For the payment of the principal of said debt, as it may become due.
   (d)   For capital expenditures of such utility.
   (e)   For the annual payment into a reserve fund for contingencies, of an
amount not to exceed ten percent of the expenditure for capital outlay for the
year, exclusive of bond fund expenditures. The total accumulated in this
reserve for contingencies shall at no time exceed five percent of the book
value of the utility's capital in service. This reserve fund shall be available
for use by the utility, only for replacements or emergency repairs and after
special appropriation by the council.
   (f)   The remainder shall be paid into the general fund by quarterly
allotments.
Sec. 3.   Candidates' designation.
   No ballot used at any municipal election shall contain any reference to a
political party, and no designation or symbol shall be placed in connection
with the name of any candidate. The order of listing of candidates' names on
the ballot shall be determined by lot.
(Amended by Stats. 1967, Ch. 103, ACR No. 106 and by Stats. 1969, Ch. 223, 6-
26-69 and by Stats. 1972, Ch. 71, 7-7-72)
Sec. 4.   No franchise without grant.
   No person, firm or corporation shall ever exercise any franchise, license,
permit, easement, privilege or other use, except in so far as he or it may be
entitled to do so by direct authority of the Constitution of the State of
California, or of the Constitution or laws of the United States, in, upon,
over, under or along any street, highway or other public place in the city
unless he or it shall have first obtained a grant therefor in accordance with
the provisions of this charter.
Sec. 5.   Effective date of tax liens.
(Repealed by Stats. 1968, Ch. 163, 7-8-68)
Sec. 6.   Contracts - Lowest responsible bidder.
   In the erection, improvement or repair of all public buildings and works,
and in all street and sewer work, the cost of which is to be paid from funds
realized by bonded indebtedness of the city or by assessment against any
particular property in the city, the work shall be let to the lowest
responsible bidder; provided, however, the council may reject any and all bids
if deemed excessive, and readvertise for bids, or provide for the work to be
done by the city.
   In case no bid is received, the council may likewise provide for the work to
be done by the city.
   When the estimate of the cost of said work by the city engineer shows the
said work can be done for an equal or less cost than that of the lowest bid,
then any of the work herein mentioned may be done by the city, and the city
shall be deemed the contractor, with the right to enforce all liens, and with
the same powers, rights, duties, and obligations as are made and provided by
the laws of the state for contractors who have entered into contracts to do
such work as the lowest responsible bidder.
   The council shall have power to adopt ordinances for the purpose of carrying
out these provisions, and such ordinances shall be supplemental to the existing
laws of the state, and shall have the same force and effect.
Sec. 7.   Lease of city land.
   The council may lease or sub-lease real property owned or leased by the city
for a period not to exceed fifty years. Nothing herein shall be deemed to
ratify, validate or extend the term of any lease outstanding on the effective
date of this section.
(Amended by Stats. 1961, Ch. 190, 6-7-61)
Sec. 8.   Effect of charter amendments - Officers.
   All officers, deputies, assistants, and employees in office or employment
when this charter or its amendments take effect, shall continue to hold and
exercise their respective offices or employment, under the terms of this
charter, until removed or until the appointment and qualification of their
successors.
Sec. 9.   Charter amendment - Vested rights - Contracts - Etc.
   All vested rights of the city shall continue and shall not in any manner be
affected by the amendment of this charter, unless specifically so provided, nor
shall any right, liability, pending suit or prosecution, either in behalf of or
against the city, be affected by the amendment of this charter, unless
otherwise herein expressly provided. All contracts entered into by the city
prior to the taking effect of the amendments to this charter shall be continued
and perfected thereunder. Public improvements for which legislative steps shall
have been taken under laws in force at the time these amendments take effect,
may be carried to completion in accordance with the provisions of such laws.
Sec. 10.   Effect of charter amendments - Pension - Retirement.
   The pension and retirement rights and privileges of officers and employees
of the city at the time this charter is amended, shall not be adversely
affected by its provisions unless specifically provided herein.
Sec. 11.   Severability provision.
   If any section or part of a section of this charter proves to be invalid, it
shall not be held to invalidate or impair the validity of any other section or
part of a section, unless it clearly appears that such other section or part of
a section is dependent for its operation upon this section or part of a section
so held invalid.
Article VIII. 1 Parks 2
(This Article amended by Stats. 1969, Ch. 223, 6-26-69)
   All lands owned or controlled by the city which are or will be used for
park, playground, recreation or conservation purposes shall be dedicated for
such purposes by ordinance. 3
   No land heretofore or hereafter dedicated for such purposes shall be sold or
otherwise disposed of, nor shall its use be abandoned or discontinued except
pursuant to majority vote of the electorate. Any election and related
procedures under Article VIII shall conform to the provisions set forth in
general law as it existed January 1,1965, except that the council may call such
election by majority vote.
   No substantial building, construction, reconstruction or development upon or
with respect to any lands so dedicated shall be made except pursuant to
ordinance subject to referendum.
1   Formerly Article VIII, Alcoholic Liquors, repealed by Stats. 1965 (ARC No.
20).
2   Disposal of park lands - See Appendix A.
3   See Ordinances 2252, 2269, 2284, 2300, 2351, 2467.
Article VIII-A. Board of Education
(This Article added by Stats. 1951, Ch. 40, 3-14-51)
Sec. 1.   Members - Number - Residency - Compensation.
   The board of education of the Palo Alto Unified School District shall
consist of five members who are residents of the territory of the unified
school district, or any additions thereto. They shall serve without
compensation.
Sec. 2.   Effect of amendment - Term.
   (a)   The members of the board of education holding office when this
amendment takes effect shall continue in office until their respective terms of
office shall expire and until their successors are elected and qualified.
   (b)   Time of Election. The election and recall of members of the board of
education shall be held at the times and in the manner provided by the
Education Code of the State of California.
(Amended by amendment filed with the city clerk July 17,1978)
   (c)   Term of Office. The term of office of the members of the board of
education, shall be four years from and after the first day of the month
succeeding their election and until their successors are elected and qualified.
The term of office of the members of the board of education which commenced
July 1, 1975, shall expire in 1979. The term of office of the member of the
board of education which commenced April 1, 1977, shall expire in 1981. The
term of office of the member of the board of education which commenced April 1,
1978, shall expire in 1983.
(Amended by amendments filed with the Secretary of State, July 1, 1976; July
17, 1978; and May 30, 1979)
   (d)   Vacancies. Vacancies on the board of education shall be filled by
appointment by the board and such appointee shall hold office until the next
regular election of members of the board and until their successors are elected
and qualified. At said next regular election succeeding any vacancy, a member
shall be elected to serve for the unexpired term and until his successor is
elected and qualified.
(Amended by Stats. 1969, Ch. 223, 6-26-69)
Sec. 3.   Powers and duties.
   The powers and duties of the board of education shall be those prescribed by
the Constitution, Education Code, and general laws of the state of California,
as they may now exist or may hereafter be amended.
Sec. 4.   Superintendent of schools - Appointment.
   The board of education shall appoint a superintendent of schools who shall
be the chief executive officer of the board and shall enforce all rules and
regulations of the board and the Education Code of the state. The
superintendent shall also act as ex officio secretary and clerk of the board.
(Amended by amendment filed with the Secretary of State, January 21, 1992)
Article IX. Amendments
Sec. 1.   Compliance with Constitution.
   This charter may be amended on compliance with the provisions of the
Constitution of the State of California.
(Amended by Stats. 1969, Ch. 223, 6-26-69)
Sec. 2.   Submission to electorate - Canvass.
   The council must make all necessary provisions for submitting the proposed
amendments to the electors, and shall canvass the votes in the same manner as
in other elections.
Sec. 3.   Wording of ballots.
   The ballots used at such elections shall contain the words "For the
Amendment" and "Against the Amendment" (stating the nature of the proposed
amendment).
Article X. Effective Date of Amended Charter
   This amended charter shall take effect on the first day of July, 1950, at
twelve o'clock noon. All ordinances, resolutions, and regulations in force at
the time of the approval of this amended charter by the legislature are hereby
continued in full force and effect until the same shall be amended or repealed,
and if inconsistent with this amended charter, until the first day of July,
1950, at twelve o'clock noon. The members of the council in office at the time
of the approval of this amended charter by the legislature shall continue to
hold office and discharge their duties until the expiration of their terms of
office and the election and qualification of their successors.
APPENDIX A
to the
CHARTER OF THE CITY OF PALO ALTO
(See Section 3, Article VIII, Parks, Added by Stats. 1965, ACR No. 161).
   EXCERPT FROM CALIFORNIA GOVERNMENT CODE ART. 2, CH. 9, PART 2, DIV. 3, TITLE
4,
   COMMENCING AT SECTION 38440, AS SAID ARTICLE EXISTED ON JANUARY 1, 1965.
   Article 2. Parks Dedicated by City
   Sec. 38440.   Abandonment and disposal - Authority.
   A city may discontinue and abandon the use as a public park of any land
owned in fee by it and dedicated or placed in such use by such city, and
thereafter dispose of the land, pursuant to this article.
   Sec. 38441.   Exchanges - Authority - Conditions.
   Without a special election, the legislative body may convey a minor portion
of such a park in exchange for an equal or greater area or value of privately
owned land contiguous to the park after:
   (a)   Notice and a public hearing pursuant to this article.
   (b)   Determination that the exchange is in the public interest.
   (c)   Adoption of a resolution of discontinuance.
   Sec. 38442.   Prohibited discontinuances.
   Except as provided in Section 38441, this article shall not be construed to
authorize:
   (a)   A discontinuance and abandonment, or change in the use, of such lands
which will cause the reversion of the lands to private ownership or a
forfeiture of the city's ownership in fee.
   (b)   The discontinuance of the use of park lands acquired by funds obtained
from a local assessment based on benefits.
   Sec. 38443.   Initiation of proceedings - Resolution.
   Proceedings are initiated when the legislative body adopts a resolution
declaring that public interest or convenience requires the discontinuance of
the use of such land as a public park, and that the legislative body intends to
call a special election to submit the question of discontinuance to the city
electors.
   Sec. 38444.   Resolution - Contents.
   The resolution shall:
   (a)   Contain an accurate description of the lands.
   (b)   State the common name of the park.
   (c)   State the disposition which the legislative body proposes to make of
the park.
   (d)   Fix a time, not less than thirty nor more than sixty days after
adoption of the resolution, and a place, at which the public or persons
particularly interested may protest.
   Sec. 38445.   Resolution - Publication.
   The city clerk shall cause the resolution to be published twice in a daily
newspaper published and circulated in the city, or if there is none, twice in a
weekly or semiweekly newspaper so published and circulated. If there are no
such newspapers, the resolution shall be published twice in a newspaper
published in the county. Publication shall be completed at least twenty days
before the time set for the hearing.
   Sec. 38446.   Notices of resolution - Posting.
   The park superintendent or another person designated by the legislative body
shall cause at least three notices of the adoption of the resolution to be
posted conspicuously not more than three hundred feet apart along the exterior
boundaries of the area proposed to be discontinued and abandoned as a public
park. Posting shall be completed at least twenty days before the time set for
the hearing. Failure to post the notices does not invalidate the proceedings or
prevent the legislative body from acquiring jurisdiction to proceed with the
discontinuance and abandonment.
   Sec. 38447.   Notices of resolution - Heading and contents.
   The posted notices shall be headed: "Notice of proposed discontinuance of
public park land" in legible characters, state the date of adoption of the
resolution, and recite the facts contained in the resolution.
   Sec. 38448.   Protests.
   At any time before the hour set for the hearing, any person or persons
interested may protest in writing against the proposed abandonment and
discontinuance, or to the extent thereof. The protest shall be delivered to the
clerk of the legislative body.
   Sec. 38449.   Protests - Hearing.
   At the time set for the hearing or to which it is postponed, the legislative
body shall hear and pass upon all such protests.
   Sec. 38450.   Protests - Rulings - Call of special election.
   Protests are sustained unless overruled by two-thirds vote of the
legislative body. The legislative body may sustain protests as to one portion,
and overrule them as to another portion of park land. If protests are
overruled, the legislative body may adopt an ordinance calling, and fixing date
of a special election to submit to the city electors the question of
discontinuance and abandonment of the use of park land on which protests were
overruled.
   Sec. 38451.   Special election - Affirmative vote - Ordinance of
discontinuance.
   If a majority of the electors voting on the proposition are in favor of it,
the legislative body shall adopt an ordinance declaring that use of the land
described in the ordinance calling the election for park purposes is
discontinued and abandoned.
   Sec. 38452.   Special election - Negative vote - Continuance of park.
   If less than a majority of such electors vote for it, the legislative body
shall not initiate proceedings for discontinuance of the use of such land for
park purposes for one year after the election.
   Note: Sections 38453 through 38459 were repealed by the state legislature in
1951.
   Sec. 38460.   Effect of ordinance - Authority to dispose of property.
   When the ordinance becomes effective, the land described in it is deemed
held by the city in fee. The city may sell or otherwise dispose of the property
in the same manner as it may dispose of other city property no longer required
for municipal purposes.
   Sec. 38461.   Proceeds of sale - Bond fund - General fund.
   If the land was acquired by money derived from bonds authorized for park
purpose, and the land sold, the reasonable market value of the land at the time
of adoption of the ordinance shall be transferred to the bond fund from such
other municipal fund as the legislative body determines. If the land was not
acquired from bond funds and the land is sold, the proceeds from such sale
shall be deposited in the general fund of the city.
   Sec. 38462.   Proceeds of sale - Use after deposit in bond fund.
   Except as permitted by general laws allowing diversions of bond funds, money
so transferred shall be devoted only to the purposes for which the bonds were
authorized.
Title 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapters:
   
1.04   Interpretation and Construction
   
1.08   Violations
   
1.12   Administrative Penalties - Citations
   
1.16   Administrative Compliance Orders
Chapter 1.04
INTERPRETATION AND CONSTRUCTION
Sections:
   
1.04.010   Short title and citation.
   
1.04.020   Continuation of existing law.
   
1.04.030   Effect of code on past actions and obligations previously accrued.
   
1.04.040   Construction.
   
1.04.050   Definitions.
   
1.04.060   Grammatical interpretation.
   
1.04.070   Civil code provisions.
   
1.04.071   Judicial review.
   
1.04.072   Expedited judicial review.
   
1.04.080   Constitutionality.
   
1.04.090   Effective date.
1.04.010   Short title and citation.
   This code shall be known as the "Palo Alto Municipal Code" and it shall be
sufficient to refer to this code as the "Palo Alto Municipal Code" in any
prosecution for the violation of any provision thereof. It shall also be
sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, amending or repealing the
code, or portions thereof, as an addition or amendment to, or a repeal of, the
"Palo Alto Municipal Code," or a portion thereof.
(Ord. 2146 (part), 1963: prior code § 1.01)
1.04.020   Continuation of existing law.
   Nothing in this code shall be construed to amend or repeal those ordinances
of the city which relate to subject matters not dealt with in this code.
(Ord. 2146 (part), 1963: prior code § 1.02)
1.04.030   Effect of code on past actions and obligations previously accrued.
   Neither the adoption of this code nor the repeal hereby of any ordinance of
this city shall in any manner affect the prosecution for violation of
ordinances, which violations were committed prior to the effective date hereof,
nor be construed as a waiver of any license fee or penalty due and unpaid at
said effective date under any ordinance, nor be construed as affecting any of
the provisions of such ordinance relating to the collection of any license fee
or penalty or the penal provisions applicable to any violation thereof, nor to
affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit in lieu thereof, required to be
posted, filed or deposited pursuant to any ordinance, and all rights and
obligations thereunto appertaining shall continue in full force and effect.
(Ord. 2146 (part), 1963: prior code § 1.03)
1.04.040   Construction.
   The provisions of this code and all proceedings under it are to be construed
with a view to effect its objects and to promote justice.
(Ord. 2146 (part), 1963: prior code § 1.04)
1.04.050   Definitions.
   (a)   The following words and phrases whenever used in this code shall be
construed as defined in this section unless from the context a different
meaning is intended, or unless a different meaning is specifically defined and
more particularly directed to the use of such words or phrases.
   (1)   "City" means the city of Palo Alto or the area within the territorial
city limits of the city of Palo Alto and such territory outside of this city
over which the city has jurisdiction or control by virtue of any constitutional
or charter provisions, or any law.
   (2)   "Council" means the city council of this city.
   (3)   "Oath" means and includes affirmation.
   (4)   "Office." The use of the title of any officer, employee, or any
office, or ordinance or charter means such officer, employee, office, ordinance
or charter of the city of Palo Alto, unless otherwise specifically designated.
   (5)   "Person" means natural person, joint venture, joint stock company,
partnership, association, club, company, corporation, business trust,
organization, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of
any of them.
   (6)   "Shall" and "must." Each is mandatory.
   (7)   "May" is permissive.
   (8)   "Street" means and includes all streets, highways, avenues, lanes,
alleys, courts, places, squares, curbs, or other public ways in this city which
have been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or such other
public property so designated in any law of this state.
   (9)   "Written" means and includes printed, typewritten, mimeographed or
multigraphed.
(Ord. 2146 (part), 1963: prior code § 1.08)
1.04.060   Grammatical interpretation.
   (a)   The following grammatical rules shall apply in this code.
   (1)   Gender. Any gender includes the other genders.
   (2)   Singular and Plural. The singular number includes the plural and the
plural includes the singular.
   (3)   Tenses. Words used in the present tense include the past and the
future tenses and vice versa.
   (4)   Use of Words and Phrases. Words and phrases used in this code and not
specifically defined shall be construed according to the context and approved
usage of the language.
(Ord. 2146 (part), 1963: prior code § 1.09)
1.04.070   Civil code provisions.
   The provisions of Sections 13 and 1645 of the Civil Code of the State of
California are hereby adopted in the interpretation of words and phrases,
unless otherwise provided herein.
(Ord. 2146 (part), 1963: prior code § 1.10)
1.04.071   Judicial review.
   Any petition for writ of administrative mandate under Section 1094.5 of the
California Code of Civil Procedure in order to seek judicial review of any
final administrative decision of the city of Palo Alto or any of its
commissions, boards, officers, or employees shall be filed no later than ninety
days after the decision becomes final as defined in Section 1094.6. An
administrative decision is a decision subject to review pursuant to Section
1094.5 and either (a) suspending, demoting, or dismissing an officer or
employee, (b) revoking or denying an application for a permit, license, or
other entitlement, or (c) denying an application for any retirement benefit or
allowance. As provided in subsection (d) of Section 1094.6, the time limit for
filing a petition for judicial review is extended to thirty days following the
date on which the administrative record is personally delivered or mailed to
the petitioner or his attorney of record provided that the petitioner has
requested preparation of the administrative record of the proceedings on which
the decision is based within ten days after the decision became final.
(Ord. 4285 § 1, 1995)
1.04.072   Expedited judicial review.
   Pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure § 1094.8(c), and any
successor statute or regulation, the permits and entitlements listed in this
section are designated for expedited judicial review pursuant to the procedure
set forth in California Code of Civil Procedure § 1094.8, or any successor
statute or regulation.
   (a)   The permits and entitlements which are regulated by the Palo Alto
Municipal Code and subject to expedited review pursuant to this section include
the following:
   (1)   Applications for an adult entertainment establishment license pursuant
to
Chapter 4.55.
   (2)   Applications for a newsrack permit pursuant to
Chapter 9.79.
   (3)   Applications for sign permits pursuant to
Chapter 16.20.
   (4)   Applications for permits to use parks or open space lands pursuant to
Chapter 22.04.
   (5)   Any other provisions of this code designated by the city council by
ordinance or resolution as being subject to expedited judicial review.
   (b)   Unless otherwise defined with respect to a specific permit or
entitlement, "application" shall mean the submission of a complete set of all
required forms, plans, and other documents required for review of the request
for a permit or other entitlement, as well as full payment of all required fees
as specified in this code.
   (c)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, any discretionary
requirements imposed as conditions of approval of any application subject to
this section, shall be deemed to be conditions subsequent and not conditions
precedent to fulfilling the requirements for approval. Nothing contained in
this section shall be construed to prohibit the city from imposing reasonable
conditions in connection with the issuance of any permit or entitlement subject
to this section, for the purpose of protecting the health, safety and welfare
of the citizens of Palo Alto, provided that such conditions are imposed as
conditions subsequent.
   (d)   Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to waive or
excuse any requirement that a use or activity subject to this section comply
with applicable locational and zoning requirements.
(Ord. 4655 § 2, 2000)
1.04.080   Constitutionality.
   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is for
any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not
affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. The council hereby
declares that it would have passed this code, and each section, subsection,
sentence, clause and phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or
more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases had been declared
invalid or unconstitutional, and if for any reason this code should be declared
invalid or unconstitutional then the original ordinance or ordinances shall be
in full force and effect.
(Prior code § 38.02)
1.04.090   Effective date.
   This code shall take effect immediately upon its adoption.
(Prior code § 38.03)
CHAPTER 1.08
VIOLATIONS
Sections:
   
1.08.010   Penalty for violations.
   
1.08.020   Prohibited acts include causing, permitting, etc.
   
1.08.030   When person arrested to be given notice to appear.
   
1.08.040   Time for appearance.
   
1.08.050   Place of appearance.
   
1.08.060   Delivery of copy to arrested person - Release upon signing duplicate
notice.
   
1.08.070   Filing of duplicate notice - Fixing bail - Deposit of bail -
Forfeiture - Order of no further proceedings.
   
1.08.080   Grounds for issuance of warrant for arrest.
   
1.08.090   Violation of promise to appear.
   
1.08.100   Issuance of arrest warrant on failure to appear.
   
1.08.110   Fees for licenses, permits, services, etc.; use of city facility or
service.
1.08.010   Penalty for violations.
   It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision or to fail to comply
with any of the requirements of this code.
   (a)   Misdemeanor. Any person violating any of the provisions or failing to
comply with any mandatory requirements of this code is guilty of a misdemeanor,
except as otherwise specified by state law or expressly provided by this code.
Unless a different penalty is expressly provided by this code, any person
convicted of a misdemeanor under the provisions of this code shall be punished
by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 or by imprisonment in the county jail for
a period not exceeding six months, or both fine and imprisonment.
   (b)   Infraction. Any person convicted of an infraction for a violation of
this code, as expressly provided herein or specified by state law, shall be
punished by a fine not exceeding $250.00.
   (c)    Multiple Violations. Any offense which would otherwise be an
infraction is a misdemeanor if a defendant has been convicted of three or more
violations of this code within the twelve month period immediately preceding
the commission of the offense, or four or more violations of this code within
the twenty four month period immediately preceding the commission of the
offense, and such prior convictions are admitted by the defendant or alleged in
the accusatory pleading. For purposes of this section, a bail forfeiture shall
be deemed to be a conviction for the offense charged.
   (d)   Separate Offense. Each person is guilty of a separate offense for each
and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of
this code is committed, continued or permitted by such person and shall be
punished accordingly.
   (e)   Reduction of Misdemeanors to Infractions. Notwithstanding any other
provision of this code, whenever violation of any section of this code is
punishable as a misdemeanor, the city attorney may file a complaint or make a
motion to amend an accusatory pleading specifying that the offense is an
infraction.
   (f)   Public Nuisance. In addition to the penalties hereinabove provided,
any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the
provisions of this code is a public nuisance and may be summarily abated as
such by the city. Each day that such condition continues shall be regarded as a
new and separate offense.
(Ord. 4745 § 2, 2002: Ord. 4453 § 2, 1997: Ord. 3794 §§ 1, 2, 1988: Ord. 2770 §
1, 1974: Ord. 2146 (part), 1963: prior code § 1.05)
1.08.020   Prohibited acts include causing, permitting, etc.
   Whenever in this code any act or omission is made unlawful it shall include
causing, allowing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering, or concealing the
fact of such act or omission.
(Ord. 2146 (part), 1963: prior code § 1.06)
1.08.030   When person arrested to be given notice to appear.
   Whenever a person is arrested for a violation of any ordinance of the city
and such person is not immediately taken before a magistrate as is more fully
set forth in the Penal Code of the State of California, the arresting officer
shall prepare in duplicate a written notice to appear in court, containing the
name and address of such person, the offense charged and the time and place
where and when such person shall appear in court.
(Ord. 2146 (part), 1963: Ord. 1770 (part), 1957: prior code § 1.07(a))
1.08.040   Time for appearance.
   The time specified in the notice to appear must be at least five days after
such arrest.
(Ord. 2146 (part), 1963: Ord. 1770 (part), 1957: prior code § 1.07(b)
1.08.050   Place of appearance.
   The place specified in the notice to appear shall be before a court
designated for arraignment by the superior court of the state of California in
and for the county of Santa Clara, or before an officer authorized by the
superior court of the state of California in and for the county of Santa Clara
to receive a deposit of bail.
(Ord. 4745 § 3, 2002: Ord. 2146 (part), 1963: Ord. 1770 (part), 1957: prior
code § 1.07(c))
1.08.060   Delivery of copy to arrested person - Release upon signing duplicate
notice.
   The officer shall deliver one copy of the notice to appear to the arrested
person; and the arrested person, in order to secure release, must give his
written promise so to appear in court by signing the duplicate notice which
shall be retained by the officer. Thereupon, the arresting officer shall
forthwith release the person arrested from custody.
(Ord. 2146 (part), 1963: Ord. 1770 (part), 1957: prior code § 1.07(d))
1.08.070   Filing of duplicate notice - Fixing bail - Deposit of bail -
Forfeiture - Order of no further proceedings.
   (a)   The officer shall, as soon as practicable, file the duplicate notice
with the magistrate specified therein. Thereupon, the magistrate shall fix the
amount of bail which in his judgment in accordance with provisions of Section
1275 of the Penal Code of the State of California will be reasonable and
sufficient for the appearance of the defendant and shall endorse upon the
notice a statement signed by him in the form set forth in Section 815(a) of the
Penal Code of the State of California. The defendant may, prior to the date
upon which he promised to appear in court, deposit with the magistrate the
amount of bail thus set. Thereafter, at the time when the case is called for
arraignment before the magistrate, if the defendant does not appear, either in
person or by counsel, the magistrate may declare the bail forfeited, and may in
his discretion order that no further proceedings shall be had in such case.
   (b)   Upon the making of such order that no further proceedings be had, all
sums deposited as bail shall forthwith be paid to the county treasury for
distribution pursuant to Section 1463 of the Penal Code of the State of
California.
(Ord. 2146 (part), 1963: Ord. 1770 (part), 1957: prior code § 1.07(e))
1.08.080   Grounds for issuance of warrant for arrest.
   No warrant shall be issued on such charge for the arrest of a person who has
given such written promise to appear in court, unless and until he has violated
such promise, or has failed to deposit bail, to appear for arraignment, trial
or judgment or to comply with the terms and provisions of the judgment as
required by law.
(Ord. 2146 (part), 1963: Ord. 1770 (part), 1957: prior code § 1.07(f))
1.08.090   Violation of promise to appear.
   Any person willfully violating his written promise to appear in court is
guilty of a misdemeanor regardless of the disposition of the charge upon which
he was originally arrested.
(Ord. 2146 (part), 1963: Ord. 1770 (part), 1957: prior code § 1.07(g))
1.08.100   Issuance of arrest warrant on failure to appear.
   (a)   When a person signs a written promise to appear at the time and place
specified in the written promise to appear and has not posted bail as provided
herein, the magistrate shall issue and have delivered for execution a warrant
for his arrest within twenty days after his failure to appear as promised, or
if such person promises to appear before an officer authorized to accept bail
other than a magistrate and fails to do so on or before the date which he
promised to appear, then within twenty days after the delivery of such written
promise to appear by the officer to a magistrate having jurisdiction over the
offense.
   (b)   When such a person violates his promise to appear before an officer
authorized to receive bail other than a magistrate, the officer shall
immediately deliver to the magistrate having jurisdiction over the offense
charged the written promise to appear and the complaint, if any, filed by the
arresting officer.
(Ord. 2146 (part), 1963: Ord. 1770 (part), 1957: prior code § 1.07(h))
1.08.110   Fees for licenses, permits, services, etc.; use of city facility or
service.
   (a)   The city manager shall establish a schedule of fees and rates for all
types of services performed by city departments under the manager's control,
except utility rates and charges, admissions, golf course fees and nonresident
library fees, to be set forth in a document to be known as the "municipal fee
schedule." Such document shall list all fees, rates and charges, except utility
rates and charges, charged and collected by any department of the city and
shall be available to the public for examination by request.
   (b)   Any change in any fee established by the city manager shall become
effective upon commencement of the thirty-first day following notice sent to
the council, except fees established pursuant to an emergency ordinance of the
city council, or fees changed by the city council after such notice. If any fee
is changed by the city council by motion action, in such case said changed fee
shall be effective on the next weekday following such council action, or at
such other time specified by the council.
   (c)   Except as provided in subsection (d) of this section, it shall be
unlawful for any person to use any city facility or service without paying the
prescribed fee or charge therefor.
   (d)   Notwithstanding subsection (c) of this section, the city council may,
in its discretion, waive any of the fees set forth in the municipal fee
schedule that would apply to a private project to construct, improve or
otherwise enhance a new or existing public facility, building or park. A
construction or capital project eligible for such fee waiver must result in a
new or improved public facility, building or park, or some portion thereof,
that will be solely owned or controlled, and operated, by the city upon the
project's completion. In the event that only some portion of a construction or
capital project will result in a new or improved city facility, building or
park, or some portion thereof, then the city council may only waive those
portions of any associated fees, on a pro rata basis, that directly relate to
the construction, improvement or enhancement of the city facility, building or
park.
   (e)   The finance committee may review any fee in the municipal fee schedule
during the annual budget review process.
(Ord. 4204 § 1, 1994: Ord. 2960 § 1, 1976: Ord. 2681 § 1, 1972)
Chapter 1.12
ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTIES - CITATIONS*
Sections:
   
1.12.010   Applicability.
   
1.12.020   Code enforcement officer - Defined.
   
1.12.025   Enforcement official - Defined.
   
1.12.030   Administrative citation.
   
1.12.040   Amount of administrative penalties.
   
1.12.050   Payment of administrative penalties.
   
1.12.060   Hearing request.
   
1.12.070   Advance deposit hardship waiver.
   
1.12.080   Hearing officer.
   
1.12.090   Hearing procedures.
   
1.12.100   Hearing officer's decision.
   
1.12.130   Administrative penalties.
   
1.12.140   Administrative costs.
   
1.12.150   Failure to pay administrative penalties and costs.
   
1.12.160   Judicial review.
   
1.12.170   Collection of administrative civil penalties.
   
1.12.180   Lien procedure.
   
1.12.190   Public hearing and protests of proposed liens.
   
1.12.200   Recording of lien.
   
1.12.210   Satisfaction of lien.
   *   Editor's Note: Prior Ordinance History: Section 1 of Ord. 4452 was
previously codified herein, and was not specifically repealed by adoption of
Ord. 4572.
1.12.010   Applicability.
   (a)   This chapter provides for administrative citations which are in
addition to all other civil legal remedies and which are an alternative to any
criminal legal remedies which may be pursued by the city to address any
violation of Title 4, Title 5, Title 6, Title 8, Title 9, Title 12, Title 15,
Title 16, Title 17, Title 18, or Title 22 of this code or to any regulations
adopted under the authority of this code.
   (b)   Use of the remedies and procedures of this chapter shall at the sole
discretion of the code enforcement officers and enforcement officials
authorized to proceed under this chapter, and the availability of the remedies
and procedures of this chapter shall not limit or preclude the use of criminal
or civil injunctive code enforcement proceedings.
(Ord. 4572 § 2 (part), 1999)
1.12.020   Code enforcement officer - Defined.
   For the purposes of this chapter, "code enforcement officer" shall mean any
city employee or agent of the city with the authority to enforce any provision
of this code to which this chapter is applicable.
(Ord. 4572 § 2 (part), 1999)
1.12.025   Enforcement official - Defined.
   For the purposes of this chapter, "enforcement official" shall mean the
principal supervisor of a department (or a division of a department)to which a
code enforcement officer empowered to issue administrative citations under this
chapter is assigned.
(Ord. 4572 § 2 (part), 1999)
1.12.030   Administrative citation.
   (a)   Whenever a code enforcement officer charged with the enforcement of
any provision of this code to which this chapter is applicable determines that
a violation of such code provision has occurred, the code enforcement officer
shall have the authority to issue an administrative citation to any person
responsible for the violation.
   (b)   Each administrative citation shall contain the following information:
   (1)   The date of the violation;
   (2)   The address or a definite description of the location where the
violation occurred;
   (3)   The section or sections of this code violated and an abbreviated
description of the acts or omissions constituting the violation;
   (4)   The amount of the penalty for the code violation;
   (5)   A description of the penalty payment process, including a description
of the time within which and the place to which the penalty shall be paid;
   (6)   A description of the administrative citation review process, including
the time within which the administrative citation may be contested and the
place from which a request for hearing form to contest the administrative
citation may be obtained; and
   (7)   The name and signature of the citing code enforcement officer.
   (c)   Prior to the issuance of an administrative citation for a violation
which pertains to building, plumbing, electrical, or similar structural or
zoning matters that do not create an immediate danger to health or safety, the
code enforcement officer shall provide a reasonable period of time not less
than five business days to correct or otherwise remedy the violation.
   (d)   An administrative citation and all other notices required by this
chapter to be served subsequent to service of a citation may be served either
by personal delivery or by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt
requested, addressed to a location reasonably calculated to give notice to the
responsible party, and shall be deemed effective on the date of personal
delivery or when the certified mail is either delivered or delivery is
attempted.
   If the certified mail receipt is returned unsigned, then service may instead
be effected by regular first class mail, postage prepaid, provided that the
notice sent by regular mail is not returned by the postal service as
undeliverable, and shall be deemed effective on the date three days following
deposit in the mail.
   Where a violation of code provisions concerning the condition of real
property is involved, an administrative citation or subsequent written notices
authorized by this chapter may be served by certified mail at the address as
shown on the last equalized county assessment roll.
   Where a violation of code provisions concerning the condition of real
property is involved and personal delivery or service by certified mail upon
the property owner is unsuccessful, service may be effected alternately or
additionally by posting a copy of the order at a conspicuous location on the
property which is the subject of the order. Where service of any notice
required under this chapter is effected in compliance with the requirements of
this section and with due process the asserted failure of any person to receive
the notice shall not affect the validity of any proceedings taken under this
chapter.
(Ord. 5491 § 1, 2020: Ord. 4745 § 4, 2002: Ord. 4590 § 1, 1999: Ord. 4572 § 2
(part), 1999)
1.12.040   Amount of administrative penalties.
   (a)   The amounts of administrative penalties for code violations imposed
pursuant to this chapter shall be set forth in the schedule of administrative
penalties established by resolution of the city council.
   (b)   The schedule of administrative penalties shall specify any increased
penalties for repeat violations of the same code provision by the same person
within thirty-six months from the date of an administrative citation.
   (c)   The schedule of administrative penalties shall specify the amount of
any late payment charges imposed for the payment of an administrative penalty
after its due date.
(Ord. 4572 § 2 (part), 1999)
1.12.050   Payment of administrative penalties.
   (a)   The administrative penalty for an administrative citation shall be
paid to the city through its revenue collections official within thirty
calendar days from the date the administrative citation is served, except as
otherwise provided in Section
1.12.060.
   (b)   Payment of an administrative penalty under this chapter shall not bar
enforcement proceedings for any continuation or repeated occurrence of any code
violation that is the subject of an administrative citation.
(Ord. 5491 § 2, 2020: Ord. 4572 § 2 (part), 1999)
1.12.060   Hearing request.
   (a)   Any recipient of an administrative citation may contest that there was
a violation of the code or that the contestant is responsible for the violation
by completing a request for hearing form and returning it to the revenue
collection official within thirty calendar days from the date of service of the
administrative citation, together with either: (1) an advance deposit of the
total amount of the administrative penalty where the penalty for the
administrative citation or series of related citations is $250 or less, or a
partial advance deposit of $250 where the penalty for the administrative
citation or series of citations is more than $250; or (2) notice that a request
for an advance deposit hardship waiver has been duly filed pursuant to Section
1.12.070.
   (b)   A request for hearing form may be obtained from the revenue collection
official.
   (c)   The person requesting the hearing shall be notified of the time and
place set for the hearing at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing.
   (d)   If the code enforcement officer submits an additional written report
concerning the administrative citation to the hearing officer for consideration
at the hearing, then a copy of this report also shall be served on the person
requesting the hearing at least five days prior to the date of the hearing.
(Ord. 5491 § 3, 2020: Ord. 4572 § 2 (part), 1999)
1.12.070   Advance deposit hardship waiver.
   (a)   Any person who requests a hearing to contest an administrative
citation and who claims to be financially unable to make the advance deposit of
the penalty as required in Section
1.12.060 may file a request for an advance deposit hardship waiver.
   (b)   The request shall be filed with the director of administrative
services within thirty days following the date of service of the administrative
citation.
   (c)   The requirement of depositing the full or partial administrative
penalty (as specified in Section
1.12.060) shall be stayed unless or until the director of administrative
services makes a determination not to issue the advance deposit hardship
waiver.
   (d)   The director of administrative services may waive the requirement of
an advance deposit and issue the advance deposit hardship waiver only if the
cited party submits to the director of administrative services a sworn
declaration, together with any supporting evidence demonstrating to the
satisfaction of the director of administrative services the person's actual
financial inability to deposit the amount of the penalty (or portion thereof as
specified in Section
1.12.060) in advance of the hearing.
   (e)   If the director of administrative services determines not to issue an
advance deposit hardship waiver, the person shall remit the full or partial
deposit (as specified in Section
1.12.060) to the city within ten days of the date of that decision in order to
secure the hearing.
   (f)   The director of administrative services shall issue a written
determination listing the reasons for determining to issue or not issue the
advance deposit hardship waiver. The written determination of the director of
administrative services shall be final, subject only to judicial review as
provided by law.
   (g)   The written determination of the director of administrative services
shall be served upon the person who applied for the advance deposit hardship
waiver.
(Ord. 5491 § 4, 2020: Ord. 4572 § 2 (part), 1999)
1.12.080   Hearing officer.
   The enforcement official shall designate a hearing officer for the
administrative citation hearing. The hearing officer may be the enforcement
official or any designee, including but not limited to subordinate employees or
persons retained for that purpose, but shall not be the citing code enforcement
officer.
(Ord. 4572 § 2 (part), 1999)
1.12.090   Hearing procedures.
   (a)   No hearing to contest an administrative citation before a hearing
officer shall be noticed unless the administrative penalty has been deposited
in advance in accordance with Section
1.12.060 or an advance deposit hardship waiver has been issued in accordance
with Section
1.12.070.
   (b)   A hearing before the hearing officer shall be set for a date that is
not less than fifteen days and not more than sixty days from the date that the
request for hearing is filed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
The party contesting the administrative citation may request one continuance
for any reason, provided that the hearing officer is given the request for
continuance at least twenty four hours in advance of the scheduled hearing and
that the deferred hearing shall not be deferred more than ninety days after the
request for hearing was made. A request for continuance made less than twenty
four hours before the scheduled hearing may be granted by the hearing officer
based upon exigency only.
   (c)   At the hearing, the party contesting the administrative citation shall
be given the opportunity to testify and to present evidence and cross-examine
witnesses concerning the administrative citation. That contestant may appear
personally or through an attorney. Prehearing discovery is not authorized, but
subpoena of witnesses and documents shall be permitted as authorized by law.
The hearing officer may conduct the hearing informally, both as to rules of
procedure and admission of evidence, in any manner which will provide a fair
hearing.
   (d)   The failure of any recipient of an administrative citation to appear
at the administrative citation hearing or, in the alternative, to present
written or demonstrative evidence shall constitute an admission of the
violation by the recipient and an admission that the amount of the
administrative penalty is appropriate as well as a failure to exhaust
administrative remedies that may bar judicial review.
   (e)   The administrative citation and any additional report submitted by the
code enforcement officer shall constitute presumptive evidence of the
respective facts contained in those documents.
   (f)   The hearing officer may continue the hearing and request additional
information from the code enforcement officer or the recipient of the
administrative citation prior to issuing a written decision.
(Ord. 4572 § 2 (part), 1999)
1.12.100   Hearing officer's decision.
   (a)   After considering all the testimony and evidence submitted at the
hearing, the hearing officer shall issue a written decision to uphold or cancel
the administrative citation and the reasons for that decision. The decision of
the hearing officer shall be issued within thirty days following completion of
the hearing. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final upon service on
the responsible party, subject only to judicial review as allowed by law.
   (b)   The hearing officer shall consider any written or oral evidence
submitted at the hearing consistent with ascertainment of the facts regarding
the violation and compliance with the order.
   (c)   Within the time specified in subsection (a) of this Section
1.12.100, the hearing officer shall make findings and issue a decision
regarding:
   (1)   The existence of the violation;
   (2)   The extent of compliance, if any.
   (d)   The hearing officer shall issue written findings on each violation.
The findings shall be supported by evidence received at the hearing.
   (e)   If the hearing officer determines from a preponderance of the evidence
that the contestant committed the violation charged in the administrative
citation, then so much of the amount of the administrative penalty as is
assessed by the hearing officer shall become final (subject only to appellate
remedies provided below) and shall become a debt to the city collectable
through the processes provided herein. If only a portion of the administrative
penalty assessed by the hearing officer was deposited prior to hearing, the
balance shall be paid to the city through its revenue collections official
within thirty calendar days from the date the hearing officer’s written
decision is served on the responsible party. The hearing officer may
alternatively set forth in the decision a payment schedule for the
administrative penalty as well as for payment of any administrative costs
assessed by the hearing officer.
   (f)   If the hearing officer determines that the administrative citation
should be upheld and the administrative penalty has not been deposited pursuant
to an advance deposit hardship waiver, the hearing officer shall set forth in
the decision a payment schedule for the administrative penalty as well as for
payment of any administrative costs assessed by the hearing officer.
   (g)   If the hearing officer determines that the administrative citation
should not be sustained, then the hearing officer shall issue a decision
canceling the administrative citation, and if the administrative penalty or
portion thereof was deposited with the city, then the city shall promptly
refund the deposited amount, together with interest at the average rate earned
on the city's portfolio for the period of time that the deposited amount was
held by the city.
   (h)   The recipient of the administrative citation shall be served with a
copy of the hearing officer's written decision within ten calendar days
following its issuance.
   (i)   The employment, performance evaluation, compensation, and benefits of
the hearing officer shall not be directly or indirectly conditioned upon the
amount of administrative citation penalties upheld by the hearing officer.
(Ord. 5491 § 5, 2020: Ord. 4572 § 2 (part), 1999)
1.12.130   Administrative penalties.
   (a)   The hearing officer may impose administrative penalties in an amount
not to exceed the maximum provided in the schedule of administrative penalties
adopted by council resolution in effect on the date when the violation
occurred.
   (b)   In determining the amount of the administrative penalty, the hearing
officer may take any or all of the following factors into consideration:
   (1)   The duration of the violation;
   (2)   The frequency, recurrence, and number of violations, related or
unrelated, by the same violator;
   (3)   The seriousness of the violation;
   (4)   The good faith efforts of the violator to come into compliance;
   (5)   The economic impact of the violation on the community;
   (6)   Such other factors as justice may require.
   (c)   Late payment charges shall accrue and be payable in the amount and by
the terms specified in the schedule of administrative penalties.
   (d)   Administrative penalties sustained by the hearing officer are a debt
owed to the city and in addition to all other means of enforcement, if the
violation concerns the condition of real property, may be enforced by means of
a lien against the real property on which the violation occurred in accordance
with Section
1.12.180. Failure to pay administrative penalties within the time allowed under
this chapter shall constitute a violation of this code punishable as a
misdemeanor.
(Ord. 4572 § 2 (part), 1999)
1.12.140   Administrative costs.
   (a)   The hearing officer may assess administrative costs against the
violator when the hearing officer determines that a violation has occurred and
that compliance was not achieved.
   (b)   Administrative costs may include any and all costs incurred by the
city (both direct and indirect costs) in investigating and commencing
administrative proceedings for the violation as well as any and all costs
incurred by the city in connection with the hearing before the hearing officer,
including but not limited to costs of the code enforcement officer incurred in
preparation for the hearing and for participating in the hearing itself and
costs of the city to conduct the hearing. Failure to pay administrative costs
in the amount specified in the administrative hearing officer's decision on or
before the date specified in that decision shall constitute a violation of this
code punishable as a misdemeanor and shall further be subject to collection and
late charges as otherwise provided for administrative penalties herein.
(Ord. 4572 § 2 (part), 1999)
1.12.150   Failure to pay administrative penalties and costs.
   Failure to pay the assessed administrative penalties and/or administrative
costs specified in a hearing officer's decision may be enforced as:
   (1)   A personal obligation of the violator; and/or
   (2)   If the violation is in connection with real property, a lien upon the
real property in accordance with Section
1.12.180, which shall remain in effect until all of the administrative
penalties, interest, and administrative costs are paid in full; and/or
   (3)   A criminal misdemeanor.
(Ord. 4572 § 2 (part), 1999)
1.12.160   Judicial review.
   Any person subject to a decision of the hearing officer may obtain review of
the decision in the appropriate court pursuant to the provisions of California
Government Code Section 53069.4. The administrative order shall provide notice
of this right of judicial review and the time allowed therefor by law.
(Ord. 4572 § 2 (part), 1999)
1.12.170   Collection of administrative civil penalties.
   The city may collect the assessed administrative penalties and
administrative costs by use of all available legal means, including recordation
of a lien pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 4572 § 2 (part), 1999)
1.12.180   Lien procedure.
   (a)   Whenever the amount of any administrative penalty and/or
administrative cost imposed pursuant to this chapter in connection with real
property has not been satisfied in full within ninety days after the
administrative penalty and/or administrative cost imposition becomes final,
unless tolled by a timely request for judicial review pursuant to California
Government Code Section 53069.4 or reversed by court order, this obligation may
constitute a lien against any real property involved where any violation was
determined to concern the condition of that real property.
   (b)   The lien provided herein shall have no force and effect until recorded
with the county recorder. Once recorded, the administrative order shall have
the force and effect and priority of a judgment lien governed by the provisions
of Section 697.340 of the California Code of Civil Procedure and may be
extended as provided in Sections 683.110 through 683.220 of the California Code
of Civil Procedure.
   (c)   Interest shall accrue on the principal amount of the judgment
remaining unsatisfied pursuant to law.
   (d)   Prior to recording any such lien, the director of administrative
services shall prepare and file with the city clerk a report stating the
amounts due and owing.
   (e)   The city clerk shall fix a time, date, and place for hearing such
report and any protests or objections thereto by the city council.
   (f)   The director of administrative services shall cause written notice to
be served on each property owner whose interest is disclosed by the current
county equalized assessment roll not less than ten days prior to the time set
for the hearing.
(Ord. 4572 § 2 (part), 1999)
1.12.190   Public hearing and protests of proposed liens.
   (a)   Any person owning a legal or equitable interest in real property
proposed to be subject to a lien pursuant to Section
1.12.180 may file a written protest with the city clerk and/or may protest
orally at the city council hearing.
   (b)   Each written protest or objection must contain a description of the
property in which the protesting party has a legal or equitable interest and
the grounds of such protest or objection. The grounds for protest or objection,
and any evidence or testimony submitted in support or in opposition to the
imposition of a lien, shall be confined to whether the amount of any
administrative penalty and/or administrative cost imposed was satisfied in full
within the time allowed by law and/or was successfully challenged by a timely
writ of mandate.
   (c)   The city council, after the hearing, shall adopt a resolution
confirming, discharging, or modifying the amount of the lien based upon
evidence produced at the hearing.
(Ord. 4572 § 2 (part), 1999)
1.12.200   Recording of lien.
   Thirty days following the adoption of a resolution by the city council
imposing a lien, the director of administrative services shall file the same as
a judgment lien in the office of the county recorder of Santa Clara County. The
lien may carry such additional administrative charges as set forth by
resolution of the city council.
(Ord. 4572 § 2 (part), 1999)
1.12.210   Satisfaction of lien.
   Once payment in full is received by the city for outstanding penalties and
costs, the director of administrative services shall either record a notice of
satisfaction or provide any property owner or financial institution having a
legal or equitable interest in the property with a notice of satisfaction so
they may record this notice with the office of the county recorder. Such notice
of satisfaction shall cancel the city's lien.
(Ord. 4572 § 2 (part), 1999)
CHAPTER 1.16
ADMINISTRATIVE COMPLIANCE ORDERS*
Sections:
   
1.16.010   Applicability.
   
1.16.020   Enforcement official - Defined.
   
1.16.030   Compliance order.
   
1.16.040   Method of service.
   
1.16.050   Hearing.
   
1.16.060   Notice of hearing.
   
1.16.070   Hearing - Findings and order.
   
1.16.080   Administrative order.
   
1.16.090   Administrative penalties.
   
1.16.100   Administrative costs.
   
1.16.110   Failure to comply with administrative compliance order.
   
1.16.120   Judicial review.
   
1.16.130   Recovery of administrative civil penalties.
   
1.16.140   Report of compliance after administrative order.
   
1.16.150   Compliance dispute.
   
1.16.160   Lien procedure.
   
1.16.170   Public hearing and protests.
   
1.16.180   Recording of lien.
   
1.16.190   Satisfaction of lien.
   *   Editor's Note: Prior Ordinance History: Section 2 of Ord. 4452 was
previously codified herein, and was not specifically repealed by adoption of
Ord. 4572. This chapter was formerly entitled "Administrative Penalties -
Continuing Violations - Compliance Orders."
1.16.010   Applicability.
   (a)   This chapter provides for administrative remedies which are in
addition to all other civil legal remedies or which are an alternative to any
criminal legal remedies which may be pursued by the city to address any
violation of Title 4, Title 5, Title 6, Title 8, Title 9, Title 12, Title 15,
Title 16, Title 17, Title 18, or Title 22 of this code.
   (b)   Use of the remedies and procedures of this chapter shall be at the
sole discretion of the enforcement officials authorized to proceed under this
chapter.
(Ord. 4572 § 3 (part), 1999)
1.16.020   Enforcement official - Defined.
   For purposes of this chapter, "enforcement official" means the principal
supervisor for any city department or division which is charged with
responsibility for enforcement of any provision of this code. An act authorized
in this chapter to be conducted by an enforcement official may be delegated by
the enforcement official to a subordinate employee or to any other person
retained for that purpose.
(Ord. 4572 § 3 (part), 1999)
1.16.030   Compliance order.
   (a)   Whenever an enforcement official determines that a violation exists
regarding any provision of this code to which this chapter is applicable and
for which the enforcement official is responsible for enforcement, the
enforcement official may issue a written compliance order to any person
responsible for the violation.
   (b)   A compliance order issued pursuant to this chapter shall contain the
following information:
   (1)   The date and location of the violation;
   (2)   The section of this code violated and a description of the violation;
   (3)   The action required to correct the violation;
   (4)   The time period after which administrative penalties will begin to
accrue if compliance with the order has not been achieved, and the amount of
penalties that will begin to accrue; in the case of continuing violations which
pertain to building, plumbing, electrical, or similar structural or zoning
matters that do not create an immediate danger to health or safety, the time
period after which administrative penalties will begin to accrue shall not be
less than five business days;
   (5)   Either a copy of this chapter or an explanation of the consequences of
noncompliance with the compliance order and a description of the hearing
procedure and appeal process for contesting the compliance order.
(Ord. 4572 § 3 (part), 1999)
1.16.040   Method of service.
   (a)   All compliance orders and notices required by this chapter to be
served may be served either by personal delivery or by certified mail, postage
prepaid, return receipt requested, and shall be deemed effective on the date
when the certified mail is either delivered or delivery is attempted. If the
certified mail receipt is returned unsigned, then service may instead be
effected by regular first class mail, postage prepaid, provided that the notice
sent by regular mail is not returned by the postal service as undeliverable;
service by regular mail shall be deemed effective on the date three days
following deposit in the mail.
   (b)   Where a violation of code provisions respecting the condition of real
property is involved, service by certified mail of a compliance order or
subsequent written notices authorized by this chapter may be effected at the
address as shown on the last equalized county assessment roll.
   (c)   Where a violation of code provisions respecting the condition of real
property is involved and personal delivery or service by mail upon the property
owner is unsuccessful, service may be effected alternately or additionally by
posting a copy of the order at a conspicuous location on the property which is
the subject of the order.
   (d)   Where service of any notice required under this chapter is effected in
compliance with the requirements of this section and with due process, the
asserted failure of any person to receive the notice shall not affect the
validity of any proceedings taken under this chapter.
(Ord. 4745 §5, 2002: Ord. 4572 § 3 (part), 1999)
1.16.050   Hearing.
   (a)   If the enforcement official determines that all violations have been
corrected within the time specified in the compliance order or within any
amended orders, the enforcement official shall so advise each party to whom the
compliance order was addressed.
   (b)   If full compliance is not achieved within the time specified in the
compliance order or within any amended orders, the enforcement official shall
schedule a hearing before the enforcement official or a delegate.
(Ord. 4572 § 3 (part), 1999)
1.16.060   Notice of hearing.
   (a)   Every notice of hearing on a compliance order shall contain the date,
time and place at which the hearing shall be conducted.
   (b)   Each hearing shall be set for a date not less than fifteen days nor
more than sixty days from the date of service of the notice of hearing unless
the hearing officer determines that the matter is urgent or that good cause
exists for an extension of time. The party subject to the compliance order may
request one continuance for any reason, provided that the deferred hearing
shall be conducted within ninety days after the date originally scheduled for
hearing; if the hearing officer determines that compliance is urgently required
to protect the public peace, health, safety, or welfare, however, the hearing
officer may deny the extension of time.
   (c)   Written notice of hearing shall be served on any person to whom the
compliance order was addressed.
   (d)   The hearing serves to provide the full opportunity of a person subject
to a compliance order to object to the determination that a violation has
occurred and/or that the violation has continued to exist and/or that the
person was not responsible for the violation. The failure of any person subject
to a compliance order to appear a the hearing or in the alternative to present
evidence for consideration at the hearing shall constitute a failure to exhaust
administrative remedies that may bar judicial review.
(Ord. 4572 § 3 (part), 1999)
1.16.070   Hearing - Findings and order.
   (a)   At the place and time set forth in the notice of hearing, the hearing
officer shall conduct a hearing on the compliance order. At the hearing, the
party subject to the compliance order shall be given the opportunity to testify
and to present evidence and cross-examine witnesses concerning the
administrative citation. That contestant may appear personally or through an
attorney. Prehearing discovery is not authorized, but subpoena of witnesses and
documents shall be permitted as authorized by law. The hearing officer may
conduct the hearing informally, both as to rules of procedure and admission of
evidence, in any manner which will provide a fair hearing.
   (b)   The hearing officer shall consider any written or oral evidence
consistent with ascertainment of the facts regarding the violation and
compliance with the order.
   (c)   Within a reasonable time following the conclusion of the hearing, the
hearing officer shall make findings and issue a decision regarding:
   (1)   The existence of the violation;
   (2)   The extent of compliance with the order.
   (d)   The hearing officer shall issue written findings on each violation.
The findings shall be supported by evidence received at the hearing.
   (e)   If the hearing officer finds by a preponderance of the evidence that a
violation has occurred and that the violation was not corrected within the time
period specified in the compliance order, the hearing officer shall issue an
administrative order.
   (f)   If the hearing officer finds that no violation has occurred or that
the violation was corrected within the time period specified in the compliance
order, the hearing officer shall issue a finding of those facts.
(Ord. 4572 § 3 (part), 1999)
1.16.080   Administrative order.
   (a)   If the hearing officer determines that a violation occurred which was
not corrected within the time period specified in the compliance order, the
hearing officer shall issue an administrative order which imposes any or all of
the following:
   (1)   An order to correct code violations, including a schedule for
correction if appropriate;
   (2)   Administrative penalties as provided in this chapter;
   (3)   Administrative costs as provided in this chapter.
   (b)   The administrative order of the hearing officer is final at the time
it is made; however, the hearing officer shall maintain continuing jurisdiction
and shall have the power to modify the administrative order, after providing
the person subject to the administrative order with notice and an opportunity
to be heard, until full compliance is achieved.
   (c)   The employment, performance evaluation, compensation, and benefits of
the hearing officer shall not be directly or indirectly conditioned upon the
amount of administrative penalties upheld by the hearing officer.
(Ord. 4745 § 6, 2002: Ord. 4572 § 3 (part), 1999)
1.16.090   Administrative penalties.
   (a)   The hearing officer may impose administrative penalties for each day
during which a violation is maintained after the date when compliance was
ordered to be achieved, in an amount not to exceed the maximum provided in the
schedule of administrative penalties adopted by council resolution effective on
the date when the violation occurred.
   (b)   In determining the amount of the administrative penalty, the hearing
officer may take any or all of the following factors into consideration:
   (1)   The duration of the violation;
   (2)   The frequency, recurrence, and number of violations, related or
unrelated, by the same violator;
   (3)   The seriousness of the violation;
   (4)   The good faith efforts of the violator to come into compliance;
   (5)   The economic impact of the violation on the community;
   (6)   Such other factors as justice may require.
   (c)   Administrative penalties imposed by the hearing officer shall accrue
from the date specified in the compliance order and shall cease to accrue on
the date the violation is corrected as determined by the enforcement official.
   (d)   The enforcement official may suspend the imposition of applicable
penalties for any period of time during which:
   (1)   The violator has filed for necessary permits; and,
   (2)   Such permits are required to achieve compliance; and,
   (3)   Such permit applications are actively pending before the city, state
or other appropriate governmental agency.
   (e)   Administrative penalties assessed by the hearing officer shall be due
by the date specified in the administrative order.
   (f)   Administrative penalties assessed by the hearing officer are a debt
owed to the city and in addition to all other means of enforcement, if the
violation concerns the condition of real property, may be enforced by means of
a lien against the real property on which the violation occurred. Failure to
pay administrative penalties within the time allowed under this chapter shall
constitute a violation of this code punishable as a misdemeanor.
   (g)   If the violation is not corrected as specified in the administrative
order, administrative penalties shall continue to accrue on a daily basis until
the violation is corrected, subject to the maximum amount set forth in the
schedule of administrative penalties.
   (h)   If the violator gives written notice to the enforcement official that
the violation has been corrected and if the enforcement official finds that
compliance has been achieved, the enforcement official shall deem the date of
the final inspection to be the date on which the enforcement official finds
that the violation was corrected.
(Ord. 4572 § 3 (part), 1999)
1.16.100   Administrative costs.
   (a)   The enforcement official may assess administrative costs against the
violator when the enforcement official finds that a violation has occurred and
that compliance has not been achieved within the time specified in the
compliance order.
   (b)   The administrative costs may include any and all costs incurred by the
city in connection with the matter before the enforcement official, including
but not limited to costs of investigation, staffing costs incurred in
preparation for the hearing and for the hearing itself, and costs for all
reinspections necessary to enforce the compliance order. Failure to pay
administrative costs within the time allowed under this chapter shall
constitute a violation of this code punishable as a misdemeanor and shall
further be subject to collection and late charges as otherwise provided for
administrative penalties herein.
(Ord. 4572 § 3 (part), 1999)
1.16.110   Failure to comply with administrative compliance order.
   Failure to pay the assessed administrative penalties and/or administrative
costs specified in an administrative order may be enforced as:
   (1)   A personal obligation of the violator; and/or,
   (2)   If the violation is in connection with real property, a lien upon the
real property which shall remain in effect until all of the administrative
penalties, interest, and administrative costs are paid in full; and/or,
   (3)   A criminal misdemeanor.
(Ord. 4572 § 3 (part), 1999)
1.16.120   Judicial review.
   Any person subject to an administrative order issued pursuant to this
chapter may obtain review of the administrative order in the appropriate court
pursuant to the provisions of California Government Code Section 53069.4 by
filing with the court a notice of appeal. The administrative order shall
provide notice of this right of judicial review and the time allowed therefor
by law.
(Ord. 4572 § 3 (part), 1999)
1.16.130   Recovery of administrative civil penalties.
   The city may collect the assessed administrative penalties and
administrative costs by use of all available legal means, including recordation
of a lien pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 4572 § 3 (part), 1999)
1.16.140   Report of compliance after administrative order.
   If the enforcement official determines that compliance has been achieved
after a compliance order has been issued by the enforcement official following
hearing, the enforcement official shall give notice to each party to whom the
compliance order was addressed indicating that compliance has been achieved.
(Ord. 4572 § 3 (part), 1999)
1.16.150   Compliance dispute.
   (a)   If the enforcement official does not file a report of compliance, a
violator who contends that compliance with an administrative order has been
achieved may request a compliance hearing before the city manager or designee
by filing a request for a hearing with the enforcement official issuing the
administrative compliance order.
   (b)   The compliance hearing shall be noticed and conducted in the same
manner as a hearing on a compliance order provided in Sections
1.12.060 and
1.12.080 through
1.12.100 of this chapter.
   (c)   The city manager or designee shall determine if compliance has been
achieved and, if so, when it was achieved. The decision of the city manager or
designee shall be final, subject only to judicial review as provided by law.
The decision shall provide notice of the right of judicial review and the time
allowed therefor by law.
(Ord. 4572 § 3 (part), 1999)
1.16.160   Lien procedure.
   (a)   Whenever the amount of any administrative penalty and/or
administrative cost imposed pursuant to this chapter in connection with real
property has not been satisfied in full within ninety days, unless tolled by a
timely request for judicial review pursuant to California Government Code
Section 53069.4 or reversed by court order, this obligation may constitute a
lien against any real property involved where any violation was determined to
concern the condition of that real property.
   (b)   The lien provided herein shall have no force and effect until recorded
with the county recorder. Once recorded, the administrative order shall have
the force and effect and priority of a judgment lien governed by the provisions
of Sections 697.340 of the California Code of Civil Procedure and may be
extended as provided in Sections 683.110 through 683.220 of the California Code
of Civil Procedure.
   (c)   Interest shall accrue on the principal amount of the judgment
remaining unsatisfied pursuant to law.
   (d)   Prior to recording any such lien, the director of administrative
services shall prepare and file with the city clerk a report stating the
amounts due and owing.
   (e)   The city clerk shall fix a time, date, and place for hearing such
report and any protests or objections thereto by the city council.
   (f)   The director of administrative services shall cause written notice to
be served on each property owner whose interest is disclosed by the current
county equalized assessment roll not less than ten days prior to the time set
for the hearing.
(Ord. 4572 § 3 (part), 1999)
1.16.170   Public hearing and protests.
   (a)   Any person owning a legal or equitable interest in real property
proposed to be subject to a lien pursuant to this chapter may file a written
protest with the city clerk and/or may protest orally at the city council
hearing.
   (b)   Each written protest or objection must contain a description of the
property in which the protesting party has a legal or equitable interest and
the grounds of such protest or objection. The grounds for protest or objection,
and any evidence or testimony submitted in support or in opposition to the
imposition of a lien, shall be confined to whether the amount of any
administrative penalty and/or administrative cost imposed was satisfied in full
within the time allowed by law and/or was successfully challenged by a timely
writ of mandate.
   (c)   The city council, after the hearing, shall adopt a resolution
confirming, discharging, or modifying the amount of the lien based upon
evidence produced at the hearing.
(Ord. 4572 § 3 (part), 1999)
1.16.180   Recording of lien.
   Thirty days following the adoption of a resolution by the city council
imposing a lien, the director of administrative services shall file the same as
a judgment lien in the office of the county recorder of Santa Clara County. The
lien may carry such additional administrative charges as set forth by
resolution of the city council.
(Ord. 4572 § 3 (part), 1999)
1.16.190   Satisfaction of lien.
   Once payment in full is received by the city for outstanding penalties and
costs, the director of administrative services shall either record a notice of
satisfaction or provide any property owner or financial institution having a
legal or equitable interest in the property with a notice of satisfaction so
they may record this notice with the office of the county recorder. Such notice
of satisfaction shall cancel the city's lien.
(Ord. 4572 § 3 (part), 1999)
Title 2 ADMINISTRATIVE CODE*
Chapters:
   
2.04   Council Organization and Procedure
   
2.06   Official City Seal and Logo
   
2.07   Post-Government Employment Regulations
   
2.08   Officers and Departments
   
2.09   Conflict of Interest Code for Designated Positions
   
2.10   Cable Television and Open Video Systems - Award of Franchises by the
City Council
   
2.11   VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDERS - APPLICABLE REQUIREMENTS
   
2.12   Emergency Organization and Functions
   
2.16   Boards and Commissions Generally
   
2.18   Public Art Commission
   
2.20   Planning and Transportation Commission
   
2.21   Architectural Review Board
   
2.22   Human Relations Commission
   
2.23   Utilities Advisory Commission
   
2.24   Library Advisory Commission
   
2.25   Parks and Recreation Commission
   
2.26   Visual Art in Public Places
   
2.27   Historic Resources Board
   
2.28   Fiscal Procedures
   
2.30   Contracts and Purchasing Procedures
   
2.31   Property Control
   
2.32   Sales and Use Tax
   
2.33   Transient Occupancy Tax
   
2.34   Real Property Transfer Tax
   
2.35   Utility Users Tax
   
2.36   Personnel Procedures
   
2.37   Business Tax
   
2.40   Municipal Elections
   
2.44   Official Newspaper
   
2.48   Solar Tax Credit
   
2.49   Electronic Signatures
   *   For charter provisions regarding the adoption of an administrative code,
see Charter Art. III, §18.
Chapter 2.04
COUNCIL ORGANIZATION AND PROCEDURE*
Sections:
   
2.04.010   Regular meeting.
   
2.04.020   Special meetings.
   
2.04.030   Closed session action reports.
   
2.04.040   Confidentiality of closed sessions.
   
2.04.050   Quorum.
   
2.04.060   Election of mayor and vice-mayor.
   
2.04.070   Agenda.
   
2.04.080   Duties of presiding officer.
   
2.04.090   Roll call.
   
2.04.100   Handbook of procedural rules.
   
2.04.110   Public right to participate.
   
2.04.120   Decorum of council members and visitors.
   
2.04.130   Enforcement of decorum.
   
2.04.140   Food and beverages prohibited in council chambers and council
conference room.
   
2.04.150   Persons authorized to be within council and staff area; authorized
activities.
   
2.04.160   City council minutes.
   
2.04.170   Council not to interfere in administrative service.
   
2.04.180   City manager authorized to process council mail.
   
2.04.190   Standing committees - Special committees.
   
2.04.200   Standing committee meetings.
   
2.04.210   Committee on finance.
   
2.04.220   Committee on policy and services.
   
2.04.230   Council representatives on various public bodies.
   
2.04.240   Method of action.
   
2.04.250   Preparation of ordinances.
   
2.04.260   Prior approval of ordinances by administrative staff.
   
2.04.270   Introducing ordinances and resolutions for passage and approval.
   
2.04.280   Title of ordinance.
   
2.04.290   Ordaining clause.
   
2.04.300   Vote by voice vote, or roll call or electronic voting device.
   
2.04.310   Posting of ordinance.
   
2.04.320   Vote required on ordinances, resolutions and election of mayor and
vice-mayor.
   
2.04.330   Effective date of ordinances.
   
2.04.340   Signature by mayor or presiding officer, attestation and filing of
ordinances and resolutions.
   
2.04.350   Expense allowance for council members.
   
2.04.360   Salary of council members.
   *   Editor's Note: Prior Ordinance History: Ordinances 4207, 4337, 4338,
4440 and 4453 were previously codified in this chapter, and were not
specifically repealed by adoption of Ord. 4692.
2.04.010   Regular meeting.
   (a)   The council of the city shall hold regular meetings on the first three
Mondays of each month, at five-thirty p.m. in the council chambers of the City
Hall, 250 Hamilton Avenue, in said city unless the council chambers shall be
determined by a majority vote of the council to be inadequate or unavailable
for a meeting, in which event the council may designate some other suitable
place in the city for the conduct of the meeting. The determination to hold the
meeting at a place other than the council chambers may be made by the mayor
prior to the regular meeting date; provided, that notice of the change in place
for conduct of the meeting shall be published prior to the meeting in a
newspaper of general circulation published in the city, setting forth the
reasons for the change, and a copy of the notice shall be posted on the council
chamber door for at least twenty-four hours prior to the time scheduled for the
meeting and during the meeting. If the council adjourns its meeting from the
council chambers to another place, notice to adjourn and the new place for
holding the meeting shall be posted on the council chamber door during the time
the meeting is being held.
   (b)   Each year, no later than the third meeting in February, the council
shall by resolution schedule its vacation for that year. The resolution shall
designate the dates of this scheduled vacation and the city clerk will give
notice thereof by whatever means are deemed appropriate. During said scheduled
annual vacation, there shall be no regular meetings of the council nor of the
council standing committees, unless it is an adjourned regular meeting. The
mayor or a majority of the council may call a special meeting during the
scheduled vacation if necessary.
(Ord. 5588 § 2, 2023: Ord. 5250 § 2, 2014: Ord. 4692 § 1 (part), 2001)
2.04.020   Special meetings.
   To the greatest extent possible, special meetings called for other than
regular meeting days should be scheduled by a majority of the council present
and voting at a regular meeting.
(Ord. 4692 § 1 (part), 2001)
2.04.030   Closed session action reports.
   The council and any other city board or commission shall publicly report
actions taken in closed session related to any litigation, and the roll call
vote on such actions, unless the report would, in the written opinion of the
city attorney for specifically stated reasons, clearly jeopardize the city's
ability to effectuate service of process on one or more unserved parties,
impair the city's ability to resolve the matter through negotiation, mediation
or other form of settlement, or expose the city to potential liability or
litigation. Notwithstanding the city attorney's written opinion, the council
may under any circumstance, by majority vote, determine that it is in the
city's best interests to disclose actions taken in closed session related to
litigation. The public report shall be given as soon as possible, but no later
than the next regular meeting, and shall include the vote or abstention of
every member present. The city attorney's written opinion shall be made public,
along with any action taken and any vote thereon, as soon as any litigation is
concluded.
(Ord. 4692 § 1 (part), 2001)
2.04.040   Confidentiality of closed sessions.
   (a)   No person in attendance at a lawful closed session conducted by the
council or any other city board or commission shall disclose the substance or
effect of any matter discussed during the closed session, or any written
material distributed in connection with the closed session, until such time as
the council or such other board or commission determines by formal action that
confidentiality is no longer necessary or appropriate. This section shall not
preclude public reports of council action as provided in Section
2.04.030.
   (b)   Violations of this section shall be punishable by resolution of the
council censuring the person or persons responsible for the disclosure and any
other penalty provided under the this code or state law.
(Ord. 4692 § 1 (part), 2001)
2.04.050   Quorum.
   (a)   A majority of the council shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of business, but a lesser number may adjourn from time to time and
may compel by a notice the attendance of absent members refusing or neglecting
to attend such meetings. Disobedience of the notice may be punished at the
discretion of the council by a fine not exceeding $250.00 per absence. The
notice may be by any means giving actual notice to appear, and may be given by
the city clerk or any person authorized by the council.
(Ord. 4692 § 1 (part), 2001)
2.04.060   Election of mayor and vice-mayor.
   The council shall elect one of its members as mayor and one as vice-mayor at
the first regular council meeting in January each year. The election of mayor
and vice-mayor shall be by a vote of a majority of the members of the council.
The mayor shall be seated and assume the duties of presiding officer
immediately following the election of mayor and before the election of the
vice-mayor.
(Ord. 4692 § 1 (part), 2001)
2.04.070   Agenda.
   (a)   The city clerk shall prepare the agenda of all matters to be submitted
to the council at its regular meeting according to the order of business which
may be set forth in the council's procedural rules numbering each item
consecutively.
   (b)   Not later than 12:00 noon on the Wednesday preceding the next regular
meeting, the city clerk shall be notified by the city manager or city attorney
of the titles of all agenda items to be submitted to the council at its next
regular meeting. The city clerk shall cause a summarized digest of the agenda
to be published in a newspaper of general circulation at least twenty-four
hours before each meeting. This section shall be directory so that failure to
provide the notification and digest publication shall not prevent addition of
matters to the council agenda in any other manner allowed by law.
   (c)   The city manager, with prior approval of the mayor, is authorized to
designate upon the agenda of the council, and the city clerk shall publish in
the agenda digest, items that shall be taken up as the first item of business
or at a specific time during the course of the meeting. Upon said hour, the
council may suspend consideration of the item then under discussion, or may
complete consideration of such item, and then must commence consideration of
such item for which time is specified, without further action to take said item
out of order upon the agenda.
   (d)   All reports, ordinances, resolutions, contracts, documents or other
matters and supporting materials in sufficient quantity for full packet
distribution shall to the greatest extent possible be delivered to the city
clerk no later than the Thursday preceding the next regular meeting. The city
clerk shall prepare the agenda of all such matters according to the order of
business which may be set forth in the council's procedural rules numbering
each item consecutively. A complete copy of such agenda and the aforesaid
supporting materials shall to the greatest extent possible be delivered or
mailed to each council member and each department head so as to reach the
recipient not later than 7:00 p.m. on the Thursday preceding each council
meeting.
   (e)   The agenda and materials, including any letters from council members
to their colleagues concerning agenda items, shall be available to the public,
all newspapers of general circulation within the city, and in the office of the
city clerk, and shall be delivered to all city libraries, except the Children's
Library, by 9:00 a.m. on the Friday preceding each council meeting, and posted
in the council chambers during each meeting. Copies of the agenda may be
obtained during business hours no later than the Friday preceding the meeting
and the day of the meeting at the office of the city clerk, at all city
libraries, except the Children's Library, and in the council chambers during
each meeting.
(Ord. 4692 § 1 (part), 2001)
2.04.080   Duties of presiding officer.
   (a)   The mayor, the vice-mayor, or the temporary presiding officer
appointed by the mayor, shall take the chair at the time designated for the
start of the meeting, and shall call the council to order. In the absence of
the mayor and the vice-mayor, and failure of the mayor to appoint a temporary
presiding officer, the city clerk or the assistant city clerk, shall call the
council to order, whereupon a temporary presiding officer shall be elected by a
majority of the council members present. Upon the arrival of the mayor or the
vice-mayor, the temporary presiding officer shall relinquish the chair at the
conclusion of the business then before the council.
   (b)   The presiding officer shall preserve strict order and decorum at all
meetings of the council, announce the council's decision on all subjects and
decide all questions of order, subject to any appeal to the council which may
be permitted under the council's procedural rules. The presiding officer shall
vote on all questions as other members of the council. In the absence of the
mayor, the vice-mayor shall be the presiding officer of the council.
   (c)   In the event the vice-mayor is absent, the mayor shall have the right
to name any member of the council to perform the duties of the presiding
officer, but such substitution shall not extend beyond an adjournment, except
as provided for in subsection (d) of this section.
   (d)   All ordinances, resolutions, and other such documents adopted and
contracts approved by the council at a meeting shall be signed by the presiding
officer of that meeting.
(Ord. 4692 § 1 (part), 2001)
2.04.090   Roll call.
   At the beginning of each regular and special council meeting, the city clerk
shall call the roll of the council members and the names of those present and
those absent shall be entered in the minutes.
(Ord. 4692 § 1 (part), 2001)
2.04.100   Handbook of procedural rules.
   The council shall adopt by resolution a handbook of procedural rules
governing any aspect of the conduct of meetings and hearings for the council
and its standing committees, including but not limited to agenda requirements,
the order of business, rules of order, rules of evidence, closed session
procedures and rules for public participation in meetings. The handbook of
procedural rules shall be deemed guidelines and failure to comply with any
procedural rule shall not be the basis for challenge to or invalidation of any
action of the council, nor shall they be construed to create any independent
remedy or right of action of any kind.
(Ord. 4692 § 1 (part), 2001)
2.04.110   Public right to participate.
   It is the policy of the city of Palo Alto that members of the public shall
have the opportunity to speak to any regular or special meeting agenda item
before final action by the council. This policy shall be implemented by the
council procedural rules.
(Ord. 4692 § 1 (part), 2001)
2.04.120   Decorum of council members and visitors.
   (a)   All council members must preserve order and decorum at all times
during meetings. No council member shall, by conversation or otherwise, delay
or interrupt council proceedings or any council member while speaking. All
council members shall obey the orders of the presiding officer, except as
otherwise herein provided.
   (b)   Any member of the public desiring to address the council shall first
secure the permission of the presiding officer. No person, other than a council
member and the person having the floor, shall be permitted to enter into any
discussion or debate without the permission of the presiding officer.
   (c)   Any person who disrupts the conduct of a meeting or who makes threats
against any person or against public order and security while in the council
chamber shall be barred by the presiding officer from further attendance at the
meeting before the council and shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. The
presiding officer's decision may be appealed to the full council by any council
member.
(Ord. 4692 § 1 (part), 2001)
2.04.130   Enforcement of decorum.
   The chief of police or the representative of the chief of police shall be ex
officio sergeant-at-arms of the council. The ex officio sergeant-at-arms shall
carry out all orders and instructions given him or her by the presiding officer
for the purpose of maintaining order and decorum in the council chamber. Upon
instructions of the presiding officer, it shall be the duty of the ex officio
sergeant-at-arms or any police officer present to eject any such person from
the council chambers or place him or her under arrest, or both.
(Ord. 4692 § 1 (part), 2001)
2.04.140   Food and beverages prohibited in council chambers and council
conference room.
   No person shall consume food or beverages in the council chambers. This
section shall not prohibit council members or staff from bringing or consuming
beverages while in the council dais area or at the meeting table in the council
conference room. Violations of this section shall be an infraction.
(Ord. 4692 § 1 (part), 2001)
2.04.150   Persons authorized to be within council and staff area; authorized
activities.
   (a)   No person, except city officials, their representatives, and
representatives of news-gathering agencies, shall be permitted within the
council and staff area unless expressly permitted by the presiding officer or
city manager.
   (b)   During city council meetings or meetings of other city boards and
commissions, the city council chambers are to be used exclusively for the
direct conduct of city business through participation in the city council
meeting by personal attendance and observation of the proceedings, addressing
the council or other public officials when recognized and granted permission to
speak, and presenting written materials or other evidence to the council or
other public officials when recognized and granted permission to speak or offer
the written materials or evidence. No other activities of any kind shall be
permitted in the council chambers during city council meetings or meetings of
other city boards and commissions.
(Ord. 4692 § 1 (part), 2001)
2.04.160   City council minutes.
   (a)   The minutes of the council shall be kept by the city clerk. The
minutes shall be neatly typewritten or printed in a book kept for that purpose,
with a record of each particular type of business transacted set off in
paragraphs, with proper subheadings.
   (b)   The minutes shall include a record of all business discussed and all
actions taken at regular or special meetings of the council and council
standing committees. The minutes shall be action minutes. As soon as possible
after each council and committee meeting, the city clerk shall post draft
action minutes on the city’s website and transmit a copy to each council
member.
   (c)   The city clerk shall also prepare a summary of discussions and actions
taken at all regular and special council meetings and council standing
committees. The summaries, or sense minutes, are for the use and convenience of
council and the public and shall not be approved by council as official records
of proceedings. As soon as possible after each council and committee meeting,
sense minutes shall be made publicly available digitally on the city’s website
and hard copies available upon request.
   (d)   At the meeting following posting of the draft action minutes, council
minutes shall be agendized by the city clerk for the council’s approval.
Corrections to the minutes shall be made at the meeting. Council members may
submit their corrections in writing or orally to the city clerk’s office before
the time of the meeting. The city clerk shall distribute a written copy of all
corrections received during regular business hours to all council members at
the meeting.
(Ord. 5423 § 2, 2018: Ord. 5349 § 2, 2015: Ord. 4692 § 1 (part), 2001)
2.04.170   Council not to interfere in administrative service.
   Neither the council nor any of its committees or members shall direct,
request or attempt to influence, either directly or indirectly, the appointment
of any person to office or employment by the city manager or in any manner
interfere with the city manager or prevent the city manager from exercising
individual judgment in the appointment of officers and employees in the
administrative service. Except for the purpose of inquiry, the council and its
members shall deal with the administrative service solely through the city
manager, and neither the council nor any member thereof shall give orders to
any of the subordinates of the city manager, either publicly or privately.
(Ord. 4692 § 1 (part), 2001)
2.04.180   City manager authorized to process council mail.
   (a)   Any written communication, except anonymous correspondence, books, and
publications, addressed to the council shall be reproduced and distributed to
the council. Those items not reproduced shall be circulated to council members.
   (b)   The city manager is authorized to receive and open all mail addressed
to the council and give it immediate attention to the end that all
administrative business referred to in such communications and not necessarily
requiring council action may be disposed of between council meetings; provided
that, council members shall receive, in the next council packet after receipt
of any such communication addressed to the council, a copy of the communication
with a notation on it advising council members that staff will respond; and,
provided further, that, in a subsequent council packet, council members shall
receive a copy of any such staff response and that all actions taken pursuant
to such communications shall be reported to the council thereafter.
   (c)   Council members shall retain personally or provide copies to the city
clerk of any written communication regarding an item of business on a meeting
agenda that is known to have been distributed to a majority of the council. If
a public records request is made regarding such written communications, the
city clerk shall make copies of materials in his or her files available for
public inspection without delay, unless the record is exempt from disclosure.
Written material received by the city clerk during a meeting may be made
available for inspection after the meeting.
(Ord. 4692 § 1 (part), 2001)
2.04.190   Standing committees - Special committees.
   (a)   Not later than the second regular council meeting in January, the
mayor shall appoint two standing committees, consisting of three members each
from the members of the council. The mayor shall appoint each council member to
only one standing committee and shall appoint the chairperson of each
committee. The mayor, or the vice-mayor at the request of the mayor, may act as
an ex officio, voting member of each committee when one or more regular
committee members are absent.
   (b)   The standing committees shall be designated, respectively, committee
on finance and committee on policy and services, and shall meet as established
by Section
2.04.200.
   (c)   Council members may attend meetings of committees of which they are
not members, without participating in any manner, but only committee members or
ex officio committee members shall vote in committee in accordance with
subsection (a) of this section.
   (d)   Council members who submit matters to the council which are referred
to a standing committee may appear before the standing committee to which the
referral has been made in order to speak as proponents of the matter. Standing
committee meetings during which such referrals may be considered shall be
noticed as council meetings for the purpose of enabling the standing committee
to discuss and consider the matter with a quorum of the council present.
   (e)   In addition to standing committees the mayor may, subject to approval
of the council, appoint such other special committees of council members,
private citizens or both as deemed desirable and necessary to assist and advise
the council in its work.
(Ord. 5653 § 2, 2025: Ord. 5455 § 2, 2018: Ord. 4692 § 1 (part), 2001)
2.04.200   Standing committee meetings.
   (a)   Regular Meetings. Each standing committee shall meet on its designated
meeting night(s) at the City Hall. The policy and services committee shall meet
on the second Tuesday of each month and the finance committee shall meet on the
first and third Tuesday of each month. The meeting time for each standing
committee’s regular meetings shall be set by the City Council by ordinance or
resolution. When additional meetings are necessary, the chairperson of each
committee may call a special meeting as provided in subsection (b) of this
section.
   (b)   Special Meetings. Special meetings of standing committees may be
called by the chairperson with the consent of a majority of the committee’s
members, but a special meeting so called shall be held at City Hall, or other
locations if appropriate, and forty-eight hours’ notice must be given to every
council member.
(Ord. 5653 § 2, 2025: Ord. 4692 § 1 (part), 2001)
2.04.210   Committee on finance.
   It shall be the duty of the committee on finance to consider and make
recommendations on matters referred to it by the council relating to finance,
budget, audits, capital planning and debt.
(Ord. 4692 § 1 (part), 2001)
2.04.220   Committee on policy and services.
   It shall be the duty of the committee on policy and services to consider and
make recommendations on matters referred to it by the council relating to
parliamentary and administrative procedures and policy matters pertaining to
intergovernmental relations, personnel policies, planning and zoning, traffic
and parking, public works, and community and human services.
(Ord. 4692 § 1 (part), 2001)
2.04.230   Council representatives on various public bodies.
   When any member or members of the council are appointed by the mayor to
represent the city on county, area, district or state boards, committees or
commissions, such appointed member or members shall be the duly authorized
representatives and spokespersons for the council on or before such bodies and
no other council member shall speak as the council's representative and in
behalf of the council before such bodies under penalty of public censure by a
majority vote of the entire council. Nothing herein shall prevent a council
member from appearing before such body as a private citizen.
(Ord. 4692 § 1 (part), 2001)
2.04.240   Method of action.
   Legislative action shall be taken by the council only by means of an
ordinance or resolution.
(Ord. 4692 § 1 (part), 2001)
2.04.250   Preparation of ordinances.
   All ordinances, except ordinances initiated by the electors of the city
under the provisions of Article VI, Section 2 of the Charter, shall be prepared
in writing by the city attorney. No ordinance shall be prepared for
presentation to the council unless ordered by a majority vote of the council or
requested in writing by the city manager, or prepared on the initiative of and
by the city attorney.
(Ord. 4692 § 1 (part), 2001)
2.04.260   Prior approval of ordinances by administrative staff.
   All ordinances, except ordinances initiated by the electors of the city
under the provisions of Article VI, Section 2 of the Charter, resolutions and
contract documents, before presentation to the council, shall have been
approved as to form by the city attorney or the city attorney's authorized
representative, and, where substantive matters of administration are involved
shall have been examined for admission by the city manager or the city
manager's authorized representative.
(Ord. 4692 § 1 (part), 2001)
2.04.270   Introducing ordinances and resolutions for passage and approval.
   (a)   Council Member to Sponsor. Ordinances, resolutions, and other matters
or subjects requiring action by the council must be introduced and sponsored by
a council member, except that the city manager or city attorney may present
ordinances, resolutions or other matters or subjects to the council for
consideration.
   (b)   Second Reading of Ordinance. With the sole exception of ordinances
which take effect upon adoption, no ordinance shall be passed by the council on
the day of its introduction nor within ten days thereafter, nor at any other
time than at a regular or special meeting. Ordinances presented to the council
for second reading shall be agendized as consent items and may be removed for
debate and discussion only upon a majority vote of the council members present
and voting. This section shall not prevent council members from making short
comments on consent items.
   (c)   Amendments. A proposed ordinance may be amended between the time of
its introduction and the time of its final passage, providing its general scope
and original intention are retained. The correction of typographical or
clerical errors shall not constitute an amendment within the meaning of this
section.
   (d)   Emergency Ordinances Preserving Public Peace, Health or Safety. Any
ordinance declared by the council to be necessary as an emergency measure for
preserving the public peace, health or safety, and containing a statement of
the reasons for its urgency, may be introduced and adopted at one and the same
meeting if passed by a vote of four-fifths of the council members present.
(Ord. 5117, 2011: Ord. 4692 § 1 (part), 2001)
2.04.280   Title of ordinance.
   Each ordinance shall be preceded by a brief title which shall indicate the
subject and purpose thereof.
(Ord. 4692 § 1 (part), 2001)
2.04.290   Ordaining clause.
   The ordaining clause of all ordinances adopted by the council shall be
substantially as follows: "The Council of the City of Palo Alto does ordain as
follows,"and the ordaining clause of all ordinances adopted by the people shall
be: "The People of the City of Palo Alto do ordain as follows."
(Ord. 4692 § 1 (part), 2001)
2.04.300   Vote by voice vote, or roll call or electronic voting device.
   Any vote of the council in open session may be made by voice vote, roll
call, or electronic voting device. The presiding officer shall state the manner
in which the vote is to be taken. Whenever a recorded or roll call vote of the
council is in order, the names of the council members shall be listed in
alphabetical order.
(Ord. 4692 § 1 (part), 2001)
2.04.310   Posting of ordinance.
   All ordinances upon second reading shall be posted in a conspicuous place in
the council chambers. Failure to post the ordinance shall in no way affect the
passage of an ordinance. This requirement is directory rather than mandatory.
This section shall not apply to ordinances which take effect immediately.
(Ord. 4692 § 1 (part), 2001)
2.04.320   Vote required on ordinances, resolutions and election of mayor and
vice-mayor.
   No ordinances or resolution shall be introduced or passed, no appointment
made, no officer removed, and no contract shall be awarded without the
affirmative vote of a majority of the members of the council. The election of
mayor and vice-mayor shall be by a vote of a majority of the members of the
council. All other action of the council, unless subject to other statutory or
constitutional requirements, shall be deemed passed upon receiving a majority
vote of all council members present and voting.
(Ord. 4692 § 1 (part), 2001)
2.04.330   Effective date of ordinances.
   (a)   No ordinance adopted by the council shall become effective until the
commencement of the thirty-first day after the date of its adoption, except the
following which shall be effective upon adoption:
   (1)   An ordinance calling or otherwise relating to an election;
   (2)   An improvement proceeding ordinance when authorized by state or local
law;
   (3)   An ordinance declaring the amount of money necessary to be raised by
taxation, or fixing the rate of taxation, or levying the annual tax upon
property, or adopting a budget;
   (4)   An emergency ordinance adopted in the manner provided for in this
chapter;
   (5)   An ordinance annexing areas to the city; or
   (6)   An ordinance providing for tax levy or appropriation for the usual
current expenses of the city.
   (b)   An ordinance adopted after midnight but during a meeting which
commenced that same evening shall be deemed to have been adopted upon the
earlier of the two calendar days. Adoption of an ordinance at an adjourned
meeting shall be deemed to be adopted upon the calendar date at which the
adoption actually occurred. In computation of time under this section, the date
of adoption shall not be counted.
(Ord. 4692 § 1 (part), 2001)
2.04.340   Signature by mayor or presiding officer, attestation and filing of
ordinances and resolutions.
   All ordinances and resolutions adopted by the council shall be signed by the
officer presiding at the council meeting at which they were adopted, attested
by the city clerk and filed in the office of the city clerk.
(Ord. 4692 § 1 (part), 2001)
2.04.350   Expense allowance for council members.
   The council may by resolution adopt a travel and expense policy providing a
schedule for expense allowances for its members and an amount shall be included
in the council budget to reimburse members of the council for expenses incurred
in their service as members of the council.
(Ord. 5304 § 2, 2015: Ord. 4692 § 1 (part), 2001)
2.04.360   Salary of council members.
   (a)   The salary of the council members shall be $600.00 per month.
Effective January 1, 2017, the salary of the council members shall be $1,000
per month. Effective January 1, 2025, the salary of the council members shall
be $1,600 per month.
   (b)   A city council member may waive any or all of the compensation
permitted by this section.
(Ord. 5619 § 2, 2024: Ord. 5501 § 2, 2020: Ord. 5304 § 3, 2015: Ord. 4692 § 1
(part), 2001)
Chapter 2.06
OFFICIAL CITY SEAL AND LOGO
Sections:
   
2.06.010   The City Seal and City Logo
   
2.06.020   Use of City Seal and Logos
2.06.010   The City Seal and City Logo.
   (a)   The City Seal is described as follows: three concentric circles. The
outermost circle is broadest with shading inside of it. Between the outermost
and second circle the words "City of Palo Alto California" appear in capital
letters. Between the second and third circles the words "Incorporated April 23,
1894" appear. In the center of the circle is a green tree.
   (b)   The City Logo is described as follows: two concentric circles. The
outermost circle is broader and green without any shading inside of it. The
inner circle is shaded in green and has a picture of a white tree in the center
of the circle. Below or to the right the circles the words "City of Palo Alto"
appear in capital letters.
   (c)   The City Manager is authorized to develop and approve other city logos
and any logo so approved by the City Manager shall be retained on file with the
City Manager.
(Ord. 5204 § 1 (part), 2013)
2.06.020   Use of City Seal and Logos.
   (a)   Use of Seal. The City Seal and City logos shall only be used for the
official business of the City of Palo Alto, its City Council, boards and
commissions, officers or departments, except upon approval of the City Council
by ordinance or resolution. Except as provided for in this Section, no person,
other than the City of Palo Alto, shall reproduce, use, give away, sell, or
distribute any seal or logo, or facsimile thereof, purporting to be or
represented to be the City Seal or City Logo of the City of Palo Alto.
   (b)   Additional City Seals. The City of Palo Alto City Council retains the
right to create variations of the City Seal and City Logo and to adopt and
establish other official seals and logos. Such variations may include, but are
not limited to, centennial seals, or other seals which mark anniversaries,
events, and/or any other city occasion the City Council wishes to commemorate.
   (c)   Amendment of City Seal. The City Seal may be altered pursuant to
resolution of the City Council.
   (d)   Custodian of City Seal and other Council-adopted Seals. The City Clerk
shall be the official custodian of the City Seal, and any other city seals
adopted by the City Council.
   (e)   Custodian of City Logos. The City Manager shall be the official
custodian of City Logos.
   (f)   Use of City Seal or Logo by Employee Organization. A recognized
employee organization may use the City Seal or Logo, or facsimile thereof, on
stationery and printed materials used in the scope of its representation of
city employees and on articles of clothing intended for use by city employees.
   (g)   Promotional Use of City Seal or Logo. The City Manager or his/her
designee is empowered to authorize the use of the City Seal or Logo on items
that are offered for sale by the City of Palo Alto for the purpose of promoting
the City of Palo Alto. Prior to authorizing such use, the City Manager or his/
her designee shall procure from the Director of Administrative Services a plan
describing the items that would bear the City Seal or Logo. Such plan shall
include the criteria used in determining the proposed items and an analysis of
the marketability of each item. Only those items bearing the City seal or logo
that have been authorized by the City Manager or his/her designee pursuant to
this provision may be offered for sale by the City of Palo Alto.
   (h)   Penalty. Any person violating this chapter shall be guilty of an
infraction. A violation of this chapter may be prosecuted by city authorities
in the name of the people of the State of California, or redressed by civil
action. Every violation of this chapter is punishable by (1) a fine not
exceeding one hundred dollars ($100) for a first violation; (2) a fine not
exceeding two hundred dollars ($200) for a second violation of the same
ordinance within one year; (3) a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500)
for each additional violation of the same ordinance within one year. The city
reserves the right to take any other legal action it finds appropriate to
enforce this chapter.
(Ord. 5204 § 1 (part), 2013)
Chapter 2.07
POST-GOVERNMENT EMPLOYMENT REGULATIONS
Sections:
   
2.07.010   No representation for compensation.
   
2.07.020   Exception for government service.
2.07.010   No representation for compensation.
   No city officer, department head, or city employee whose appointment
requires confirmation by the city council under Title 2 of this code, shall,
for compensation, act as agent or attorney for, or otherwise represent any
other person or entity, by making any formal or informal appearance, or by
making any oral or written communication, before the city council, any city
board or commission, or any officer or employee of the city, if the appearance
or communication is made for the purpose of influencing administrative or
legislative action, or influencing any action or proceeding involving the
issuance, amendment, awarding or revocation of a permit, license, grant,
entitlement or contract, or the sale or purchase of goods, services or
property. Administrative action does not include any action that is solely
ministerial. This limitation shall expire one year after the officer,
department head or employee has left employment with the city.
(Ord. 5375 § 1, 2016; Ord. 4935 § 2 (part), 2007)
2.07.020   Exception for government service.
   Nothing in this chapter shall apply to any individual who appears or
communicates with the city on behalf of another government agency as a board
member, officer, or employee of that government agency. Nor shall it apply to
any former employee who is compensated by the city to provide transitional or
other services. This chapter shall not apply if the application is made by the
employee for themselves or their own business.
(Ord. 4935 § 2 (part), 2007)
Chapter 2.08
OFFICERS AND DEPARTMENTS*
Sections:
   
2.08.010   Officers of the city.
   
2.08.020   Approval of city manager's appointments.
   
2.08.030   Duties of officers.
   
2.08.040   General responsibilities of department heads.
   
2.08.050   Rules and regulations.
   
2.08.075   Care of city-owned property.
   
2.08.085   Fees and revenues.
   
2.08.090   Reports of department activities.
   
2.08.100   Holidays and other special days.
   
2.08.110   Office and duties of the city clerk.
   
2.08.120   Office and duties of the city attorney.
   
2.08.130   Office and duties of the city auditor.
   
2.08.140   Office and duties of the city manager.
   
2.08.145   Reserved.
   
2.08.150   Department of administrative services.
   
2.08.160   Department of human resources.
   
2.08.170   Police department.
   
2.08.180   Fire department.
   
2.08.185   Office of emergency services.
   
2.08.190   Department of public works.
   
2.08.200   Department of utilities.
   
2.08.210   Department of community services.
   
2.08.220   Department of planning and development services.
   
2.08.230   Department of libraries.
   
2.08.240   Department of information technology.
   
2.08.250   Reserved.
   
2.08.260   Office of transportation.
   
2.08.300   Books and records.
   
2.08.310   Oath of office.
   
2.08.320   Duties of the city manager, relating to health.
   
2.08.330   Health officer.
   
2.08.340   Summons.
   
2.08.350   Powers and duties of health officer.
   
2.08.360   Interference with health officer prohibited.
   
2.08.370   Reserved.
   *   Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history: Ordinance Nos. 1405, 2146, 2260,
2305, 2316, 2389, 2429, 2447, 2452, 2510, 2520, 2528, 2569, 2611, 2635, 2662,
2669, 2739, 2808, 2960, 3060, 3149, 3257, 3414, 3507, 3514, 3546, 3709, 3731,
3762, 3841, 3927, 3930, 4036, 4122.
2.08.010   Officers of the city.
   (a)   The following shall be considered officers of the city:
   (1)   City manager;
   (2)   City attorney;
   (3)   City clerk;
   (4)   City auditor;
   (5)   Assistant city manager.
(Ord. 4274 § 1 (part), 1995)
2.08.020   Approval of city manager's appointments.
   Appointments to the following positions shall be made by the city manager
with the approval of the council:
   (a)   Assistant city manager;
   (b)   Director of administrative services;
   (c)   Chief of police;
   (d)   Fire chief;
   (e)   Director of human resources;
   (f)   Director of planning and development services;
   (g)   Director of utilities;
   (h)   Director of public works - city engineer;
   (i)   Director of community services;
   (j)   Director of libraries;
   (k)   Director of information technology; and
   (l)   Director of the office of emergency services.
(Ord. 5494 § 1, 2020: Ord. 4809 § 1, 2003: Ord. 4274 § 1 (part), 1995)
2.08.030   Duties of officers.
   Each officer shall perform all duties required of his or her office by state
laws, the Charter, and ordinances of the city, and such duties not in conflict
therewith as may be required either by the council or the city manager,
whichever makes the appointment.
(Ord. 4274 § 1 (part), 1995)
2.08.040   General responsibilities of department heads.
   (a)   Each council-appointed officer shall be immediately responsible to the
council, and the head of each other department shall be immediately responsible
to the city manager, for the effective administration of his or her department
and all activities assigned thereto. In the case of vacancy in office or during
the absence of any department head, the city manager may designate an interim
acting head or the city manager may, with the approval of the council, perform
personally the functions of any department head under the city manager's
control. All department heads shall have the following responsibilities:
   (1)   To participate as a member of the city manager's management team and
to review and help develop overall approaches to city problems and priorities;
   (2)   To provide guidance and long-term planning for his or her own
department;
   (3)   To formulate and recommend policies and procedures governing the
operation of the department, and to administer such policies and procedures
when approved and conduct such activities for the city;
   (4)   To work with department management personnel in interpreting policies
of the city council and city manager, establishing department priorities,
monitoring department performance, identifying action which will improve the
department's level of performance and coordinating the department's activities
with other city departments;
   (5)   To formulate for city manager approval plans and programs pertaining
to the department's functions and to implement such approved plans and
programs;
   (6)   To proceed as directed by law on all matters requiring official action
by the department;
   (7)   To keep informed as to the latest practices in their particular fields
and inaugurate with the approval of the city manager and council, as
appropriate, such new practices as appear to be of benefit to the municipal
service and to the public.
   (b)   All department heads and council-appointed officers shall advise and
assist all other departments heads and council-appointed officers on matters
within their respective provinces and will coordinate their activities and
cooperate with each other on matters of mutual concern.
   (c)   Any department head or council-appointed officer may delegate to
members of the department coming under his or her direction such duties and
responsibilities as he or she deems advisable, together with proportionate
authority for their fulfillment, but in no case may a department head delegate
overall responsibility or any accountability.
   (d)   Each department and council-appointed officer head shall be
responsible for the preservation of all records under his or her jurisdiction
and shall provide a system of filing and indexing the same. No records,
reports, correspondence, or other data relative to the business of any
department shall be destroyed or removed permanently, except in accordance with
a records retention program approved pursuant to state law.
(Ord. 4274 § 1 (part), 1995)
2.08.050   Rules and regulations.
   (a)   The city manager may prescribe and enforce such rules and regulations
as may be deemed necessary for the operation and management of all offices and
departments coming under his or her control, and may recommend to the council
for approval rules and regulations for the management of all offices and
departments of the city.
   The city manager shall communicate to all parties concerned the content of
such rules and regulations, and in addition shall file with the city clerk a
true copy, which is to be kept in a suitable record. This record shall be
available for inspection in accordance with state law.
   (b)   The city manager may prescribe and enforce regulations for entry into
or use by members of the public of any city real property, building, structure,
or other facility. Such regulations may restrict or prohibit the times and
duration of entry into or use by members of the public of specified city
facilities. Such regulations may restrict or prohibit the entry into or use by
members of the public of motor vehicles, bicycles, skateboards, roller skates,
or other conveyances on specified city facilities. Such regulations may
restrict or prohibit the personal conduct of any member of the public within
specified city facilities. Any such regulations shall be prescribed and
enforced for the purpose of providing maximum access to and use of city
facilities by members of the public consistent with the public health, safety,
comfort, and convenience of all other public users of the city facilities.
   Any regulation prescribed by the city manager for public entry into or use
of any city real property, building, structure or other facility shall become
effective on the fifteenth day following notice sent to the city council;
provided, however, that any regulation may be terminated or modified at any
time by resolution or ordinance. It shall be unlawful for any person to disobey
or fail to observe any such regulation of which such person has actual notice,
however given, or constructive notice through appropriate signs or notices
posted on affected city real property, building, structure, or other facility.
   Any regulation prescribed by the city manager for public entry into or use
of any city real property, building, structure or other facility shall be filed
with the city clerk and shall be available for inspection in accordance with
state law.
(Ord. 4439 § 2, 1997: Ord. 4274 § 1 (part), 1995)
2.08.075   Care of city-owned property.
   Each department head and council-appointed officer shall be responsible for
care and safekeeping of all city-owned property used by or in the custody of
the department and shall take steps as necessary to ensure that the use or
condition of said property does not incur legal liability or loss for the city
or its officers and employees. The term "property" as used herein includes
land, buildings, structures, vehicles, equipment, tools, furniture, supplies,
money, securities, and components of the utilities system.
(Ord. 4274 § 1 (part), 1995)
2.08.085   Fees and revenues.
   Each department head and council-appointed officer shall be responsible for
recommending to the department of administrative services a schedule of fees
and rates to be charged for services performed by the department, and for
assuring that such funds as may be collected in the operation of the department
shall be deposited with the department of administrative services in accordance
with policies and procedures established for the collection and deposit of
municipal funds.
(Ord. 4274 § 1 (part), 1995)
2.08.090   Reports of department activities.
   Reports of the activities of each department shall be made to the city
manager at such times and in such form as determined by the city manager.
Unless directed otherwise by the city manager, each department shall provide
periodic reports which summarize the department's performance, present
position, and future plans. The department shall provide other such special
reports as may be required from time to time.
(Ord. 4274 § 1 (part), 1995)
2.08.100   Holidays and other special days.
   (a)   Regular Holidays. The following days are declared to be holidays on
which municipal business of the city shall be suspended:
Every Saturday and Sunday;
New Year's Day, January 1;
Martin Luther King Day, the third Monday in January;
Washington's Birthday, the third Monday in February;
Memorial Day, the last Monday in May;
Independence Day, July 4;
Labor Day, the first Monday in September;
Columbus Day, the second Monday in October;
Veterans Day, November 11;
Thanksgiving Day, the fourth Thursday in November, and the day following;
Christmas Day, December 25.
   In the event that any of the aforementioned days, except Sunday itself,
falls on Sunday, the following Monday shall be considered a holiday. In the
event that any of the aforementioned days, except Saturday itself, falls on
Saturday, the preceding Friday shall be considered a holiday.
   (b)   Other Special Days. The mayor may proclaim a day or any portion
thereof as a holiday, a day of mourning, or other similar special day for the
observation or commemoration of a noteworthy public event, provided that
municipal business shall not be suspended on such day or portion thereof,
unless the mayor's proclamation so states.
(Ord. 4274 § 1 (part), 1995)
2.08.110   Office and duties of the city clerk.
   (a)   The office of the city clerk shall be under the direction of a city
clerk who shall be accountable to the city council. The duties of the city
clerk shall be as follows:
   (1)   To keep a record of the proceedings of the council and of such other
bodies as the council may require;
   (2)   To keep all ordinances, resolutions, contracts, and agreements of the
city and authenticate such records as may be necessary;
   (3)   To publish ordinances and other legal notices as required;
   (4)   To keep and maintain a record of all elections of the city and to be
responsible for the conduct of elections;
   (5)   To keep informed on all matters pending before the council and before
other bodies as the council may require;
   (6)   To have power to administer oaths or affirmations in connection with
all matters relating to the municipality;
   (7)   To have authority to appoint deputies and assistants in accordance
with control procedures established for that purpose and administered by the
department of human resources;
   (8)   To provide public information regarding city council activities;
   (9)   To be responsible for management of the city's records and information
management program;
   (10)   To perform such other duties as may be required by the Charter or as
the council may require.
(Ord. 5494 § 2 (part), 2020: Ord. 4274 § 1 (part), 1995)
2.08.120   Office and duties of the city attorney.
   (a)   The office of the city attorney shall be under the direction of a city
attorney who shall be accountable to the city council. The duties of the city
attorney shall be as follows:
   (1)   To advise the council, the city manager, boards, commissions and all
officers and departments of the city on all matters of law;
   (2)   To draft, or assist in the drafting of, all ordinances, resolutions,
agreements, and contracts to be made or entered into by the city, and approve
the form of such instruments;
   (3)   To prosecute all violators of city ordinances and to represent the
city in all actions at law;
   (4)   To have authority to appoint deputies and assistants in accordance
with control procedures for that purpose and administered by the department of
human resources; provided, that the appointment of the chief assistant city
attorney shall be approved by at least a majority of the council;
   (5)   To defend any officer or employee of the city in any action arising
out of the performance of the official duties of such officer or employee;
   (6)   To perform such other duties as may be required by the Charter or as
the council may require.
(Ord. 5494 § 2 (part), 2020: Ord. 5427 § 1, 2018: Ord. 4274 § 1 (part), 1995)
2.08.130   Office and duties of the city auditor.
   (a)   The office of the city auditor shall be under the direction of a city
auditor who shall be accountable to the city council. The duties of the city
auditor shall be as follows:
   (1)   Be knowledgeable in conducting performance audits under Government
Auditing Standards, as established by the Comptroller General of the United
States; public administration; public policy; and public financial and fiscal
practices;
   (2)   Be a licensed certified public accountant (CPA) or certified internal
auditor (CIA);
   (3)   Establish an organizational structure appropriate to carrying out the
responsibilities and functions of this section; and
   (4)   Set and maintain a tone for ethical behavior, establish a positive
ethical environment for the office of the city auditor, and conduct audit work
in accordance with the principles of integrity, objectivity, confidentiality,
and competency.
   (b)   The mission of the office of the city auditor is to promote honest,
efficient, effective, economical, and fully accountable and transparent city
government. To fulfill this mission, the office of the city auditor shall
conduct performance audits and perform nonaudit services of any city
department, program, service, or activity as approved by the city council. The
purpose of these audits is to provide the city council, city management, the
residents of Palo Alto, and other stakeholders with independent and objective
analysis as to whether management is using its financial, physical, and
informational resources effectively, efficiently, economically, ethically, and
equitably, and in compliance with laws, regulations, contract and grant
requirements, and city policies and procedures. Audits shall be conducted and
nonaudit services provided in accordance with Government Auditing Standards, as
established by the Comptroller General of the United States, Governmental
Accountability Office.
   (c)   In addition to the aforementioned responsibilities, the office of the
city auditor shall:
   (1)   Select and recommend to the city council for approval an independent
certified public accounting firm to conduct the city’s annual external
financial audit and coordinate the annual external financial audit with the
approved firm.
   (2)   Perform other functions consistent with the provisions of this
section.
   (d)   At the beginning of each fiscal year, the city auditor shall prepare
an annual audit plan for city council approval. The plan will be issued on the
office of the city auditor website, with written notification to the city
council, and be placed on the appropriate committee agenda. The plan shall
identify the preliminary objectives of each audit to be performed, reflecting
the purpose of the engagement and a preliminary description of the areas that
may be addressed. The city auditor will review the plan and consult with the
city manager prior to submitting it to the appropriate committee of the city
council for approval. The city manager may identify areas where the city will
benefit from performance audits or a nonaudit service. The city auditor may
review the plan with and seek the advice of the city attorney prior to
submitting it to the appropriate committee of the city council for approval.
The annual audit plan may be amended during the fiscal year with approval of
the city council.
   (e)   The office of the city auditor shall prepare quarterly reports
describing the status and progress towards completing the audits. The reports
will be issued on the office of the city auditor website, with written
notification to the city council, and be placed on the appropriate committee
agenda.
   (f)   The city auditor shall prepare a written report of the results of each
audit conducted and will be responsible for retaining a copy as a permanent
record. The reports shall meet the reporting requirements specified in the
Government Auditing Standards and the views of the city manager.
   (1)   Within two weeks after receiving the final draft report, the city
manager, or his or her designee, will prepare an official written response to
the findings and recommendations contained within the report and provide the
response to the office of the city auditor. The city auditor and city manager
may agree to an extension of the two-week time frame if requested by the city
manager. If a response is not received within the established time frame, the
office of the city auditor will issue the audit report without management’s
response.
   (2)   The office of the city auditor shall also provide a copy of the draft
report to the city attorney for review and comment, including legal advice
relating to disclosure of information contained in the report; and to other
appropriate officials as determined by the city auditor.
   (g)   Audit reports and other work products of the office of the city
auditor will be placed on the agenda of the city council or appropriate city
council committee consistent with the following general guidelines:
   (1)   Information items and items that will be discussed in a study session
will be placed on the council agenda.
   (2)   Audit reports and other audit work products will be placed on the
finance committee agenda when the subject matter focuses primarily on
enterprise fund departments, functions, or activities, or is concerned
primarily with financial matters.
   (3)   All other audit reports and audit work products will be placed on the
policy and services committee agenda.
   (h)   The city auditor will prepare and issue an annual report on the status
of recommendations made in completed audits. The report will reflect the status
as reported by the city manager or his or her designee. The report will be
issued on the office of the city auditor website, with written notification to
the city council, in the first quarter of the fiscal year and be placed on the
appropriate committee agenda. Further follow-up audits will be conducted as
determined and recommended by the city auditor and approved by the city
council.
   (i)   (1)   Unless prohibited by law, the office of the city auditor will
have unrestricted access to all sources of information, property, and personnel
relevant to 1) the performance of a council-approved audit or 2) the
identification of potential risks when developing the annual audit plan.
Department management and staff will not intentionally withhold, hide, or
destroy any information or property that may be potential evidence in a planned
or ongoing audit. Nothing in this section shall authorize the office of the
city auditor to have access to documents, records, and information related to
the office of any elected official.
   (2)   The office of the city auditor will handle documents and information
received with the same prudence exercised by those normally accountable for
them and consistent with appropriate policies and regulations and the ethical
principles cited in the Government Auditing Standards.
   (j)   To the extent possible, the office of the city auditor will
accommodate an area’s daily operations in scheduling and conducting audits.
(Ord. 5494 § 2 (part), 2020: Ord. 5281 § 2, 2014; Ord. 4601 § 1, 1999: Ord.
4274 § 1 (part), 1995)
2.08.140   Office and duties of the city manager.
   (a)   The office of the city manager shall be under the direction of a city
manager who shall be accountable to the city council. The duties of the city
manager shall be as follows:
   (1)   To have the duties as set forth in the Charter;
   (2)   To approve expenditures, policies, and procedures for the departments
coming under control of the city manager;
   (3)   To sign for the city-approved contracts, agreement, and leases which
do not require the signature of the mayor;
   (4)   To recommend the sale or lease of material, equipment, property, and
real estate of the city to the council;
   (5)   To negotiate contracts and leases as authorized by the council;
   (6)   To establish a schedule of fees and rates for all types of services
performed by departments under his or her control, except for those which the
city council authorizes;
   (7)   To recommend changes to the basic organization plan of departments
under the control of the city manager, and to enforce changes approved by the
council;
   (8)   To have the authority to appoint deputies and assistants in accordance
with control procedures established for that purpose and administered by the
department of human resources; provided, that the appointment of the assistant
city manager shall be approved by the council in accordance with the City
Charter;
   (9)   Notwithstanding Section
2.08.040, to have the authority to delegate to the assistant city manager the
direct reporting responsibility over any department head under the control of
the city manager;
   (10)   To provide economic resources planning services for the city, as
needed; and
   (11)   To perform such duties as may be required by the Charter or as the
council may require.
(Ord. 5494 § 2 (part), 2020: Ord. 4274 § 1 (part), 1995)
2.08.145   Reserved*.
   *   Editor’s Note: Former Section 2.08.145, pertaining to consultation with
city auditor, was originally adopted by Section 1 of Ord. No. 4274, and was
repealed by Section 2 of Ord. No. 5274.
2.08.150   Department of administrative services.
   (a)   The department of administrative services shall be under the control
of a director of administrative services who shall be accountable to the city
manager to carry out the duties of this department. The duties of the
department of administrative services shall be as follows:
   (1)   Provide administrative support for the finance committee of the city
council;
   (2)   Management and preparation of the city's budget reports in
coordination with the city manager and in accordance with the requirements set
forth in the Municipal Code and City Charter, includes analysis and review of
citywide revenue and expenses and departmental budget requests;
   (3)   Provide analytical resources for studies on organization, staffing
utilization, management and procedures for the city, in order to provide cost-
effective municipal services;
   (4)   To participate in intermediate and long-range financial planning
strategies and to develop and recommend methods for financing city programs and
projects;
   (5)   Manage production of the city's annual financial reports, general-
purpose financial statements, and comprehensive annual financial report in
accordance with city ordinances, legal requirements and generally accepted
accounting principles:
   (A)   generate appropriate financial reports as required by county, state
and federal agencies;
   (B)   coordinate financial audit activities with appropriate parties
(internal and external).
   (6)   Administer the procurement of supplies, materials and equipment and
contracts for general services for the city. Control emergency purchasing in
accordance with approved procedures when centralized procurement is
impracticable;
   (7)   Manage and complete the accounts payable and payroll processes;
   (8)   Operate and maintain the warehouse and storage facilities of the city;
   (9)   Administer the city's responsibilities regarding surplus property;
   (10)   Provide centralized mail and messenger services and printing and
other duplicating services for all city departments;
   (11)   Administer the investment of city funds and banking agreements in
accordance with city policy and state law;
   (12)   Administer and manage the issuance of debt by the city or financing
authority entities as may be formed by the city from time to time;
   (13)   Administer and enforce all ordinances and regulations of the city
relating to the imposition and collection of city taxes and other miscellaneous
accounts receivables, to provide revenue collections services and to collect
delinquent receivables;
   (14)   Administer and supervise real property such as secure easement titles
and leases, negotiate for the purchase or disposition of real property on
behalf of the city, and manage all property owned by the city and leased to
other persons or agencies;
   (15)   Perform or cause to be performed all duties required by this code or
other law of the director of finance, tax administrator, manager of purchasing,
supervisor of revenue collections, chief financial officer, city treasurer and
city controller;
   (16)   To perform such other duties as may be required.
(Ord. 5494 § 2 (part), 2020: Ord. 5274 § 3, 2014; Ord. 4274 § 1 (part), 1995)
2.08.160   Department of human resources.
   (a)   The department of human resources shall be under the supervision of a
director of human resources who shall be accountable to the city manager. The
duties of the office of human resources shall be as follows:
   (1)   To be responsible for the management and administration of the
personnel program in accordance with rules and regulations established in the
merit system;
   (2)   To administer control procedures for the recruitment, employment and
promotion of personnel of the city;
   (3)   To follow such personnel procedures and practices as may be approved
by the city manager;
   (4)   To advise and assist the city manager in the preparation of wage
scales for recommendation to the council;
   (5)   To prepare and maintain such job and position classifications and
specifications as may be required;
   (6)   To keep and maintain complete personnel records;
   (7)   To coordinate such employee safety programs as may be directed by the
city manager;
   (8)   To coordinate and administer the worker's compensation program;
   (9)   To coordinate and administer such employee-in-service training
programs as may be directed by the city manager;
   (10)   To perform all duties defined in the merit system and such other
duties as may be required;
   (11)   To establish procedures for the operation of the city's insurance
program and to keep the city manager advised as to the status of the program;
   (12)   As directed by the city manager, to represent the city in meet-and-
confer negotiations with recognized employee groups and administer resulting
agreements;
   (13)   To perform or cause to be performed all duties required by this code
or other law of the loss control officer and risk manager;
   (14)   To perform such other duties as may be required.
(Ord. 5494 § 2 (part), 2020: Ord. 4274 § 1 (part), 1995)
2.08.170   Police department.
   (a)   The police department shall be under the direction of a chief of
police who shall be accountable to the city manager. The duties of the police
department shall be as follows:
   (1)   To be responsible for the preservation of the public peace and order,
the prevention and detection of crime, the apprehension of criminal suspects,
the protection of persons and property, and the enforcement of law;
   (2)   To enforce all traffic regulations, and to consult as necessary with
the transportation department on matters concerning traffic engineering;
   (3)   To coordinate the use of the regional Silicon Valley Regional
Communications System by all city departments, to maintain back-up radio
capabilities, and to provide radio dispatching service for all city departments
requiring such service;
   (4)   To ensure that unclaimed property received by the police department is
sold at a public auction pursuant to the provisions of this code;
   (5)   To administer the police department's parking enforcement program;
   (6)   To enforce all city ordinances and state laws relating to the care,
control, impounding and rescue of all animals; and to perform or cause to be
performed all duties required by this code of animal control officers; and
   (7)   To perform such other duties as may be required.
   (b)   For organizational purposes, the police department shall consist of
the following divisions: administration, field services, investigative
services, and technical services.
(Ord. 5494 § 2 (part), 2020: Ord. 4274 § 1 (part), 1995)
2.08.180   Fire department.
   (a)   The fire department shall be under the control of a fire chief who
shall be accountable to the city manager to carry out the duties of this
department. The duties of the fire department shall be as follows:
   (1)   To be responsible for the prevention of fires, the protection of life
and property against fires, and the removal of fire hazards and preparation of
emergency plans;
   (2)   To be responsible for the rendering of emergency medical services for
which the department is equipped, including emergency medical transportation
services;
   (3)   To inspect business and other premises for fire hazards, and to
enforce the fire prevention code and to conduct educational fire prevention and
risk reduction programs;
   (4)   To protect the environment from the adverse effects of hazardous
materials and to coordinate and administer programs to minimize problems
associated with the use and disposal of hazardous materials;
   (5)   To serve as an information resource for the public, other city
departments, industry and the media concerning the areas described in this
section;
   (6)   To perform or cause to be performed all duties required by this code
or other law of the fire marshal;
   (7)   To perform such other duties as may be required.
(Ord. 5494 § 2 (part), 2020: Ord. 4274 § 1 (part), 1995)
2.08.185   Office of Emergency Services.
   (a)   The office of emergency services shall be under the direction of the
director of the office of emergency services, who shall be accountable to the
city manager. The duties of the office of emergency services shall be as
defined in Section
2.12.050.
(Ord. 5494 § 2 (part), 2020)
2.08.190   Department of public works.
   (a)   The department of public works shall be under the direction of the
director of public works-city engineer, who shall be accountable to the city
manager. The duties of the department of public works shall be as follows:
   (1)   To be responsible for the planning, design, construction, maintenance,
repair and improvement of all city facilities and property owned or operated by
the city, including the approval of plans and designs for such improvements
within the meaning of California Government Code section 830.6, except as
otherwise provided in this code;
   (2)   To assist with the preparation of the capital improvement program and
assist the city manager, as directed, in reviewing capital project budget
requests;
   (3)   To provide engineering services as required including development and
implementation of capital improvement program projects;
   (4)   To provide permitting and inspection services relating to private
construction of public facilities and private construction affecting city
property;
   (5)   To schedule repairs and preventative maintenance to ensure that the
streets and sidewalks are maintained in a safe, and structurally sound, and
sanitary manner, and to maintain all markings for traffic control painted or
placed upon the streets or curbs;
   (6)   To maintain trees, parking lots, paved bicycle paths, and underpasses
in a safe and aesthetic manner; and to maintain trees adjacent to electric
power lines in order to minimize electrical outages caused by tree limbs;
   (7)   To coordinate the needs of the city departments in their requirements
for motorized equipment, to operate the city garage, actively supervise a
preventative maintenance program, keep the operating records of all motorized
equipment used or operated by the city, monitor the use of pool cars, and
maintain fuel sites at city facilities;
   (8)   To be responsible for the management, regulation, operation, system
rehabilitation, and capital improvements of the storm water management
enterprise, and to coordinate related activities with interested municipalities
or special districts;
   (9)   To be responsible for refuse collection, source reduction, recycling,
street sweeping, and long-term resource recovery and disposal activities of the
refuse enterprise;
   (10)   To be responsible for the operation and capital improvements of the
regional water quality control plant, on behalf of the city and its partner
agencies within the regional service area; the permitting and enforcement of
regulations with respect to industrial discharges into the sewer system; and
the development of programs and treatment methods to ensure the maximum
feasible compliance with regulations protecting the San Francisco Bay and
environment;
   (11)   To be responsible for the general aviation operation and management
of the Palo Alto municipal airport, the adoption and enforcement of general
aviation rules and regulations applicable to parties doing general aviation-
related business at the airport, and the management and control of all general
aviation and non-general aviation-related leases, licenses, permits, easements
and other contracts and authorizations issued to or in connection with parties
doing business at the airport;
   (12)   To perform such other duties as may be required.
(Ord. 5494 § 2 (part), 2020: Ord. 5260 § 3, 2014; Ord. 4274 § 1 (part), 1995)
2.08.200   Department of utilities.
   (a)   The department of utilities shall be organized and administered under
the direction of a director of utilities who shall be accountable to the city
manager. The duties of the department of utilities shall be as follows:
   (1)   To plan, direct and coordinate the operations of the city's utilities
department;
   (2)   To coordinate the forecasting of the city's long-range utility needs
and develop financial plans to ensure that the city's utilities rate, reserve
and revenue levels will be able to meet customer service, operating and
financial requirements;
   (3)   To provide administrative support to the utilities advisory commission
on matters relating to the department;
   (4)   To generate appropriate reports as may be required by county, state
and federal agencies or by law;
   (5)   To operate a responsive customer service center, to manage customer
service utilities billing, inquiries and complaints and to provide a fast and
courteous response to each customer's request for utility service;
   (6)   To establish rates to offset operating costs of all city utility
operations designated as utilities enterprise funds and to provide a fair and
reasonable rate of return on the city's capital improvement investment in those
utilities designated as utilities enterprise funds;
   (7)   To provide technical or other efficiency services to enable
residential, commercial and industrial utilities customers to reduce their
operating costs, improve the quality of the environment and maintain a high
level of customer satisfaction;
   (8)   To forecast and plan the acquisition and disposition of sufficient
least-cost resource supplies to meet existing and future supply requirements in
an environmentally acceptable manner;
   (9)   To negotiate for the purchase and sale of water, gas and electricity
and contract with water, gas and electric power producers, suppliers and
marketers for resource supply at the best available price or cost;
   (10)   To recommend capital construction and improvements of all utility
systems, and to administer such programs when approved;
   (11)   To inspect all construction work done by or for the utilities and
require compliance with all contracts made in connection therewith;
   (12)   To prepare or cause to be prepared all utility maps of the utilities,
and to keep and to maintain such records as are necessary for the fulfillment
of this function;
   (13)   To provide operations, maintenance, and construction necessary to
ensure the safe, efficient and reliable delivery of electric, water, gas and
wastewater collection services to all customers;
   (14)   To provide operations, maintenance, and construction necessary to
ensure the proper operation of the city's traffic signal, street lighting and
communication systems;
   (15)   To perform or cause to be performed all duties required by this code
or other law of the director of utilities and the department of utilities; and
   (16)   To perform such other duties as may be required.
   (b)   For organizational purposes, the department of utilities shall consist
of the following divisions: administration; customer support services; resource
management; engineering; and operations.
(Ord. 5494 § 2 (part), 2020: Ord. 4906 § 1, 2006: Ord. 4813 § 1, 2004: Ord.
4624 § 1, 2000: Ord. 4274 § 1 (part), 1995)
2.08.210   Department of community services.
   (a)   The department of community services shall be under the control of a
director of community services who shall be accountable to the city manager to
carry out the duties of this department. The duties of the department of
community services shall be as follows:
   (1)   To develop and provide programs for increased knowledge, artistic
expression, physical activity, social service assistance, youth and teen
leadership, and enjoyment of the outdoors, either directly or in cooperation
with the resources of the community;
   (2)   To manage the use, scheduling, and operation of municipal parks;
playgrounds; open space preserves; swimming pools; community centers; camps;
athletic centers, courts and fields; golf course; theaters; cultural centers;
museums; interpretative centers; and activities connected therewith in a safe
manner;
   (3)   To maintain landscaped areas, including district and neighborhood
parks, mini-parks, athletic fields, and other city facilities in a safe and
aesthetic manner; and to maintain open space preserves in a manner that is safe
and protective of the natural environment;
   (4)   To plan, monitor, and commission public art associated with municipal
and private development projects;
   (5)   To prepare and recommend annual operating and capital improvement
budgets; monitor expenditures and revenues; review and exercise final approval
authority over all department expenditures; and review and analyze fee
structure and fee collection;
   (6)   To provide staff advisory and technical assistance to the human
relations commission, the public art commission, the parks and recreation
commission and such similar groups that may be created or established;
   (7)   To perform or cause to be performed all duties required by this code
or other law of the community services department; and
   (8)   To perform such other duties as may be required.
(Ord. 5494 § 2 (part), 2020: Ord. 5095 § 1, 2010: Ord. 5015 § 1, 2008: Ord.
4854 § 1, 2004: Ord. 4809 § 2, 2003: Ord. 4708 § 1, 2001: Ord. 4274 § 1 (part),
1995)
2.08.220   Department of planning and development services.
   (a)   The department of planning and development services shall be under the
control of a director of planning and development services who shall be
accountable to the city manager to carry out the duties of this department. The
duties of the department of planning and development services shall be as
follows:
   (1)   Maintain, update and oversee implementation of the city's
comprehensive plan;
   (2)   Prepare land use studies and analysis supporting policy
recommendations to the city council;
   (3)   Review and process development applications in accordance with
applicable local, state and federal regulations or rulings, including all
functions designated by law to the building official;
   (4)   Provide technical assistance and support to the planning and
transportation commission, architectural review board and historic resources
board;
   (5)   Prepare and submit annual reports related to land use planning and the
building industry as required by council direction, local ordinance, state and
federal laws;
   (6)   Identify staff to serve as and to implement the responsibilities of
the ADA coordinator as required by the Americans with Disabilities Act;
   (7)   Enforce the provisions of the municipal code related to land use
planning and zoning, building regulations and other provisions as directed by
the city manager;
   (8)   Maintain records related land use planning and development,
demographic and census information; support administrative functions; prepare
balanced budgets; and foster an environment that promotes staff growth and
professional development to advance department responsibilities and program
objectives;
   (9)   Perform or cause to be performed all duties required by this code or
other law of the building official, chief building official, building
inspector, zoning administrator, director of planning, and director of planning
and development services; and,
   (10)   To perform other such duties as may be required.
(Ord. 5494 § 2 (part), § 3, 2020: Ord. 4274 § 1 (part), 1995)
2.08.230   Department of libraries.
   (a)   The department of libraries shall be organized and administered under
the control of a director of libraries who shall be accountable to the city
manager to carry out the duties of the department. The duties of the department
of libraries shall be as follows:
   (1)   To manage, operate, direct, and control a continuing municipal library
system providing access to informational services for the residents of Palo
Alto;
   (2)   To generate appropriate reports as may be required by county, state,
and federal agencies or by law;
   (3)   To review and approve adult, teen, and children's service programs and
activities;
   (4)   To review and approve technical services activities specified in
library collection development policy;
   (5)   To recommend and monitor annual operating and capital improvement
budgets, reviewing and exercising final approval authority over all library
expenditures; establish and monitor inventory control systems for all library
furnishings and material; and review and analyze fee structure and fee
collection;
   (6)   To perform or cause to be performed all duties required by this code
or other law of the director of libraries and the department of libraries; and
   (7)   To perform such other duties as may be required.
(Ord. 5498 § 2, 2020: Ord. 5494 § 2 (part), 2020: Ord. 4809 § 3, 2003)
2.08.240   Department of information technology.
   (a)   The department of information technology shall be organized and
administered under the direction of a director of information technology who
shall be accountable to the city manager to carry out the duties of this
department. The duties of the department of information technology shall be as
follows:
   (1)   To provide leadership to the city council, city manager and directors
on alignment of technology with city initiatives, policy and strategic
objectives;
   (2)   To direct and manage interdepartmental technology governance, planning
and coordination activities to accomplish specific city-wide objectives;
   (3)   To make presentations and prepare reports and plans;
   (4)   To coordinate with the city manager, directors and business managers
to address problems and capitalize upon opportunities as they arise;
   (5)   To develop and implement organizational policies and procedures
regarding appropriate usage of technology within the organization;
   (6)   To initiate and develop internal and external partnerships to leverage
city technology investments;
   (7)   To develop and present funding strategies to support technology
investments;
   (8)   To provide direct oversight and direction on mission critical city-
wide technology;
   (9)   To negotiate and review complex proposals and contracts for purchase
of information technology (IT) products and services, and to develop
partnership agreements;
   (10)   To establish and maintain a working environment conducive to positive
morale, individual style, quality, creativity, and teamwork;
   (11)   To serve as a member of leadership team, and addresses city-wide
policy, management and strategic issues, including information security and
other cyber risks;
   (12)   To formulate, recommend and administer policies and procedures
governing the operation of the information technology (IT) department.
Establish long-range goals and implementation plans for services provided by
the IT department;
   (13)   To plan, develop and direct a comprehensive long-term strategic plan
for automated systems needs for the City of Palo Alto, including centralized
computer applications, personal computers, and telecommunications functions;
   (14)   To oversee automated systems within the city, including prioritizing
requests for applications development or enhancement, hardware and software
standards, equipment acquisition and replacement;
   (15)   To coordinate technical staff placed within individual city
departments;
   (16)   To position the city to effectively respond to the rapidly changing
technological environment;
   (17)   To be responsible for planning, preparing and administering the
information technology department budget, including operating and capital
budgets;
   (18)   To be responsible for the future direction of the information
technology department, ensuring the coordination of the department's effort
with the needs of the organization;
   (19)   To manage projects to include oversight of funding allocations,
oversight and coordination of resources;
   (20)   To perform such other duties as may be required.
(Ord. 5494 § 2 (part), 2020: Ord. 5131 § 1, 2011)
2.08.250   Reserved.
2.08.260   Office of transportation.
   (a)   The office of transportation shall be under the direction of the chief
transportation official who shall be accountable to the city manager. The
duties of the office of transportation shall be as follows:
   (1)   To be responsible for the functions of transportation planning,
traffic engineering, parking management, and transit planning for the city;
   (2)   To perform other such duties as may be required.
(Ord. 5494 § 2 (part), 2020)
2.08.300   Books and records.
   All public records of the city shall be available at all times during office
hours, and any person may inspect the same, provided, such person shall specify
the record desired, and such record shall not be taken from the office. Copies
of all public records shall be provided in accordance with state law.
(Ord. 4274 § 1 (part), 1995)
2.08.310   Oath of office.
   (a)   Each council member of the city, all officers appointed by the council
and all officers of the police department and other designated employees as may
be required, shall take and file with the city clerk or the clerk's deputy the
constitutional oath of office before entering upon the duties thereof.
   (b)   The oath may be administered by the city clerk, and is as follows:
   I, _____, do swear (or affirm) that I will support the Constitution of the
United States, the Constitution of the State of California, and the Charter of
the City of Palo Alto, and that I will faithfully discharge the duties of the
office of _________ according to the best of my ability.
   (c)   Such oath of office shall be subscribed by all persons making it, as
herein provided.
(Ord. 4274 § 1 (part), 1995)
2.08.320   Duties of the city manager, relating to health.
   The city manager shall have charge of the public health of the city, and for
this purpose shall establish all rules and regulations necessary to preserve
the health of the city, and shall exercise the powers and perform the duties of
boards of health of cities as prescribed by the laws of the state of
California. The city manager with the approval of the council may extend the
health service of the city to contiguous territory so located that in order to
preserve the public health of the city it is necessary to so extend it. A
charge for such service shall be made and fixed by the council, and shall be
collected and paid to the city under rules and contracts made and established
by the council for that purpose.
(Ord. 4274 § 1 (part), 1995)
2.08.330   Health officer.
   The city manager, with the approval of the council, shall appoint a health
officer who shall be a person suitably trained or experienced in public health
administration. The city council may contract with the county of Santa Clara,
pursuant to the provisions of Sections 480, et seq. of the Health and Safety
Code, for the performance by health officers or other employees of the county
of any or all functions relating to the enforcement in the city of all
ordinances relating to public health and sanitation, and the making of all
inspections and the performance of all functions in connection therewith.
   Whenever the term "health officer" is used in this code, without limitation,
it shall mean and include city health officer and any other duly authorized
health officer, or the qualified representative or deputies of the health
officer.
(Ord. 4274 § 1 (part), 1995)
2.08.340   Summons.
   The city manager and the health officer shall have the power to cite and
summon any person to appear before either of them, and such person so summoned
shall be required to appear and testify to any and all facts in his or her
possession in regard to any violation of any law, ordinance or regulation
pertaining to public health or sanitation. Such person so cited and summoned
may be required to testify under oath administered by the city clerk.
(Ord. 4274 § 1 (part), 1995)
2.08.350   Powers and duties of health officer.
   (a)   The powers and duties of the health officer shall be as follows:
   (1)   To have general power to inspect, examine, isolate, quarantine,
placard and disinfect persons, places and things within the city;
   (2)   To have authority and power, and be permitted, in the course of duty,
to enter into and upon, and to inspect any and all lands, places, vehicles,
buildings and structures, and the contents thereof, within the city;
   (3)   To have power to examine, or cause to be examined by a licensed
physician designated by him or her for such examination, any person within the
city known or reasonably suspected to be afflicted with any communicable
disease. Provided, however, that in lieu of said examination such person may as
an alternative be placed in quarantine, the release from which shall be
conditioned upon evidence, by physical and laboratory examinations, that the
disease no longer exists;
   (4)   To have any power and duties conferred or placed upon the health
officer by state law;
   (5)   To make such additional rules and regulations as may be necessary to
secure the proper sanitation of all restaurants or food establishments and for
the proper and orderly administration of Sections
2.08.330 -
2.08.360;
   (6)   To perform such other duties as may be required by the city manager or
the city council.
(Ord. 4274 § 1 (part), 1995)
2.08.360   Interference with health officer prohibited.
   No person shall refuse, resist or attempt to resist the entrance of a health
officer into any railway car, vehicle, building, room, lot or other place, or
portion thereof, in the performance of duty, or resist, hinder or interfere
with the health officer in the performance of any examination, or refuse to
obey any lawful order of a health officer made in the performance of duty
within the power conferred upon the health officer by this code or by any law
of the city or law of the state.
(Ord. 4274 § 1 (part), 1995)
2.08.370   Reserved.
   (Repealed by Ord. 4453 § 4, 1997)
Chapter 2.09
CONFLICT OF INTEREST CODE FOR DESIGNATED POSITIONS
Sections:
   
2.09.010   Adoption of conflict of interest code.
   
2.09.020   Designated positions.
   
2.09.030   Disclosure statements.
   
2.09.040   Place of filing.
   
2.09.050   Notice and adoption procedures.
   
2.09.060   Exemptions for specified consultants.
   
2.09.070   Reserved.
   
2.09.080   Reserved.
2.09.010   Adoption of conflict of interest code.
   In compliance with the Political Reform Act of 1974, California Government
Code Section 81000, et seq., the city council shall adopt by resolution a
conflict of interest code for designated positions which shall be applicable to
all designated employees and consultants of the city pursuant to Government
Code Section 87300. The city council may adopt the conflict of interest code by
incorporating by reference applicable provisions of the Political Reform Act or
regulations promulgated thereunder by the Fair Political Practices Commission.
Nothing in this chapter is intended to modify or abridge the provisions of the
Political Reform Act or any other state or local laws or regulations pertaining
to conflicts of interest.
(Ord. 4011 § 1, 1991: Ord. 3161 § 1 (part), 1979)
2.09.020   Designated positions.
   The city council shall adopt by resolution a list of designated positions
which shall be incorporated in this chapter by reference as though fully set
forth. Officers and employees holding these positions are designated employees
and are deemed to make or participate in the making of decisions which may
foreseeably have a material effect on a financial interest.
(Ord. 3161 § 1 (part), 1979)
2.09.030   Disclosure statements.
   The city council shall adopt by resolution a list of disclosure categories
which shall be incorporated in this chapter by reference as though fully set
forth. A designated employee shall be assigned to one or more of the disclosure
categories. It has been determined that it is foreseeable that the types of
investments, interest in real property, and income listed in the disclosure
categories may be affected materially by decisions made or participated in by
the designated employee by virtue of his or her position. Each designated
employee shall file statements of economic interests disclosing his or her
interest in investments, real property, and income designated as reportable
under the category to which the employee's position is assigned.
(Ord. 3161 § 1 (part), 1979)
2.09.040   Place of filing.
   All designated employees required to submit a statement of economic
interests shall file the original with the city clerk.
(Ord. 4011 § 2, 1991: Ord. 3161 § 1 (part), 1979)
2.09.050   Notice and adoption procedures.
   Before adopting or amending the conflict of interest code, list of
designated positions, or list of disclosure categories, the city council will
provide elected and appointed officials, employees, residents of the city, and
consultants of the city adequate notice and a fair opportunity to present their
views. Notice of intention to amend the conflict of interest code, list of
designated positions or list of disclosure categories may be provided by
publication in a newspaper of general circulation within the city once, not
later than twenty days before any amendment. Notice may also be provided by
posting upon public bulletin boards at least twenty days before any amendment
or by serving designated employees individually with a copy of the written
notice not later than twenty days before an amendment. Such notice shall
specify whether the opportunity to present views shall be pursuant to written
comments submitted before any amendment or whether oral comments at a public
meeting will be accepted.
(Ord. 4011 § 3, 1991: Ord. 3161 § 1 (part), 1979)
2.09.060   Exemptions for specified consultants.
   The city manager or his or her designee may determine in writing that a
particular consultant, although a designated position, is hired to perform a
range of duties that is limited in scope and thus is not required to fully
comply with the disclosure requirements. Any such written determination shall
include a description of the consultant's duties and, based upon the
description, a statement of the extent of disclosure requirements, if any. The
city manager or his or her designee may also determine whether a particular
consultant is performing duties so as to constitute a "consultant" as the term
is defined in the Political Reform Act and regulations promulgated thereunder.
The city manager's determination shall be a public record and shall be retained
for public inspection in the same manner and location as the conflict of
interest code.
(Ord. 4011 § 4, 1991: Ord. 3161 § 1 (part), 1979)
2.09.070   Reserved.
   (Repealed by Ord. 4011 § 5, 1991)
2.09.080   Reserved.
   (Repealed by Ord. 4011 § 5, 1991)
Chapter 2.10
CABLE TELEVISION AND OPEN VIDEO SYSTEMS - AWARD OF FRANCHISES BY THE CITY
COUNCIL*
Sections:
   
2.10.010   Definitions.
   
2.10.020   Nature of franchise.
   
2.10.030   Administration and regulations.
   
2.10.040   Transfers.
   
2.10.050   Construction, operation, maintenance and repair.
   
2.10.060   Indemnity, insurance, bonds and security fund.
   
2.10.070   Enforcement and remedies.
   
2.10.080   Books and records.
   
2.10.090   Reports.
   
2.10.100   Maps and improvement plans.
   
2.10.110   Other records.
   
2.10.120   Exemptions.
   
2.10.130   Privacy.
   
2.10.140   Procedures for payment.
   
2.10.200   Cable system franchise application.
   
2.10.210   Initial and renewal franchise applications.
   
2.10.220   Renewal franchise under 47 U.S.C. § 546.
   
2.10.230   Cable system transfer application.
   
2.10.240   Legal qualifications.
   
2.10.250   Franchise fee.
   
2.10.260   No exclusivity.
   
2.10.270   Minimum franchise conditions.
   
2.10.275   Penalties for customer service standards violations.
   
2.10.280   Rate regulation.
   
2.10.300   Initial and renewal OVS applications.
   
2.10.310   OVS transfer application.
   
2.10.320   Minimum requirements.
   
2.10.330   Special termination rules.
   
2.10.340   Rate regulation.
   
2.10.350   Fee in lieu of franchise fee.
   
2.10.360   Exclusive contracts.
   
2.10.400   Miscellaneous provisions.
   
2.10.500   Customer service standards.
   
2.10.600   Applicability and sunset.
   *   Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history: Ordinance No. 3461.
2.10.010   Definitions.
   (a)   For the purposes of this chapter, the following words, terms, phrases,
and abbreviations and their similar formulations shall have the meanings given
them in this chapter or, as appropriate, in
Chapters 1.04,
2.08,
2.30 and
12.04 of the Palo Alto Municipal Code and in the Charter of the city of Palo
Alto ("Charter"), as may be amended from time to time, unless the context
indicates otherwise. Words not defined in this chapter or other chapters of the
Palo Alto Municipal Code shall have the same meaning as established in Title VI
of Title 47 of the United States Code, and, if not defined therein, their
common and ordinary meaning. References to governmental entities (whether
persons or entities) shall refer to those entities or their successors in
authority. If a specific provision of law referred to in this chapter should be
renumbered, then the reference shall be read to refer to the renumbered
provision. References to any law shall be interpreted broadly to cover
government actions, however nominated, including any law now in force or
subsequently enacted or amended.
   (1)   "Access," "PEG access," or "PEG use" means the availability of a cable
system or open video system for public, educational or governmental use
(including institutional network use) by various agencies, institutions,
organizations, groups, and individuals, including the city and its designated
access providers, to acquire, create and distribute programming not under a
franchisee's editorial control, including, but not limited to:
   (A)   "Public access" or "public use" means access where organizations,
groups or individual members of the general public, on a non-discriminatory
basis, are the primary or designated programmers or users having editorial
control over their programming;
   (B)   "Educational access" or "educational use" means access where
accredited educational institutions are the primary or designated programmers
or users having editorial control over their programming; and
   (C)   "Governmental access" or "governmental use" means access where
governmental institutions or their designees are the primary or designated
programmers or users having editorial control over their programming.
   (2)   "Affiliate" means a person that, directly or indirectly, owns or
controls, is owned or controlled by, or is under common ownership or control
with, another person.
   (3)   "Basic service" means any service tier regularly provided to all
subscribers which includes the retransmission of one or more local television
broadcast signals.
   (4)   "Cable Act" means the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, 47
U.S.C. §§ 521 et seq., as amended by the Cable Television Consumer Protection
and Competition Act of 1992, Pub. L. No. 102-385, 106 Stat. 1460, and as
further amended by the Telecommunications Act of 1996, Pub. L. No. 104-104, 110
Stat. 56.
   (5)   "Cable communications system" or "system" means both open video
systems and cable systems.
   (6)   "Cable coordinator" means the individual or individuals designated by
the city to administer a cable communications system franchise.
   (7)   "Cable system" means a facility, consisting of a set of closed
transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control
equipment that is designed to provide cable service, including video
programming, that is provided to multiple subscribers within a community, but
such term does not include:
   (A)   A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of
one or more television broadcast stations;
   (B)   A facility that serves subscribers without using, or connecting to a
facility that uses, any portion of the public rights-of-way within the city;
   (C)   A facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part,
to the provisions of Title II (Common Carriers) of the Communications Act of
1934, except that such facility shall be considered a cable system to the
extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly
to subscribers, unless the extent of such use is solely to provide interactive
on-demand services;
   (D)   Any facility of an electric utility used solely for operating its
electric utility systems; or
   (E)   An OVS that is certified by the FCC.
   Any reference to a cable system includes the cable system as a whole or any
part thereof, including, but not limited to, pedestals, equipment cabinets,
electronic equipment, amplifiers, power guards, nodes, cables, fiber optics and
other equipment necessary or useful to operate the cable system.
   (8)   "Cable service" means:
   (A)   The one-way transmission to subscribers of (i) video programming, or
(ii) other programming service; and
   (B)   Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or
use of such video programming or other programming service.
   (9)   "Cable modem" means a device used to transmit data over a cable
communications system.
   (10)   "Cable modem service" means an Internet access service provided by an
operator or its affiliates over a cable communications system. "Cable modem
services" shall not include "dial-up" access to the Internet services of the
operator or its affiliates.
   (11)   "Channel" means a portion of the electromagnetic frequency spectrum
which is used in a cable system or an open video system and which is capable of
delivering a television signal whether in an analog or digital format. The
definition does not restrict the use of any channel to the transmission of
analog television signals.
   (12)   "City" means the government of the city of Palo Alto, a chartered
city and a municipal corporation duly organized and validly existing under the
laws of the state of California, and all departments, divisions, and offices
thereof.
   (13)   "City attorney" means the individual who is designated as the city
attorney of the city under Section
2.08.120 of
Chapter 2.08 of Title 2 of the Palo Alto Municipal Code, and any individual who
is designated as the representative of the city attorney.
   (14)   "City clerk" means the individual who is designated as the city clerk
of the city under Section
2.08.110 of
Chapter 2.08 of Title 2 of the Palo Alto Municipal Code, and any individual who
is designated as the representative of the city clerk.
   (15)   "Construction, operation, maintenance or repair" or "construction,
operation, maintenance and repair" or words of similar import means the named
actions interpreted broadly, encompassing, among other things, installation,
extension, maintenance, replacement of components, relocation, undergrounding,
grading, site preparation, adjusting, testing, make-ready, and excavation.
   (16)   "Council" means the council of the city of Palo Alto exercising all
powers necessary and appropriate pursuant to Article III of the Charter.
   (17)   "Director of administrative services" means the individual who is
designated as the director of administrative services of the city under Section
2.08.150 of
Chapter 2.08 of Title 2 of the Palo Alto Municipal Code, and any individual who
is designated as the representative of the director of administrative services.
   (18)   "Director of public works" means the individual who is designated as
the director of public works of the city under Section
2.08.190 of
Chapter 2.08 of Title 2 of the Palo Alto Municipal Code, and any individual who
is designated as the representative of the director of public works.
   (19)   "Director of utilities" means the individual who is designated as the
director of utilities of the city under Section
2.08.200 of
Chapter 2.08 of Title 2 of the Palo Alto Municipal Code, and any individual who
is designated as the representative of the director of utilities.
   (20)   "Downstream channel" means a channel designed and activated to carry
a transmission from the headend to other points on a cable communications
system, including interconnections.
   (21)   "FCC" means the Federal Communications Commission.
   (22)   "Franchise" means an authorization granted by the city to the
operator of a cable communications system giving the operator the non-exclusive
right to occupy the space, or use facilities upon, across, beneath, or over
public rights-of-way in the city to provide cable communications services
therein.
   (23)   "Franchise area" means the area of the city that a franchisee is
authorized to serve by the terms of its franchise or by operation of law.
   (24)   "Franchisee" means a person holding a cable communications system
franchise granted by the city.
   (25)   "Gross revenues" mean any and all revenue of a "cable operator" (as
defined in the Cable Act), of any kind, nature or form, without deduction,
derived from the operation of a cable communications system to provide cable
service. "Gross revenues" shall be construed as broadly as permitted by the
Cable Act and any other applicable law. By way of example and not limitation,
"gross revenues" shall include, but are not limited to, revenues from basic
service, cable programming services, any per-channel or per-program services,
equipment sales and rentals, cable modem services, installation services,
disconnection services, reconnection services, late fees and other subscriber
charges, and revenues from the carriage of programming, advertising, and
shopping services. "Gross revenues" shall be construed to include revenues of
affiliates (other than those revenues, which are already treated as the
revenues of the franchisee), to the full extent necessary to prevent the
avoidance or evasion of any and all fees owed on gross revenues. "Gross
revenues" shall not include: (A) the revenue of any person, including, without
limitation, an affiliate or a provider of video programming services to a cable
communications system operator, to the extent that the revenue is included in
the gross revenues of that operator; (B) taxes imposed by law on subscribers by
a taxing authority, which taxes a cable communication system operator is
obligated to collect and remit to the taxing authority, provided, however, that
neither the fee imposed by Sections
2.10.250 and
2.10.350 hereby, nor any tax or fee imposed on the operator (as opposed to the
subscriber) shall be deemed to be such a tax; (C) any gains realized in the
sale or disposition of capital assets and other tangible property of the
operator; and (D) bad debts, provided, however, that the recovery of bad debts
shall be included in gross revenues to the extent that such bad debts are
subsequently collected.
   (26)   "Headend" means a combination of equipment at a location within a
cable communications system where signals are received and processed for
distribution to other points on the cable communications system.
   (27)   "Hertz" means a measure of the electromagnetic frequency spectrum.
   (28)   "Internet" means the myriad of facilities, including, but not limited
to, computer equipment and software, comprising the interconnected networks
that employ the TCP/IP, or any predecessor or successor protocols to TCP/IP, to
communicate information.
   (29)   "Internet service provider" means a person, including, but not
limited to, an operator of a cable communications system, who provides access
to the Internet, or who otherwise furnishes a service that enables users to
gain access to other services or offerings over the Internet.
   (30)   "Law" means any administrative, legislative or judicial act,
decision, bill, certificate, charter, code, constitution, opinion, order,
ordinance, policy, procedure, rate, regulation, resolution, rule, schedule,
specification, statute, tariff, or other requirement of any federal,
California, state, regional, county, municipal, local, or joint powers agency,
or any other agency having joint or several jurisdiction over the city, a
franchisee or an operator, including, but not limited to, any regulation or
order of an official or quasi-official entity or body, now in force or
hereinafter amended from time to time.
   (31)   "MHz" means one million Hertz.
   (32)   "Node" means a point of connection in a network where signals carried
on cable are converted to electrical signals for carriage on other cable.
   (33)   "Operator," when used with reference to a system, means a person (a)
who directly or through one or more affiliates provides cable service over a
cable communications system and directly or through one or more affiliates owns
a significant interest in such facility, or (b) who otherwise controls or is
responsible for, through any arrangement, the management and operation of a
cable communications system.
   (34)   "Open video system" or "OVS" means a facility, consisting of a set of
closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and
control equipment that is designed to provide cable service, including video
programming, that is provided to multiple subscribers within a community,
including, but not limited to, pedestals, equipment enclosures (such as
equipment cabinets), amplifiers, power guards, nodes, cables, fiber optics and
other equipment necessary to operate the OVS, or installed in conjunction with
the OVS, the operator of which has been certified by the FCC as an OVS in the
city.
   (35)   "OVS franchise" means a contract entered into in accordance with this
chapter between the city and an OVS franchisee setting forth the terms and
conditions under which the OVS franchise will be exercised.
   (36)   "Person" includes any individual, corporation, partnership,
association, joint stock company, trust, or any other legal entity, but not the
city.
   (37)   "Public rights-of-way" means the surface of and the space above and
below any street, road, highway, freeway, bridge, lane, path, alley, court,
sidewalk, parkway, drive, or right-of-way or easement primarily dedicated to
travel, now or hereafter existing within the city which may be properly used
for the purpose of installing, constructing, operating, maintaining, and
repairing a cable communications system; and any other property that a
franchisee is entitled by California or federal law to use by virtue of the
grant of a franchise.
   (38)   "Public property" means any property that is owned or under the
control of the city that is not located in the public rights-of-way, including,
for purposes of this chapter, but not limited to, buildings, parks, and pole
structures, such as utility poles and light poles, or similar facilities or
property owned by or leased to the city.
   (39)   "School" means any accredited primary school, secondary school,
college, and university.
   (40)   "SEC" means the Securities and Exchange Commission.
   (41)   "Subscriber" or "customer" means the city or any person who is
lawfully receiving, for any purpose or reason, any cable service by means of a
cable communications system, whether or not a fee is paid for such service.
   (42)   "TCP/IP" means the transmission control protocol/Internet protocol, a
set of protocols to link computer and/or other networks.
   (43)   "Upstream channel" means a channel designed and activated to carry
transmissions from a point on the cable system, other than the headend, to the
headend or another point on the cable system.
   (44)   "User" means the city or a person using a channel, capacity or
equipment and facilities for purposes of producing or transmitting material, as
contrasted with the receipt thereof in the capacity of a subscriber.
(Ord. 4636 § 2, 2000)
2.10.020   Nature of franchise.
   (a)   The council may grant one or more nonexclusive, revocable franchises
to construct, operate, maintain and repair a cable communications system in the
city. A franchise granted by the council pursuant to this chapter shall
authorize and permit a franchisee to construct, operate, maintain and repair a
cable system, or an OVS, as applicable, to provide cable service in the
franchise area, and for that purpose to erect, install, construct, repair,
replace, reconstruct, and maintain facilities appurtenant to such system in,
on, over, under, upon, across, and along those public rights-of-way that the
city may authorize a franchisee to use.
   (b)   No person may construct, operate, maintain or repair a cable
communications system in the city without first obtaining a franchise therefor.
   (c)   A franchise shall not convey rights other than as specified in this
chapter, or in a franchise agreement; no rights shall pass by implication.
   (d)   A franchise shall not include, or be a substitute for:
   (1)   Compliance with requirements for the privilege of transacting and
carrying on a business within the city, including, but not limited to,
compliance with the conditions that the city may establish before facilities
may be constructed for, or providing non-cable services;
   (2)   Any permit, agreement or authorization, other than the authorization
required by Section
2.10.020(a), required in connection with operations on or in public rights-of-
way or public property, including, but not limited to, encroachment permits,
pole attachment permits and street cut permits; and
   (3)   Any permit, agreement or authorization for occupying any other
property of the city or private entities to which access is not specifically
granted by the franchise.
   (e)   A franchise shall not relieve a franchisee of its duty to comply with
all laws, including laws of the city, and every franchisee shall comply with
the same. The rights granted under a franchise are subject to the exercise of
police and other powers the city now has or may later obtain, including, but
not limited to, the power of eminent domain. Every franchise issued by the city
shall be deemed to incorporate the requirements of the Charter.
   (f)   A franchise shall not convey title, equitable or legal, in the public
rights-of-way, and the rights granted therein may not be subdivided or
subleased.
   (g)   No franchise shall be exclusive, or prevent the city from issuing
other franchises or authorizations, or prevent the city from itself
constructing, operating, maintaining or repairing its own cable communications
system, with or without a franchise.
   (h)   Every franchise shall be for a term of years, which term shall be not
less than five years, unless a franchise specifies otherwise.
   (i)   Unless specifically stated otherwise in a franchise or required by
law, all acts, which a franchisee is required to perform under a franchise or
applicable law, shall be performed at the franchisee's expense.
   (j)   If an operator of a cable communications system fails to perform work
that it is required to perform within the time provided for performance, the
city may perform or cause the performance of the work and bill the operator
therefor, unless a franchise specifies otherwise. The operator shall pay the
amounts billed within thirty days, unless a franchise specifies otherwise.
   (k)   Every franchise shall be issued and adopted by the council in the form
of a separate ordinance or resolution and a franchise agreement entered into by
the city and the franchisee, who shall accept the franchise.
(Ord. 4636 § 3, 2000)
2.10.030   Administration and regulations.
   (a)   The city may from time to time adopt rules and regulations to
implement the provisions of this chapter. This chapter, and any rules and
regulations adopted pursuant thereto, are not contracts with any franchisee,
and may be amended at any time.
   (b)   The cable coordinator is hereby authorized to administer this chapter
and any franchise issued pursuant thereto, and to provide or cause to be
provided any notices (including noncompliance notices) and to take any action
on behalf of the city that may be required under this chapter or a franchise,
or under applicable law.
   (c)   The failure of the city, upon one or more occasions, to exercise a
right or to require compliance or performance under a franchise or any other
applicable law shall not be deemed to constitute a waiver of such right or a
waiver of compliance or performance, unless such right has been specifically
waived in writing.
   (d)   The city may designate one or more entities, including itself, to
control and manage the use of public, educational and governmental access
channels, facilities and equipment owned, controlled or used by the city or the
designated entity or entities.
(Ord. 4636 § 4, 2000)
2.10.040   Transfers.
   (a)   Every franchise shall be deemed to be held in trust, and to be
personal to the franchisee. Any transfer that is made without the prior written
approval of the city shall be deemed to impair that trust. A transfer is any
transaction pursuant to which:
   (1)   A cable communications system, or any part thereof, is sold or
assigned, directly or indirectly, to any person other than the franchisee
holding a franchise for that system (except the term does not include the sale
of portions of a cable communications system that are removed);
   (2)   Any change, acquisition, or transfer of control of a franchisee or its
direct or indirect parents, whether by merger, consolidation, a sale of assets
or ownership interests, or by any other means, occurs. A transfer occurs
whenever there is a change, acquisition or transfer of control of more than a
ten percent ownership in the outstanding voting securities or more than a
twenty percent ownership in the outstanding non-voting securities of the
franchisee or its direct or indirect parents by any entity, or a group of
entities acting in concert. However, a transfer also occurs whenever there is a
change in actual working control, in whatever manner exercised, over the
affairs of a franchisee or its direct or indirect parents. Without limiting the
above, any change in the general partners of a franchisee will be presumed a
change in control; or
   (3)   The rights or obligations held by the franchisee under its franchise
are transferred, sold, assigned, or leased, in whole or in part, directly or
indirectly, to another party.
   (b)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, pledges in trust,
hypothecations, encumbrances, leases, or mortgages of the assets of a cable
communications system to secure indebtedness may be made without application
and without the city's prior written consent, unless a franchise specifies
otherwise. However, no such arrangement may be made if it would in any respect
under any condition: (1) prevent the cable communications system franchisee or
any successor from complying with the franchise or applicable law; or (2)
permit any third party (including any lender) to succeed to the interest of the
franchisee, or to own or control the system, without the prior written consent
of the city. Any mortgage, pledge, hypothecation, encumbrance or lease shall be
subject to and subordinate to the rights of the city, as appropriate, under any
franchise, this chapter, or other applicable law.
   (c)   The successors and assigns of the franchisee shall be fully bound by
the terms and conditions of the franchise.
(Ord. 4636 § 5, 2000)
2.10.050   Construction, operation, maintenance and repair.
   (a)   The construction, operation, maintenance and repair of cable
communications systems shall be performed in compliance with all laws and
practices affecting such system. This shall include, but not be limited to,
zoning and safety codes, construction standards, regulations for providing
notice to persons that may be affected by such system construction, and such
directives governing the time, place and manner in which facilities may be
installed in the public rights-of-way. Any person engaged in the construction,
operation, maintenance or repair of communications facilities shall exercise
reasonable care in the performance of all of its activities and shall use
commonly accepted methods and devices for preventing failures and accidents
that are likely to cause damage, injury, or nuisance to the public or to
property.
   (b)   A franchise shall be required before a permit may be issued for work
associated with the construction of a cable communications system. Any permit
issued for such work to a person that does not hold a franchise shall vest no
rights in the permittee; the permit may be revoked at will, and the permittee
shall remove all facilities installed under the permit upon demand of the city.
   (c)   The construction, operation, maintenance and repair of a cable
communications system shall not commence until the required permits have been
obtained from the proper city officials and the required fees have been paid.
All work will be performed in strict accordance with the conditions of the
permits. Upon the receipt of written notice of the director of public works or
the director of utilities, as applicable, any work and/or construction
undertaken that is not completed in compliance with the city's requirements and
other applicable laws, or which is installed without obtaining necessary
permits and approvals, shall be removed or caused to be removed by the
franchisee.
   (d)   Interference with the use of the public rights-of-way by others,
including others that may be installing cable communications systems, must be
minimized. The city may require a person using the public rights-of-way to
cooperate with others through joint trenching and other arrangements to
minimize adverse impacts on the public rights-of-way and public property.
   (e)   Unless it is impracticable, operators of cable communications systems
shall use existing poles and conduits. Any person in the public rights-of-way
may not install additional poles, nor may vertical or horizontal extenders be
used to increase pole capacity, without the permission of the director of
public works, the director of utilities and/or any other individual(s)
authorized by law to grant such permission.
   (f)   Whenever the facilities of all existing utilities are located or are
required to be relocated underground in an area in the city, every franchisee
and every operator of a cable communications system in the same area shall
locate their respective facilities underground in accordance with the
requirements of Chapters
12.08,
12.12 and
12.16 of the Palo Alto Municipal Code.
   (g)   Any and all public rights-of-way, other public property, or private
property that is disturbed or damaged during the construction, operation,
maintenance or repair of a cable communications system by or on behalf of a
franchisee shall be promptly repaired by the franchisee at its expense. Public
property and public rights-of-way shall be restored to the satisfaction of the
city or to a condition as good as that which existed before the disturbance or
damage occurred.
   (h)   A franchisee shall, by a time specified by the director of public
works or the director of utilities, as applicable, protect, support,
temporarily disconnect, relocate, or remove any of its property when required
by the city in the exercise of its governmental or proprietary powers by reason
of traffic conditions; public safety; public rights-of-way construction and
repair (including, but not limited to, regrading, resurfacing or widening);
public rights-of-way vacation; construction, installation or repair of sewers,
drains, water pipes, power lines, signal lines, tracks, or any other type of
government-owned system or utility, public work, public facility, or
improvement; or for any other purpose where the work involved would be aided by
the removal or relocation of the cable communications system. Collectively,
such matters are referred to below as the "public work."
   (1)   The director of public works or the director of utilities, as
applicable, shall provide written notice describing where the public work is to
be performed at least one week prior to the deadline by which a franchisee must
protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate or remove its facilities.
   (2)   In an emergency, or where a cable communications system creates or is
contributing to an imminent danger to health, safety, or property, the city may
protect, support, temporarily disconnect, remove, or relocate any and all parts
of the cable communications system without prior notice, and charge the
franchisee for costs incurred.
   (i)   To accommodate the construction, operation, maintenance or repair of
the facilities of another person authorized to use the public rights-of-way or
public property, a franchisee shall, by a time specified by such person,
protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate or remove its facilities.
The franchisee must be given written notice describing where the construction,
operation, maintenance or repair is to be performed at least fifteen days prior
to the time by which its work must be completed. The director of public works
and/or the director of utilities, as applicable, may resolve disputes as to
responsibility for costs associated with removal, relaying, or relocation of
facilities among entities authorized to install facilities in the public
rights-of-way or on public property if such entities are unable to do so
themselves.
   (j)   A franchisee shall, on the request of any person holding a valid
permit issued by a governmental authority, temporarily raise or lower its wires
by a time specified to permit the moving of buildings or other objects. A
franchisee shall be given not less than seven days' advance written notice to
arrange for such temporary wire changes. The expense of such temporary removal
or the raising or lowering of wires shall be paid by the person requesting the
same.
   (k)   A franchisee shall remove its property in the public rights-of-way
that it intends to abandon within ninety days after it gives written notice to
the city of its intention to abandon. However, if, within ninety days of the
receipt of written notice of abandonment, the city determines that the safety,
appearance, function or use of public rights-of-way and facilities in public
rights-of-way will be adversely affected, the franchisee may abandon its
property after receipt of appropriate notice from the city. A franchisee that
abandons its property must, upon request, transfer ownership of the property to
the city at no cost, and execute necessary quitclaim deeds and indemnify the
city against future costs associated with the mitigation or elimination of any
environmental hazard associated with the abandoned property.
   (l)   Every cable communications system shall be subject to inspection and
testing by the city. Each franchisee shall respond to requests for information
regarding its system and plans for the system as the city may from time to time
issue, including, but not limited to, a request for information regarding its
plans for the construction, operation, maintenance and repair and the purposes
for which the system is being constructed, operated, maintained or repaired.
   (m)   Each franchisee that places facilities underground shall be a member
of the regional notification center for subsurface installations (Underground
Services Alert) as may be required by California Government Code §§ 4216 et
seq., and shall field mark the locations of its underground communications
facilities upon request. A franchisee shall locate its facilities for the city
at no charge.
   (n)   Each franchisee shall provide to the city a plan for any initial
system construction, or for any substantial rebuild, upgrade or extension of
its facility, which shall show its timetable for construction of each phase of
the project, and the areas of the city that will be affected.
(Ord. 4636 § 6, 2000)
2.10.060   Indemnity, insurance, bonds and security fund.
   (a)   No franchise shall be valid or effective until and unless the city
obtains an adequate indemnity from the franchisee. The indemnity shall:
   (1)   Release the city from and against any and all liability and
responsibility in or arising out of the construction, operation, maintenance or
repair of the cable communications system. Each franchisee must further agree
not to sue or seek any money or damages from the city in connection with the
grant of that franchisee's franchise and also agree to abide by the city's
laws.
   (2)   Indemnify and hold harmless the city, its elected and appointed
officers, agents, and employees, from and against any and all claims, demands,
or causes of action of any kind or nature, and the resulting losses, costs,
expenses, reasonable attorneys' fees, liabilities, damages, orders, judgments,
or decrees sustained by the city or any third party arising out of, or by
reason of, or resulting from or of the acts, errors, or omissions of the
franchisee, or its agents, contractors, subcontractors or employees related to
or in any way arising out of the construction, operation, maintenance or repair
of the system.
   (b)   A franchisee (or those acting on its behalf) shall not commence or
cause the commencement of the construction, operation, maintenance or repair of
the system without obtaining and maintaining insurance in amounts and of a type
satisfactory to the city. The required insurance must be obtained and
maintained for the entire period the franchisee owns, controls or manages
facilities in the public rights-of-way. If the franchisee, its agents,
contractors, and subcontractors do not have the required insurance, the cable
coordinator may order such entities to stop operations until the insurance is
obtained and approved.
   (c)   Certificates of insurance, reflecting evidence of the required
insurance and naming the city as an additional insured, and other proofs as the
city may find necessary, shall be filed with the city Clerk. For any person
issued a franchise after the effective date of this chapter, the certificates
and other required proofs shall be filed within thirty days of the issuance of
a franchise, once a year thereafter, and whenever there is any change in
coverage. For entities that have facilities in the public rights-of-way as of
the effective date of this chapter, the certificates shall be filed within
sixty days of the effective date of this chapter, annually thereafter, and
whenever there is any change in coverage, unless a pre-existing franchise
provides for the filing of certificates in a different manner.
   (d)   Certificates shall contain a provision that coverage afforded under
these policies will not be canceled until at least thirty days' prior written
notice has been given to the city. Only companies authorized to provide
insurance coverage under the laws of the state of California must issue
policies. Financial ratings must be no less than "A:VII" in the latest edition
of Best's Key Rating Guide, published by A.M. Best Guide.
   (e)   A franchisee (and those acting on its behalf to construct or operate
the system) shall obtain and maintain the following minimum insurance. The city
shall be named as an additional insured on the general liability and automotive
policies. Those insurance policies shall be primary and contain a cross-
liability clause.
   (1)   Commercial general liability insurance to cover liability bodily
injury and property damage. Exposures to be covered are premises, operations,
products/completed operations, and certain contracts. Coverage must be written
on an occurrence basis, with the following limits of liability:
   Bodily Injury
   1.   Each Occurrence   $1,000,000
   2.   Annual Aggregate   $3,000,000
   Property Damage
   1.   Each Occurrence   $1,000,000
   2.   Annual Aggregate   $3,000,000
   Personal Injury
   1.   Annual Aggregate   $3,000,000
   Completed operations and products liability shall be maintained for two
years after the termination of the franchise or completion of the work for the
cable communications system owner or operator (in the case of a contractor or
subcontractor).
   Property damage liability insurance shall include coverage for the following
hazards:
   X - Explosion
   C - Collapse
   U - Underground.
   (2)   Workers' compensation insurance shall be obtained and maintained
during the life of the franchise to comply with statutory limits for all
employees, and in the case any work is sublet, each franchisee shall require
its contractors and subcontractors similarly to provide workers' compensation
insurance for all of the latter's employees unless such employees are covered
by the protection afforded by the franchisee. Each franchisee and its agents,
contractors and subcontractors shall obtain and maintain during the life of
this policy employers liability insurance. The following minimum limits must be
maintained:
   Workers' Compensation
   Statutory
   Employer's Liability
   $500,000 per Occurrence
   (3)   Comprehensive Auto Liability.
   Bodily Injury
   1.   Each Occurrence   $ 1,000,000
   2.   Annual Aggregate   $ 3,000,000
   Property Damage
   1.   Each Occurrence   $ 1,000,000
   2.   Annual Aggregate   $ 3,000,000
   Coverage shall include owned, hired, and non-owned vehicles.
   (f)   Every franchisee shall obtain and maintain a performance bond to
ensure the faithful performance of its responsibilities under this chapter and
any franchise. The amount of the performance and payment bonds shall be set by
the cable coordinator or may be set in a franchise ordinance in light of the
nature of the work to be performed, but shall not be less than ten percent of
the estimated cost of constructing or (in the case of existing systems)
upgrading the system. The bonds are not in lieu of any additional bonds that
may be required through the permitting process. The bond shall be in a form
acceptable to the city attorney. Bonds must be obtained prior to the effective
date of any franchise, transfer or franchise renewal, unless a franchise
specifically provides otherwise.
   (g)   Every franchisee shall establish and maintain a security fund in cash
or provide the city an irrevocable letter of credit in the amount of $100,000
to secure the payment of fees owed, to secure any other performance promised in
a franchise, and to pay any taxes, fees or liens owed to the city. The letter
of credit shall be in a form and with an institution acceptable to the director
of administrative services and in a form acceptable to the city attorney. If
the city should draw upon the security fund or the letter of credit, the
franchisee shall, within fourteen days, restore the security fund or the letter
of credit to the required full amount. This security fund or letter of credit
may be waived or reduced by the city for a franchisee where the city determines
in its discretion that a particular franchisee's operations are sufficiently
limited that a security fund or a letter of credit is not necessary to secure
the required performance. The city may from time to time require a franchisee
to change the amount of the required security fund and letter of credit to
reflect changed risks to the city and to the public, including delinquencies in
taxes or other payments to the city. The security fund or the letter of credit
must be obtained prior to the effective date of any franchise, transfer or
franchise renewal, unless a franchise specifically provides otherwise.
(Ord. 4636 § 7, 2000)
2.10.070   Enforcement and remedies.
   (a)   The city council may revoke a franchise or reduce the term of a
franchise if it finds, after notice of proposed revocation and an opportunity
for a hearing, that a franchisee has violated its franchise or this chapter;
has defrauded or attempted to defraud the city or subscribers; or has attempted
to evade the requirements of its franchise or this chapter. Except as to
violations that are impossible to cure, and as provided in Sections
2.10.070(b) and
2.10.070(c), the franchise may be revoked only if the franchisee is given
written notice of the default and thirty days to cure the default, and the
franchisee fails to cure the default, or to propose a written schedule for
curing the default acceptable to the city, where it is impracticable to cure
the default within thirty days.
   (b)   No opportunity to cure is required for willful violations or where
repeated violations demonstrate a pattern of non-compliance, and fraud and
attempted fraud shall be deemed incurable. The city may declare a franchise
forfeited without an opportunity to cure where a franchisee voluntarily ceases
providing service that it is required to provide or transfers the franchise
without the prior written consent of the city.
   (c)   A franchise will terminate automatically by operation of law 120 days
after an assignment for the benefit of creditors or the appointment of a
receiver or trustee to take over the business of the franchisee, whether in a
receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy, assignment for the benefit of
creditors, or other action or proceeding. However, the franchise may be
reinstated within that 120-day period, if: (1) such assignment, receivership or
trusteeship has been vacated; or (2) such assignee, receiver or trustee has
fully complied with the terms and conditions of this chapter and the franchise,
and has executed an agreement, approved by any court of competent jurisdiction,
assuming and agreeing to be bound by the terms and conditions of this chapter
and the franchise. In the event of foreclosure or other judicial sale of any of
the facilities, equipment or property of a franchisee, the city may revoke the
franchise following a public hearing before the council. The city shall serve
notice upon the franchisee and the successful bidder at the sale, in which
event the franchise and all rights and privileges thereunder will be revoked
and will terminate thirty days after serving such notice, unless the city has
approved the transfer of the franchise to the successful bidder, and the
successful bidder has promised and agreed with the city to assume and be bound
by the terms and conditions of the franchise and this chapter.
   (d)   Upon the termination or forfeiture of a franchise, whether by action
of the city as provided above, or by passage of time, a franchisee must stop
using its cable communications system for the purposes authorized by the
franchise. The city may take possession of some or all of franchisee's
facilities consistent with 47 U.S.C. § 547, or require the franchisee or its
bonding company to remove some or all of the franchisee's facilities from the
areas of the city, and restore the affected property and the public rights-of-
way to their same or better condition. This provision shall not permit the city
to remove facilities that are used to provide another service for which the
franchisee holds a valid franchise or other authorization issued by the city or
other governmental authority, as applicable.
   (e)   The remedies provided for under this chapter, or under a franchise,
shall be cumulative. The recovery by the city of any amounts under insurance,
the performance bond, the security fund or the letter of credit, shall not
limit a franchisee's duty to indemnify the city, or relieve a franchisee of its
franchise obligations or limit the amounts owed to the city.
(Ord. 4636 § 8, 2000)
2.10.080   Books and records.
   (a)   Each franchisee shall provide the city access to books and records
related, in whole or in part, to the construction, operation, maintenance or
repair of the cable communications system, or a group of systems of which the
system is a part, so that the city may inspect and copy those books and
records, including those that relate to the monitoring or enforcement of a
franchisee's compliance with this chapter or a franchisee's franchise. The
records shall include, but are not limited to, revenue records, and other
records related to compliance with any provision of this chapter or a
franchise. A franchisee shall be responsible for obtaining and maintaining the
necessary possession or control of all such books and records, so that it can
produce the documents upon request. Books and records shall be maintained for a
period of five years, except that a franchise may specify a shorter period for
certain categories of voluminous books and records where the information
contained therein can be derived simply from other materials. The phrase "books
and records" shall be read expansively to include information in whatever
formats the same may be stored.
   (b)   Books and records requested shall be produced to the city by a time
and at a location in the city designated by the cable coordinator. However, if
the requested books and records are too voluminous, or for security reasons
cannot be copied and moved, then the franchisee may request that the inspection
take place at some other location mutually agreed to by the city and the
franchisee, provided that (1) the franchisee shall make necessary arrangements
for copying documents selected by the city after its review; and (2) the
franchisee shall pay all travel and additional copying expenses incurred by the
city (above those that would have been incurred had the documents been produced
in the city) in inspecting those documents or having those documents inspected
by its designee.
(Ord. 4636 § 9, 2000)
2.10.090   Reports.
   (a)   The cable coordinator may from time to time direct a franchisee to
prepare reports related to monitoring or enforcing a franchisee's compliance
with this chapter or a franchisee's franchise and to submit those reports by a
date certain, in a format prescribed by the city manager, in addition to those
required by this chapter.
   (b)   Unless the cable coordinator grants an exemption, within forty-five
days of the end of each quarter, a franchisee shall submit a report to the city
containing the following information:
   (1)   The number of service calls (calls requiring a truck roll) received
during the prior quarter and the percentage of service calls compared to the
subscriber base; and
   (2)   The total estimated hours of known outages as a percentage of total
hours of operation. The term "outage" means a loss of sound or video on any
signal, or a significant deterioration of any signal affecting two or more
subscribers.
   (c)   Unless the cable coordinator grants an exemption, no later than ninety
days after the end of its fiscal year, a franchisee shall submit the following
information:
   (1)   A fully audited or certified revenue report from the preceding
calendar year for the cable communications system, and a certified statement
setting forth the computation of gross revenues used to calculate the franchise
fee for the preceding year and a detailed explanation of the method of
computation showing: (i) gross revenues by category (including, but not limited
to, basic, pay, pay-per-view, advertising, installation, equipment, late
charges, miscellaneous, other); and (ii) the deductions, if any, that were made
from gross revenues in calculating the franchise fee (including, but not
limited to, bad debt, credits and refunds), and the amount of each deduction;
   (2)   A report showing, for each applicable customer service standard, the
franchisee's performance with respect to that standard for each quarter of the
preceding year. In each case where the franchisee or the cable coordinator
concludes that the franchisee did not comply fully, the franchisee will
describe the corrective actions it is taking to assure future compliance. In
addition, the report should identify the number and nature of the customer
service complaints received and an explanation of their dispositions;
   (3)   A report showing the number of linear feet of public rights-of-way
occupied by the franchisee's system, the total number of the franchisee's
subscribers, and the total number of the franchisee's basic service subscribers
and subscribers for each tier of cable programming service offered; and
   (4)   An ownership report, indicating the number and names of all persons
whom at the time of filing control or own an interest in the franchisee of ten
percent or more of the outstanding voting securities of the franchisee.
   (d)   Within ten days of their receipt or (in the case of documents created
by the franchisee or its affiliate) filing, a franchisee shall provide the
city:
   (1)   Any notices of deficiency or forfeiture related to the operation of
the system; and
   (2)   Any requests for protection under bankruptcy laws, or any judgment
related to a declaration of bankruptcy by the franchisee or by any partnership
or corporation that owns or controls, directly or indirectly, the franchisee.
(Ord. 4636 § 10, 2000)
2.10.100   Maps and improvement plans.
   Each franchisee shall maintain accurate maps and improvement plans which
show the location, size, and a general description of all facilities installed
in the public rights-of-way and any power supply sources (including voltages
and connections). Maps and improvement plans shall be based upon post-
construction inspection to verify location. Each franchisee shall provide a map
to the director of public works and/or the director of utilities, as
applicable, showing the location of its facilities, in such detail and scale as
may be directed by the director of public works and/or the director of
utilities, as applicable, and shall update the map at least annually, and
whenever the facility expands or is relocated. Copies of maps and improvement
plans shall be provided in 3 mil Mylar format and on disk, in a commercially
available electronic format specified by the director of public works and/or
the director of utilities, as applicable.
(Ord. 4636 § 11, 2000)
2.10.110   Other records.
   (a)   Unless the cable coordinator waives the requirement, a franchisee
shall for a period of five years at all times maintain:
   (1)   Records of all complaints received, their nature and resolution. The
term "complaints" refers to complaints about any aspect of the franchisee's
operations;
   (2)   Records of outages known to the franchisee, their cause and duration;
   (3)   Records of service calls for repair and maintenance indicating the
date and time service was requested, the date of acknowledgment and date and
time service was scheduled (if it was scheduled), and the date and time service
was provided (whether or not a resolution of the complaint was achieved), and
(if different) the date and time the problem was solved;
   (4)   Records of installation and reconnection and requests for service
extension, indicating the date of request, the date of acknowledgment, and the
date and time that service was extended; and
   (5)   Records sufficient to show whether the franchisee has complied with
each customer service standard that applies to it.
(Ord. 4636 § 12, 2000)
2.10.120   Exemptions.
   The cable coordinator may temporarily exempt any franchisee from its
obligations under Sections
2.10.080,
2.10.090,
2.10.100, and
2.10.110 if the city manager determines that the requirement would be unduly
burdensome or unnecessary, and that the city and subscriber interests may be
adequately protected in some other manner.
(Ord. 4636 § 13, 2000)
2.10.130   Privacy.
   A franchisee shall take all reasonable steps required so that it is able to
provide reports, books and records to the cable coordinator, including by
providing appropriate subscriber privacy notices. Each franchisee shall be
responsible for redacting data that applicable law prevents it from providing
to the city. Nothing in this section shall be read to require a franchisee to
violate California or federal subscriber privacy laws.
(Ord. 4636 § 14, 2000)
2.10.140   Procedures for payment.
   (a)   The franchise fee paid pursuant to Section
2.10.250, or fee in lieu of franchise fee paid pursuant to Section
2.10.350, shall be paid quarterly unless specified otherwise in a franchise.
Payment for each quarter shall be made to the city not later than forty-five
days after the end of each calendar quarter.
   (b)   Unless a franchise provides otherwise, a franchisee or other entity
subject to a fee under Section
2.10.250 or Section
2.10.350 shall file with the cable coordinator within forty-five days of the
end of each calendar quarter a statement showing gross revenues during the
preceding quarter and the number of subscribers served.
   (c)   No acceptance by the city of any payment shall be construed as an
accord and satisfaction that the amount paid is in fact the correct amount, nor
shall such acceptance of such payment be construed as a waiver or release of
any claim the city may have for additional sums payable.
   (d)   Neither the franchise fee under Section
2.10.250, nor the fee paid in lieu of the franchise fee under Section
2.10.350, is a payment in lieu of any tax, fee or other assessment of general
applicability (including any such tax, fee or assessment imposed on utilities,
cable and OVS operators or their services, but not including a tax, fee, or
assessment which is unduly discriminatory against cable and OVS system
operators or cable subscribers).
   (e)   In the event that a fee payment is not received by the city on or
before the due date set forth in this Section or in a franchise, or the fee
owed is not fully paid, the person subject to the fee will be charged interest
from the due date at the highest interest rate allowed by California law.
   (f)   Within ninety days of the date a franchisee ceases operations under a
franchise (whether because of franchise termination, transfer, bankruptcy or
for any other reason), the franchisee shall file a final statement of revenues
covering the period from the beginning of the calendar year in which the
operations ceased to the date operations ceased. The statement shall contain
the information and shall be certified as required by Section
2.10.090(c)(1).
(Ord. 4636 § 15, 2000)
2.10.200   Cable system franchise application.
   (a)   A written application must be filed for an initial and a renewal cable
system franchise, or for approval of a transfer with the city. A request for
renewal filed under 47 U.S.C. § 546(h) need not contain the information
required by Section
2.10.200(b).
   (b)   The cable coordinator may specify the information that must be
provided in connection with an application, and the form in which the
information is to be provided.
   (1)   At a minimum each application must identify the applicant, show that
the applicant is financially, technically and legally qualified to construct,
operate, maintain and repair the cable system, contain a pro forma showing
capital expenditures and expected income and expenses for the first five years
the applicant is to hold the franchise, and show that the applicant is ready,
willing and able to comply unconditionally with this chapter and its franchise
obligations.
   (2)   Any application for an initial franchise must describe in detail the
cable system that the applicant proposes to build, show where it will be
located, set out the system construction schedule, and show that the applicant
will provide adequate channels, facilities and other support for public,
educational and governmental use (including institutional network use) of the
cable system.
   (3)   To be accepted for filing, not less than one original and two copies
of an application must be submitted. All applications shall include the names
and addresses of individuals authorized to act on behalf of the applicant with
respect to the application.
   (4)   An applicant (and the transferor and transferee, in the case of a
transfer) shall respond to any request for information from the city, by the
time specified by the city.
   (c)   If the city finds that it is in the public interest to issue a
franchise considering the factors above, and such other matters as it is
required or entitled to consider, and subject to the applicant's entry into an
appropriate franchise agreement, it shall issue a franchise. Prior to deciding
whether or not to issue a franchise, the city may hold one or more public
hearings or implement other procedures under which comments from the public on
an application may be received.
   (d)   An application may be rejected if it is incomplete, or if the response
to requests for information is not timely and complete. An applicant shall not
be precluded from filing another application.
(Ord. 4636 § 16, 2000)
2.10.210   Initial and renewal franchise applications.
   (a)   This section establishes additional provisions that apply to an
application for an initial franchise, or a renewal franchise application that
is not governed by 47 U.S.C. § 546(a) - (g).
   (b)   Any person may apply for an initial or a renewal franchise by
submitting an application therefor on that person's own initiative, or in
response to a request for proposals issued by the city. If the city receives an
unsolicited application, it may choose to issue a request for additional
proposals, and require the applicant to amend its proposal to respond thereto.
The city shall promptly conduct such investigations as are necessary to act on
an application.
   (c)   In determining whether to grant a franchise, the city may consider:
   (1)   The extent to which an applicant for a renewal franchise has
substantially complied with applicable law and the material terms of any
existing cable franchise;
   (2)   Whether an applicant for a renewal franchise's quality of service
under its existing franchise, including, but not limited to, signal quality,
response to customer complaints, billing practices, and the like has been
reasonable in light of the needs of the community;
   (3)   Where the applicant has not previously held a cable system franchise
in the city, whether the applicant's record in other communities indicates that
it can be relied upon to provide high-quality service throughout any franchise
term;
   (4)   Whether the applicant has the financial, legal, and technical ability
to provide the services, facilities, and equipment set forth in an application,
and to satisfy any minimum requirements established by the city;
   (5)   Whether the applicant's application is reasonable to meet the future
cable-related needs and interests of the city, taking into account the cost of
meeting such needs and interests;
   (6)   Whether the issuance of a franchise is warranted in the public
interest considering the immediate and future effect on public rights-of-way,
public property, and private property that will be used by the applicant's
cable system;
   (7)   Whether the issuance of the franchise would reduce competition in the
provision of cable service in the city; and
   (8)   Such other matters as the city is authorized or required to consider.
   (d)   If the city determines that the issuance of a franchise would be in
the public interest considering the factors described above, it may proffer a
franchise agreement to the applicant. No franchise shall become effective until
the franchise is unconditionally accepted by the applicant, and the franchise
agreement is signed.
(Ord. 4636 § 17, 2000)
2.10.220   Renewal franchise under 47 U.S.C. § 546.
   (a)   This section establishes additional provisions that apply to renewal
franchise applications governed by 47 U.S.C. § 546(a) - (g).
   (b)   A franchisee which intends to exercise rights under 47 U.S.C. § 546(a)
- (g) shall submit a notice in writing to the city manager in a timely manner
clearly stating that it is activating the procedures set forth in those
sections. The city shall thereafter commence any proceedings that may be
required under federal law, and upon completion of those proceedings, the city
may issue a request for proposals and an application may be submitted for
renewal. The city may preliminarily deny the application by ordinance or
resolution, and if the application is preliminarily denied, the city may
conduct such proceedings and by ordinance or resolution establish such
procedures and appoint such individuals as may be necessary to conduct any
proceedings to review the application, consistent with 47 U.S.C. § 546(a) -
(g).
(Ord. 4636 § 18, 2000)
2.10.230   Cable system transfer application.
   (a)   This section establishes additional provisions that apply to
applications for transfer approval.
   (b)   An application for transfer must contain all the information required
by the cable coordinator, by Section
2.10.200 et seq., and all information required by any FCC transfer form,
including Form 394.
   (c)   In determining whether a transfer application should be granted,
denied, or granted subject to conditions, the city may consider to the extent
permitted by law the legal, financial, and technical qualifications of the
transferee to operate the cable system; any potential impact of the transfer on
subscriber rates or services; whether the incumbent cable operator is in
compliance with its franchise and, if not, whether the incumbent or the
transferee furnishes adequate cure or assurance of cure; whether the transferee
owns or controls any other cable communications system in the city, whether
operation by the transferee may eliminate or reduce competition in the delivery
of cable service in the city; and whether transfer of the system to the
transferee or approval of the transfer would otherwise adversely affect
subscribers, the public, or the city's interests under this chapter, the
franchise, or other applicable law. The proposed transferee shall pay all
actual and reasonable costs incurred by the city in reviewing and evaluating an
application for a transfer.
   (d)   In order to obtain approval of a transfer, an applicant must show, at
a minimum that: the transferee is qualified; the transfer will not adversely
affect the interests of subscribers, the public, or the city; and that
franchise and chapter non-compliance issues have been resolved. No application
shall be granted unless the transferee agrees in writing that it will abide by
and accept all terms of this chapter and the franchise, and that it will assume
the obligations, liabilities, and responsibility for all acts and omissions,
known and unknown, of the previous franchisee for all purposes.
(Ord. 4636 § 19, 2000)
2.10.240   Legal qualifications.
   (a)   The applicant for an initial franchise or for the transfer of a
franchise shall comply with the provisions of this chapter and applicable laws,
and it shall comply with the requirements of a franchise as the city may
lawfully require.
   (1)   The applicant must not have had any cable system or OVS franchise
validly revoked, and the revocation is no longer subject to appeal, by the city
within three years preceding the submission of the application.
   (2)   The applicant may not have had an application to the city for an
initial or a renewal cable system franchise denied on the ground that the
applicant failed to propose a cable system meeting the cable-related needs and
interests of the community (or, in the case of a franchise renewal, denied on
the ground that the franchisee failed substantially to comply with the material
terms of its franchise), or as to which any challenges to such franchising
decision were finally resolved (including any appeals) adversely to the
applicant, within three years preceding the submission of the application; and
may not have had an application for an initial or a renewal OVS franchise
denied by the city on any ground within three years of the application.
   (3)   The applicant shall not be issued a franchise if, at any time during
the ten years preceding the submission of the application, the applicant or any
of its officers or directors was convicted of fraud, racketeering,
anticompetitive actions, unfair trade practices or other conduct of such
character that the applicant cannot be relied upon to deal truthfully with the
city and the subscribers, or to substantially comply with its obligations.
   (4)   The applicant must have the necessary authority under California and
federal law to operate a cable system and to conduct business in the state of
California and the city, or show that it is in a position to obtain that
authority.
   (5)   The applicant shall not be issued a franchise if it files materially
misleading information in its application or intentionally withholds
information that the applicant lawfully is required to provide.
   For the purposes of Section
2.10.240(a)(1) - (3), the term "applicant" includes any affiliate of the
applicant.
   (b)   Notwithstanding Section
2.10.240(a), an applicant shall be provided a reasonable opportunity to show
that a franchise should issue even if the requirements of Section
2.10.240(a)(1) - (3) are not satisfied, by virtue of the circumstances
surrounding the matter and the steps taken by the applicant to cure all harms
flowing therefrom and prevent their recurrence, the lack of involvement of the
applicant's principals, or the remoteness of the matter from the operation of a
cable system.
(Ord. 4636 § 20, 2000)
2.10.250   Franchise fee.
   An operator of a cable system shall pay to the city a franchise fee in an
amount equal to five percent of gross revenues, or such other amount as may be
specified in the franchise; provided, however, that if the franchise specifies
an amount, that amount shall be subject to increase should federal limits on
fee payments be eliminated or changed and other operators are subject to the
same modified fee.
(Ord. 4636 § 21, 2000)
2.10.260   No exclusivity.
   A franchisee may not require a subscriber or a building owner or manager to
enter into an exclusive contract as a condition of providing or continuing
service. However, nothing herein prevents a franchisee from entering into an
otherwise lawful, mutually desired exclusive arrangement with a building owner
or manager of a multiple dwelling unit or commercial subscriber.
(Ord. 4636 § 22, 2000)
2.10.270   Minimum franchise conditions.
   (a)   In addition to satisfying such additional or stricter conditions as
the city finds necessary based on its investigations, the following elements
shall be required, subject to the requirements of 47 U.S.C. § 546, in the case
of every franchisee serving more than 1000 subscribers:
   (1)   Each franchisee shall provide a cable system that uses at least two-
way 750 MHz equipment of high quality and reliability.
   (2)   Each franchisee shall install and activate the return portion of the
cable system in the sub-low transmission frequency (split) spectrum of 5 MHz to
30 or 40 MHz.
   (b)   A franchisee shall provide a minimum of five channels for PEG access
to each subscriber.
   (1)   Each franchisee shall install, maintain, and replace as necessary, a
dedicated, bi-directional fiber optic link between its headend and a location
designated by the city as the primary access center. Each franchisee shall
install, maintain, and replace activated two-way cable plant and all headend,
cable plant, and node equipment required to make it operable so that the city,
schools, and all designated PEG access centers and access facilities located
within the franchise area will be able to send and receive signals (video,
audio, and data) using the activated two-way cable plant. Each franchisee shall
ensure that technically adequate signal quality, routing systems, and switching
and/or processing equipment are initially and continuously provided for all
access interconnections both within the franchisee's cable system and with
other cable communications systems throughout the duration of its franchise.
   (2)   In the event a franchisee makes any change in the cable system and
related equipment and facilities or in the franchisee's signal delivery
technology which directly or indirectly substantially affects the signal
quality or transmission of access programming, the franchisee shall at its
expense take necessary steps or provide necessary technical assistance,
including, but not limited to, the acquisition of all necessary equipment, to
ensure that the capabilities of access programmers are not diminished or
adversely affected by such change.
   (3)   A franchisee shall maintain all access channels (both upstream
channels and downstream channels) and all interconnections of access channels
at the same level of technical quality and reliability as the best commercial
channels carried on the system.
   (c)   Every franchisee shall provide service in its franchise area upon
request to any person or any government building. Each franchisee shall extend
service upon request within its franchise area, provided that, a franchise may
permit a franchisee to require a potential subscriber to contribute a fair
share of the capital costs of installation or extension as a condition of
extension or installation in cases where such extension or installation may be
unduly expensive. Service shall be provided within the time limits specified in
Section
2.10.270(d).
   (d)   Except as a franchise provides otherwise, service must be extended
upon request to any person or to any government building in a franchisee's
franchise area: (i) within seven days of the request, where service can be
provided by activating or installing a drop of 125 feet or less; (ii) within
thirty days of the request, where service can be provided by activating a drop
of a length in excess of 125 feet, but not exceeding one-quarter mile; (iii)
within ninety days of the request, where an extension of one-quarter mile to
one-half mile is required; or (iv) within six months where an extension of more
than one-half mile is required.
   (e)   A cable system within the city shall meet or exceed the technical
standards set forth in 47 C.F.R. § 76.601 and any other applicable technical
standards.
   (f)   Each franchisee shall perform at its expense such tests as may be
necessary to show whether or not the franchisee is in compliance with its
obligations under applicable FCC standards, this chapter or a franchise.
   (g)   Upon request of the city, every cable system shall be required to
interconnect with every other cable communications system within the city on
fair and reasonable terms for purposes of providing PEG and institutional
network services.
   (h)   Each franchisee shall, during the term of the franchise, ensure that
subscribers are able to receive continuous service. In the event the franchise
is revoked or terminated, the franchisee may be required to continue to provide
service for a reasonable period of time to assure an orderly transition of
service from the franchisee to another entity. A franchise may establish more
particular requirements under which these obligations will be satisfied.
(Ord. 4636 § 23, 2000)
2.10.275   Penalties for customer service standards violations.
   (a)   Each franchisee must satisfy FCC, California and city cable customer
service standards or consumer protection standards. In the case of a conflict
among standards, the stricter standard shall apply.
   (b)   For violation of cable customer service standards, penalties will be
imposed in accordance with the administrative penalties provisions of the Palo
Alto Municipal Code, or, if none, as follows:
   (1)   $200 for each day of each material breach, not to exceed $600 for each
occurrence of material breach;
   (2)   If there is a subsequent material breach of the same provision within
twelve months, $400 for each day of each material breach, not to exceed $1,200
for each occurrence of the material breach; and
   (3)   If there is a third or additional material breach of the same
provision within twelve months of the first, $1,000 for each day of each
material breach, not to exceed $3000 for each occurrence of the material
breach.
   (c)   Any penalty assessed under this Section
2.10.275 will be reduced dollar-for-dollar to the extent any liquidated damage
provision of a franchisee's franchise imposes a monetary obligation on that
franchisee for the same customer service failures, and no other monetary
damages may be assessed. The city will provide notice, and impose penalties,
under this section pursuant to the procedures established by California
Government Code § 53088.2(r).
(Ord. 4636 § 24, 2000)
2.10.280   Rate regulation.
   (a)   The city may regulate any of a franchisee's rates and charges to the
full extent permitted by law. The city will regulate rates in accordance with
FCC rules and regulations, where applicable. Except to the extent FCC rules
provide otherwise, all rates and charges that are subject to regulation, and
changes in those rates or charges must be approved in advance. The cable
coordinator may take any required steps to file complaints, toll rates, issue
accounting orders or take any other steps required to comply with FCC
regulations. The council shall be responsible for issuing rate orders that
establish rates or order refunds.
   (b)   Except to the extent the city may not enforce such a requirement, a
franchisee is prohibited from discriminating in its rates, charges, services,
or terms of services, and from granting undue preferences to any subscriber,
potential subscriber, group of subscribers or potential group of subscribers;
provided, however, that a franchisee may offer temporary, bona fide promotional
discounts in order to attract or maintain subscribers, so long as such
discounts are offered on a non-discriminatory basis to similar classes of
subscribers throughout the franchise area; and a franchisee may offer discounts
for the elderly, the disabled, or the economically disadvantaged, and such
other discounts as it is expressly entitled to provide under federal law, if
such discounts are applied in a uniform and consistent manner.
   (c)   A franchisee shall not deny access or charge different rates to any
group of subscribers or potential subscribers because of the income of the
residents of the local area in which such group resides.
(Ord. 4636 § 25, 2000)
2.10.300   Initial and renewal OVS applications.
   (a)   A written application for grant of an initial or a renewal OVS
franchise shall be filed with the city. To be acceptable for filing, not less
than an original of the application shall be submitted together with two
copies. The application must conform to any applicable request for proposals,
and contain all information required under Section
2.10.300(b). All applications shall include the names and addresses of
individuals authorized to act on behalf of the applicant with respect to the
application.
   (b)   The cable coordinator may specify the information that must be
provided in connection with a request for proposals or an application for an
initial or a renewal OVS franchise. At a minimum, each application must:
identify the applicant; show where it plans to construct its system, and the
system construction schedule; show that the applicant will provide adequate
channels, facilities and other support for public, educational and governmental
use (including institutional network use) of the OVS; and show that the
applicant is financially, technically and legally qualified to construct,
operate, maintain and repair the OVS.
   (c)   A person may apply for an initial or a renewal OVS franchise on its
own initiative or in response to a request for proposals.
   (1)   Upon receipt of an application the city shall proffer the applicant a
proposed OVS franchise, which shall be mailed to the individual requesting its
issuance and made available to any other interested party. The city may request
such other information, as it deems appropriate.
   (2)   An applicant shall respond to requests for information completely, and
within the time directed by the cable coordinator, and must strictly comply
with procedures, instructions, and requirements the city may establish.
   (3)   An application may be rejected if it is incomplete, if the response to
requests for information is not timely and complete, or the applicant fails to
follow procedures or respond fully to information requests.
   (d)   In evaluating an OVS franchise application, the city may consider the
following:
   (1)   The extent to which the applicant has substantially complied with the
applicable law and, in the case of a renewal franchise application, the
material terms of any existing city OVS franchise;
   (2)   Whether the applicant has the financial, technical, and legal
qualifications to hold an OVS franchise;
   (3)   Whether the application satisfies any minimum requirements established
by the city for, or will provide otherwise, adequate public, educational, and
governmental use capacity, facilities, or financial support (including with
respect to institutional networks);
   (4)   Whether the issuance of a franchise would require replacement of
property or involve disruption of property, public services, or use of the
public rights-of-way; and
   (5)   Whether the approval of the application may eliminate or reduce
competition in the delivery of cable service in the city.
   (e)   If the city finds that it is in the public interest to issue an OVS
franchise considering the factors above, and such other matters as it is
required or entitled to consider, and subject to the applicant's entry into an
appropriate OVS agreement, it shall issue a franchise. Prior to deciding
whether or not to issue a franchise, the city may hold one or more public
hearings or implement other procedures under which comments from the public on
an application may be received.
   (f)   In order to be legally qualified:
   (1)   The applicant shall comply with the provisions of this chapter and
applicable laws, and to comply with such requirements of an OVS franchise as
the city may lawfully require;
   (2)   The applicant must not hold a cable system franchise, or have pending
an application for a cable system franchise;
   (3)   The applicant must not have had any cable system or OVS franchise
validly revoked, (including any appeals) by the city within three years
preceding the submission of the application;
   (4)   The applicant may not have had an application for an initial or a
renewal cable system franchise to the city denied on the ground that the
applicant failed to propose a cable system meeting the cable-related needs and
interests of the community (or, in the case of a renewal franchise, denied on
the ground that the franchisee failed substantially to comply with the material
terms of its franchise), or as to which any challenges to such franchising
decision were finally resolved (including any appeals) adversely to the
applicant, within three years preceding the submission of the application;
   (5)   The applicant may not have had an application for an initial or a
renewal OVS franchise denied by the city on any grounds within three years of
the filing of the application;
   (6)   The applicant shall not be issued a franchise if, at any time during
the ten years preceding the submission of the application, the applicant or any
of its officers or directors was convicted of fraud, racketeering,
anticompetitive actions, unfair trade practices or other conduct of such
character that the applicant cannot be relied upon to deal truthfully with the
city and the subscribers, or to substantially comply with its obligations;
   (7)   The applicant must have the necessary authority under California and
federal law to operate an OVS, and must be certified by the FCC under 47 U.S.C.
§ 573; and
   (8)   The applicant shall not be issued a franchise if it files materially
misleading information in its application or intentionally withholds
information that the applicant lawfully is required to provide.
   For purposes of Section
2.10.300(a)(2) - (5), the term "applicant" includes any affiliate of the
applicant.
   (g)   Notwithstanding Section
2.10.300(f), an applicant shall be provided a reasonable opportunity to show
that a franchise should issue, even if the requirements of Section
2.10.300(a)(4) - (5) are not satisfied, by virtue of the circumstances
surrounding the matter and the steps taken by the applicant to cure all harms
flowing therefrom and prevent their recurrence, the lack of involvement of the
applicant's principals, or the remoteness of the matter from the operation of a
cable system.
(Ord. 4636 § 26, 2000)
2.10.310   OVS transfer application.
   (a)   No OVS transfer shall occur without prior written notice to and the
approval of the council.
   (b)   An OVS franchisee shall promptly notify the city of any proposed
transfer, and submit an application for its approval.
   (1)   The cable coordinator may specify information that must be provided in
connection with a transfer application. At a minimum, an application must:
describe the entities involved in the transaction and the entity that will hold
the franchise; describe the chain of ownership before and after the proposed
transaction; show that the entity that will hold the franchise will be legally,
financially, and technically qualified to do so; attach complete information on
the proposed transaction, including, but not limited to, the contracts or other
documents that relate to the proposed transaction, and all documents,
schedules, exhibits, or the like referred to therein; and attach any
shareholder reports or filings with the SEC that discuss the transaction.
   (2)   For the purposes of determining whether it shall consent to a
transfer, the city or its agents may inquire into all qualifications of the
prospective transferee and such other matters as the city may deem necessary to
determine whether the transfer is in the public interest and should be
approved, denied, or conditioned. If the transferee or OVS franchisee refuses
to provide information, or provides incomplete information, the request for
transfer may be denied.
   (c)   In deciding whether a transfer application should be granted, denied
or granted subject to conditions, the city may consider: the legal, financial,
and technical qualifications of the transferee to operate the OVS; whether the
incumbent OVS franchisee is in compliance with its OVS franchise and this
chapter and, if not, the proposed transferee's commitment to cure such
noncompliance within the time required by applicable law; whether the
transferee owns or controls any other OVS or cable system in the city, and
whether operation by the transferee may eliminate or reduce competition in the
delivery of cable service in the city; and whether operation by the transferee
or approval of the transfer would adversely affect the interests of
subscribers, the public, or the city under this chapter, the OVS franchise, or
other applicable law.
   (d)   In order to obtain approval of a transfer, an applicant must show, at
a minimum, that: the transferee is qualified; the transfer will not adversely
affect the interests of subscribers, the public, or the city; and chapter and
franchise non-compliance issues have been resolved. No application shall be
granted unless the transferee agrees in writing that it will abide by and
accept all terms of this chapter and the OVS franchise, and that it will assume
the obligations, liabilities, and responsibility for all acts and omissions,
known and unknown, of the previous franchisee for all purposes. The proposed
transferee shall pay all reasonable costs incurred by the city in reviewing and
evaluating the applications.
(Ord. 4636 § 27, 2000)
2.10.320   Minimum requirements.
   (a)   No OVS operator shall be issued a franchise, and an OVS operator may
not commence providing video services, including video programming services,
until it: (A) agrees to match in all respects the highest PEG obligations borne
by any cable system franchisee in the city; or (B) agrees to PEG obligations of
a monetary value that is equivalent to the highest PEG obligations borne by any
cable system operator or franchisee.
   (b)   Any OVS operator that constructs an institutional network must match
in all respects the highest institutional network obligations borne by any
cable system operator or franchisee in the city, unless the OVS franchisee
agrees to an alternative institutional network equivalent to the obligations of
a cable system operator or franchisee in the city.
   (c)   Every OVS agreement shall specify the construction schedule that will
apply to any required construction, upgrade, or rebuild of the OVS. The
schedule shall provide for prompt completion of the project, considering the
amount and type of construction required.
   (d)   Each OVS franchisee shall perform at its expense such tests as may be
necessary to show whether or not the franchisee is in compliance with its
obligations under this chapter or an OVS franchise.
   (e)   Every OVS franchisee must satisfy FCC, California and city OVS
customer service standards or consumer protection standards. In the case of a
conflict among standards, the stricter standard shall apply.
(Ord. 4636 § 28, 2000)
2.10.330   Special termination rules.
   (a)   If an OVS franchisee's FCC certification is revoked or terminates
otherwise as a result of the passage of time or as a matter of law, the city
may revoke the OVS franchise after a hearing. The OVS franchise also may be
revoked if federal regulations or statutory provisions governing OVS are
declared invalid or unenforceable, or are repealed.
(Ord. 4636 § 29, 2000)
2.10.340   Rate regulation.
   The city may regulate an OVS franchisee's rates and charges to the full
extent permitted by law, and may do so by amendment to this chapter, separate
ordinance, by amendment to an OVS franchise, or in any other lawful manner.
(Ord. 4636 § 30, 2000)
2.10.350   Fee in lieu of franchise fee.
   (a)   In lieu of the franchise fee required by Section
2.10.250, an OVS franchisee shall pay to the city a fee in an amount equal to
five percent of the gross revenues of the OVS franchisee or its affiliates, or
such other amount as may be specified in the franchise; provided, however, that
if the franchise specifies an amount, that amount shall be subject to
modification in the event federal limits on fee payments are modified and other
operators are subject to the same modified fee.
   (b)   A person leasing capacity from an OVS operator other than a person
whose revenues are included in the payment made under Section
2.10.350(a) shall pay the city a fee in lieu of the franchise fee required by
Section
2.10.250 of five percent of the gross revenues of such person.
   (c)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, where the OVS franchisee charges a
person other than an affiliate, to use its OVS (the "use payments"); and that
person recovers those use payments through charges to its subscribers that are
included in that person's gross revenues and that person fully recovers the use
payments through the charges to its subscribers and pays a fee on those charges
pursuant to Section
2.10.350(b); then the OVS franchisee may deduct from its gross revenues the use
payments it receives from that person.
(Ord. 4636 § 31, 2000)
2.10.360   Exclusive contracts.
   An OVS franchisee may not require a subscriber or a building owner or
manager to enter into an exclusive contract as a condition of providing or
continuing service, nor may an OVS franchisee enter into any arrangement that
would effectively prevent other persons from using the OVS to compete in the
delivery of cable services with a franchisee or its affiliates.
(Ord. 4636 § 32, 2000)
2.10.400   Miscellaneous provisions.
   (a)   The captions to sections throughout this chapter are intended solely
to facilitate reading and reference to the sections and provisions of this
chapter. Such captions shall not affect the meaning or interpretation of this
chapter.
   (b)   Unless otherwise indicated, when the performance or doing of any act,
duty, matter, or payment is required under this chapter or any franchise, and a
period of time or duration for the fulfillment of doing thereof is prescribed
and is fixed herein, the time shall be computed so as to exclude the first and
include the last day of the prescribed or fixed period of time.
   (c)   If any term, condition, or provision of this chapter shall, to any
extent, be held to be invalid or unenforceable by a valid order of any court or
regulatory agency of competent jurisdiction, the remainder hereof shall be
valid in all other respects and continue to be effective. In the event of a
subsequent change in applicable law that renders valid the provision that had
been held invalid, that provision shall thereupon return to full force and
effect without further action by the city and shall thereafter be binding on
the franchisee and the city.
   (d)   To the extent consistent with federal law, subscribers shall have the
right to attach videocassette recorders, receivers, and other terminal
equipment to a franchisee's cable system. Subscribers also shall have the right
to use their own remote control devices and converters, and other similar
equipment. A franchisee shall not, as a condition of providing service, require
a subscriber or potential subscriber to remove any existing antenna, or
disconnect any antenna except at the express direction of the subscriber or
potential subscriber, or prohibit installation of a new antenna, provided that
such antenna is connected with an appropriate device and complies with
applicable law.
   (e)   A franchisee shall not discriminate among persons or the city or take
any retaliatory action against a person or the city because of that person's or
the city's exercise of any right it may have under federal, California, or city
law, nor may a franchisee require a person or the city to waive such rights as
a condition of taking service.
   (f)   A franchisee shall not refuse to employ, discharge from employment, or
discriminate against any person in compensation or in terms, conditions, or
privileges of employment because of race, color, creed, national origin, sex,
age, disability, religion, ethnic background, or marital status. A franchisee
shall comply with all federal, California, and local laws governing equal
employment opportunities, and hiring practices.
   (g)   The operator of any system installed as of the effective date of this
chapter, for which a franchise is required under this chapter, shall have three
months from the effective date of this chapter to file one or more applications
for a franchise. Any operator timely filing such an application under this
Section
2.10.400(g) shall not be subject to a penalty for failure to have such a
franchise so long as such application remains pending; provided, however,
nothing herein shall relieve any operator of a cable communications system of
any liability for its failure to obtain any permit or other authorization
required under other provisions of the Palo Alto Municipal Code, and nothing
herein shall prevent the city from requiring removal of any facilities
installed in violation of the Palo Alto Municipal Code.
   (h)   Any person holding an existing franchise for a cable communications
system as of the date this chapter is adopted may continue to operate under the
existing franchise to the conclusion of its present term (but not any renewal
or extension thereof) with respect to those activities expressly authorized by
the franchise; provided that, such person shall be subject to the other
provisions of this chapter to the full extent permitted by law.
   (i)   To the maximum extent permitted by law, pending applications shall be
subject to this chapter. A person with a pending application shall have thirty
days from the effective date of this chapter to submit additional information
to comply with the requirements of this chapter governing applications.
(Ord. 4636 § 33, 2000)
2.10.500   Customer service standards.
   (a)   The customer service standards applicable to franchisees of cable
communications systems are established in Appendix A* to this chapter and are
incorporated herein by reference. The customer service standards applicable to
Internet and cable modem service set forth in Appendix A are hereby repealed.
   (b)   The city manager may modify by relaxing or strengthening the customer
service standards, or any part thereof, and the modified customer service
standards shall take effect fourteen days after written notice of the same is
given by the city manager to the council.
(Ord. 4658 § 1, 2001: Ord. 4636 § 34, 2000)
   *   Editor's Note: Appendix A is not codified. Refer to the office of the
city clerk for this document.
2.10.600   Applicability and sunset.*
   (a)   This
Chapter 2.10 shall apply to any person that was a franchisee in the city on
January 1, 2007, through the later of (1) January 2, 2008, or (2) the date of
the granting to that franchisee of a state franchise by the California Public
Utilities Commission after one of the conditions in Section 5840(o) of the
California Public Utilities Code has been satisfied.
   (b)   This
Chapter 2.10 shall apply to any person that was not a franchisee in the city on
January 1, 2007, and that wishes to apply, on or before December 31, 2007, for
a local franchise from the city. After December 31, 2007, this chapter shall
not apply to any person that was not a franchisee in the city on January 1,
2007.
   (c)   This
Chapter 2.10 shall sunset in its entirety and no longer be effective on the
date that all cable operators and video service providers operating in the city
have state franchises granted by the California Public Utilities Commission.
(Ord. 4945 § 1, 2007)
   *   Editor's Note: Repeal of Ch. 2.10. Section 2 of Ord. 4945 provides that:
"When the earlier of the date set forth in Section
2.10.600(c) of
Chapter 2.10 of Title 2 of the Palo Alto Municipal Code or July 25, 2010
occurs,
Chapter 2.10 of Title 2 of the Palo Alto Municipal Code shall be repealed in
its entirety."
Chapter 2.11
VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDERS - APPLICABLE REQUIREMENTS
Sections:
   
2.11.010   Purpose and interpretation.
   
2.11.020   Definitions.
   
2.11.030   State franchise required.
   
2.11.040   Administration and regulations.
   
2.11.050   Construction, operation, maintenance and repair.
   
2.11.060   Franchise fee.
   
2.11.070   Public, education and government access channel capacity and
support.
   
2.11.080   Audits and records.
   
2.11.090   State franchise service obligations.
   
2.11.100   Customer service and protection.
   
2.11.110   Emergency alert system.
   
2.11.120   Notices.
   
2.11.130   Miscellaneous provisions.
2.11.010   Purpose and interpretation.
   It is the purpose of this
Chapter 2.11 to implement within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city the
provisions of DIVCA and the rules of the commission promulgated thereunder that
are applicable to a "local franchising entity" or a "local entity" as defined
in DIVCA. Consistent with that purpose, the provisions of this
Chapter 2.11 are to be construed in a manner that is consistent with DIVCA and
the applicable rules of the Commission promulgated thereunder.
(Ord. 4945 § 4, 2007)
2.11.020   Definitions.
   For the purposes of this
Chapter 2.11, the following words, terms, phrases, and abbreviations and their
similar formulations shall have the meanings given them in this
Chapter 2.11 or, as appropriate, in Chapters
1.04,
2.08,
2.30 and
12.04 of the Palo Alto Municipal Code and in the Charter of the City of Palo
Alto, as may be amended from time to time, unless the context indicates
otherwise. Words not defined in this
Chapter 2.11 or the other chapters of the Palo Alto Municipal Code shall have
the same meaning as established in (1) DIVCA, and, if not defined therein, (2)
Commission rules implementing DIVCA, and, if not defined therein, (3) Title VI
of Title 47 of the United States Code, and, if not defined therein, (4) their
common and ordinary meaning. References to governmental entities (whether
persons or entities) shall refer to those entities or their successors in
authority. If a specific provision of law referred to in this
Chapter 2.11 should be renumbered, then the reference shall be read to refer to
the renumbered provision. References to any law shall be interpreted broadly to
cover government actions, however nominated, including any law now in force or
subsequently enacted or amended.
   (a)   "Access," "PEG access," or "PEG use" means the availability of cable
system or video service provider network capacity for public, educational or
governmental use by various agencies, institutions, organizations, groups, and
individuals, including the city and its designated access providers, to
acquire, create and distribute programming not under a cable operator's or
video service provider's editorial control, including, but not limited to:
   (1)   "Public access" or "public use" means access where organizations,
groups or individual members of the general public, on a nondiscriminatory
basis, are the primary or designated programmers or users having editorial
control over their programming;
   (2)   "Educational access" or "educational use" means access where
accredited educational institutions are the primary or designated programmers
or users having editorial control over their programming; and
   (3)   "Governmental access" or "governmental use" means access where
governmental institutions or their designees are the primary or designated
programmers or users having editorial control over their programming.
   (b)   "Cable coordinator" means the city manager or the individual or
individuals designated by the city manager to administer oversight of state
franchisees in the city.
   (c)   "Channel" means a portion of the electromagnetic frequency spectrum
which is used in a cable system or the network of a video service provider and
which is capable of delivering a television signal whether in an analog or
digital format. The definition does not restrict the use of any channel to the
transmission of analog television signals.
   (d)   "City" means the government of the City of Palo Alto, a chartered city
and a municipal corporation duly organized and validly existing under the laws
of the State of California, and all departments, divisions, and offices
thereof.
   (e)   "Council" means the city council as defined in Section
1.04.050(2).
   (f)   "Commission" means the California Public Utilities Commission.
   (g)   "Comcast Franchise" means the Cable Television Franchise Agreement by
and between the City of Palo Alto, California, on behalf of the Joint Powers,
and TCI Cablevision of California, Inc., effective as of July 25, 2000.
   (h)   "DIVCA" means the Digital Infrastructure and Video Competition Act of
2006, Assembly Bill 2987 (Ch. 700, Stats. 2006), and as that act may hereafter
be amended.
   (i)   "Communications service equipment" and "communications service
facilities" means the equipment and facilities used by a video service provider
to provide cable or video service.
   (j)   "EAS" means emergency alert system.
   (k)   "FCC" means the Federal Communications Commission.
   (l)   "Person" includes any natural person, association, company,
corporation, limited liability company, limited liability partnership, limited
partnership, joint stock company, partnership, trust, or any other legal
entity, but not the city.
   (m)   "PEG" means public, educational and governmental access.
   (n)   "Public rights-of-way" means the surface of and the space above and
below any street, road, highway, freeway, bridge, lane, path, alley, court,
sidewalk, parkway, drive, or right-of-way or easement primarily dedicated to
travel, now or hereafter existing within the city which may be properly used
for the purpose of installing, constructing, operating, maintaining, and
repairing a cable system or a video service provider's network; and any other
property that a state franchisee is entitled by California or federal law to
use by virtue of the grant of a state franchise.
   (o)   "Public property" means any property that is owned or under the
control of the city that is not located in the public rights-of-way, including,
for purposes of this chapter, but not limited to, buildings, parks, and pole
structures, such as utility poles and light poles, or similar facilities or
property owned by or leased to the city.
   (p)   "State franchisee" means any cable operator or video service provider
that, pursuant to DIVCA, has been granted by the commission a state franchise
to provide cable or video service by means of communications service equipment
or facilities and whose video service area includes all or any part of the
incorporated limits of the city.
   (q)   "Video service provider" has the meaning set forth in DIVCA and, in
addition, refers collectively to any cable operator, video service provider or
OVS operator as defined in DIVCA.
(Ord. 4945 § 5, 2007)
2.11.030   State franchise required.
   (a)   No person may construct, operate, maintain or repair a cable system or
video service provider's network in the city without first obtaining a state
franchise therefor.
   (b)   A state franchise shall not convey rights other than as specified in
this
Chapter 2.11 or in DIVCA or other applicable law; no rights shall pass by
implication.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided by DIVCA, a state franchise shall not
include, or be a substitute for:
   (1)   Compliance with generally applicable requirements for the privilege of
transacting and carrying on a business within the city, including, but not
limited to, compliance with the conditions that the city may establish before
facilities may be constructed for, or providing, non-video services;
   (2)   Any permit or authorization, other than a state franchise, required in
connection with operations on or in public rights-of-way or public property,
including, but not limited to, encroachment permits, street work permits, pole
attachment permits and street cut permits; and
   (3)   Any permit, agreement or authorization for occupying any other
property of the city or any private person to which access is not specifically
granted by the state franchise.
   (d)   Except as otherwise provided in DIVCA, a state franchise shall not
relieve a franchisee of its duty to comply with all laws, including the
ordinances, resolutions, rules, regulations, and other laws of the city, and
every state franchisee shall comply with the same. The city reserves its rights
to the lawful exercise of police and other powers the city now has or may later
obtain.
   (e)   The city reserves the right to construct, operate, maintain or repair
its own cable system or video service provider network.
(Ord. 4945 § 6, 2007)
2.11.040   Administration and regulations.
   (a)   The city may from time to time adopt rules and regulations to
implement the provisions of this
Chapter 2.11 consistent with DIVCA.
   (b)   The cable coordinator is hereby authorized to administer this
Chapter 2.11 and to provide or cause to be provided any notices (including
noncompliance notices) and to take any action on behalf of the city that may be
required under this
Chapter 2.11, DIVCA, or under applicable law.
   (c)   The failure of the city, upon one or more occasions, to exercise a
right or to require compliance or performance under this
Chapter 2.11 or any other applicable law shall not be deemed to constitute a
waiver of such right or a waiver of compliance or performance, unless such
right has been specifically waived in writing or its exercise by the city is
not permitted by DIVCA.
   (d)   The city may designate one or more entities, including itself, to
control and manage the use of PEG access channels, and any PEG facilities and
equipment (in addition to any other communications service equipment or
facilities) owned, controlled or used by the city or the designated entity or
entities.
(Ord. 4945 § 7, 2007)
2.11.050   Construction, operation, maintenance and repair.
   A video service provider operating within the jurisdictional boundaries of
the city shall, in its use of public rights-of-way and public and private
property, be considered a "utility" within the meaning of Section
12.04.040 of the Palo Alto Municipal Code, and shall abide by the provisions of
Title 12 of the Palo Alto Municipal Code applicable to any utility or
utilities.
(Ord. 4945 § 8, 2007)
2.11.060   Franchise fee.
   (a)   Every state franchisee operating within the jurisdictional boundaries
of the city shall pay a franchise fee to the city in the amount of five percent
of that state franchisee's gross revenues derived from the operation of its
network to provide cable or video services within the city.
   (b)   For purposes of this
Chapter 2.11, "gross revenue" shall have the meaning set forth in Section 5860
of the California Public Utilities Code.
   (c)   A state franchisee shall remit the franchise fee to the city
quarterly, within forty-five days after the end of each calendar quarter. Each
payment shall be accompanied by a summary explaining the basis for the
calculation of the franchise fee.
   (d)   If a state franchisee fails to pay the franchise fee when due, or
underpays the proper amount due, the state franchisee shall pay a late payment
charge at an annual interest rate equal to the highest prime lending rate
during the period of delinquency, plus one percent.
(Ord. 4945 § 9, 2007)
2.11.070   Public, education and government access channel capacity and
support.
   (a)   PEG Channel Capacity.
   (1)   A state franchisee shall designate and activate seven PEG channels on
its network. The state franchisee shall designate and activate the seven PEG
channels within three months from the date that the state franchisee receives a
state franchise to provide video service in an area including the city,
provided, however, that this three-month period shall be tolled for such a
period, and only for such a period, during which the state franchisee's ability
to designate or provide such PEG capacity is technically infeasible, as
provided in Section 5870(a) of the California Public Utilities Code.
   (2)   A state franchisee shall provide an additional PEG channel when the
standards set forth in Section 5870(d) of the California Public Utilities Code
are satisfied by the city or any entity designated by the city to be
responsible for PEG access channel capacity and support.
   (b)   PEG Support.
   (1)   Amount of PEG Support Fee.
   (A)   Except as provided in subparagraphs (B) and (C), every state
franchisee operating within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city shall pay
a PEG support fee to the city in the amount of eighty-eight cents ($0.88) per
month per subscriber within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city.
   (B)   Upon the expiration of the Comcast Franchise or its earlier
termination pursuant to Section 5840(o)(3) of the California Public Utility
Code, every state franchisee operating within the jurisdictional boundaries of
the city shall pay a new PEG support fee to the city in the amount of eighty-
eight cents ($.88) per month per subscriber in the city.
   (C)   The PEG support fee established by the city pursuant to paragraph (b)
(1)(B) shall expire with respect to a particular state franchisee upon the
expiration of that state franchisee's state franchise, and the city shall, by
ordinance, reauthorize the PEG support fee for that state franchisee upon such
expiration.
   (2)   The PEG support fee shall be used by the city for PEG purposes
consistent with state and federal law.
   (3)   A state franchisee shall remit the PEG support fee to the city
quarterly, within forty-five days after the end of each calendar quarter. Each
payment shall be accompanied by a summary explaining the basis for the
calculation of the PEG support fee.
   (4)   If a state franchisee fails to pay the PEG support fee when due, or
underpays the proper amount due, the state franchisee shall pay a late payment
charge at an annual interest rate equal to the highest prime lending rate
during the period of delinquency, plus one percent or the highest rate allowed
by California law, whichever is lower.
   (c)   PEG Carriage and Interconnection.
   (1)   State franchisees shall ensure that all PEG channels are receivable by
all subscribers, whether they receive digital or analog service, or a
combination thereof, without the need for any equipment other than that needed
to receive the lowest cost tier of service. PEG access capacity provided by a
state franchisee shall be of similar quality and functionality to that offered
by commercial channels on the state franchisee's lowest cost tier of service
unless the PEG signal is provided to the state franchisee at a lower quality or
with less functionality.
   (2)   If a state franchisee and an incumbent cable operator cannot reach a
mutually acceptable interconnection agreement for PEG carriage, the city shall
require the incumbent cable operator to allow the state franchisee to
interconnect its network with the incumbent cable operator's network at a
technically feasible point on the state franchisee's network as identified by
the state franchisee. If no technically feasible point of interconnection is
available, the state franchisee shall make interconnection available to the PEG
channel originator and shall provide the facilities necessary for the
interconnection. The cost of any interconnection shall be borne by the state
franchisee requesting the interconnection unless otherwise agreed to by the
parties.
   (d)   Institutional Network and Other In-Kind PEG Facilities and Cable
Service Support Obligations. The incumbent cable operator's obligation to
provide and support PEG channel facilities and institutional networks and to
provide free cable service to schools and other public buildings as provided in
the Comcast Franchise shall continue until July 25, 2010.
   (e)   PEG support fee reauthorizations.
   (1)   On expiration and renewal of AT&T’s state franchise on March 30, 2017,
the city hereby reauthorizes the PEG support fee.
   (2)   On expiration and renewal of Comcast’s state franchise on January 2,
2018, the city hereby reauthorizes the PEG support fee.
(Ord. 5424 § 2, 2018: Ord. 5411 § 2, 2017: Ord. 4990 § 2, 2008: Ord. 4945 § 10,
2007)
2.11.080   Audits and records.
   (a)   Not more than once annually, the city or its designee may examine and
audit the business records of a state franchisee to ensure compliance with the
franchise fee payment obligations of Section
2.11.060 and the PEG support fee payment obligations of Section
2.11.070(b).
   (b)   A state franchisee shall keep all business records reflecting any
gross revenues, even if there is a change in ownership of the state franchisee,
for a least four years after such gross revenues are recognized by the state
franchisee on its books and records. In the case of subscriber numbers used for
calculating the PEG fee, a state franchisee shall keep data on the number of
its subscribers in the city, even if there is a change in ownership of the
state franchisee, for at least four years after the close of each calendar
quarter on which the PEG support fee is to be paid.
   (c)   To the extent consistent with DIVCA and other applicable law, the city
may request, and a state franchisee shall provide, information and books and
records to the extent necessary to monitor a state franchisee's compliance with
this
Chapter 2.11.
(Ord. 4945 § 11, 2007)
2.11.090   State franchise service obligations.
   The city may bring complaints to the commission that a state franchisee is
not offering video service as required by Section 5890 of the California Public
Utilities Code.
(Ord. 4945 § 12, 2007)
2.11.100   Customer service and protection.
   (a)   A state franchisee shall comply with Sections 53055, 53055.1, 53055.2
and 53088.2 of the California Government Code; the FCC customer service and
notice standards set forth in Sections 76.309, 76.1602, 76.1603 and 76.1619 of
Title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations; Section 637.5 of the California
Penal Code; the privacy standards of Section 551 of Title 47 of the United
States Code; and all other applicable state and federal customer service and
consumer protection standards pertaining to the provision of video service,
including any such standards hereafter adopted. In case of a conflict, the
stricter standard shall apply. All customer service and consumer protection
standards under this paragraph shall be interpreted and applied to accommodate
newer or different technologies while meeting or exceeding the goals of the
standards.
   (b)   The cable coordinator shall monitor the compliance of state
franchisees with respect to the state and federal customer service and consumer
protection standards set forth in paragraph (a). The cable coordinator will
provide a state franchisee with written notice of any material breaches of
applicable customer service or consumer protection standards, and will allow
the state franchisee thirty days from the receipt of the notice to remedy the
specified material breach. Material breaches not remedied within the thirty-day
time period will be subject to the following penalties to be imposed by the
city:
   (1)   For the first occurrence of a violation, a fine of $500.00 shall be
imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed $1,500.00
for each violation.
   (2)   For a second violation of the same nature within twelve months, a fine
of $1,000.00 shall be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not
to exceed $3,000.00 for each violation.
   (3)   For a third or further violation of the same nature within twelve
months, a fine of $2,500.00 shall be imposed for each day the violation remains
in effect, not to exceed $7,500.00 for each violation.
   (c)   A state franchisee may appeal a penalty assessed by the cable
coordinator to the council within sixty days of the initial assessment. The
city council shall hear all evidence and relevant testimony and may uphold,
modify or vacate the penalty. The council's decision on the imposition of a
penalty shall be final.
(Ord. 4945 § 13, 2007)
2.11.110   Emergency alert system.
   (a)   A state franchisee shall comply with the EAS requirements of the FCC
in order that emergency messages may be distributed over the state franchisee's
network.
   (b)   A state franchisee's EAS shall be remotely activated by telephone and
shall allow an authorized representative of the city to override the audio and
video on all channels on the state franchise's network that may be lawfully
overridden, without the assistance of the state franchisee, for emergency
broadcasts from a location designated by the city in the event of a civil
emergency or for reasonable tests. Testing of a state franchisee's EAS shall
occur at times that will cause minimal subscriber inconvenience.
   (c)   The city shall permit only appropriately trained and authorized
persons to operate the EAS equipment. Except to the extent expressly prohibited
by applicable law, the city shall hold the state franchisee, its employees and
officers harmless from any claims arising out of the emergency use of its
facilities by the city.
   (d)   Paragraphs (b) and (c) of this Section
2.11.110 shall expire and no longer be effective after July 25, 2010.
(Ord. 4945 § 14, 2007)
2.11.120   Notices.
   All notices and copies of documents that DIVCA requires to be provided to
the city, as a local entity or a local franchising entity, shall be addressed
to the City Manager, Attention: Cable Coordinator.
(Ord. 4945 § 15, 2007)
2.11.130   Miscellaneous provisions.
   (a)   The captions to sections throughout this
Chapter 2.11 are intended solely to facilitate reading and reference to the
sections and provisions of this chapter. Such captions shall not affect the
meaning or interpretation of this chapter.
   (b)   Unless otherwise indicated, when the performance or doing of any act,
duty, matter, or payment is required under this
Chapter 2.11, and a period of time or duration for the fulfillment of doing
thereof is prescribed and is fixed herein, the time shall be computed so as to
exclude the first and include the last day of the prescribed or fixed period of
time.
   (c)   If any term, condition, or provision of this
Chapter 2.11 shall, to any extent, be held to be invalid or unenforceable by a
valid order of any court or regulatory agency of competent jurisdiction, the
remainder hereof shall be valid in all other respects and continue to be
effective. In the event of a subsequent change in applicable law that renders
valid the provision that had been held invalid, that provision shall thereupon
return to full force and effect without further action by the city and shall
thereafter be binding on the state franchisee and the city.
(Ord. 4945 § 16, 2007)
Chapter 2.12
EMERGENCY ORGANIZATION AND FUNCTIONS
Sections:
   
2.12.010   Purposes.
   
2.12.020   Definitions.
   
2.12.030   Palo Alto emergency services council - Membership.
   
2.12.040   Powers and duties of emergency services council.
   
2.12.050   General powers and duties of director of emergency services.
   
2.12.060   Powers of director in state of "local emergency," "state of
emergency," or "state of war emergency."
   
2.12.070   Emergency organization.
   
2.12.080   Emergency plan.
   
2.12.090   Continuity of government in event of disaster.
   
2.12.100   Punishment of violations.
2.12.010   Purposes.
   The declared purposes of this chapter are to provide for the preparation and
carrying out of plans for the protection of persons and property within the
city in the event of an emergency, the direction of the emergency organization,
and the coordination of functions of this city with all other public agencies,
corporations, organizations and affected private persons.
(Ord. 2641 § 1 (part), 1971: Ord. 2146 (part), 1963: prior code § 2.1001)
2.12.020   Definitions.
   (a)   The following words and phrases, whenever used in this chapter, shall
be construed as defined in this section:
   (1)   "Emergency" means the actual or threatened existence of conditions of
disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within the
city caused by such conditions as air pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic,
riot, or earthquake, or other conditions, including conditions resulting from
war or imminent threat of war, but other than conditions resulting from a labor
controversy, which conditions are or are likely to be beyond the control of the
services, personnel, equipment, and facilities of this city, requiring the
combined forces of other political subdivisions to combat.
   (2)   "State of war emergency" means the condition which exists immediately,
with or without a proclamation thereof by the governor, whenever this state or
nation is attacked by an enemy of the United States, or upon receipt by the
state of a warning from the federal government indicating that such an enemy
attack is probable or imminent.
   (3)   "Local emergency" means the duly proclaimed existence of conditions of
disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within the
territorial limits of the city of Palo Alto caused by such conditions as air
pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot, or earthquake or other
conditions, other than conditions resulting from a labor controversy, which
conditions are or are likely to be beyond the control of the services,
personnel, equipment, and facilities of the city of Palo Alto and require the
combined forces of other political subdivisions to combat.
(Ord. 2641 § 1 (part), 1971: Ord. 2146 (part), 1963: prior code § 2.1002)
2.12.030   Palo Alto emergency services council - Membership.
   (a)   The Palo Alto emergency services council is hereby created and shall
consist of the following:
   (1)   The mayor who shall be chairman;
   (2)   The director of emergency services shall be the city manager, who
shall be vice-chairman;
   (3)   The assistant director of emergency services;
   (4)   Such chiefs of emergency services as are provided for in the current
emergency plan of the city adopted pursuant to this chapter; and
   (5)   Such representatives of civic, business, labor, veterans, professional
or other organizations having an official emergency responsibility, as may be
appointed by the director with the advice and consent of the city council.
(Ord. 2641 § 1 (part), 1971: Ord. 2146 (part), 1963: prior code § 2.1003)
2.12.040   Powers and duties of emergency services council.
   It shall be the duty of the Palo Alto emergency services council, and it is
hereby empowered to recommend for adoption by the city council, emergency and
mutual aid plans and agreements, and such ordinances, resolutions, rules and
regulations as are necessary to implement such plans and agreements. The
emergency services council shall meet upon call of the chairman or in his
absence from the city or inability to call such meeting, upon the call of the
vice-chairman.
(Ord. 2641 § 1 (part), 1971: Ord. 2146 (part), 1963: prior code § 2.1004)
2.12.050   General powers and duties of director of emergency services.
   (a)   There is hereby created the office of emergency services. The city
manager shall be the director of emergency services.
   (b)   There is hereby created the position of assistant director of
emergency services who shall be appointed by the director.
   (c)   The director and assistant director are hereby empowered to:
   (1)   Request the city council to proclaim the existence or threatened
existence of a "local emergency" if the city council is in session, or to issue
such proclamation if the city council is not in session, subject to
ratification by the city council within seven days thereafter or the
proclamation shall have no further force or effect;
   (2)   Request the Governor to proclaim a "state of emergency" when in the
opinion of the director, the resources of the area or region are inadequate to
cope with the emergency upon request by proper authority;
   (3)   Control and direct the effort of the civil emergency organization of
the city for the accomplishment of the purposes of this chapter;
   (4)   Direct coordination and cooperation of services and staff of the
emergency organization of the city, and resolve questions of authority and
responsibility that may arise between them; and
   (5)   Represent the city in all dealings with public or private agencies on
matters pertaining to emergencies as defined herein.
(Ord. 2641 § 1 (part) 1971: Ord. 2146 (part), 1963: prior code § 2.1005)
2.12.060   Powers of director in state of "local emergency," "state of
emergency," or "state of war emergency."
   (a)   In the event of the proclamation of a "local emergency" as herein
provided, the proclamation of a "state of emergency" by the Governor or the
Director of the State Office of Emergency Services, or the existence of a
"state of war emergency," the director is hereby empowered to:
   (1)   Make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably related to
the protection of life and property as affected by such emergency; provided,
however, such rules and regulations must be confirmed at the earliest
practicable time by the city council;
   (2)   Obtain vital supplies, equipment, and such other properties found
lacking and needed for the protection of life and property and to bind the city
for the fair value thereof and, if required immediately, to commandeer the same
for public use;
   (3)   Require emergency services of any city officer or employee and, in the
event of the proclamation of a "state of emergency" in the county in which this
city is located or the existence of a "state of war emergency," to command the
aid of as many citizens of this community as he deems necessary in the
execution of his duties; such persons shall be entitled to all privileges,
benefits, and immunities as are provided by state law for registered disaster
service workers;
   (4)   Requisition necessary personnel or material of any city department or
agency; and
   (5)   Execute all of his ordinary power as city manager, all of the special
powers conferred upon him by this chapter or by resolution or emergency plan
pursuant hereto adopted by the city council, all powers conferred upon him by
any statute, by any agreement approved by the city council, and by any other
lawful authority;
   (6)   The assistant director shall, under the supervision of the director
and with the assistance of emergency service chiefs, develop emergency plans
and manage the emergency programs of this city; and shall have such other
powers and duties as may be assigned by the director.
(Ord. 2641 § 1 (part), 1971: Ord. 2146 (part), 1963: prior code § 2.1006)
2.12.070   Emergency organization.
   All officers and employees of this city, together with those volunteer
forces enrolled to aid them during an emergency, and all groups, organizations,
and persons who may by agreement or operation of law, including persons
impressed into service under the provisions of subsection (a)(3) of Section
2.12.060 of this chapter, be charged with duties incident to the protection of
life and property in the city during such emergency, shall constitute the
emergency organization of the city of Palo Alto.
(Ord. 2641 § 1 (part), 1971: Ord. 2146 (part), 1963: prior code § 2.1007)
2.12.080   Emergency plan.
   The Palo Alto emergency services council shall be responsible for the
development of the city of Palo Alto emergency plan, which plan shall provide
for the effective mobilization of all the resources of this city, both public
and private, to meet any condition constituting an emergency; and shall provide
for the organization, powers and duties, services and staff of the emergency
organization. Such plan shall take effect upon its adoption by resolution of
the city council.
(Ord. 2641 § 1 (part), 1971: Ord. 2146 (part), 1963: prior code § 2.1008)
2.12.090   Continuity of government in event of disaster.
   (a)   At the second council meeting in January each year or as soon
thereafter as may be practicable, the city council shall select seven emergency
standby council members. Emergency standby council members shall be selected
from former members of the city council who agree to serve in that capacity
during that year and to reside within the city of Palo Alto during that year so
long as they elect to participate as members of the emergency standby council.
A member of the emergency standby council shall serve in that capacity from the
date of appointment until the appointment of another emergency standby council
the following year, unless and until the member notifies the city clerk in
writing that the member has elected to terminate participation in the emergency
standby council. Each emergency standby council member shall take the oath of
office required for the city council prior to assuming the position of
emergency standby council member.
   (b)   Each emergency standby council member appointed by the city council as
described in subsection (a) shall have the duty during the term of that
member's appointment to remain informed of the duties of city council members
and the business and affairs of the city of Palo Alto to the extent necessary
to enable participation as a member of the city council upon appointment in the
event of an emergency as provided hereafter.
   (c)   In the event of the declaration of a state of war emergency, a state
of emergency, or a local emergency as those terms are designated in Articles
12, 13, and 14 of Title 2 of the California Government Code and less than a
quorum of the city council is available and a city council meeting is urgently
required, the members of the emergency standby council shall be contacted for
service. At that meeting, any city council members who are unavailable for duty
at the time of that meeting as defined by section 8636 of the California
Government Code (unavailable such as the officer is either killed, missing, or
so seriously injured as to be unable to attend meetings and otherwise perform
the duties of office), shall be replaced by a member of the emergency standby
council as necessary to reach seven members. The order of selection of
emergency standby council members shall be determined by council policy. The
appointment of members of the emergency standby council to fill vacancies
created by the unavailability of city council members at any time during a
state of emergency shall be performed by city council, and additional emergency
standby members shall be appointed during the state of emergency as required to
maintain a total of seven members on the city council.
   (d)   Members of the emergency standby council who are appointed to serve as
city council members shall serve in that position until replaced by a member of
the city council who becomes no longer unavailable such that the addition of
emergency standby council members is no longer necessary in order to constitute
a quorum, until termination of the state of emergency, or until the election or
appointment of a new regular city council member as provided by law.
(Ord. 4913 § 2, 2006)
2.12.100   Punishment of violations.
   (a)   It shall be a misdemeanor punishable as provided in Section
1.08.010 of this code, for any person during an emergency, to:
   (1)   Wilfully obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency
organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued
pursuant to this chapter, or in the performance of any duty imposed upon him by
virtue of this chapter;
   (2)   Do any act forbidden by any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant
to this chapter, if such act is of such a nature as to give or be likely to
give assistance to the enemy or to imperil the lives or property of inhabitants
of this city, or to prevent, hinder, or delay the defense or protection
thereof;
   (3)   Wear, carry, or display, without authority, any means of
identification specified by the emergency agency of the state.
(Ord. 3881 § 1, 1989: Ord. 2641 § 1 (part), 1971: Ord. 2146 (part), 1963: prior
code § 2.1010)
Chapter 2.16
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS GENERALLY
Sections:
   
2.16.010   Vacancies.
   
2.16.015   Temporary vacancies.
   
2.16.020   Removal.
   
2.16.030   Compensation - Expense allowance.
   
2.16.040   Financial interest of board members and commissioners in contracts.
   
2.16.050   Ex officio members.
   
2.16.060   Manner of appointment.
   
2.16.070   Schedule of appointments.
   
2.16.080   Term limits.
2.16.010   Vacancies.
   Any vacancy occurring in the membership of any board or commission may
remain vacant until the next regularly scheduled recruitment for that board or
commission or may be filled at any time by special recruitment, at the
discretion of the City Council.
(Ord. 5208 § 1, 2013: Ord. 2146 (part), 1963: prior code § 2.250.1)
2.16.015   Temporary vacancies.
   A member of a board or commission may be granted a leave of absence by the
city council, and a temporary vacancy thereupon shall exist for the period of
such leave of absence. During the period of such temporary vacancy, the city
council may fill such vacancy by a temporary appointment to the board or
commission; provided, however, that the period of such temporary appointment
shall not exceed the period of the temporary vacancy. At the expiration of such
a leave of absence so granted, the member of the board or commission
automatically shall resume full and permanent membership on the board or
commission.
(Ord. 3162 § 1, 1979)
2.16.020   Removal.
   The appointing authority may remove any member with the approval of the
council.
(Ord. 2146 (part), 1963: prior code § 2.250.2)
2.16.030   Compensation - Expense allowance.
   All members of boards and commissions shall serve without compensation as
members thereof. The city council, by resolution, may establish an expense
allowance schedule at fixed periodic rates for any or all boards and
commissions, based upon estimated expenditures by the members of a particular
board or commission over an extended period of time, to reimburse such members
for expenses incurred in their service as members thereof.
(Ord. 2747 § 2, 1973: Ord. 2146 (part), 1963: prior code § 2.250.3)
2.16.040   Financial interest of board members and commissioners in contracts.
   No member of any city board or commission shall be financially interested
in, or a party to, any contract entered into by the city. This section shall
not apply to remote interests, or other exempt interests, as defined in
Government Code Sections 1090, et seq. or as otherwise determined by the city
attorney, provided that such interest is disclosed and the member refrains from
participating in any action relating to the contract.
(Ord. 4347 § 1, 1996)
2.16.050   Ex officio members.
   Ex officio members provided for by the Charter or ordinances of the city
shall not be entitled to vote on matters before their respective boards and
commissions.
(Ord. 2146 (part), 1963: prior code § 2.250.5)
2.16.060   Manner of appointment.
   (a)   The City Clerk shall advertise vacancies or pending vacancies in
boards and commissions at least fifteen (15) days before such vacancies are
scheduled to be filled. The City Clerk shall exercise his or her discretion in
choosing the method of advertisement that will most effectively reach potential
candidates.
   (b)   Concurrent with the advertisement of vacancies or pending vacancies on
boards and commissions, the City Clerk shall publicize the application and
evaluation procedures that will apply to such vacancies, including the last day
on which applications will be accepted for such vacancies.
   (c)   The City Clerk may extend the deadline for applications, as necessary
to ensure a sufficient number of qualified candidates.
   (d)   Applications received after the deadlines set by the City Clerk shall
be held until the next regularly scheduled or special recruitment for the
applicable board or commission.
   (e)   The City Council shall review all applications and shall make a final
selection and appointment at a regular City Council meeting after the period
for submittal of applications has expired.
   (f)   All members of boards and commissions shall take an oath of office
before commencing their service.
(Ord. 5208 § 2, 2013: Ord. 5090 § 10, 2010)
2.16.070   Schedule of appointments.
   (a)   The City Council shall review applications to fill vacancies in the
following boards and commissions by April of each year:
   (1)   Utilities Advisory Commission (
Chapter 2.23)
   (2)   Architectural Review Board (
Chapter 2.21)
   (3)   Historic Resources Board (
Chapter 2.27)
   (4)   Planning and Transportation Commission (
Chapter 2.20)
   (b)   The City Council shall review applications to fill vacancies in the
following boards and commissions by November of each year:
   (1)   Public Art Commission (
Chapter 2.18)
   (2)   Human Relations Commission (
Chapter 2.22)
   (3)   Parks and Recreation Commission (
Chapter 2.25)
   (c)   The City Council shall fill vacancies in all other boards and
commissions, if any, in April of each year or at another time, at its
discretion.
   (d)   The City Council may fill mid-term vacancies during the next regularly
scheduled recruitment for the board or commission or may hold a special
recruitment, at its discretion. Special recruitments shall be subject to the
requirements of Section
2.16.060.
(Ord. 5643 § 2, 2025: Ord. 5529 § 2, 2021: Ord. 5498 § 3, 2020: Ord. 5354 § 2,
2015: Ord. 5311 § 2, 2015: Ord. 5208 § 3, 2013)
2.16.080   Term limits.
   Effective January 1, 2022, no person may serve more than three consecutive
terms of office as a member of the same board or commission. This section shall
apply to the boards and commissions listed in Section
2.16.070(a), except for the Planning and Transportation Commission, in which no
person may serve more than two consecutive terms of office as a member of the
same board or commission.
   (a)   For the purposes of this section, a member will be considered to have
served a term of office if he or she serves more than half of a standard term.
For boards and commissions with three-year terms, half of the term shall be 18
months. For boards and commissions with four-year terms, half of the term shall
be two years.
   (b)   A member's service that began on or before January 1, 2022 shall count
under the provisions of this section only for those members who served for at
least one day on a board or commission between January 1, 2021 and January 1,
2022. Notwithstanding the previous sentence, members of boards and commissions
serving as of January 1, 2022 shall be permitted to complete their term.
   (c)   A member who has served three consecutive terms of office (or two
consecutive terms of office for the Planning and Transportation Commission) may
remain as a member of the same board or commission for up to six months past
the end of the term if no replacement is appointed or until a replacement is
appointed, whichever comes first.
   (d)   A member who has served three consecutive terms of office (or two
consecutive terms of office for the Planning and Transportation Commission)
shall not be appointed to the same board or commission within one year of the
last date of service.
(Ord. 5529 § 3, 2021)
Chapter 2.18
PUBLIC ART COMMISSION*
Sections:
   
2.18.010   Membership.
   
2.18.020   Qualifications of members.
   
2.18.040   Term of office.
   
2.18.050   Officers, meetings, and procedures.
   
2.18.070   Jurisdiction.
   *   Editor's Note: For the duties of the public art commission with respect
to the art in public places program - See
Chapter 2.26 of this code. Prior ordinance history: Ordinance Nos. 2926, 2892,
3218, 3263, 3333 and 3556.
2.18.010   Membership.
   There is created a public art commission composed of seven members who are
not council members, officers, or employees of the city, and who shall be
appointed by the city council.
(Ord. 5614 § 2, 2024: Ord. 5503 § 1 (part), 2020: Ord. 3888 § 1 (part), 1989)
2.18.020   Qualifications of members.
   Members of the public art commission either shall be members of the
architectural review board or shall be professional visual artists,
professional visual arts educators, professional visual arts scholars, or
visual arts collectors whose authorities and skills are known and respected in
the community and, whenever feasible, who have demonstrated an interest in, and
have participated in, the arts program of the city.
(Ord. 3888 § 1 (part), 1989)
2.18.040   Term of office.
   Terms of office on the Public Art Commission shall be three years. Effective
January 1, 2022, terms of office due to expire on May 31 of each year shall be
extended to expire on the March 31 of the following year, and thereafter terms
of office shall commence on April 1. Effective January 1, 2025, terms of office
due to expire on March 31 of each year shall be extended to expire on October
31 of the same year, and thereafter terms of office shall commence on November
1. If a successor is unavailable, a member may remain in office until his or
her successor is appointed, subject to the limits in Section
2.16.080.
(Ord. 5643 § 3, 2025: Ord. 5529 § 4, 2021: Ord. 5503 § 1 (part), 2020: Ord.
5354 § 3, 2015: Ord. 3931 § 1, 1990: Ord. 3888 § 1 (part), 1989)
2.18.050   Officers, meetings, and procedures.
   (a)   Chairperson. The public art commission shall select one of its members
as chairperson, who shall hold office for one year or until a successor is
elected, unless the chairperson's term as a member of the public art commission
expires sooner.
   (b)   Meetings. The public art commission shall establish a regular time and
place of meeting and shall hold at least one regular meeting a month. Special
meetings may be called by the chairperson or by any three members of the public
art commission upon personal notice being given to all members or by written
notice being mailed to each member twenty-four hours prior to such meeting
unless such notice requirement is waived in writing.
   (c)   Procedures. The public art commission shall prescribe bylaws, forms,
applications, rules, and regulations for the conduct of its business. All
meetings of the public art commission shall be open to the public and are
subject to Title 5, Division 2, Part 1, Chapter 9 of the California Government
Code or successor legislation. The decisions of the public art commission shall
be transmitted to the director of arts and culture and to such other body or
bodies which have jurisdiction to review the project under consideration.
(Ord. 3930 § 23, 1990: Ord. 3888 § 1 (part), 1989)
2.18.070   Jurisdiction.
   (a)   Art in Public Places. The public art commission shall perform the
duties and shall have the responsibilities specified in
Chapter 2.26 of this title.
   (b)   Additional Duties. The public art commission shall perform such other
duties and undertake such other responsibilities as the city council may direct
from time to time.
   (c)   Interaction with Other City Bodies. If the functions of the public art
commission overlap the functions of another city committee, commission, board,
task force, or the like, the director of arts and culture, in cooperation with
the public art commission and such other city body, shall devise a procedure
for coordinating such functions to avoid duplication of efforts, to maximize
cooperation between the city bodies, and to utilize the expertise of the
various city bodies in a manner most compatible with the public welfare.
   (d)   Interaction with City Departments. The chief building official shall
determine whether a proposed work of art is a mural or a sign under Section
16.20.011(a)(10) of this code prior to review by the public art commission.
(Ord. 3930 § 24, 1990: Ord. 3888 § 1 (part), 1989)
Chapter 2.20
PLANNING AND TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION*
Sections:
   
2.20.010   Membership.
   
2.20.020   Term of office.
   
2.20.030   Officers.
   
2.20.050   Duties and powers.
   *   Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history: Ordinances, or parts of
ordinances, formerly codified in this chapter and not repealed by Ord. 4606,
include Ords. 3333, 2931, 2925, 2682, 2561 and 2146. The chapter was originally
derived from prior code §§ 2.251.1 and 2.251.2.
   Ord. 4606 changed the name of this chapter from "Planning Commission" to
"Planning and Transportation Commission." See § 2.20.050.
2.20.010   Membership.
   There is created a planning and transportation commission composed of seven
members who are not council members, officers or employees of the city, who are
residents of the city, and who shall be appointed by the city council.
(Ord. 4606 § 1 (part), 1999)
2.20.020   Term of office.
   Terms of office on the Planning and Transportation Commission shall be four
years. Effective January 1, 2022, terms of office due to expire on December 15
of each year shall be extended to expire on March 31 of the following year, and
thereafter terms of office shall commence on April 1. If a successor is
unavailable, a member may remain in office until his or her successor is
appointed, subject to the limits in Section
2.16.080.
(Ord. 5529 § 5, 2021: Ord. 5311 § 3, 2015: Ord. 5208 § 6, 2013: Ord. 4606 § 1
(part), 1999)
2.20.030   Officers.
   The Commission shall elect a chairperson and a vice chairperson from its
membership who shall serve in such capacity for one year each, or until a
successor is elected, unless his or her term as a member of the Commission
sooner expires.
(Ord. 5432 § 1, 2018: Ord. 5208 § 7, 2013: Ord. 4606 § 1 (part), 1999)
2.20.050   Duties and powers.
   The commission is an advisory commission. In addition to the duties set
forth for the planning commission in Titles 18 and 19 of this code, it shall,
as requested by the city council, the city manager, or the director of planning
and development services provide advice on any matter pertaining to land use
planning and transportation systems affecting the city. The term “planning
commission” used anywhere in this code or in state law shall refer to the
planning and transportation commission.
(Ord. 5494 § 3, 2020: Ord. 4606 § 1 (part), 1999)
Chapter 2.21
ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW BOARD
Sections:
   
2.21.010   Architectural review board.
   
2.21.020   Officers
   
2.21.025   Term of office.
   
2.21.030   Procedures of the architectural review board.
   
2.21.040   Duties of the architectural review board.
2.21.010   Architectural review board.
   There is created an Architectural Review Board consisting of five persons
appointed by the City Council, and at least three of whom shall be architects,
landscape architects, building designers or other design professionals. The
Architectural Review Board shall have the powers and duties specified in this
chapter, and shall comply with the procedures specified in this chapter.
(Ord. 5208 § 9, 2013: Ord. 4826 § 2 (Exh. 1 (part)), 2004)
2.21.020   Officers.
   The Board shall elect a chairperson and a vice chairperson from its
membership who shall serve in such capacity for one year each, or until a
successor is elected, unless his or her term as a member of the Board sooner
expires.
(Ord. 5660 § 2, 2025)
2.21.025   Term of office.
   Terms of office on the Architectural Review Board shall be three years.
Effective January 1, 2022, terms of office due to expire on December 15 of each
year shall be extended to expire on March 31 of the following year, and
thereafter terms of office shall commence on April 1. If a successor is
unavailable, a member may remain in office until his or her successor is
appointed, subject to the limits in Section
2.16.080.
(Ord. 5529 § 6, 2021: Ord. 5311 § 4, 2015: Ord. 5208 § 11, 2013)
2.21.030   Procedures of the architectural review board.
   The architectural review board shall meet at least monthly and shall
prescribe bylaws, forms, applications, rules and regulations for the conduct of
its business. All meetings of the architectural review board shall be open to
the public. The architectural review board shall send a report, not less than
once a year, to the planning commission and city council for the purpose of
communicating the concerns of the board with respect to the city's plans,
policies, ordinances and procedures as these affect the projects which the
board reviews.
(Ord. 4826 § 2 (Exh. 1 (part)), 2004)
2.21.040   Duties of the architectural review board.
   The duty of the architectural review board is to perform all duties required
of it by Title 16 (Building Regulations), Title 18 (Zoning), and any other
applicable sections of this code. In addition, the director of planning and
development services and the city council may request the opinion of the
architectural review board on other architectural matters.
(Ord. 5494 § 3, 2020: Ord. 4826 § 2 (Exh. 1 (part)), 2004)
Chapter 2.22
HUMAN RELATIONS COMMISSION
Sections:
   
2.22.010   Membership.
   
2.22.020   Term of office.
   
2.22.030   Officers, meetings and procedures.
   
2.22.050   Jurisdiction.
   
2.22.060   Authority.
   
2.22.070   Liberal construction.
2.22.010   Membership.
   There is created a human relations commission composed of seven members who
are not council members, officers or employees of the city, who are residents
of the city, and who shall be appointed by the city council.
(Ord. 5583 § 2, 2023: Ord. 5503 § 2 (part), 2020: Ord. 2924 § 1, 1976: Ord.
2537 (part), 1969: Ord. 2485 § 1 (part), 1969)
2.22.020   Term of office.
   Terms of office on the Human Relations Commission shall be three years.
Effective January 1, 2022, terms of office due to expire on May 31 of each year
shall be extended to expire on the March 31 of the following year, and
thereafter terms of office shall commence on April 1. Effective January 1,
2025, terms of office due to expire on March 31 of each year shall be extended
to expire on October 31 of the same year, and thereafter terms of office shall
commence on November 1. If a successor is unavailable, a member may remain in
office until his or her successor is appointed, subject to the limits in
Section
2.16.080.
(Ord. 5643 § 4, 2025: Ord. 5529 § 7, 2021: Ord. 5503 § 2 (part), 2020: Ord.
5354 § 4, 2015: Ord. 5208 § 13, 2013: Ord. 3355, 1982: Ord. 2537 (part), 1969:
Ord. 2485 § 1 (part), 1969)
2.22.030   Officers, meetings and procedures.
   (a)   The commission shall elect one of its members chairperson who shall
hold office for one year and until a successor is elected unless the
chairperson’s term as a member of the commission sooner expires.
   (b)   The Human Relations Commission shall establish a regular time, date
and place of meeting and shall ordinarily hold meetings monthly. Special
meetings may be called by the chairperson or by any four members of the
commission upon personal notice being given to all members or by written notice
being mailed to each member twenty-four hours prior to such meeting unless such
notice requirement is waived in writing.
   (c)   Four of the seven members shall constitute a quorum and the
affirmative votes of a majority of members present are required to take any
action.
   (d)   The commission may establish ad hoc committees of up to three
commission members for advisory and investigative purposes. The commission
shall, by majority vote, appoint members of ad hoc committees.
(Ord. 5632 § 2, 2024: Ord. 5503 § 2 (part), 2020: Ord. 5431 § 1, 2018: Ord.
2537 (part), 1969: Ord. 2485 § 1 (part), 1969)
2.22.050   Jurisdiction.
   (a)   The human relations commission has the discretion to act with respect
to any human relations matter when the commission finds that any person or
group does not benefit fully from public or private opportunities or resources
in the community, or is unfairly or differently treated due to factors of
concern to the commission.
   (1)   Public or private opportunities or resources in the community include,
but are not limited to, those associated with ownership and rental of housing,
employment, education and governmental services and benefits.
   (2)   Factors of concern to the commission include, but are not limited to,
socioeconomic class or status, physical condition or handicap, married or
unmarried state, emotional condition, intellectual ability, age, sex, sexual
preference, gender identity, race, cultural characteristics, ethnic background,
ancestry, citizenship, and religious, conscientious or philosophical belief.
   (b)   The commission shall conduct such studies and undertake such
responsibilities as the council may direct.
(Ord. 5431 § 2, 2018: Ord. 2813 § 1, 1974: Ord. 2485 § 1 (part), 1969)
2.22.060   Authority.
   Upon making a finding pursuant to Section
2.22.050(a), the commission may act as follows:
   (a)   To foster public awareness and understanding of human relations
problems by any means of disseminating information including, but not limited
to, educational programs and printed and electronic media;
   (b)   To facilitate resolution of problems or improvement of conditions
within the jurisdiction of the commission by encouragement, persuasion and
mediation and by pointing out private or public agencies which might provide
assistance;
   (c)   To make such studies which, in the judgment of the commission, might
aid in affecting matters within the jurisdiction of the commission;
   (d)   To recommend local legislation or other action to the council and to
encourage the council to support or oppose state or federal legislation or
regulation relating to matters within the jurisdiction of the commission;
   (e)   To coordinate programs of the commission with similar programs by
private and public agencies and organizations;
   (f)   To recommend or oppose legislation other than that of the city,
provided that the city council has not taken an official position with respect
to such legislation, and provided further that any communication, whether oral
or written, from the commission concerning such legislation clearly indicates
that such recommendation or opposition is that of the commission and is not
necessarily that of the city council; and
   (g)   To recommend grantees under the Human Services Resource Allocation
Process, Community Development Block Grant, and Emerging Needs Fund.
(Ord. 5529 § 11, 2021: Ord. 2924 § 2, 1976: Ord. 2813 § 2, 1974)
2.22.070   Liberal construction.
   The provisions of this chapter shall be liberally construed to effectuate
the public purpose of fostering human relations.
(Ord. 2813 § 3, 1974)
Chapter 2.23
UTILITIES ADVISORY COMMISSION
Sections:
   
2.23.010   Membership.
   
2.23.030   Term of office.
   
2.23.040   Officers.
   
2.23.050   Purposes and duties.
   
2.23.060   Meetings.
2.23.010   Membership.
   There is created a utilities advisory commission composed of seven members
who shall be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the city council, but
who shall not be council members, officers or employees of the city. Each
member of the commission shall be a utility customer or the authorized
representative of a utility customer. Six members of the commission shall at
all times be residents of the city.
(Ord. 5047 § 1 (part), 2009: Ord. 4027 § 1 (part), 1991)
2.23.030   Term of office.
   Terms of office on the Utilities Advisory Commission shall be three years.
Effective January 1, 2022, terms of office due to expire on May 31 of each year
shall be extended to expire on the March 31 of the following year, and
thereafter terms of office shall commence on April 1. Commission appointments
shall be staggered so that in each three-year cycle, two members are appointed
one year, two members are appointed the next year, and three members are
appointed the next year. If a successor is unavailable, a member may remain in
office until his or her successor is appointed, subject to the limits in
Section
2.16.080.
(Ord. 5529 § 8, 2021: Ord. 5354 § 5, 2015: Ord. 5208 § 15, 2013: Ord. 5047 § 1
(part), 2009: Ord. 4027 § 1 (part), 1991)
2.23.040   Officers.
   The commission shall elect one of its members chairperson. The chairperson
shall hold office for one year and until his or her successor is elected,
unless his or her term as a member of the commission expired earlier.
(Ord. 4027 § 1 (part), 1991)
2.23.050   Purposes and duties.
   (a)   The purpose of the utilities advisory commission shall be to advise
the city council on present and prospective long-range planning and policy and
major program and project matters relating to the electric utility, gas
utility, water utility, wastewater collection utility, fiber optics utility and
recycled water matters, excluding daily operations.
   (b)   The utilities advisory commission shall have the following duties:
   (1)   Advise the city council on long-range planning and policy matters
pertaining to:
   (A)   Development of the electric utility, gas utility, water utility,
wastewater collection utility, fiber optics utility, and the recycled water
resource;
   (B)   Joint action projects with other public or private entities which
involve, affect or impact the electric utility, gas utility, water utility,
wastewater collection utility, fiber optics utility, and the recycled water
resource;
   (C)   Environmental aspects and attributes of the electric utility, gas
utility, water utility, wastewater collection utility, fiber optics utility,
and the recycled water resource;
   (D)   Water and energy conservation, energy efficiency, and demand side
management; and
   (E)   Recycled water matters not otherwise addressed in the preceding
subparagraphs (A) through (D);
   (2)   Review and make recommendations to the city council on the consistency
with adopted and approved plans, policies, and programs of any major electric
utility, gas utility, water utility, wastewater collection utility, fiber
optics utility, or the recycled water resource;
   (3)   Formulate and review legislative proposals regarding the electric
utility, gas utility, water utility, wastewater collection utility, fiber
optics utility and the recycled water resource, to which the city is a party,
in which the city has an interest, or by which the city may be affected;
   (4)   Review the electric utility, gas utility, water utility, wastewater
collection utility, and fiber optics utility capital improvement programs,
operating budgets and related reserves, and rates, and the recycled water
program, budget, and rate, and thereafter forward any comments and
recommendations to the finance committee or its successor;
   (5)   Provide advice upon such other matters as the city council may from
time to time assign.
   The utilities advisory commission shall not have the power or authority to
cause the expenditure of city funds or to bind the city to any written, oral or
implied contract.
   (c)   The utilities advisory commission may, subject to its city council-
approved bylaws and at the discretion of the city council, foster and
facilitate engagement with the general public, not excluding representatives of
commerce and industry, in regard to the utility matters referred to in
subsections (b)(1)(A) through (E).
(Ord. 5096 § 1, 2010: Ord. 4938 § 1, 2007: Ord. 4027 § 1 (part), 1991)
2.23.060   Meetings.
   (a)   The commission shall establish a regular time and place of meeting and
shall hold at least one regular meeting per month.
   (b)   Four of the seven members shall constitute a quorum.
   (c)   The commission may establish rules and procedures governing the
conduct of its meetings.
   (d)   The commission shall be subject to the Ralph M. Brown Act, California
Government Code Section 54950, et seq.
(Ord. 5047 § 1 (part), 2009: Ord. 4027 § 1 (part), 1991)
Chapter 2.24
LIBRARY ADVISORY COMMISSION*
Sections:
   
2.24.001   Dissolution of the Library Advisory Commission.
   *   Editor's Note: Former Chapter 2.24, Board of Compensation Referees,
previously codified at this point, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance
No. 4122.
2.24.001   Dissolution of the Library Advisory Commission.
   The Library Advisory Commission created by this Chapter 2.24 is dissolved as
of July 16, 2020 by operation of Ordinance 5498. The terms of all existing
members, commissioners, and officers shall end on July 15, 2020. Any extant
duties of the Library Advisory Commission that exist in contracts, policies, or
other documents, if any, shall revert to the City Council, which may delegate
such duties.
(Ord. 5498 § 4, 2020)
Chapter 2.25
PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION
Sections:
   
2.25.010   Membership.
   
2.25.030   Term of office.
   
2.25.040   Officers.
   
2.25.050   Purpose and duties.
   
2.25.060   Meetings.
2.25.010   Membership.
   There is created a parks and recreation commission composed of seven members
who shall be appointed by and shall serve at the pleasure of the city council,
but who shall not be council members, officers or employees of the city of Palo
Alto. Each member of the commission shall have a demonstrated interest in
parks, open space and recreation matters. All members of the commission shall
at all times be residents of Palo Alto.
(Ord. 4587 § 2 (part), 1999)
2.25.030   Term of office.
   Terms of office on the Parks and Recreation Commission shall be three years.
Commission appointments shall be staggered so that in each three-year cycle
three members are appointed to serve during the first year, four members are
appointed to serve during the second year, and no members are appointed to
serve during the third year. Effective January 1, 2022, terms of office due to
expire on December 15 of each year shall be extended to expire on March 31 of
the following year, and thereafter terms of office shall commence on April 1.
Effective January 1, 2025, terms of office due to expire on March 31 of each
year shall be extended to expire on October 31 of the same year, and thereafter
terms of office shall commence on November 1. If a successor is unavailable, a
member may remain in office until his or her successor is appointed, subject to
the limits in Section
2.16.080.
(Ord. 5643 § 5, 2025: Ord. 5529 § 9, 2021: Ord. 5311 § 5, 2015: Ord. 5208 § 18,
2013: Ord. 4587 § 2 (part), 1999)
2.25.040   Officers.
   The commission shall elect a chairperson and a vice chairperson from its
membership who shall serve in such capacity for one year each, or until a
successor is elected, unless his or her term as a member of the Commission
sooner expires.
(Ord. 5660 § 3, 2025: Ord. 4587 § 2 (part), 1999)
2.25.050   Purpose and duties.
   (a)   The purpose of the parks and recreation commission shall be to advise
the city council on matters relating to the activities of the open space, parks
and golf division and the recreation division of the community services
department, excluding daily administrative operations.
   (b)   The commission shall have the following duties:
   (1)   Advise the city council on planning and policy matters pertaining to:
   (A)   The goals of and the services provided by the open space, parks and
golf division and the recreation division of the community services department.
   (B)   The future delivery of services by the open space, parks and golf
division and the recreation division of the community services department.
   (C)   The city manager’s recommendations pertaining to the disposition of
major gifts of money, personal property and real property to the city to be
used for open space, parks, golf and recreation activities.
   (D)   The construction and renovation of capital facilities of the open
space, parks and golf division and the recreation division of the community
services department.
   (E)   Joint action projects with other public or private parks, open space
and recreation entities.
   (2)   Review state legislative proposals that may affect the operation of
the open space, parks and golf division and recreation division of the
community services department.
   (3)   Review the city manager’s proposed budget for capital improvements and
operations relating to the open space, parks and golf division and recreation
division of the community services department, and thereafter forward any
comments to one or more of the applicable committees of the city council.
   (4)   Provide advice upon such other matters as the city council may from
time to time assign.
   (5)   Receive community input concerning parks, open space and recreation
activities.
   (6)   Review and comment on fund-raising efforts on behalf of the open
space, parks and golf division and recreation division of the community
services department.
   (7)   Serve as a community forum for urban forestry matters and provide
feedback, recommendations, and interpretations to City Council on the Urban
Forest Master Plan and other associated policies.
   (c)   The parks and recreation commission shall not have the power or
authority to cause the expenditure of city funds or to bind the city to any
written or implied contract.
(Ord. 5557 § 10, 2022: Ord. 5431 § 3, 2018: Ord. 4587 § 2 (part), 1999)
2.25.060   Meetings.
   (a)   The parks and recreation commission shall establish a regular time,
date and place of meeting and shall hold at least one regular meeting per
calendar quarter.
   (b)   Four of the seven members shall constitute a quorum.
   (c)   The commission may establish rules and procedures governing the
conduct of its meetings in accordance with Robert's Rules of Order.
   (d)   The commission shall be subject to the Ralph M. Brown Act, California
Government Code Section 54950, et seq., as may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 4587 § 2 (part), 1999)
Chapter 2.26
VISUAL ART IN PUBLIC PLACES
Sections:
   
2.26.010   Definitions.
   
2.26.020   Visual art in public places funds.
   
2.26.030   Duties of the public art commission.
   
2.26.040   Standards for review.
   
2.26.050   General rules for art in public places.
   
2.26.060   City council review of artistic matters in the visual art in public
places program.
   
2.26.070   Public art for municipal projects.
2.26.010   Definitions.
   (a)   For the purpose of this chapter, unless it is plainly evident from the
context that a different meaning is intended, certain terms as used in this
chapter are defined as follows:
   (1)   "Art in public places" means any visual work of art displayed for two
weeks or more in an open city-owned area, on the exterior of any city-owned
facility, within any city-owned facility in areas designated as public area,
lobbies, or public assembly areas, or on non-city property if the work of art
is installed or financed, either wholly or in part, with city funds or grants
procured by the city.
   (2)   "Work of art" means and includes, but is not limited to, a sculpture,
monument, mural, fresco, relief, painting, fountain, banner, mosaic, ceramic,
weaving, carving, and stained glass. "Work of art" normally would not include
landscaping, paving, architectural ornamentation, or signs as defined in
Chapter 16.20 of this code.
   (3)   "Permanent installation" means a work of art in a public place
intended to remain or remaining for one year or more.
   (4)   "Temporary installation" means a work of art in a public place
intended to remain for less than one year.
(Ord. 2892 § 2 (part), 1975)
2.26.020   Visual art in public places funds.
   (a)   Special Reserve Account. The city manager shall establish in the
capital improvement fund a special reserve account designated as the "visual
art in public places reserve account." Said reserve account shall be credited
annually with such funds as determined by the city council and with all funds
received by the city for visual art in public places, whether contributed,
earned, secured through grants, or otherwise obtained.
   (b)   Use of Funds. It is intended that funds in the visual art in public
places reserve account may be appropriated in the annual budget to obtain and
install visual art in public places, to maintain and refurbish visual art in
public places when the cost of such maintenance exceeds funds currently
available for the maintenance of public property in general, to obtain
professional consultants to assist the city and the public art commission in
selecting artists and visual art in public places, to preserve meritorious
works of art in public places and on private property in public view, and to
defray such other capital expenses which are, or may become, an integral part
of the visual art in public places program.
   (c)   Review of Disbursements. Each proposed appropriation for the visual
art in public places program and each disbursement from the visual art in
public places reserve account shall receive the prior review and advice of the
public arts commission.
   (d)   Additional Funding. The director of arts and culture shall explore on
a continuing basis the availability of funds for the visual art in public
places program from such organizations as the National Endowment for the Arts,
the California Arts Commission, and other public and private agencies.
(Ord. 3930 § 25, 1990: Ord. 3888 §§ 2, 3, 1989: Ord. 3514 § 9, 1984: Ord. 3507
§ 9, 1984: Ord. 3219 § 1, 1980: Ord. 2892 § 2 (part), 1975)
2.26.030   Duties of the public art commission.
   (a)   The duties of the public art commission with respect to the art in
public places program shall be as follows:
   (1)   To advise the city in matters pertaining to the quality, quantity,
scope, and style of art in public places;
   (2)   To periodically review, at least once a year, the capital improvement
program with the director of arts and culture and such other members of the
city staff as may be appropriate for inclusion of works of art in various
projects;
   (3)   To devise methods of selecting and commissioning artists with respect
to the design, execution, and placement of art in public places and, pursuant
to such methods, to advise the director of arts and culture on the selection
and commissioning of artists for such purposes;
   (4)   To advise the city regarding the amounts to be expended on art in
public places;
   (5)   To advise and assist the director of arts and culture in obtaining
financial assistance for art in public places from private, corporate, and
governmental sources;
   (6)   To review plans for the installation of art in public places;
   (7)   To review the inventory of art in public places and to advise the city
in matters pertaining to the maintenance, placement, alteration, sale,
transfer, ownership, and acceptance or refusal of donations of, and other
mailers pertaining to, art in public places;
   (8)   To recommend the retention of consultants, consistent with the city's
consultant selection procedures, to assist the city in making decisions
concerning the art in public places program;
   (9)   To advise the city on such other matters pertaining to the art in
public places program as may be appropriate;
   (10)   To advise and assist private property owners who desire such advice
and assistance regarding the selection and installation of works of art to be
located on their property in the public view;
   (11)   To act as a liaison between local artists and private property owners
desiring to install works of art on their private property in public view;
   (12)   To give recognition to, and to maintain, an inventory of meritorious
works of art in the public view;
   (13)   To endeavor to preserve works of art in the public view deemed to be
meritorious by the public art commission through agreements with the property
owner and/or the artist.
(Ord. 3930 § 26, 1990: Ord. 3888 § 4, 1989: Ord. 3219 § 2, 1980: Ord. 2892 § 2
(part), 1975)
2.26.040   Standards for review.
   (a)   In performing its duties with respect to the art in public places
program, the public art commission shall give special attention to the
following manners:
   (1)   Conceptual compatibility of the design with the immediate environment
of the site;
   (2)   Appropriateness of the design to the function of the site;
   (3)   Compatibility of the design and location within a unified design
character or historical character of the site;
   (4)   Creation of an internal sense of order and a desirable environment for
the general community by the design and location of the work of art;
   (5)   Preservation and integration of natural features with the project;
   (6)   Appropriateness of the materials, textures, colors, and design to the
expression of the design concept;
   (7)   Representation of a broad variety of tastes within the community and
the provision of a balanced inventory of art in public places to insure a
variety of style, design, and media throughout the community that will be
representative of the eclectic tastes of the community.
(Ord. 3888 § 5, 1989: Ord. 2892 § 2 (part), 1975)
2.26.050   General rules for art in public places.
   (a)   Review of Permanent and Temporary Installations. Permanent
installations shall receive the prior review and advice of the public art
commission. Temporary installations shall receive the prior review and advice
of the director of arts. Extensions of time for temporary installations to
remain for one year or more may be granted by the director of arts in
consultation with the public art commission. Permanent installations shall not
be removed, altered, or changed without the prior review and advice of the
public art commission.
   (b)   Private Sites for Art In Public Places. No work of art financed or
installed either wholly or in part with city funds or with grants procured by
the city shall be permanently installed on privately owned property without a
written agreement between the city and the owner specifying the proprietary
interests in the work of art, binding the owner to the general rules for art in
public places, and specifying other provisions deemed necessary or desirable by
the city attorney. Additionally, such written agreements, except those for
murals which shall be exempt from the requirements imposed by this sentence,
shall specify that the private property owner shall assure:
   (1)   That the installation of the work of art will be done in a manner
which will protect the work of art and the public;
   (2)   That the work of art will be maintained in good condition; and
   (3)   That the insurance and indemnification will be provided as is
appropriate.
   (c)   Consultation with the Artist. Installation, maintenance, alteration,
refinishing, and moving of art in public places shall be done in consultation
with the artist whenever feasible.
   (d)   Inventory of Art in Public Places. The director of art and culture
shall maintain a detailed record of all art in public places, including site
drawings, photographs, designs, names of artists, and names of architects
whenever feasible. The director of arts and culture shall attempt to give
appropriate recognition to the artists in publicity and promotion regarding art
in public places.
(Ord. 3930 § 27, 1990: Ord. 3888 § 6, 1989: Ord. 3118 § 1, 1979: Ord. 2892 § 2
(part), 1975)
2.26.060   City council review of artistic matters in the visual art in public
places program.
   (a)   Recognizing that professional expertise is necessary and desirable in
artistic matters, such as the selection of artists for a project, the selection
of particular works of art, and the approval of designs and plans for works of
art under the visual art in public places program, it is a policy that:
   (1)   Decisions on artistic matters will be made by city staff and the
public art commission;
   (2)   The city council will not exercise its independent judgment on
artistic matters unless the city council requests that the matter be agendized
for its review;
   (3)   Unless the city council determines to exercise its independent
judgment as provided above, sketches, designs, photographs, precise plans, art
examples, and similar items on artistic matters will not be transmitted to the
city council as a matter of course in conjunction with projects before the city
council;
   (4)   The city council will refer questions, suggestions, requests,
complaints, and similar items pertaining to the visual art in public places
program to city staff and the public art commission for their review and
response.
(Ord. 3888 § 7, 1989: Ord. 2892 § 2 (part), 1975)
2.26.070   Public art for municipal projects.
   (a)   It shall be city policy to set aside one percent (1%) of its annual
capital improvement program (CIP) budget, as defined in the section, for the
purpose of providing for public art. Except as provided in this section, all
CIP projects shall be subject to this policy, including but not limited to
buildings, shelters, parking garages and lots, restrooms, small structures,
parks, medians, landscaping, plazas, gateways, bridges, walls, tunnels, and
street and road construction. Salaries and benefits of public employees
supporting CIP projects shall not be included in the CIP budget subject to this
ordinance.
   The following CIP projects are excluded from this policy:
   (1)   ADA compliance projects (not including projects where ADA compliance
is a portion of a larger project).
   (2)   Road, path and sidewalk repairs, including: traffic signals and
upgrades, curb and gutter repairs, sign reflectivity, road and parking signage,
resurfacing of roads or other existing hardscape areas.
   (3)   Emergency repair projects.
   (4)   Cyclical replacement and repair of trails, outdoor furnishings, or
fencing.
   (5)   Studies.
   (6)   Roof replacement.
   (7)   Mechanical, security, A/V equipment, HVAC, and IT installations,
upgrades and repairs.
   (8)   Art in public places CIP.
   (9)   Utilities projects, except where the project includes construction or
reconstruction of a building.
   (10)   Vehicle repair and replacement.
   (11)   Seismic upgrades and waterproofing.
   (12)   Projects where the majority of the cost is allocated to elements
located underground.
   (13)   Projects where prohibited by federal or state law, including projects
or portions of projects funded by grants from non-city sources that prohibit
expenditure of funds for art.
   (b)   Nothing in this section is intended to prohibit the city council from
adopting an ordinance or resolution establishing a public art contribution for
any project otherwise excluded from this policy or setting the public art
contribution for any project at greater than one percent of the CIP budget.
   (c)   Funds shall be deposited into the public art fund. The city manager or
designee, in consultation with the public art commission, as appropriate, shall
determine public or publically-accessible sites for art funded by the one
percent for art policy. Funds may be expended on public art at any appropriate
site within the city. Funds from two or more CIP projects may be pooled to fund
a single work of art. Funds may be used for permanent or temporary public art.
The city manager shall establish procedures to administer this policy,
including procedures for selecting sites, artists and art works.
   (d)   The city manager may adopt administrative regulations to implement
this section.
(Ord. 5301, 2015)
Chapter 2.27
HISTORIC RESOURCES BOARD
Sections:
   
2.27.010   Historic Resources Board.
   
2.27.020   Term of office.
   
2.27.030   Organization.
   
2.27.040   Duties.
2.27.010   Historic Resources Board.
   The Historic Resources Board shall be composed of five members appointed by
the City Council and serving without pay. Members shall have demonstrated
interest in and knowledge of history, architecture or historic preservation.
Two members shall be professionals in the disciplines of architecture,
architectural history, planning, landscape architecture, or related
disciplines, or pre-historic and historic archaeology, folklore, cultural
anthropology, curation, or conservation and at least one member shall possess
academic education or practical experience in history or a related field such
as American studies, American civilization, or cultural geography. The Palo
Alto Historical Association shall be given notice of vacancies on the board and
shall be encouraged to have its members submit applications.
(Ord. 5624 § 2, 2024: Ord. 5208 § 20, 2013)
2.27.020   Term of office.
   Terms of office on the Historic Resources Board shall be three years. Terms
shall be staggered so that three positions are refilled one year, and four
positions are refilled two years later. Effective January 1, 2022, terms of
office due to expire on December 15 of each year shall be extended to expire on
March 31 of the following year, and thereafter terms of office shall commence
on April 1. If a successor is unavailable, a member may remain in office until
his or her successor is appointed, subject to the limits in Section
2.16.080.
(Ord. 5529 § 10, 2021: Ord. 5311 § 6, 2015: Ord. 5208 § 21, 2013)
2.27.030   Organization.
   (a)   The Board shall hold meetings monthly or at the pleasure of the
chairperson, but no fewer than four meetings per year.
   (b)   The Board shall establish such rules as may be appropriate and
necessary for the orderly conduct of its business, consistent with City Council
guidelines for boards and commissions.
   (c)   The Board shall elect a chairperson and a vice chairperson from its
membership who shall serve in such capacity for terms of one year each, or
until a successor is elected. The chairperson shall preside over meetings of
the board, and in the absence or disability of the chairperson, the vice
chairperson shall perform the duties of the chairperson.
   (d)   Three members shall constitute a quorum and decisions of the board
shall be determined by majority vote of those members present at the meeting.
Action minutes shall be kept by the Board.
(Ord. 5624 § 3, 2024: Ord. 5208 § 22, 2013)
2.27.040   Duties.
   It is the duty of the historic resources board to:
   (a)   Render advice and guidance to a property owner upon the owner's
application for alteration of any historic single-family or duplex building in
the downtown area and any such building designated as significant elsewhere in
the city;
   (b)   Inform the architectural review board of the historical and/or
architectural significance of historic commercial and multiple-family
structures in the downtown area and any such buildings designated as
significant elsewhere in the City that are under review by the Architectural
Review Board. Submit recommendations to the Architectural Review Board
regarding proposed exterior alterations of such historic structures;
   (c)   Recommend to the council the designation of additional buildings and
districts as historic. Research available information and add historical
information to the inventory sheets of historic structures/sites. This
inventory is maintained in the department of planning and development services;
and
   (d)   Perform such other functions as may be delegated from time to time to
the Historic Resources Board by the City Council.
(Ord. 5494 § 3, 2020: Ord. 5208 § 23, 2013)
Chapter 2.28
FISCAL PROCEDURES*
Sections:
   
2.28.010   Fiscal year.
   
2.28.014   One-year budget cycle.
   
2.28.015   Two-year budget cycle.
   
2.28.020   Submission of two-year budget.
   
2.28.030   Budget message.
   
2.28.040   Budget document.
   
2.28.050   Categories of expenditure control.
   
2.28.060   Contingent account.
   
2.28.070   Budget adoption.
   
2.28.080   Amendments after adoption.
   
2.28.090   Lapse of appropriations.
   
2.28.100   Capital plan.
   
2.28.110   Expenditures and disbursements.
   
2.28.120   Revenue and receipts.
   
2.28.130   Cancellations and refunds.
   
2.28.140   Depositories and investments.
   
2.28.150   Authorized signatures.
   
2.28.160   Official bonds.
   
2.28.170   Insurance.
   
2.28.180   System of accounts.
   
2.28.185   Natural gas utility transfer.
   
2.28.190   Independent audit.
   
2.28.200   Annual financial report.
   
2.28.220   Assessment and collection of property taxes and special assessments
by Santa Clara County.
   
2.28.230   Claims.
   
2.28.240   Settlement of claims and actions.
   
2.28.250   Money collected in the name of the city.
   *   Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history: Ordinance Nos. 3951, 3546, 3514,
3507, 3414, 3348, 2977, 2695, 2635, §§ 5, 6, 7; 2452 § 6; 2389; 2335, 2332 and
2146; prior code §§ 2.401-2.408.4, 2.408.7-2.412, 2.421 and 2.450.
2.28.010   Fiscal year.
   The fiscal year of the city shall begin on the first day of July each year
and end on the last day of June of the subsequent year.
(Ord. 4274 § 2 (part), 1995)
2.28.014   One-year budget cycle.
   A one-year budget cycle refers to the twelve month budget period covering
one fiscal year.
(Ord. 4274 § 2 (part), 1995)
2.28.015   Two-year budget cycle.
   The "two-year budget cycle" shall mean two consecutive fiscal years for
which the council adopts and appropriates a budget for the first of such fiscal
years and adopts a spending plan for the second fiscal year. In years where a
two-year budget is submitted, the council shall adopt and appropriate a budget
for the second fiscal year of such cycle as provided in this chapter; provided,
however, the city manager may submit a one-year budget when the manager
determines that it is efficient or otherwise beneficial to the city.
(Ord. 4274 § 2 (part), 1995)
2.28.020   Submission of two-year budget.
   On or about May 15th of the first year of each two-year budget cycle, the
city manager shall submit to the council a proposed budget for the ensuing
budget cycle, along with an accompanying message. When a two-year budget is
proposed, only the budget for the first year shall be voted on and formally
appropriated by the council as provided in Section
2.28.070. The budget for the second year shall be a spending plan and the
council shall approve it only in concept. On or about May 15th of the second
year of a two-year budget cycle, the city manager shall submit to the council
the proposed changes to the spending plan the council previously adopted in
concept. The council shall then vote on and formally appropriate the amended
spending plan as the budget for the second year as provided in Section
2.28.070.
(Ord. 4274 § 2 (part), 1995)
2.28.030   Budget message.
   The city manager's message shall, in summary form, narrate the budget both
in financial terms and proposed programs as they relate to city plans, policies
and objectives.
(Ord. 4274 § 2 (part), 1995)
2.28.040   Budget document.
   The budget document shall provide a clear and complete financial plan for
all city activities proposed for the ensuing budget cycle. In accordance with
Article III, Section 12 of the Charter, except for trust funds, the budget
document shall project all the expenditures and estimated receipts for all
funds and departments in such form and detail as required by the director of
administrative services, under the direction of the city manager. The budget
shall contain:
   (a)   An overall financial summary;
   (b)   A schedule of estimated general revenue detailed by source, and
reserve balances available to finance the general governmental expenditures of
the city. The schedule shall include an estimate of the proposed property tax
revenues and the proposed transfers from city-owned utilities;
   (c)   Proposed expenditures for general governmental administration,
services and operations set forth by each office, or department identified in
Chapter 2.08 of this code. Proposed expenditures shall be detailed by
department and category of expenditure, and by service. Comparisons shall be
made between the previous year's actual spending, the current year's budget,
the proposed first year appropriation and the proposed plan for the second year
appropriation, if a two-year budget is submitted. The budget for each
department or office shall be accompanied by supporting narrative relating
expenditures to particular services, objectives and responsibilities of the
unit. There shall also be included a listing by position classification of
regular personnel, currently authorized and proposed, and the person-years
represented thereby together with the person-years of temporary or nonpermanent
personnel;
   (d)   Proposed capital expenditures for governmental facilities and other
public works, detailed by project and their proposed method of financing,
including grants from other agencies;
   (e)   In accordance with Article VII, Section 2 of the Charter, the
estimated revenue of each utility owned or operated by the city and the
proposed disposition thereof. Proposed expenditures, current and capitalized,
shall be detailed in terms of category and shown in the appropriate comparative
format. The budget for each utility shall be accompanied by supporting
narrative and statistics. There shall also be included a listing by position
classification of regular personnel assigned to the department of utilities,
authorized and proposed. The person-years represented thereby together with the
person-years of temporary or nonpermanent personnel shall be allocated to each
utility;
   (f)   A budget for scheduled amounts required to be made available for
retirement of the city's general and special obligation bond debt and the
sources from which such amounts shall be obtained;
   (g)   Pursuant to his or her powers under Section
1.08.110 of this code, the city manager may also in his or her discretion
include in the proposed budget or in subsidiary documents a schedule of any
proposed amendments to the municipal fee schedule;
   (h)   The budget adopted in the second year of a two-year budget cycle may
be an abbreviated document, and shall include, at a minimum: summaries by fund
and by department by categories of expenditure, a narrative message from the
city manager, a listing of regular personnel by person-years by department, and
an incorporation by reference of all other information required by this section
as set forth in the adopted budget from the first year of the two-year budget
cycle.
(Ord. 4274 § 2 (part), 1995)
2.28.050   Categories of expenditure control.
   The categories of expenditure proposed in the budget document for each fund
or organization unit shall be detailed within the following classifications:
   (a)   Direct expenditures by department for:
   (1)   Salaries and benefits paid to or on behalf of employees;
   (2)   Nonsalary costs, as a group;
   (3)   Allocated costs, representing charges made to one department from
another city department, including administrative overhead charges;
   (4)   Utility commodity and commodity transmission services purchased for
resale;
   (5)   Debt service expense;
   (6)   Expenses not otherwise classified herein.
   (b)   The transfer of net revenue or fund balance between said funds.
(Ord. 4274 § 2 (part), 1995)
2.28.060   Contingent account.
   The budget for the operating funds may contain a contingent account. Upon
written authorization of the city manager, the appropriation for this account
or a portion thereof may be assigned to a department or project to cover
unanticipated expenditures within that particular fund.
(Ord. 4274 § 2 (part), 1995)
2.28.070   Budget adoption.
   (a)   Notice and Hearing. In each budget cycle, the clerk shall publish in
an official newspaper of the city a notice stating:
   (1)   That a public hearing will be held on the budget;
   (2)   The time and place of the hearing, which shall not be less than five
days following the date of publication;
   (3)   The places where copies of the proposed budget are available for
inspection by the public;
   (4)   Any other such noticing as may be required by state law for the
adoption of the municipal fee schedule.
   (b)   First-Year Amendment and Adoption. After the public hearing before the
adoption of the budget for the first year of a two-year budget cycle, the
council may adopt and appropriate the budget for the first year by ordinance
with or without amendment, provided that no amendment shall increase authorized
expenditures to an amount greater than the total of estimated receipts and
available funds, including reserve funds. If a two-year budget cycle is
utilized, the budget for the second year shall be a spending plan and the
council shall approve it only in concept.
   (c)   Second-Year Amendment and Adoption. After the public hearing before
the adoption of the budget for the second year of the two-year budget cycle,
the council may adopt and appropriate the budget for the second year by
ordinance with or without amendment, provided that no amendment shall increase
authorized expenditures to an amount greater than the total of estimated
receipts and available funds, including reserve funds.
(Ord. 4274 § 2 (part), 1995)
2.28.080   Amendments after adoption.
   During the fiscal year, the city manager shall amend the budgetary accounts
of the city to reflect the following:
   (a)   Additional Appropriations. By a two-thirds vote, the council may make
additional appropriations of receipts that are in excess of the total estimated
receipts and appropriations contained in the adopted budget.
   (b)   Additional Positions. By a majority vote, the council may add
positions to the table of organization.
   (c)   Transfer of Appropriations.
   (1)   By a majority vote, the council may transfer part or all of the
unencumbered balance of any appropriation from one fund, department, office, or
capital project to another;
   (2)   By written authorization, the city manager may direct the
redistribution, within any department or office, of the unencumbered balance of
appropriations within the departments or offices, provided that he or she shall
not make transfers from the classification of utilities purchased for resale to
any other object or make transfers between funds or transfers between
departments without the affirmative vote of a majority of the council;
   (3)   By written authorization, the city manager may authorize a transfer of
appropriation from the unallocated balance of the contingent account to any
department, office or capital project. Funds shall not be transferred between
the general fund and the enterprise funds, nor between operating and capital
funds.
   (d)   Transfer of Positions. By written authorization, the city manager may
transfer positions or assign personnel from any department or office under the
control of the city manager to another in accordance with Article IV, Section 6
(n) of the Charter.
   (e)   Inter-fund Transactions. In the event that appropriations and
equivalent offsetting credits for allocated inter-fund services or transfers
are affected by amendments to appropriations for direct expenditures or
estimated revenue, the city manager may make corresponding adjustments to the
inter-fund accounts so affected.
   (f)   Salaries and Benefits. Amendments to the Employee Classification and
Compensation Plan adopted by the council pursuant to Article III, Sections 12,
18, and 21 of the Charter.
   (g)   Prior year Encumbrances. Appropriations that were encumbered by
properly executed, but uncompleted, purchase orders or contracts at the close
of the previous fiscal year may be carried forward and incorporated with
appropriations of the current year.
   (h)   Municipal Fee Schedule. By a majority vote, the council may, by
ordinance, add or change fees in the municipal fee schedule.
(Ord. 5360 § 1, 2015: Ord. 4274 § 2 (part), 1995)
2.28.090   Lapse of appropriations.
   The unencumbered balance of appropriations shall lapse at the close of the
fiscal year. Reappropriations may be authorized by majority vote of the city
council from the unencumbered balance of appropriations of one fiscal year to
the next fiscal year before the approval of the budget closing ordinance as
long as the Director of Administrative Services certifies that sufficient funds
are available to be carried forward to the next fiscal year.
(Ord. 5274 § 1, 2014; Ord. 4274 § 2 (part), 1995)
2.28.100   Capital plan.
   (a)   Submission to Council. The city manager shall prepare and submit a
five-year capital plan to the council once every two years. This shall occur on
or about two months prior to the final date for submission of a two-year
proposed budget. In the second year of a two-year budget cycle, the city
manager shall prepare and submit to the council only proposed changes to the
capital plan that the council adopted in concept the previous year.
   (b)   The first year capital plan shall include:
   (1)   A message from the city manager;
   (2)   An overall financial summary;
   (3)   A list of all general governmental and utilities capital improvements
which are proposed to be undertaken or continued during the ensuing five fiscal
years, with appropriate supporting information as to the necessity for such
improvements. Cost estimates, method of financing and recommended time
schedules for each such improvement and the estimated annual cost of operating
and maintaining the general governmental and utilities facilities to be
constructed or acquired.
(Ord. 4274 § 2 (part), 1995)
2.28.110   Expenditures and disbursements.
   (a)   In accordance with Article III, Section 12 of the Charter, all
expenditures made on behalf of the city directly or through any agency, except
those required to be made by state law, must be made in accordance with the
authorization contained in the appropriation ordinance and amendments thereto.
   (b)   No purchase or commitment therefor shall be made without the approval
of the city manager as provided in Article IV, Section 6 of the Charter.
   (c)   No disbursement of city moneys shall be made except by warrant or
check drawn on the city treasury and signed by the city manager or director of
administrative services, except that the city manager or designee may approve
in advance by voucher purchases from petty cash and the purchase of investment
securities from banks by direct charge to the city's account.
   (d)   No disbursement of city moneys shall be made unless the obligation is
supported by accounting evidence in proper form as required by the city manager
and sufficient money is available. If such disbursement is from budget
appropriations, there must be an adequate unencumbered balance in the fund,
organization unit or project for the expenditure object described.
   (e)   No disbursement shall be made to or on account of employees for
expenses incurred in the course of city business unless the municipal purpose
served by such expenses is in conformity with rules and regulations established
by the city manager.
   (f)   No disbursement shall be made to or on account of employees of the
city for personal use or benefit except as provided in the compensation plan
adopted by the council.
(Ord. 4274 § 2 (part), 1995)
2.28.120   Revenue and receipts.
   (a)   Revenue of known amounts due the city from specified sources will be
accrued on bills prepared by the director of administrative services. Such
bills and other revenue and receipts, including interest earnings, shall be
collected when due by the director of administrative services and promptly
deposited in designated banks.
   (b)   All city money collected or received by any other department or agency
of the city shall be deposited promptly with the finance director or in
designated banks. The city manager shall establish written procedures for the
proper handling and safekeeping of cash by city employees.
   (c)   All checks or other bills of exchange payable to the city shall be
endorsed by the director of administrative services "for deposit only" to the
demand bank account of the city.
(Ord. 4274 § 2 (part), 1995)
2.28.130   Cancellations and refunds.
   (a)   The city manager may cancel an account receivable, provided that bills
which are or may become a lien on property or bills that represent legal claims
by the city shall require the additional approval of the city attorney before
they may be canceled.
   (b)   The city manager may refund overpayments or erroneous payments.
Account guarantee deposits collected from utilities customers may be refunded
by the city manager.
(Ord. 4274 § 2 (part), 1995)
2.28.140   Depositories and investments.
   (a)   In accordance with the Government Code, the director of administrative
services shall designate banks for the deposit and, upon proper warrant from
the city manager, the disbursement of city moneys.
   (b)   After taking into account the amounts necessary to meet the current
and pending cash requirements of the city, the director of administrative
services may arrange for term deposits, or investment in securities authorized
by law, of the treasury balance.
   (c)   All securities shall be placed in and maintained under safekeeping
agreement with a state or national bank designated by the director of
administrative services. No officer or employee of the city shall take delivery
or otherwise have access thereto other than by specific authorization of the
council approved by the city manager.
(Ord. 4274 § 2 (part), 1995)
2.28.150   Authorized signatures.
   The council shall provide from time to time by resolution for authorized
signatures to negotiable instruments drawn in the name of the city and may
authorize facsimile as well as actual signatures.
(Ord. 4274 § 2 (part), 1995)
2.28.160   Official bonds.
   Pursuant to Article III, Section 21 of the Charter the director of
administrative services shall obtain fidelity bonds covering the honesty of all
city employees and the faithful performance of its principal officers and
department heads.
(Ord. 4274 § 2 (part), 1995)
2.28.170   Insurance.
   The city manager shall obtain and maintain in force such policies and
contracts of insurance or fidelity bonds as are necessary to protect the city
from severe financial or property loss subject to the following policy:
   (a)   The city may assume the risk of loss when:
   (1)   In the judgment of the city manager, insurance coverage is not
obtainable at a reasonable premium;
   (2)   In the judgment of the city manager, the estimated amount of a
potential single property loss from a particular risk is less than $100,000.00;
   (3)   Deductible or excess coverage is obtainable provided that the total
dollar amount of loss retention annually or per occurrence for all policies in
force shall not exceed $5 million.
   (b)   The city may obtain full or partial insurance coverage for its
exposure to all liability claims other than those arising from workers
compensation; provided, however, such liability coverage includes the cost of
claims investigation and litigation when such costs are not anticipated in the
city budget.
   (c)   When coverage is obtained through a licensed agent or broker or
association thereof, such procurement and other services shall be governed by a
written agreement with the city.
   (d)   Placement of insurance coverage shall be limited to companies which
maintain policyholder reserves in excess of $12 million and are rated B+ or
better in "Bests" published ratings of insurance companies.
(Ord. 4274 § 2 (part), 1995)
2.28.180   System of accounts.
   In accordance with Article III, Section 12 and Article IV, Section 12 of the
Charter, the city manager shall have full charge of all accounting and billing
in all departments. The form in which the budget is adopted shall be
recommended by the city manager and shall determine the method to be followed
in all accounting by all representatives and administrative agents of the city.
The system of accounts, financial procedures and controls so established or
maintained shall conform to generally accepted principles of municipal and
utilities accounting and shall be in such detail as will provide for proper
management of the city's resources and complete information on its financial
affairs and shall be readily susceptible to audit.
   In accordance with Article VII, Section 2 of the Charter, in addition to the
general fund, separate funds or accounting entities shall be maintained for
each city-owned public utility. Separate funds shall also be maintained as
required to comply with the direction of the Government Accounting Standards
Board or any other applicable accounting standards. The system of accounts
shall clearly reflect the resources, obligations, reserves and unappropriated
balance of each fund.
(Ord. 4274 § 2 (part), 1995)
2.28.185   Natural gas utility transfer.
   Each fiscal year the city council may transfer from the natural gas utility
to the general fund an amount equal to 18% of the gross revenues of the gas
utility received during the fiscal year two fiscal years before the fiscal year
of the transfer. At its discretion, the city council may decide to transfer a
lesser amount. The projected cost of the transfer shall be included in the
city’s retail natural gas rates as part of the cost of providing gas service.
(Ord. 5582 § 1, 2022)
2.28.190   Independent audit.
   The council shall provide for an independent, annual audit or more frequent
audits as it deems necessary of the transactions and accounts of all officers
and employees having the authority to collect, disburse, have custody of or
otherwise manage public money, records or property. Such audits shall be made
by a nonresident, certified public accountant or firm of such accountants who
have no personal interest, direct or indirect, in the affairs of the city
government.
(Ord. 4274 § 2 (part), 1995)
2.28.200   Annual financial report.
   In accordance with Article III, Section 16 of the Charter, the council shall
publish annually a financial report of the city prepared by the city manager.
(Ord. 4274 § 2 (part), 1995)
2.28.220   Assessment and collection of property taxes and special assessments
by Santa Clara County.
   Pursuant to the provisions of the Charter and of Article 2, Chapter 2 and
Article 1, Chapter 4, both of Part 2, Division 1, Title 5 of the Government
Code of the State of California, certain duties of city officers are
transferred to officers of the county of Santa Clara, state of California, as
follows:
   (a)   Officers of the county of Santa Clara who perform duties relating to
the assessment of property for county taxes, the equalization and correction of
the assessment, the collection, payment and enforcement of the taxes, including
delinquent taxes and interest and penalties, and the redemption of property
from sale or other penalty for nonpayment of county taxes, shall perform such
duties as applied to city taxes;
   (b)   County officers shall levy, collect and enforce for the city its
special assessments in connection with special improvement districts, sidewalk
repairs and the abatement of nuisances, including the enforcement of their
payment, the collection of penalties and interest, and the sale of property for
nonpayment and the redemption of property from sale;
   (c)   City officers shall perform all duties relative to the collection of
city taxes levied prior to the fiscal year 1969-70, including the enforcement
of their payment, the sale of property for nonpayment and redemption from sale.
(Ord. 4274 § 2 (part), 1995)
2.28.230   Claims.
   (a)   Authority. The ordinance codified in this section is enacted pursuant
to Section 935 of the California Government Code.
   (b)   Statement of Purpose. This ordinance is intended to apply the
requirements of Article XIII, Section 32 of the California Constitution to
disputes involving taxes, fees and other charges imposed by the city. These
requirements include the "pay first, litigate later" rule that requires those
who dispute their taxes, fees and other charges to pay them before suing for a
refund. In the absence of such a rule, any taxpayer could impose significant
hardship on the city and undermine its ability to predict its revenues and
manage its resources for the benefit of the public it serves. The absence of
such a rule could result in the city's loss of substantial revenue due to a
taxpayer's withholding payment due to spurious or unfounded refund claims.
   (c)   Claims Required. All claims against the city for money or damages not
otherwise governed by the Government Claims Act, California Government Code
Sections 900 et seq., or another state law (hereinafter in this ordinance,
"claims") shall be presented within one year, and in the manner prescribed by
Part 3 of Division 3.6 of Title 1 of the California Government Code (commencing
with Section 900 thereof) for the claims to which that part applies by its own
terms, as those provisions now exist or shall hereafter be amended, and as
further provided by this chapter.
   (d)   Form of Claim. All claims shall be made in writing and filed with the
City Clerk. All claims shall state under penalty of perjury the specific
grounds under which the claim is founded, and shall include written records
establishing the claimant's entitlement to the amount claimed. All claims shall
be verified by the claimant or by his or her guardian, conservator, executor or
administrator. No claim may be filed on behalf of a class of persons unless
verified by every member of that class as required by this section. In
addition, all claims shall contain the information required by California
Government Code Section 910.
   (e)   Claim Prerequisite to Suit. In accordance with California Government
Code Sections 935(b) and 945.6, all claims shall be presented as provided in
this section and acted upon by the city prior to the filing of any action on
such claims and no such action may be maintained by a person who has not
complied with the requirements of subdivision (c) of this section.
   (f)   Exhaustion of Administrative Remedies. Prior to seeking judicial
relief with respect to a dispute regarding a tax, fee or other charge imposed
by the city, an aggrieved taxpayer, fee payer or any other person must: (i)
exhaust any administrative remedies specified by any other provision of this
code or other applicable law, (ii) pay the full amount owed, including
applicable penalties and interest, and (iii) present a claim for refund as
required by any or all of: section
2.28.230 of this code; the Government Claims Act, Government Code Section 910
et seq.; and other applicable law.
   (g)   Suit. Any action brought against the city upon any claim or demand
shall conform to the requirements of Sections 940 - 949 of the California
Government Code. Any action brought against any employee of the city shall
conform with the requirements of Section 950 - 951 of the California Government
Code.
(Ord. 5078 § 2, 2010: Ord. 4930 § 1, 2007: Ord. 4274 § 2 (part), 1995)
2.28.240   Settlement of claims and actions.
   As provided in Section 935.4 of the Government Code of California, the city
attorney is designated to perform the functions of the city council relative to
claims and actions against the city or any of its officers or employees under
the provisions of Division 3.6 of the Government Code, as follows:
   (a)   Where the city has insured itself against liability for the claimed
injury, the city attorney shall forward to the insurance carrier without prior
council approval a written recommendation as to acceptance, settlement, or
rejection of such claim, provided that the amount of any recommended allowance,
compromise or settlement does not exceed $35,000.00;
   (b)   Where the city is uninsured, the city attorney shall be authorized to
accept, settle or reject without prior approval of the council, claims against
the city, provided that no allowance, compromise or settlement shall exceed
$35,000.00. Upon the written order from the city attorney, the director of
administrative services shall cause to be issued a warrant upon the treasury of
the city in the amount for which a claim has been allowed, compromised or
settled;
   (c)   The city attorney is further authorized to compromise or settle,
without prior approval of the council, except on a matter of policy, any
actions which the city is either plaintiff or defendant and which are not
covered by insurance, provided that the amount of such compromise or settlement
shall not exceed $35,000.00;
   (d)   The city attorney shall make biannual reports to the council on action
taken on claims and actions against the city;
   (e)   A recommendation under subsection (a) above shall constitute "action"
upon such claim within the meaning of Government Code Section 945.4.
(Ord. 5023 § 2, 2008: Ord. 4274 § 2 (part), 1995)
2.28.250   Money collected in the name of the city.
   The solicitation and collection of all money made in the name of or for the
use of units of city government by nongovernmental agencies or agents shall be
governed by the following procedure:
   (a)   The purpose for which money is to be solicited or collected shall be
referred to the city council;
   (b)   Obtain approval of the city council to enter into such activities on
behalf of units of the city government;
   (c)   Obtain approval of the city council on the manner and technique by
which the money is to be solicited and/or collected;
   (d)   Establish with the city council prior to the time of solicitation and/
or collection the conditions under which the money is to be given to the city
of Palo Alto;
   (e)   Report to the city council the total amount of money collected and
such costs as were incident to the solicitation and collection of said money
within thirty days after collection.
(Ord. 4274 § 2 (part), 1995)
Chapter 2.30
CONTRACTS AND PURCHASING PROCEDURES*
*   Editor's Note: Ordinance 4827 amended Chapter 2.30 in its entirety. Certain
ordinances or parts of ordinances previously codified herein remain in effect,
though superseded. Those ordinances are: Ords. 3927, 3992, 4009, 4059, 4095,
4453, 4462, 4589 and 4740.
Sections:
PART 1 -- GENERAL
   
2.30.010   Purposes.
   
2.30.020   Scope.
   
2.30.030   Council contract policies adopted by resolution.
   
2.30.040   Centralized purchasing.
   
2.30.050   Purchasing manual.
   
2.30.060   Validity of contracts and purchase orders.
   
2.30.070   Approval as to form by the City Attorney.
   
2.30.080   Interpretive authority.
   
2.30.090   No conflicting policies or procedures.
PART 2 -- CONTRACT TYPES
   
2.30.100   Public works contract.
   
2.30.110   Contract for goods.
   
2.30.120   General services contract.
   
2.30.130   Professional services contract.
   
2.30.140   Contracts for wholesale utility commodities and services.
   
2.30.150   Contracts for dark fiber optics licensing services.
   
2.30.160   Emergency contracts.
PART 3 -- CONTRACTING AUTHORITY
   
2.30.200   Procurement officer contract award authority.
   
2.30.210   City Manager contract award authority.
   
2.30.220   City Attorney contract award authority.
   
2.30.225   Wholesale utility commodity transactions.
   
2.30.230   Designated employee purchases of $10,000.00 or less.
   
2.30.240   Designated employees’ use of petty cash, P-card or other credit
card.
   
2.30.250   Council approval or award of contracts.
   
2.30.260   Contracts with terms exceeding one year — Appropriation.
   
2.30.270   Delegations of authority to contract.
   
2.30.280   Authority to modify and terminate contracts not approved or awarded
by the Council.
   
2.30.290   Authority to modify contracts awarded by the Council.
   
2.30.295   Limitations on contract authority; authority otherwise conferred.
PART 4 — COMPETITIVE SOLICITATION REQUIREMENTS
   
2.30.300   Public works contracts.
   
2.30.310   Contracts for goods.
   
2.30.320   General services contracts.
   
2.30.330   Professional services contracts.
   
2.30.340   Contracts for wholesale utility commodities and services.
   
2.30.350   Contract splitting prohibited.
   
2.30.360   Exemptions from competitive solicitation requirements.
PART 5 — COMPETITIVE SOLICITATION PROCEDURES
   
2.30.400   Informal invitation for bids or requests for proposals.
   
2.30.410   Formal request for proposals.
   
2.30.420   Formal invitation for bids -- Notice, submittal, opening.
   
2.30.430   Combined request for proposals and invitation for bids.
   
2.30.440   Determination of lowest responsive/responsible bidder.
   
2.30.450   Tie bids.
   
2.30.460   Correction or withdrawal of bids or proposals.
   
2.30.470   Cancellation of solicitations -- Rejections of bids/proposals.
   
2.30.480   Waiver of minor irregularities, defects and informalities.
   
2.30.485   Delegation of awarding authority determinations.
   
2.30.490   Design-build contract procurement procedures.
PART 6 — CONTRACT TERMS AND CONDITIONS
   
2.30.500   Bid security, bonds and insurance.
   
2.30.510   Nondiscrimination.
PART 7 — ETHICS IN CONTRACTING
   
2.30.600   Ethics.
   
2.30.610   Preparation of bid or proposal documents.
PART 6A — SURVEILLANCE AND PRIVACY PROTECTIONS
   
2.30.620   Title.
   
2.30.630   Council approval required for contracts, agreements, grant
applications and donations involving surveillance technology.
   
2.30.640   Council approval of surveillance use policy.
   
2.30.650   Information required.
   
2.30.660   Determination by Council that benefits outweigh costs and concerns.
   
2.30.670   Oversight following Council approval.
   
2.30.680   Definitions.
   
2.30.690   No private right of action.
PART 8 — RECORDS AND REPORTS
   
2.30.700   Records, public inspection.
   
2.30.710   City Manager reports.
PART 9 — REWARDS
   
2.30.800   Rewards relating to arrest and conviction.
PART 10 — STANDARDIZATION
   
2.30.900   Standardization.
PART 1 — GENERAL
2.30.010   Purposes.
   This chapter defines the contract procurement policies, procedures and
requirements for public works construction, general services, professional
services, wholesale utility commodities and services, and contracts, the
performance for which the city receives substantial value. This chapter
establishes the contracting authority of the City Manager, the Chief
Procurement Officer (“Procurement Officer”), designated employees, City
Attorney, and City Council (“Council”). The purpose of this chapter is: to
foster and encourage the use of best management practices in contracting and
purchasing; to ensure quality and efficiency in the procurement of goods,
services, equipment, materials and supplies at the lowest cost commensurate
with the quality needed; to provide for a fair and equitable procurement
process utilizing standardized solicitation procedures; and to maintain honesty
and integrity in the procurement process.
(Ord. 5494 § 4, 2020: Ord. 5387 § 1 (part), 2016: Ord. 4827 § 1 (part), 2004)
2.30.020   Scope.
   (a)   Contracts for public works construction, general services and
professional services, information technology services, wholesale utility
commodities and services and other energy related contracts, and contracts,
price quotations or purchase orders for goods, materials, equipment and
supplies shall be solicited and awarded pursuant to the procedures contained in
this chapter.
   (b)   The solicitation and award policies, procedures and requirements
contained in this chapter shall not apply to the following:
   (1)   Subdivision agreements, improvement agreements, deferred parking
agreements, development agreements and other land use contracts entered into
between the city and property owners or developers pursuant to other parts of
this municipal code;
   (2)   Franchises and franchise agreements;
   (3)   Contracts between the city and other public entities and public
utilities for the city’s provision of services to the other entities and
utilities;
   (4)   Transactions involving the acquisition, assignment and disposal of
interests in real property; and
   (5)   Agreements to provide funds pursuant to the human services resource
allocation process or community development block grant program.
(Ord. 5494 § 5, 2020: Ord. 5387 § 1 (part), 2016: Ord. 4827 § 1 (part), 2004)
2.30.030   Council contract policies adopted by resolution.
   The Council may from time to time adopt by resolution policies related to
contract solicitation and award procedures and requirements. The policies may
include, without limitation, policies addressing local boycotts, protest
procedures, and price preferences for use of recycled or sustainable goods and
for local businesses. The policies shall not conflict with, but may be in
addition to, any provisions of this chapter. All Council policies shall be
considered and implemented in the solicitation and award of contracts made
under this chapter.
(Ord. 5387 § 1 (part), 2016: Ord. 4827 § 1 (part), 2004)
2.30.040   Centralized purchasing.
   All acquisitions and purchases shall be made by and through the Procurement
Officer, except:
   (a)   Purchases of goods and services made from petty cash funds made in
conformance with this chapter and pursuant to control procedures approved by
the City Manager and contained in the administrative policies and procedures
manual maintained by the City Manager;
   (b)   Emergency purchases made in conformance with this chapter and Federal
Emergency Management Agency (“FEMA”) Public Assistance Program’s procurement
orders, or other similar rules, regulations, guidelines and control procedures
for cost reimbursement purposes approved by the City Manager and contained in
the purchasing manual;
   (c)   Contracts for legal services;
   (d)   Purchases of goods and services, and payment of public works services,
by city procurement card (“P-card”) or other credit card, made in conformance
with this chapter and pursuant to control procedures approved by the City
Manager and contained in the purchasing manual;
   (e)   Purchases where the total expenditure by the city does not exceed
$10,000.00, made in conformance with this chapter and pursuant to control
procedures approved by the City Manager and contained in the purchasing manual;
   (f)   Transactions negotiated under master contracts for wholesale utility
commodities and services, as described in Section
2.30.140 made in conformance with Section
2.30.340;
   (g)   Mutual aid agreements; and
   (h)   Delegations made according to Section 2.30.230.
(Ord. 5494 § 6, 2020: Ord. 5387 § 1 (part), 2016: Ord. 4827 § 1 (part), 2004)
2.30.050   Purchasing manual.
   The Procurement Officer shall prepare a written purchasing manual that
implements the requirements of this chapter. The purchasing manual shall
establish and describe in detail the contract solicitation and award procedures
and requirements that must be followed in making acquisitions, purchases and
licenses on behalf of the city. The purchasing manual shall include, among
other things, control procedures established under the authority of this
chapter. The City Manager shall approve the purchasing manual and any
modifications made to the manual from time to time.
(Ord. 5387 § 1 (part), 2016: Ord. 4827 § 1 (part), 2004)
2.30.060   Validity of contracts and purchase orders.
   The city shall not be and is not bound by any contract, price quotation,
purchase order, document, or any other agreement, unless it is made, in
writing, and is:
   (a)   Approved by the Council and signed by the mayor, vice mayor or other
duly authorized officer or employee on behalf of the city as provided in this
chapter; and
   (b)   Approved as to form by the City Attorney, as described in Section
2.30.070.
   The foregoing requirements shall not apply to authorized purchases with a
city P-card or other credit card.
(Ord. 5387 § 1 (part), 2016: Ord. 4827 § 1 (part), 2004)
2.30.070   Approval as to form by the City Attorney.
   The City Attorney shall approve as to form all contracts, price quotations,
purchase orders, documents and other agreements. The City Attorney’s approval
as to form may be performed on a general basis (by standard form contract) or
on a case-by-case basis. No city office or department other than the Office of
the City Attorney is authorized to create, modify or approve for use standard
form contracts.
   Each contract, price quotation, purchase order, document or other agreement
that is subject to individual review and approval by the City Attorney shall be
signed by the City Attorney or designee to signify that it is approved as to
form. A standard form contract that has been approved by the City Attorney for
general use may be used without further approval or signature by the City
Attorney, provided the form of contract is not modified.
   The Procurement Officer in consultation with the City Attorney and the City
Auditor shall be responsible for creating a control system for the creation and
use of standard form contracts, price quotations, purchase orders, documents
and other agreements to be included in the purchasing manual.
(Ord. 5387 § 1 (part), 2016: Ord. 4827 § 1 (part), 2004)
2.30.080   Interpretive authority.
   The City Attorney shall exercise the sole authority to interpret the
provisions of this chapter and to issue, in writing, interpretive opinions
concerning the meaning and application of the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 5387 § 1 (part), 2016: Ord. 4827 § 1 (part), 2004)
2.30.090   No conflicting policies or procedures.
   No city committee, office, department, board, commission or other division
or body may adopt or create an internal procurement policy or procedure that
conflicts with or is inconsistent with any provision of this chapter.
(Ord. 5387 § 1 (part), 2016: Ord. 4827 § 1 (part), 2004)
PART 2 – CONTRACT TYPES
2.30.100   Public works contract.
   A public works contract includes a contract paid for in whole or in part out
of public funds for the construction, alteration, repair, improvement,
reconstruction or demolition of any public building, facility, street,
sidewalk, utility, park or open space improvement, or other public improvement.
(Ord. 5387 § 1 (part), 2016: Ord. 4827 § 1 (part), 2004)
2.30.110   Contract for goods.
   A contract for goods includes a contract or purchase order for the purchase
of supplies, materials or equipment, including, without limitation, office
supplies, janitorial supplies, furnishings, equipment, machinery, tools,
vehicles, computer hardware and software and other personal property, materials
or goods. A contract for goods includes a blanket purchase order contract,
where a specified quantity of units to be purchased is not established at the
time the contract is executed. A blanket purchase order contract must establish
a maximum dollar amount of expenditure for the contract and set forth pricing
terms for the items to be purchased. A contract for goods may include labor
incidental to the purchase of goods, including any set-up, installation, and
testing services.
(Ord. 5387 § 1 (part), 2016: Ord. 4827 § 1 (part), 2004)
2.30.120   General services contract.
   A general services contract includes a contract providing for work, labor or
services not requiring specialized experience, knowledge or training with or
without the furnishing of goods, materials, supplies or equipment, including,
without limitation:
   (a)   Maintenance of public buildings, streets, parks and playgrounds and
other public improvements;
   (b)   Repair, modification and maintenance of equipment or other goods;
   (c)   Licensing, installation and maintenance of or relating to information
technology property, goods and services, including, without limitation,
computer hardware and software, and data storage services, unless the
information technology services would require specialized certification,
knowledge, expertise, or training are needed and provided;
   (d)   Janitorial services, uniform cleaning, tree trimming, street sweeping,
power washing and landscape maintenance;
   (e)   Leasing or licensing of goods and other personal property for use by
the city; and
   (f)   General class instruction, including, without limitation, recreation
class instruction services.
(Ord. 5494 § 7, 2020: Ord. 5387 § 1 (part), 2016: Ord. 4827 § 1 (part), 2004)
2.30.130   Professional services contract.
   A professional services contract includes a contract for services which
involves the exercise of professional discretion and independent judgment based
on specialized certification, knowledge, expertise or training. These services
may include, without limitation, those provided by accountants, actuaries,
auditors, appraisers, architects, attorneys, engineers, financial advisors,
information technology experts, instructors, and environmental and land use
planners.
(Ord. 5387 § 1 (part), 2016: Ord. 4827 § 1 (part), 2004)
2.30.140   Contracts for wholesale utility commodities and services.
   A contract for wholesale utility commodities and services include a contract
with a private or public supplier of utility commodities and services or other
counterparty (in the case of gas or electricity) for the purchase or sale-
incidental-to-purchase of water, gas or electricity and all related
supplemental or ancillary services, and any other energy-related contract,
including, without limitation: transmission; renewable energy credits; offsets;
allowances; energy procured via a “feed in tariff,” and regulatory compliance
instruments. A contract for wholesale utility commodities and services further
includes, without limitation, a master agreement containing general terms and
conditions that provide for the execution of one or more purchase or sale-
incidental-to-purchase transactions under the terms of a standard form contract
and any exhibit, addendum or confirmation.
(Ord. 5387 § 1 (part), 2016: Ord. 4827 § 1 (part), 2004)
2.30.150   Contracts for dark fiber optics licensing services.
   A contract for dark fiber optics licensing services includes a contract with
any person, including, without limitation, a telecommunications or non-
telecommunications carrier, an internet services provider, a distributed
antenna system services provider, or a small cell technology services provider
for the licensing of city-owned, installed and maintained dark fiber optics and
related facilities, if any, located in the public rights-of-way and public
utility easements. A telecommunications carrier includes any person subject to
the Telecommunications Act of 1996, as amended, or other federal law now or
hereinafter in effect.
(Ord. 5494 § 8, 2020: Ord. 5387 § 1 (part), 2016: Ord. 4827 § 1 (part), 2004)
2.30.160   Emergency contracts.
   A contract for goods or services necessary to protect the public health,
safety, and welfare in the event of an emergency. An emergency means and
includes an urgent unforeseen event that threatens life, property, or the
general public health, safety and welfare, including, without limitation, an
emergency declared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The City Manager
is authorized to conclude an emergency exists without further declaration by
the Council.
(Ord. 5387 § 1 (part), 2016)
PART 3 – CONTRACTING AUTHORITY
2.30.200   Procurement officer contract award authority.
   The Procurement Officer may award and sign the following contracts:
   (a)   Public Works Contracts. Public works contracts, where the term does
not exceed three years, and the contract priceand any price contingency
established for change orders, but excluding sales tax or use tax, do not
exceed $85,000.00 in the first contract year, and do not exceed the sum of
$85,000.00 and any unexpended monies carried forward from a prior contract
year, in any subsequent contract year.
   (b)   Contracts for Goods. Contracts to purchase goods, where the term does
not exceed three years, and the contract price and any price contingency
established for change orders, but excluding sales tax or use tax, do not
exceed $85,000.00 in the first year, and do not exceed the sum of $85,000.00and
any unexpended monies carried forward from a prior contract year, in any
subsequent contract year.
   (c)   General Services Contracts. General services contracts, where the term
does not exceed three years, and the contract priceand any price contingency
established for change orders or additional services, but excluding sales tax
or use tax, do not exceed $85,000.00 in the first contract year, and do not
exceed $85,000.00 and any unexpended monies carried forward from a prior
contract year, in any subsequent contract year.
   (d)   Professional Services Contracts. Professional services contracts,
where the term does not exceed three years, and the contract price, and any
price contingency established for additional services, but excluding sales tax
or use tax, do not exceed the sum of $85,000.00 in the first contract year, and
do not exceed the sum of $85,000.00 and any unexpended monies carried forward
from a prior contract year, in any subsequent contract year.
   (e)   Software and Hardware Purchase, Licensing, Maintenance and Support
Contracts. Notwithstanding Subsection 2.30.200(c), the Procurement Officer may
award and sign contracts other than general services agreements, including,
without limitation, vendor-based standard form hardware and software purchase
and licensing contracts, for the purchase of hardware and software, the
licensing of software, and the maintenance and support of hardware and
software, where the term of licensing or maintenance and support services does
not exceed five years and the contract price, excluding sales tax or use tax,
does not exceed $85,000.00 per year in the first contract year and does not
exceed the sum of $85,000.00 and any unexpended monies carried forward from a
prior contract year, in any subsequent contract year. The contracts referred to
herein may include contracts for data storage services, which shall be subject
to the city's information security policies, terms, conditions and other
requirements established by the chief information officer with the concurrence
and approval of the City Attorney.
(Ord. 5494 § 9, 2020: Ord. 5387 § 1 (part), 2016: Ord. 4827 § 1 (part), 2004)
2.30.210   City Manager contract award authority.
   The City Manager may award and sign the following contracts:
   (a)   Public Works Contracts. Public works contracts, where the term does
not exceed three years, and the contract price and any price contingency
established for change orders, but excluding sales tax or use tax, do not
exceed $250,000.00 in the first contract year, and do not exceed the sum of
$250,000.00 and any unexpended monies carried forward from a prior contract
year, in any subsequent contract year.
   (b)   Contracts for Goods. Contracts to purchase goods, where the term does
not exceed three years and the contract price and any contingency established
for change orders, but excluding sales tax or use tax, do not exceed
$250,000.00 in the first contact year, and do not exceed the sum of $250,000.00
and any unexpended monies carried forward from a prior contract year, in any
subsequent contract year.
   (c)   General Services Contracts. Contracts for services associated with the
leasing or licensing of personal property other than hardware or software,
where the term does not exceed seven years, and the contract price and any
price contingency established for change orders, but excluding sales tax or use
tax, do not exceed $85,000.00 in the first contract year, and do not exceed the
sum of $85,000.00 plus any unexpended monies carried forward from a prior
contract year, in any subsequent contract year.
   (d)   Contracts for Studies and Services Related to Private Development.
Professional services contracts for: (1) the preparation of environmental
assessments or other studies deemed necessary by the director of planning and
development services for the processing of applications for private development
projects, or (2) inspection and plan review services deemed necessary by the
director of planning and development services to evaluate conformity of private
development projects with applicable building codes, regardless of the cost or
term thereof, provided the applicant for the private development project
agrees, in writing, to bear responsibility for the entire contract cost, and
the contract does not require the expenditure of city funds in any amount.
   (e)   Rewards. The City Manager may offer and pay rewards where the amount
of the reward does not exceed $25,000.00, in accordance with the procedures of
Section
2.30.800.
   (f)   Emergency Contracts. The City Manager is authorized to expend city
funds for emergency contracts, as defined in Section
2.30.160, without limitation on the contract cost or amount and without
following the contract solicitation and award procedures otherwise required by
this chapter, provided that any procurement of goods and services obtained
during an emergency declared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency shall
comply with applicable FEMA Public Assistance Program's procurement orders,
rules, regulations, guidelines and control procedures for cost reimbursement
purposes. Expenditures made during an emergency must be reported to the Council
at the next regular meeting if approval for such expenditures would otherwise
have been made by the Council. The City Manager may issue a verbal report to
the Council before a written report is delivered.
   (g)   Contracts to Rent, Lease, License, Acquire, Transfer or Purchase
Interests in Real Property from Other Parties. Contracts for the rental,
leasing, licensing, or purchase by installment interests in real property from
other parties for a term of seven years or less, where the contract price does
not exceed $85,000.00 per year, or to encumber or transfer any interest in real
property from other parties for any term of years. The City Manager may enter
into and sign a contract to acquire or purchase an interest in real property,
where the contract price does not exceed $85,000.00.
   (h)   Contracts to Rent, Lease, or License City Real Property to Other
Parties. The authority granted under this Section is distinct from the
authority of the director of community services to grant individuals and groups
permits for the exclusive temporary use of buildings and facilities located in,
and the areas of, city parks and open spaces, as described in
Chapter 22.04 of this municipal code or in the park and open space regulations.
The City Manager may award and sign contracts to rent, lease or license city
real property to other parties regardless of the price for a term not exceeding
three years. Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, the City Manager may enter
into and sign contracts for the rental, lease or licensing of real property at
the Cubberley Community Center for terms of up to five years.
   (i)   Contracts to Provide Municipal Services to other Public Entities or
Utilities. A contract to provide municipal services and functions to any other
public agency, public utility or other public entity in any amount for a term
not exceeding three years, provided the contract is in compliance with all
Council-adopted policies covering such contracts. The authority granted herein
does not include the authority of the City Manager to add permanent employee
positions.
   (j)   Contracts Providing for Indemnity or Risk of Loss. The City Manager,
with the concurrence and approval of the City Attorney and the insurance risk
manager, may enter into and sign contracts, otherwise within the limits of his
or her authority under Section
2.08.140 of this municipal code, that provide for the city or its officers or
employees to defend, indemnify, or assume the risk of damage, loss, or
liability for, or subrogate to any other contracting party respecting claims,
demands, actions, losses or liabilities arising from the city's performance or
non-performance under the contract.
   (k)   Wholesale Utility Commodities and Services Contracts. Wholesale
utility commodities and services contracts, where the term does not exceed five
years and the contract price does not exceed $250,000.00 in any contract year.
   (l)   Software and Hardware Purchase, Licensing, Maintenance and Support
Contracts. Notwithstanding Subsection
2.30.210(c), the City Manager may award and sign contracts other than general
services agreements, including, without limitation, vendor-based standard form
hardware and software purchase and licensing contracts, for the purchase of
hardware and software, the licensing of software, and the maintenance and
support of hardware and software, where the term of licensing or maintenance
and support services does not exceed seven years and the contract price,
excluding sales tax or use tax, does not exceed $85,000.00 per year in the
first contract or fiscal year and does not exceed the sum of $85,000.00 and any
unexpended monies carried forward from a prior fiscal year, in any subsequent
contract or fiscal year. The contracts referred to herein may include contracts
for data storage services, which shall be subject to the city's information
security policies, terms, conditions and other requirements established by the
chief information officer with the concurrence and approval of the City
Attorney.
   (m)   Contracts with a business operator implementing business tax offsets
under Section
2.37.080.
   (n)   Other Contracts. All other types of contracts for which the contract
term does not exceed three years and the total expenditure by the city does not
exceed $85,000.00 in the first contract or fiscal year, and does not exceed the
sum of $85,000.00 and any unexpended monies carried forward from a prior fiscal
year, in any subsequent contract or fiscal year.
(Ord. 5494 §§ 3, 10, 2020: Ord. 5387 § 1 (part), 2016: Ord. 4827 § 1 (part),
2004: Ord. 5607 § 2, 2024)
2.30.220   City Attorney contract award authority.
   The City Attorney may award and sign contracts for legal services,
including, without limitation, services provided by outside counsel,
investigators, consultants and other experts needed for litigation or other
administrative and legal proceedings, to be provided to the city for any time
period, where the contract price and any contingency established for additional
services, but excluding sales tax or use tax, do not exceed the sum of
$85,000.00 in the first contract or fiscal year, and do not exceed the sum of
$85,000.00 and any unexpended monies carried forward from a prior fiscal year,
in any subsequent contract or fiscal year. In addition to the authority
described herein, the City Attorney may sign contracts, where the contract
price exceeds the amounts set forth above, provided the Council has first
approved the use of such services.
(Ord. 5494 § 11, 2020: Ord. 5387 § 1 (part), 2016: Ord. 4827 § 1 (part), 2004)
2.30.225   Wholesale utility commodity transactions.
   The City Manager, the director of utilities and their designated employees
may enter into and execute transactions for wholesale utilities commodities and
services in accordance with the authority, limits and procedures set forth in
the Energy Risk Management Policies Guidelines and Procedures Manual, as
amended from time to time. Employees authorized under this section shall be
authorized in writing and the written authorizations shall be kept on file by
the Procurement Officer.
(Ord. 5494 § 12, 2020: Ord. 5387 § 1 (part), 2016: Ord. 4827 § 1 (part), 2004)
2.30.230   Designated employee purchases of $10,000.00 or less.
   Employees authorized, in writing, by their department heads may award and
sign contracts for the purchase of goods and the procurement of general
services, where the contract price does not exceed $10,000.00 and the contract
term does not exceed one year. All purchases and procurements shall be made in
accordance with the contracting procedures and requirements contained in this
chapter and in the purchasing manual. The written authorizations of department
heads shall be kept on file by the Procurement Officer.
(Ord. 5494 § 14, 2020: Ord. 5387 § 1 (part), 2016: Ord. 4827 § 1 (part), 2004)
2.30.240   Designated employees’ use of petty cash, P-card or other credit
card.
   Employees designated in writing by their department heads, including by
completed P-card authorization request form, may make purchases by using petty
cash or make payments by using a city P-card or other credit card. All
purchases shall be made in accordance with the contracting procedures and
requirements contained in this chapter and in the purchasing manual. The
written authorizations of department heads shall be kept on file by the
Procurement Officer.
(Ord. 5494 § 14, 2020: Ord. 5387 § 1 (part), 2016: Ord. 4827 § 1 (part), 2004)
2.30.250   Council approval or award of contracts.
   The Council shall approve or award and the mayor or vice-mayor shall sign
all contracts for which no contracting or signature authority has been
established under this chapter, unless the Council has authorized a city
officer or employee to negotiate and execute a contract on the city’s behalf
without the further approval of the Council.
(Ord. 5387 § 1 (part), 2016: Ord. 4827 § 1 (part), 2004)
2.30.260   Contracts with terms exceeding one year – Appropriation.
   Any contract with a term exceeding one year shall not be approved by any
city employee with contracting authority under this chapter or the Council,
unless the total amount due and payable by the city over the life of the
contract is appropriated at the time the city assumes the obligation to pay, or
the total amount due and payable during the first full or partial fiscal year
of a multi-fiscal year contract is appropriated and the contract is subject to
annual appropriation by the Council of amounts to become due and payable in
subsequent fiscal years. The requirements of this Section do not apply to
contracts not subject to the debt limit requirements of Article XVI, section 18
of the California Constitution as determined by the City Attorney or designee.
(Ord. 5387 § 1 (part), 2016: Ord. 4827 § 1 (part), 2004)
2.30.270   Delegations of authority to contract.
   This Section establishes the exclusive source of authority to delegate any
authority to contract granted by this chapter. The authority to delegate
contracting authority shall not be implied from any other provision of this
municipal code.
   (a)   Procurement Officer Delegations. The Procurement Officer may delegate
the authority granted under Section
2.30.200, as follows: a city employee holding the position of contract manager
or senior buyer may be authorized to award and sign any contract in an amount
of $50,000.00 or less per year with a term not to exceed three years; and a
city employee holding the position of buyer may be authorized to award and sign
any contract in an amount of $25,000.00 or less per year with a term not to
exceed three years.
   (b)   City Manager Delegations. The City Manager may delegate the authority
to contract granted to the City Manager by this chapter or Section
2.08.140(a)(3) and (5) of this municipal code to an Assistant City Manager and
to the Director of Administrative Services, and, as to wholesale utility
commodities and services contracts and transactions issued thereto, the City
Manager may delegate to the Director of Utilities. If an Assistant City
Manager, the Director of Administrative Services, or the Director of Utilities
is unable to exercise the authority delegated to him or her due to legal or
physical incapacity, constraint, or unavailability, the City Manager may, with
the prior concurrence of the City Attorney, delegate the authority to any other
city employee.
   (c)   City Attorney Delegations. The City Attorney may delegate any
authority to contract granted to the City Attorney by this chapter to a city
employee holding the position of chief assistant city attorney or, if the chief
assistant city attorney is unavailable, assistant city attorney.
   (d)   Delegations to be Written. All delegations of authority shall be in
writing, be dated, and describe the limits of the authority delegated,
including, without limitation, the type, dollar amount, quantity of goods, the
scope of services or authority, and the term of the contracts that may be
executed under the delegation. All delegations of authority shall be kept on
file by the Procurement Officer.
(Ord. 5427 § 2, 2018: Ord. 5387 § 1 (part), 2016: Ord. 4827 § 1 (part), 2004)
2.30.280   Authority to modify and terminate contracts not approved or awarded
by the Council.
   (a)   Each employee with contracting authority conferred by this chapter may
authorize and sign amendments or change orders to contracts he or she awarded
under the authority granted in this chapter subject to the following:
   (1)   All modifications to contracts, including, without limitation, changes
to the scope of work, quantity of goods, price or term shall be made in writing
and accomplished in accordance with the terms of the original contract;
   (2)   The amendment or change order to a contract shall not cause the
contract, as modified, to exceed the monetary or term limits of that city
employee's contracting authority, as described in this chapter, except that the
city employee may extend the term of a contract, with no increase in the
compensation payable, for a period not to exceed six consecutive months beyond
the term limits of his or her contracting authority; and
   (3)   For contracts awarded under an exemption from competitive solicitation
pursuant to Section
2.30.360 or by Council action, the amendment or change order to a contract
shall not cause the contract, as modified, to exceed the scope of the exemption
from competitive solicitation.
   (b)   Each city employee with contacting authority conferred by this chapter
shall have the authority to terminate the contract in accordance with the
contract's terms and conditions.
(Ord. 5494 § 15, 2020: Ord. 5387 § 1 (part), 2016: Ord. 4827 § 1 (part), 2004)
2.30.290   Authority to modify contracts awarded by the Council.
   (a)   The Council, at the time it awards a contract or authorizes a city
officer or employee to award a contract, may also authorize the city officer or
employee to execute an amendment or change order to a contract in an amount
exceeding the monetary or term limits of the officer or employee’s contracting
authority, as described in this chapter. Amendments or change orders made under
the authority granted by the Council shall be accomplished in accordance with
the terms of the original contract or the original contract, as amended, and
shall not cause the contract, as modified, to exceed the limits of the
contracting authority granted by the Council.
   (b)   The City Manager is authorized to enter into and execute on behalf of
the city, without the prior approval of the Council, any amendment or change
order to a contract, previously approved by the Council, that does not increase
the compensation payable under the contract or to accomplish the following:
   (1)   To extend the term of the contract for a period not to exceed six
consecutive months from the last Council-approved contract expiration date;
   (2)   To make minor revisions to the scope of services or delivery schedule;
or
   (3)   To make clerical corrections.
   (c)   The City Manager may approve and sign assignments of contracts,
including, without limitation, leases and licenses, previously approved by the
Council when he or she has determined that the proposed assignee has the
ability, capacity, experience and skill and is otherwise qualified to perform
the contract.
(Ord. 5387 § 1 (part), 2016: Ord. 4827 § 1 (part), 2004)
2.30.295   Limitations on contract authority; authority otherwise conferred.
   (a)   This chapter does not authorize a city officer or employee to award or
sign any contract that the officer or employee is otherwise prohibited from
awarding or signing under the provisions of the City Charter, this municipal
code, or any other applicable law, or other official action of the Council.
   (b)   Nothing in this chapter shall limit any authority conferred by the
Council to a city officer or employee to negotiate and execute any contract on
the Council’s behalf without the further approval of the Council.
(Ord. 5387 § 1 (part), 2016: Ord. 4827 § 1 (part), 2004)
PART 4 – COMPETITIVE SOLICITATION REQUIREMENTS
2.30.300   Public works contracts.
   Public works contracts that are not exempt from the competitive solicitation
requirements under Section
2.30.360 or by Council action shall be solicited, as follows:
   (a)   Public works contracts, providing for an estimated expenditure of
$85,000.00 or less, and not otherwise required to be formally bid by the
Charter, shall be solicited by informal invitation for bids in accordance with
Section
2.30.400.
   (b)   Public works contracts, providing for an estimated expenditure
exceeding $85,000.00, shall be solicited by formal invitation for bids in
accordance with Section
2.30.420.
   (c)   Article VII, Section 6 of the City Charter requires formal bidding for
public works contracts funded by bonded indebtedness of the city or by
assessment against particular property in Palo Alto. Section
2.30.300 requires the formal bidding of all public works contracts exceeding
$85,000.00, unless an exemption is provided by Section
2.30.360 or is otherwise authorized by Council under Section
2.30.300(d).
   (d)   Design-build contracts, to the extent debt financing limitations do
not apply, that provide for an expenditure of more than $85,000.00 shall be
solicited by requests for proposals in accordance with Section
2.30.490. Despite any law to the contrary, the design-build method of delivery
may be used for any public works contract, including, without limitation, any
design-build-operate contracts, where the City Manager determines, in writing,
the delivery method will best fulfill the requirements of the public works
project.
   (e)   The Council may determine that a particular public works project may
be solicited and contracted for by using alternate project delivery methods,
including, without limitation, construction manager at risk or competitive
negotiation. Any Council action authorizing an alternate project delivery
method shall set forth the reasons and factual basis supporting the use of the
alternate project delivery method for the project and describe the solicitation
method to be used and the criteria for determining the successful bidder, to
whom the public works contract should be awarded.
(Ord. 5494 § 16, 2020: Ord. 5387 § 1 (part), 2016: Ord. 4827 § 1 (part), 2004)
2.30.310   Contracts for goods.
   Contracts for goods, not exempt from the competitive solicitation
requirements under Section
2.30.360 or by Council action, shall be solicited, as follows:
   (a)   Contracts for goods, providing for an estimated expenditure by the
city of $50,000.00 or less, shall be solicited by informal invitation for bids
in accordance with the provisions of Section
2.30.400; and
   (b)   Contracts for goods, providing for an estimated expenditure by the
city exceeding $50,000.00, shall be solicited by formal invitation for bids in
accordance with the provision of Section
2.30.420.
(Ord. 5494 § 17, 2020: Ord. 5387 § 1 (part), 2016: Ord. 4827 § 1 (part), 2004)
2.30.320   General services contracts.
   General services contracts, not exempt from the competitive solicitation
requirements under Section
2.30.360 or by Council action, shall be solicited, as follows:
   (a)   General services contracts, providing for an estimated expenditure by
the city not exceeding $50,000.00, shall be solicited by informal invitation
for bids or informal request for proposals in accordance with Section
2.30.400.
   (b)   General services contracts, providing for an estimated expenditure by
the city exceeding $50,000.00 shall be solicited by formal invitation for bids
in accordance with Section
2.30.420 or by formal request for proposals in accordance with Section
2.30.410.
   (c)   The Procurement Officer shall determine, after consideration of
whether the needs of the city or the circumstances require that a contract
should be awarded based on significant factors in addition to price, whether
the services subject to a general services contract shall be solicited by bid
or request for proposals.
(Ord. 5494 § 18, 2020: Ord. 5387 § 1 (part), 2016: Ord. 4827 § 1 (part), 2004)
2.30.330   Professional services contracts.
   Professional services contracts, not exempt from the competitive
solicitation requirements under Section
2.30.360 or by Council action, shall be solicited, as follows:
   (a)   Professional services contracts, providing for an estimated
expenditure by the city not exceeding $85,000.00, shall be solicited by
informal request for proposals in accordance with Section
2.30.400.
   (b)   Professional services contracts, providing for an estimated
expenditure by the city exceeding $85,000.00, shall be solicited by formal
request for proposals in accordance with Section
2.30.410.
   (c)   In lieu of the solicitation requirements set forth in Subsections (a)
and (b), professional services contracts in any amount may be awarded from a
list of qualified professionals to be created and maintained by the Procurement
Officer, so long as the list is created and the award of contract to an entity
on the list is in compliance with procedures contained in this chapter and in
the purchasing manual.
(Ord. 5494 § 19, 2020: Ord. 5387 § 1 (part), 2016: Ord. 4827 § 1 (part), 2004)
2.30.340   Contracts for wholesale utility commodities and services.
   (a)   Solicitation of Contracts.
   (1)   Contracts for the purchase or sale-incidental-to-purchase of wholesale
utility commodities and services, providing for an estimated expenditure not
exceeding $85,000.00, shall be solicited by informal invitation for bids or
informal request for proposals in accordance with Section
2.30.400. Contracts for the purchase or sale-incidental-to-purchase of
wholesale utility commodities and services, providing for an estimated
expenditure exceeding $85,000.00, shall be solicited by formal invitation for
bids, formal request for proposals or combination thereof, in accordance with
Section
2.30.410,
2.30.420 or
2.30.430 or through solicitation of counterparties enabled to transact under a
Council-approved master agreement in accordance with Section
2.30.340(a)(3).
   (2)   Council shall pre-approve standard form master agreement templates for
wholesale utility commodities and services and such agreement shall be made
publicly available.
   (3)   Whenever the city desires to award a contract under a Council-approved
master agreement for wholesale utility commodities and services, any
counterparty which has executed a Council-approved master agreement with the
city, and is otherwise eligible to bid for or propose in regard to the
particular transaction in accordance with the Energy Risk Management Policy,
Guidelines, and Procedures Manual, may be solicited in writing. The
counterparty offering the price and other required product and performance
terms and conditions for wholesale utility commodities and services deemed to
be the most advantageous to the city shall be eligible for an award of contract
respecting the transaction.
   (b)   Delegation of Master Agreement Terms and Conditions. For master
agreements and other contracts for wholesale utility commodities and services
not otherwise within the City Manager's authority to award, the Council may
authorize the City Manager to award and sign contracts with qualified, eligible
counterparties. The Council authorization shall specify the limits of the
authority delegated, including the maximum expenditure limit of the authority
and the terms of the contracts and/or transactions that may be executed under
the delegation of authority.
   (1)   Electricity master agreements. Any Council action delegating authority
to the City Manager to contract for electricity commodities and services shall
specify generally at least the following terms and conditions: quantity and the
description of energy and energy services to be procured, including, without
limitation: on-peak and off-peak energy and ancillary services; term,
specifying a not-to-exceed period of time; period of delivery denoted in years
or months or years and months; and point of delivery.
   (2)   Gas master agreements. Any Council action delegating the authority to
contract for gas commodities and services shall specify generally at least the
following terms and conditions: quantity and the description of gas services to
be procured, including, without limitation: scheduled gas and gas
transportation services; term, specifying a not-to-exceed period of time;
period of delivery denoted in years or months or years and months; and point of
delivery of the locus on the interstate transmission system at which transfer
of title is made.
   (c)   Required Contract Terms for Wholesale Utilities Commodities and
Services Contracts. The city shall use standard form contracts, as practicable,
including, without limitation, form contracts copyrighted by the Edison
Electric Institute, the Western States Power Pool Inc., Inc., the North
American Energy Standards Board, Inc, and contracts used by the city's "feed-in
tariff" energy program. Unless waived by Council action, a contract for gas or
electricity wholesale utility commodities and services, and any amendment to
that contract, shall not be awarded by the city and executed by the duly
authorized representatives of the city, unless the following terms and
conditions are required: (1) governing law shall be the laws of the State of
California; (2) choice of venue shall be the county of Santa Clara; and (3) a
counterparty shall obtain and maintain during the term of the contract the
minimum credit rating established as of the date of award of contract of not
less than a BBB- credit rating established by Standard & Poor’s and a Baa3
credit rating established by Moody's Investors Services.
   (d)   Public Agency Contracts. The city may procure and make sales-
incidental-to-purchase of wholesale utility commodities and services from
energy counterparties through public agencies, including, without limitation,
the Northern California Power Agency and the federal Western Area Power
Administration.
   (1)   The city may engage the public agency to act as the agent of the city
to procure wholesale utility commodities and services, provided that the public
agency conducts a competitive selection process and awards one or more
contracts in substantial compliance with the contract procurement procedures
and requirements of this chapter, unless such substantial compliance is waived
by the Council action accompanied by findings in support of the waiver.
   (2)   The City Attorney shall determine whether the contract procurement
process of the public agency substantially complies with the provisions of this
chapter. For the purposes of this Section
2.30.340, the public agency's competitive selection process, if any, shall be
deemed to substantially comply if the public agency:
   a.   conducts a formal or an informal invitation for bids or request for
proposals process to solicit bids or proposals for the provision of wholesale
utility commodities and services;
   b.   executes a standard form contract, including, without limitation, a
form contract copyrighted by the Edison Electric Institute, the Western States
Power Pool, Inc. Inc., or the North American Energy Standards Board, Inc.; and
   c.   unless waived by the Council, the standard form contract requires or
specifies:
   1.   the governing law shall be the law of the State of California;
   2.   the choice of venue shall be identified according to either the county
in which such public agency does business, or the preference for federal or
state court jurisdiction over the public agency, the energy counterparty, and
the contract; and
   3.   the energy counterparty shall obtain and maintain during the term of
the contract the minimum credit rating established as of the date of award of
contract of not less than a BBB- credit rating established by Standard & Poor’s
and a Baa3 credit rating established by Moody's Investors Services.
   (e)   Energy Risk Management Policy, Guidelines and Procedures Manual. All
procurement of wholesale utility commodities and services, shall conform to the
requirements of the Energy Risk Management Policy, Guidelines and Procedures
Manual.
(Ord. 5494 § 20, 2020: Ord. 5387 § 1 (part), 2016: Ord. 5148 § 1, 2012: Ord.
4827 § 1 (part), 2004)
2.30.350   Contract splitting prohibited.
   It is unlawful to ‘split’ or separate into smaller portions, work orders,
projects, purchases, contracts, or public works projects for the purpose of
evading the competitive solicitation requirements or contract authority
limitations of this chapter, including, without limitation, the ‘splitting’ or
division of work or services between or among offices, departments or divisions
or other organizational units of the city.
(Ord. 5387 § 1 (part), 2016: Ord. 4827 § 1 (part), 2004)
2.30.360   Exemptions from competitive solicitation requirements.
   The following are exemptions from the informal and formal competitive
solicitation requirements of this chapter, except as otherwise provided. These
exemptions will be narrowly interpreted and applied. The department requesting
an exemption shall provide all relevant information supporting the application
of the exemption to the Procurement Officer. Based upon this information, the
Procurement Officer shall make a recommendation to the City Manager and the
City Manager shall determine whether an exemption from the competitive
solicitation requirements applies. Nothing herein is intended to preclude the
use of competitive solicitations, as practicable.
   (a)   Emergency Contracts, provided that any procurement of goods and
services obtained during an emergency declared by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency shall comply with applicable FEMA Public Assistance Program's
orders, rules, regulations, guidelines and control procedures for cost
reimbursement purposes.
   (b)   Whenever solicitations of bids or proposals would for any reason be
impracticable, unavailing or impossible, provided that in the case of a public
works project, the project is not otherwise required by the charter to be
formally bid. These situations are those where solicitations of bids or
proposals would not be useful or produce any operational or financial advantage
for the city. Situations where solicitations of bids or proposals would be
impracticable, unavailing or impossible, include, without limitation, the
following:
   (1)   Contract specifications cannot be drawn in a way that would enable
more than one vendor, consultant or contractor to meet them;
   (2)   Due to circumstances beyond the control of the city, the time
necessary to use the competitive solicitation process, procedures and
requirements would result in a substantial economic loss to the city or the
substantial interference with a required city operation;
   (3)   Special conditions attached to a grant, donation or gift requires the
use of particular goods and/or services.
   All requests for exemptions under this subsection shall be supported by
written documentation (facsimile or electronic mail may be used), approved by
the department head and the Procurement Officer.
   (c)   Where competitive bids or requests for proposals have been solicited
and no bid or proposal has been received, or where no bid or proposal meeting
the requirements of the invitation to bid or request for proposals has been
received, provided that, in the case of a public works project, the project is
not otherwise required by the charter to be formally bid.
   (d)   Contracts for goods, wholesale commodities and services, general
services or professional services available from only one source, where the
Procurement Officer has determined, in writing, there is no adequate substitute
or equivalent provider. Examples of acceptable sole source acquisitions or
purchases may include, without limitation: equipment or services for equipment,
for which there is no comparable competitive product or service except that
provided by the equipment manufacturer, distributor or dealer; proprietary
products sold directly by the manufacturer; a component or replacement part,
for which there is no commercially available substitute and which can be
obtained only from the manufacturer; goods where there is only one authorized
distributor in the area; and goods where compatibility with goods in use by the
city is an overriding consideration. All requests for sole source acquisitions
or purchases shall be supported by written documentation (facsimile or
electronic mail may be used), approved by the office or department head, and
forwarded to the Procurement Officer.
   (e)   Contracts for goods where, pursuant to Section
2.30.900, the City Manager has determined that standardization of the supplies,
materials or equipment is permissible.
   (f)   Placement of insurance coverage and surety bonds.
   (g)   Legal services contracts, including, without limitation, the services
of outside counsel, consultants and other experts needed for litigation,
administrative or other legal proceedings.
   (h)   Professional services contracts for private development related
studies and services whenever the services are funded wholly by private
developers.
   (i)   Professional services contracts, where the estimated total expenditure
by the city, regardless of term, does not exceed $50,000.00.
   (j)   Cooperative purchases, with one or more other public agencies or
through a cooperative purchasing agency, provided: (i) the services are
solicited using methods substantially similar to those required by this
chapter, as determined by the Procurement Officer; and (ii) the contract is
consistent with the requirements specified in this municipal code.
   (k)   The use of another governmental or public agency's contract or
substantially the same contract terms provided: (i) the agency uses a
solicitation method substantially similar to the method required by this
chapter; (ii) the contract is consistent with the requirements specified in
this municipal code; and (iii) the Procurement Officer determines that the city
will realize overall value to utilizing the other agency's contract or contract
terms compared to the city performing its own solicitation.
   (l)   Contracts with, or solicited on the city's behalf by, Northern
California Power Agency, Transmission Agency of Northern California, and
Western Area Power Administration to procure wholesale utility commodities and
services that meet the requirements of Section
2.30.340(d) or
2.30.360(k).
   (m)   Contracts with Pacific Gas and Electric Company and the California
Independent System Operator Corporation for energy transmission services to the
extent necessary and expedient to provide for the general health, safety and
welfare of the city's utility customers.
   (n)   Contracts with any public agency or governmental body to construct a
public work, where the Procurement Officer determines the public agency or
governmental body has used methods similar to those required by this chapter to
contract for the public work.
   (o)   Contracts with any public utility holding a certificate of public
convenience and necessity or any entity holding a cable service or video
service franchise pursuant to
chapter 2.10 of this municipal code to construct a public works, where such
works involves property of such public utility or cable service or video
service franchisee and is otherwise of direct concern to both the city and such
public utility or cable service or video service franchisee, provided that the
project is not otherwise required by the charter to be formally bid.
   (p)   Contracts with private developers to construct public improvements in
connection with their development projects, even if the city contributes funds
to the improvement project, provided that the projects are not otherwise
required by the charter to be formally bid.
   (q)   Projects, where the public work is performed by the city with its own
employees.
   (r)   Contracts, where the estimated total expenditure by the city does not
exceed $10,000.00.
   (s)   Contracts with entities to procure at wholesale prices utility
commodities and services under a city "feed-in tariff" energy program that
meets the requirements of Section
2.30.340(c).
   (t)   Professional services contracts in relation to personnel matters for:
recruitment consultants, workplace investigations, threat assessments, conflict
intervention, and industrial safety.
(Ord. 5494 § 21, 2020: Ord. 5387 § 1 (part), 2016: Ord. 5148 § 2, 2012: Ord.
5081 § 1, 2010: Ord. 4827 § 1 (part), 2004)
PART 5 – COMPETITIVE SOLICITATION PROCEDURES
2.30.400   Informal invitation for bids or requests for proposals.
   (a)   An informal invitation for bids or requests for proposals may be
solicited by any reasonable means, including, without limitation, mail,
telephone, facsimile transmission, e-mail or posting to the city's web site.
Quotations shall be solicited from a minimum of three bidders or proposers; if
quotations from three bidders or proposers cannot be obtained by the exercise
of due diligence, quotations shall be solicited from less than three bidders or
proposers, as practicable. The Procurement Officer shall maintain a record of
all informal invitations for bids and informal requests for proposals received
by the city for a period of time in compliance with California law and the
city's records retention schedule.
   (b)   An informal invitation for bids shall be awarded to the lowest
responsive and responsible bidders, as described in Section
2.30.440.
   (c)   An informal request for proposals shall be awarded on the basis of the
proposal deemed most advantageous to the city based on the factors set forth in
Section
2.30.410(e).
   (d)   If a contract, price quotation, or purchase order is made or awarded
to other than the consultant or contractor submitting the lowest price in its
quotation, bid or proposal, the Procurement Officer shall prepare the record of
the transaction, in writing, containing the reasons or grounds for the decision
to award the contract.
(Ord. 5494 § 22, 2020: Ord. 5387 § 1 (part), 2016: Ord. 4827 § 1 (part), 2004)
2.30.410   Formal request for proposals.
   (a)   Advertising. Contracts that must be solicited by formal request for
proposals shall be solicited by notice requesting proposals by advertising the
notices requesting proposals on the City’s website for no fewer than five days
prior to the date set for the submission of proposals. As practicable,
proposals shall be solicited from a minimum of three proposers.
   (b)   Proposal submittal. The request for proposals shall specify the date,
time and place for submitting proposals and describe the scope and time frame
for the delivery of the proposed solution requested, the information to be
submitted by the proposer, and the criteria for evaluating the proposal.
   (c)   Proposal opening. Proposals received after the specified date and time
shall not be accepted and shall be returned unopened unless opening is
necessary for identification purposes.
   (d)   Award. The contract shall be awarded on the basis of the proposal
deemed most advantageous to the city.
   (e)   The following factors shall be considered in determining the proposal
deemed most advantageous to the city:
   (1)   Quality of the proposal;
   (2)   Quality, performance and effectiveness of the solution, goods and/or
services to be provided by the consultant or the contractor;
   (3)   Consultant or contractor’s experience, including the experience of
staff to be assigned to the project, with engagements of similar scope and
complexity;
   (4)   Cost to the city;
   (5)   Consultant or contractor’s financial condition and stability;
   (6)   Consultant or contractor’s ability to perform the contract within the
time specified;
   (7)   Consultant or contractor’s prior record of performance with the city
or other local, county or state agency, if applicable;
   (8)   Consultant or contractor’s ability to provide in the future any
maintenance, repairs, parts and/or services, if applicable;
   (9)   Consultant or contractor’s compliance with applicable laws,
regulations, policies (including city policies), guidelines and orders
governing prior or existing contracts performed by the consultant or
contractor; and
   (10)   Any other factor or factors the city deems relevant as specified in
the request for proposals.
(Ord. 5494 § 23, 2020: Ord. 5387 § 1 (part), 2016: Ord. 4827 § 1 (part), 2004)
2.30.420   Formal invitation for bids – Notice, submittal, opening.
   (a)   Advertising. Contracts that must be solicited by formal invitation for
bids shall be solicited by notices inviting bids by advertising the notices
inviting bids on the City's website for no fewer than five days prior to the
date set for receiving bids. As practicable, bids shall be solicited from a
minimum of three bidders.
   (b)   Notice. The notices inviting bids shall generally describe the goods
and/or services to be purchased or acquired or the public works to be
constructed, identify the place where the bid proposal form, specifications and
other contract documents may be obtained, and specify the date, time and place
when and where bids will be opened.
   (c)   Bid Submittal. All bids shall be sealed. All bids shall be submitted
at the place, and at or before the date and time, specified in the notice
inviting bids. Bids received after the specified date and time shall not be
accepted and shall be returned to the bidder unopened unless the opening is
necessary for identification purposes.
   (d)   Bid Opening. Bids timely received shall be opened in public, at the
date, time and place specified in the notice inviting bids, and the aggregate
bid of each bidder shall be announced.
(Ord. 5494 § 24, 2020: Ord. 5387 § 1 (part), 2016: Ord. 4827 § 1 (part), 2004)
2.30.430   Combined request for proposals and invitation for bids.
   (a)   Nothing in Part 5 of this chapter shall prohibit the city from
conducting a competitive solicitation process which combines the elements of
the request for proposals and invitation for bids processes in a single process
in order to award a contract for wholesale utility commodities and services or
design-build contracts.
(Ord. 5494 § 25, 2020: Ord. 5387 § 1 (part), 2016: Ord. 4827 § 1 (part), 2004)
2.30.440   Determination of lowest responsive/responsible bidder.
   The awarding authority shall award contracts required to be formally bid to
the lowest responsive and responsible bidder. As used in this chapter “awarding
authority” means the city officer or employee with the authority to award and
sign the particular contract, as provided in part three of this chapter, or the
Council.
   (a)   Low Bid. The low bid shall be the bid offering the lowest total cost
to the city.
   (1)   The determination of lowest total cost shall be made after applying
relevant policies adopted by resolution of the Council that may provide for a
price preference.
   (2)   Where ‘add alternate’ or ‘deduct alternate’ items are included in the
specifications, the determination of lowest total cost shall be made in
accordance with the procedure for considering the ‘add alternate’ and ‘deduct
alternate’ items as set forth in the bid specifications.
   (3)   The determination of lowest total cost may include the effect of
factors such as trade discounts, delivery costs and life cycle costs, when
these are included in the specifications.
   (b)   Responsive Bid. A responsive bid is a bid determined by the awarding
authority to conform in all material respects to the requirements of the bid
documents.
   (c)   Responsible Bidder. A responsible bidder is a bidder determined by the
awarding authority:
   (1)   To have demonstrated the attribute of trustworthiness, and to have the
quality, fitness, capacity, experience, and skill to satisfactorily perform the
work, or provide the goods and/or services called for in the invitation for
bids;
   (2)   To have the ability to perform the contract within the time specified;
   (3)   To have the equipment, facilities and resources of such capacity and
location to enable the bidder to perform the contract;
   (4)   To have the ability to provide, as required, future maintenance,
repair, parts and service for the use of goods purchased;
   (5)   To have a record of satisfactory or better performance under prior
contracts with the city or others; and
   (6)   To have complied with applicable laws, regulations, policies
(including city policies), guidelines and orders governing prior or existing
contracts performed by the bidder.
(Ord. 5494 § 26, 2020: Ord. 5387 § 1 (part), 2016: Ord. 4827 § 1 (part), 2004)
2.30.450   Tie bids.
   If an identical price is received from two or more responsive and
responsible bidders, the awarding authority may determine the successful bidder
by the casting of lots in public and in the presence of the tie bidders, at a
date, time and place set by the awarding authority. The awarding authority
shall provide notice to the tie bidders of the date, time and place for casting
lots by e-mail, phone or facsimile transmission.
(Ord. 5387 § 1 (part), 2016: Ord. 4827 § 1 (part), 2004)
2.30.460   Correction or withdrawal of bids or proposals.
   (a)   Before date and time for receipt of bids or proposals. Bids or
proposals that contain mistakes discovered by a bidder or proposer before the
date and time for receipt of bids or proposals may be modified or withdrawn by
written notice to the employee designated for the receipt of bids or proposals
received prior to the deadline for receipt of bids or proposals. Any
modification shall be filed under seal with the employee designated for receipt
of bids and proposals.
   (b)   After date and time for receipt of bids or proposals. A bidder or
proposer may not change its bid or proposal after the date and time set for the
receipt of bids or proposals, except that the bidder or proposer may seek the
city’s consent to the substitution of a subcontractor where the bidder can
demonstrate in accordance with California law, including Section 4107.5 of the
California Public Contract Code, that the name of the a substituted
subcontractor was listed as a result of an inadvertent clerical error.
   (c)   Withdrawal of Bids or Proposals. A bidder or proposer alleging a
mistake in a bid or proposal may be permitted to withdraw its bid or proposal
only in conformance with California law, including Section 5100, et seq., of
the California Public Contract Code.
(Ord. 5387 § 1 (part), 2016: Ord. 4827 § 1 (part), 2004)
2.30.470   Cancellation of solicitations -- Rejections of bids/proposals.
   (a)   Cancellation of Solicitations. The Procurement Officer may cancel the
solicitations for proposals or bids process before the date and time set for
the receipt of proposals or bids upon a written determination at the time the
notice of cancellation is provided that such action is in the city’s best
interest for reasons, including, without limitation, any of the following:
   (1)   The city does not then require the construction of the public works
project or the provision of goods and/or services;
   (2)   The city will not then appropriate fund for the public works project,
goods and/or services; or
   (3)   Proposed amendments to the solicitation document would make a new
solicitation desirable and necessary.
   (b)   Rejection of Bids or proposals. The awarding authority may reject any
or all bids or proposals. If all bids or proposals are rejected, the awarding
authority may exercise the discretion to resolicit for bids or proposals. In
the case of a bid, if the awarding authority is the Council and all bids would
be rejected due to prices or costs that exceed the city’s costs estimate, the
Procurement Officer may exercise the discretion to reject all bids and to re-
solicit bids.
(Ord. 5387 § 1 (part), 2016: Ord. 4827 § 1 (part), 2004)
2.30.480   Waiver of minor irregularities, defects and informalities.
   The awarding authority may exercise its discretion to waive minor
irregularities, defects or informalities in the bids or proposals, provided the
waiver would not affect the amount of the bid or proposal or give a competitive
advantage upon the bidder or proposer an advantage over others.
(Ord. 5387 § 1 (part), 2016: Ord. 4827 § 1 (part), 2004)
2.30.485   Delegation of awarding authority determinations.
   The awarding authority may delegate to the Procurement Officer the
implementation of a determination by the awarding authority under Sections
2.30.440;
2.30.450;
2.30.470(b); and
2.30.480 of this chapter. Where the awarding authority is Council, Council
hereby delegates to the Procurement Officer the implementation of
determinations by Council as the awarding authority under Sections
2.30.440;
2.30.450;
2.30.470(b); and
2.30.480 of this chapter.
(Ord. 5494 § 27, 2020)
2.30.490   Design-build contract procurement procedures.
   This Section establishes the exclusive procedures for the award of wholly or
partially city-funded design-build contracts, to the extent debt financing
limitations do not apply, and supersedes in their entirety all statutory
provisions pertaining to local agency design-build construction, as set forth
in chapter 4 of part 3 of division 2 of the California Public Contract Code,
Section 22160 et seq., as amended from time to time.
   (a)   Bridging documents shall be prepared by a qualified, licensed design
professional, identifying the scope and estimated price or costs of the public
works project and including additional requirements or information necessary to
adequately describe the city's needs for the project. These may include,
without limitation, the size, type, and desired design character of the
project, the performance specifications covering the quality of supplies,
materials, equipment, and workmanship, or preliminary plans or building layout
plans. The design professional, which prepares the bridging documents, may not
subsequently submit or participate in the proposal submitted for an award of
design-build contract, or have any financial interest in any design-build
entity or team which submits a design-build contract construction proposal or
which provides the design-build services.
   (b)   A formal request for proposals may be posted and advertised in manner
provided for in Section
2.30.410(a), or by targeted distribution to three or more design-build entities
or teams which the Procurement Officer determines possesses demonstrated
skills, experience, and financial qualifications to provide the required
design-build services.
   (c)   A formal request for proposals shall comply with the requirements of
Section
2.30.410(a) and shall include: the bridging documents prepared according to
Section
2.30.490(a); a request for qualifications; and the design-build contract
documents approved by the City Attorney as required by this chapter.
   (d)   Design-build entities and teams may be required to pre-qualify in
order to be eligible to submit a proposal for the design-build project by
responding to the request for qualifications in advance of the date set for the
submission of proposals. The Procurement Officer may determine and will provide
notice that the statement of qualifications may be submitted concurrently with
the proposals.
   (e)   The design-build contract may be awarded to the responsive,
responsible design-build entity or team on the basis of either the lowest lump-
sum price or the 'best value' provided, as defined in the formal request for
proposals. A design-build contract that is awarded on the 'best value' basis
will be evaluated based solely on the selection criteria and procedures set
forth in the formal request for proposals.
   (f)   The design-build contract shall require the design-build entity or
team and its subcontractors of every tier to comply with the requirements of
Section 22164(c) of the California Public Contract Code, as amended.
(Ord. 5494 § 28, 2020: Ord. 5387 § 1 (part), 2016)
PART 6 – CONTRACT TERMS AND CONDITIONS
2.30.500   Bid security, bonds and insurance.
   (a)   When Required. The Procurement Officer is authorized to require bid
security and surety bonds, including payment and performance bonds, as well as
specific types and amounts of insurance coverage in connection with contracts
for public works, goods, general services, professional services, and wholesale
utility commodities and services to the extent required by California or
federal law, or this chapter, or upon a determination that it is in the best
interest of the city to do so by the City Manager or, if the City Manager does
not make a determination, by the Procurement Officer in consultation with the
City Attorney.
   (b)   Bid Security. Bid security shall be submitted with the bid and shall
be in the form of a certified check, cashier’s check or surety bond. Any surety
bond shall be issued by an admitted surety authorized to conduct business in
the State of California and shall be in a form acceptable to the City Attorney
and as specified in the solicitation for bids document. If a bidder fails to
submit the required bid security with the bid, the bid shall be deemed
nonresponsive. After bids are opened, bid security shall be irrevocable for the
period specified in the invitation for bids. If the successful bidder fails to
execute the contract within the time specified, the total amount of the bid
security shall be forfeited to the city. The bid security of an unsuccessful
bidder shall be returned to the bidder by no later than sixty days from the
date of contract award. Bids for public works projects costing in excess of
$85,000.00 shall require the submission of bid security in an amount equal to
at least ten percent of the bid. On public works projects costing $85,000.00 or
less, and all other procurements of goods and services without regard to price,
the Procurement Officer is authorized to determine whether any bid security in
any amount shall be required on a project-by-project basis.
   (c)   Surety bonds. Payment and performance security shall be required of
contractors and take the form of surety bonds acceptable to the City Attorney
and issued by an admitted surety authorized to conduct business in the State of
California. Contracts for public works projects costing in excess of $25,000.00
shall require the submission of payment bond and performance bond, each in an
amount equal to one hundred percent of the contract price at the time the
contract is executed. Where the contract is with a governmental agency or a
public utility the requirement for performance and payment security may be
waived, in writing, by the Procurement Officer if the contracting governmental
agency or public utility agrees, in writing, that, to the extent all work is
not to be done by its own employees, it will require any and all contractors it
awards contracts for the performance of any of the work to provide, before
commencement of the work, the payment bond and performance bond, on terms and
conditions it establishes, which is satisfactory to the Procurement Officer and
complying with the provisions of applicable California law. Payment bond and
performance bond for public works projects shall be extended in the full amount
of the contract for a one-year warranty period beyond the date of acceptance of
the public works project by the city. On public work projects costing
$25,000.00 or less, and on all acquisitions of goods and services without
regard to price, the Procurement Officer is authorized to determine whether any
payment and performance security in any amount shall be required on a case-by-
case basis.
   (d)   Form of Bonds. The only bonds acceptable to the city shall be those
executed on forms approved by the City Attorney and as specified in the
invitation for bids or request for proposals.
   (e)   Insurance. The insurance risk manager acting on behalf of the City
Manager by the authority conferred by Section
2.28.170 of this municipal code shall determine the insurance requirements to
be imposed upon any third party doing business with the city pursuant to this
chapter. The successful bidder or proposer shall submit certificates of
insurance and endorsement forms, as applicable, as evidence that it has
obtained and will maintain the types and amounts of insurance coverages
required by the bid or proposal solicitation documents. Such evidence shall be
submitted to the Procurement Officer promptly upon request and shall be issued
by an admitted insurer authorized to conduct business in the State of
California and is acceptable to the city. The insurance risk manager may waive
the insurance requirement where the contract is an intergovernmental agency
contract or a city-public utility contract, and the governmental, public or
quasi-public agency or the public utility, to whom the contract is awarded,
agrees, in writing, that it will obtain and maintain and provide evidence of
the required insurance coverage before the commencement of work, naming the
city, its officials, officers, employees and agents as additional insureds to
such policy.
(Ord. 5494 § 29, 2020: Ord. 5387 § 1 (part), 2016: Ord. 4827 § 1 (part), 2004)
2.30.510   Nondiscrimination.
   All contracts costing in excess of $10,000.00 shall include a certification
of nondiscrimination that in the performance of the contract with the city, the
consultant or the contractor will not discriminate in the employment of any
person due to that person's race, skin color, gender, gender identity, age,
religion, disability, national origin, ancestry, sexual orientation, pregnancy,
genetic information or condition, housing status, marital status, familial
status, weight or height of such person.
   Any consultant or contractor who is found in violation of any federal, state
or local nondiscrimination law in the performance of any contract with the
city, thereby shall be found in material breach of such contract and thereupon
the city shall have the power to cancel or suspend the contract, in whole or in
part, or to deduct from the amount payable to such contractor the sum of $1,000
for each person for each calendar day during which the City Manager determines
such person was subject to discriminatory conduct or action by the consultant
or the contractor or any officer, employee, agent or representative of the
consultant or the contractor, as damages for breach of contract, or both. Only
a finding of the U.S. Department of Labor, the U.S. Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission, State of California Fair Employment Practices
Commission, or the equivalent federal agency or office shall constitute
evidence of a violation of contract under this Section.
(Ord. 5387 § 1 (part), 2016: Ord. 4827 § 1 (part), 2004)
PART 7 – ETHICS IN CONTRACTING
2.30.600   Ethics.
   (a)   Statement of Policy. City employees shall discharge their duties
impartially so as to assure fair competitive access to city contracting
opportunities by responsible consultants and contractors. Moreover, they shall
conduct themselves in a manner as will foster public confidence in the
integrity of city contracting policies, procedures and activities.
   (b)   Conflict of Interest. No city employee shall participate directly or
indirectly in a city contract when the employee knows that:
   (1)   The employee or any member of the employee’s immediate family has a
financial interest pertaining to the contract; or
   (2)   The employee or any member of the employee’s immediate family is
negotiating or has an employment arrangement which is contingent upon or will
be affected by the contract.
   (c)   Withdrawal from Participation. Upon the discovery of an actual or
potential conflict of interest, an employee shall promptly withdraw from
further participation in the contract procurement process.
   (d)   Gratuities. No person shall offer, give or agree to give any city
employee any gratuity, discount or offer of employment in connection with the
award of a contract by the city. No city employee shall solicit, demand, accept
or agree to accept from any other person a gratuity, discount or an offer of
employment in connection with a city contract.
(Ord. 5387 § 1 (part), 2016: Ord. 4827 § 1 (part), 2004)
2.30.610   Preparation of bid or proposal documents.
   In accordance with State conflict of interest law, a contractor or
consultant that prepares, advises or assists in the preparation of plans and/or
specifications that will be included as part of an invitation for bids or
request for proposals shall be ineligible: (i) to submit a bid or proposal
under that invitation for bids or request for proposals; (ii) to be a
subcontractor or sub-consultant under a bid or proposal under that invitation
for bids or request for proposals; and (iii) to be a subcontractor or sub-
consultant under (or have any interest in) a contract arising from that
invitation for bids or request for proposals. This ineligibility shall not
apply where a single entity acts as both the designer and builder of the same
project pursuant to a design-build procurement contract or other alternative
procurement method-based contract as may be permitted by law. Nothing in this
section is intended to differ from State conflict of interest law, as may be
amended from time to time, and in the event of a conflict between this section
and State conflict of interest law, State conflict of interest law shall
control.
(Ord. 5494 § 30, 2020: Ord. 5387 § 1 (part), 2016: Ord. 4827 § 1 (part), 2004)
PART 6A — SURVEILLANCE AND PRIVACY PROTECTIONS
2.30.620   Title.
   This Part 6A shall be known as the Surveillance and Privacy Protection
Ordinance.
(Ord. 5450 § 2 (part), 2018)
2.30.630   Council approval required for contracts, agreements, grant
applications and donations involving surveillance technology.
   The Council shall approve each of the following:
   (a)   Applications for grants, acceptance of state or federal funds, or
acceptance of in-kind or other donations of surveillance technology;
   (b)   Notwithstanding any delegation of authority to award contracts in this
chapter, contracts of any type and any amount that include acquisition of new
surveillance technology;
   (c)   Use of Council-approved surveillance technology for a purpose, in a
manner, or in a location outside the scope of prior Council approval; or
   (d)   Agreements with a non-city entity to acquire, share, or otherwise use
surveillance technology or the information it provides.
(Ord. 5494 § 31, 2020: Ord. 5450 § 2 (part), 2018)
2.30.640   Council approval of surveillance use policy.
   The Council shall approve a surveillance use policy addressing each activity
that it approves that is listed in Section
2.30.630. If no current surveillance use policy covers an approved activity,
Council shall adopt a new policy or amend an existing policy to address the new
activity.
(Ord. 5494 § 32, 2020: Ord. 5450 § 2 (part), 2018)
2.30.650   Information required.
   Unless it is not reasonably possible or feasible to do so, before Council
approves a new activity listed in Section
2.30.630, the city should make available to the public a surveillance
evaluation and a proposed surveillance use policy for the proposed activity.
(Ord. 5494 § 33, 2020: Ord. 5450 § 2 (part), 2018)
2.30.660   Determination by Council that benefits outweigh costs and concerns.
   Before approving any new activity listed in Section
2.30.630, the Council shall assess whether the benefits of the surveillance
technology outweigh its costs. The Council should consider all relevant
factors, including financial and operational impacts, enhancements to services
and programs, and impacts on privacy, civil liberties, and civil rights.
(Ord. 5494 § 34, 2020: Ord. 5450 § 2 (part), 2018)
2.30.670   Oversight following Council approval.
   Beginning after the close of fiscal year 2019 and annually thereafter, the
city shall produce and make available to the public an annual surveillance
report. The annual surveillance report should be noticed as an informational
report to the Council. The Council may calendar the annual surveillance report
or any specific technology included in the report for further discussion or
action, and may direct that (a) use of the surveillance technology be modified
or ended; (b) the surveillance use policy be modified; or (c) other steps be
taken to address Council and community concerns.
(Ord. 5494 § 35, 2020: Ord. 5450 § 2 (part), 2018)
2.30.680   Definitions.
   The following definitions apply to this section:
   (a)   "Annual surveillance report" means a written report, submitted after
the close of the fiscal year and that includes the following information with
respect to the prior fiscal year:
   (1)   A description of how each Council-approved surveillance technology was
used, including whether it captured images, sound, or information regarding
members of the public who are not suspected of engaging in unlawful conduct;
   (2)   Whether and how often data acquired through the use of the
surveillance technology was shared with outside entities, the name of any
recipient entity, the types of data disclosed, and the reason for the
disclosure;
   (3)   A summary of any community complaints or concerns about the
surveillance technology;
   (4)   Non-privileged and non- confidential information regarding the results
of any internal audits, information about violations of the surveillance use
policy, and any actions taken in response;
   (5)   Whether the surveillance technology has been effective at achieving
its identified purpose;
   (6)   The number and nature of Public Records Act requests relating to the
surveillance technology;
   (7)   Annual costs for the surveillance technology and for compliance with
this surveillance and privacy protection ordinance, including personnel and
other ongoing costs, and sources of funding; and
   (8)   Other relevant information as determined by the City Manager.
   The annual surveillance report will not include information that may
compromise the integrity or limit the effectiveness of a law enforcement
investigation.
   (b)   "Surveillance evaluation" means written information, including as part
of a staff report, including:
   (1)   A description of the surveillance technology, including how it works
and what information it captures;
   (2)   Information on the proposed purpose, use and benefits of the
surveillance technology;
   (3)   The location or locations where the surveillance technology may be
used;
   (4)   Existing federal, state and local laws and regulations applicable to
the surveillance technology and the information it captures; the potential
impacts on civil liberties and privacy; and proposals to mitigate and manage
any impacts;
   (5)   The costs for the surveillance technology, including acquisition,
maintenance, personnel and other costs, and current or potential sources of
funding.
   (c)   "Surveillance technology" means any device or system primarily
designed and actually used or intended to be used to collect and retain audio,
electronic, visual, location, or similar information constituting personally
identifiable information associated with any specific individual or group of
specific individuals, for the purpose of tracking, monitoring or analysis
associated with that individual or group of individuals. Examples of
surveillance technology include drones with cameras or monitoring capabilities,
automated license plate readers, closed-circuit cameras/televisions, cell-site
simulators, biometrics-identification technology and facial- recognition
technology. For the purposes of this chapter, "surveillance technology" does
not include:
   (1)   Any technology that collects information exclusively on or regarding
city employees or contractors;
   (2)   Standard word-processing software; publicly available databases; and
standard message tools and equipment, such as voicemail, email, and text
message tools;
   (3)   Information security tools such as web filtering, virus detection
software;
   (4)   Audio and visual recording equipment used exclusively at open and
public events, or with the consent of members of the public;
   (5)   Medical devices and equipment used to diagnose, treat, or prevent
disease or injury;
   (6)   Any technology used as part of the Foothills Fire Early Warning System
to detect fires within the following area:
   West Side: Skyline Blvd (Hwy 35) from Route 84 (Woodside Rd/La Honda Rd.) to
Hwy 9
   North Side: Route 84 from Skyline to Alameda de las Pulgas
   East Side: Alameda de las Pulgas to Santa Cruz Ave to Junipero Serra Rd. to
Foothill Expwy.
   South Side: Draw a line from the intersection of Hwy 9 at Hwy 35 to the
intersection of Foothill Expwy at Magdalena.
   (d)   "Surveillance use policy" means a stand-alone policy or a section in a
comprehensive policy that is approved by Council and contains:
   (1)   The intended purpose of the surveillance technology.
   (2)   Uses that are authorized, any conditions on uses, and uses that are
prohibited.
   (3)   The information that can be collected by the surveillance technology.
   (4)   The safeguards that protect information from unauthorized access,
including, but not limited to, encryption, access-control, and access oversight
mechanisms.
   (5)   The time period for which information collected by the surveillance
technology will be routinely retained; the process by which the information is
regularly deleted after that period lapses; and conditions and procedures for
retaining information beyond that period.
   (6)   If and how non-city entities can access or use the information,
including conditions and rationales for sharing information, and any
obligations imposed on the recipient of the information.
   (7)   A description of compliance procedures, including functions and roles
of city officials, internal recordkeeping, measures to monitor for errors or
misuse, and corrective procedures that may apply.
(Ord. 5555 § 2, 2022: Ord. 5494 § 36, 2020: Ord. 5450 § 2 (part), 2018)
2.30.690   No private right of action.
   This surveillance and privacy protection ordinance is not intended and shall
not be interpreted to create a private right of action for damages or equitable
relief on behalf of any person or entity against the city or any of its
officers or employees.
(Ord. 5450 § 2 (part), 2018)
PART 8 – RECORDS AND REPORTS
2.30.700   Records, public inspection.
   (a)   Records Maintenance. The Procurement Officer shall maintain written
records for each contract, price quotation, purchase order, document or other
agreement awarded or entered into by the city, which shall include, at a
minimum: the request from the department; the bid or proposal documents
received for the contract, if any; all bids or proposals received; the basis on
which the contract award was made; and a copy of any and all contracts awarded.
The Procurement Officer shall maintain and retain written records of any
determination to cancel solicitation documents and of an awarding authority’s
decision to reject bids or proposals. Such records shall be retained for a
period of time in compliance with California law and the city’s records
retention schedule, and the records shall be made available for public
inspection during normal city business hours. The foregoing provisions shall
not apply to records of wholesale utility commodities and services transactions
retained under master agreements referred to in Section
2.30.140, which shall be maintained by the department of utilities.
   (b)   Public Inspection. Bids shall be available for public inspection
following the date and time set for receipt of bids. Proposals shall be
available for public inspection consistent with State public records law, as
may be amended from time to time. This Section shall not be construed to
require the disclosure of records that are otherwise exempt from inspection and
copying by law.
(Ord. 5494 § 37, 2020: Ord. 5387 § 1 (part), 2016: Ord. 4827 § 1 (part), 2004)
2.30.710   City Manager reports.
   (a)   City Manager shall make a biannual report to the Council of all
contracts for professional services or general services awarded by the City
Manager, the Procurement Officer or other designated employees, the costs of
which exceed $25,000.00, and of all contracts awarded by the City Manager for
public works and goods, the costs of which exceed $85,000.00.
   (b)   The City Manager shall prepare and deliver an annual report to the
Council of all leases, licenses and rentals of city real property with third
parties, approved by the City Manager.
(Ord. 5494 § 38, 2020: Ord. 5387 § 1 (part), 2016: Ord. 4827 § 1 (part), 2004)
PART 9 – REWARDS
2.30.800   Rewards relating to arrest and conviction.
   The authority to offer and pay a reward leading to the arrest and conviction
of a criminal is reasonably contemplated by this chapter to the extent an
expenditure of city funds in return for valuable information can be considered
payment for the rendering of services to the city, as contemplated by Section
2.30.010.
   (a)   The City Manager is authorized to offer and pay a reward of up to
$25,000.00 for information leading to the arrest and conviction of any person
or persons whose willful conduct causes unlawful injury or death to another
person, or whose willful misconduct results in unlawful damage or destruction
of personal property of the city or another person. The City Manager shall
cause the reward offer to be publicized and reported to the Council.
   (b)   A reward shall not be paid unless the information is received by the
Palo Alto Police Department within ninety days of publication of the reward
offer.
   (c)   Conviction of the person or persons found responsible for the crime
shall be required for payment of a reward unless the City Manager makes a
written finding that the conviction, determination of guilt, or finding of
responsibility was impossible due to the death of the criminal.
   (d)   Reward claims shall be made, in writing, and the claimant shall
provide his or her name, address and telephone number. Unless disclosure is
authorized by the claimant, this information shall be deemed confidential and
protected from public disclosure to the maximum extent permitted by California
law.
   (e)   Each reward offer shall be made, in writing, and shall be valid only
if approved in advance as to form and in compliance with this Section by the
City Attorney.
(Ord. 5494 § 39, 2020: Ord. 5387 § 1 (part), 2016: Ord. 4827 § 1 (part), 2004)
PART 10 – STANDARDIZATION
2.30.900   Standardization.
   Where the City Manager has determined that it is required by the health,
safety or welfare of the people or employees of the city, or that significant
costs savings have been demonstrated, the standardization of supplies,
materials or equipment, including, without limitation, information technology
property, for purchase or to be used in a public works project is permitted and
the supplies, materials or equipment specifications may specify a single brand
or trade name. The City Manager may consider the following factors in
determining to standardize on a single brand or trade name:
   (a)   Repair and maintenance costs would be minimized;
   (b)   User personnel training would be facilitated thereby;
   (c)   Supplies or spare parts would be minimized;
   (d)   Modifications to existing equipment would not be necessary;
   (e)   Training of repair and maintenance personnel would be minimized; and
   (f)   Matching existing supplies, materials or equipment is required for
proper operation of a function or program.
(Ord. 5494 § 40, 2020: Ord. 5387 § 1 (part), 2016: Ord. 4827 § 1 (part), 2004)
Chapter 2.31
PROPERTY CONTROL
Sections:
   
2.31.010   Surplus property and equipment - Disposal or destruction.
   
2.31.020   Police chief to receive unclaimed property.
   
2.31.030   Holding and storage of unclaimed property.
   
2.31.040   Disposition of lost, stolen or abandoned property other than
vehicles.
   
2.31.050   Abandoned vehicles.
   
2.31.060   Finder may reclaim property or money.
   
2.31.070   Unclaimed money to be deposited in general fund.
   
2.31.080   Disposition of proceeds of sale.
   
2.31.090   Sale to vest title.
   
2.31.100   Proceedings where no bid.
   
2.31.110   Dangerous or perishable property.
   
2.31.120   Sections not applicable.
2.31.010   Surplus property and equipment - Disposal or destruction.
   (a)   Authority of Director of Administrative Services. All using
departments shall submit to the director of administrative services, at such
times and in such form as the director shall prescribe, reports showing all
property which is no longer used or which has been obsolete or worn out. The
director of administrative services shall have authority to sell all property
which cannot be used by any department or which has become unsuitable for city
use, by negotiated sales, through the acceptance of sealed bids, by public
auction, or by exchange or trade-in for new property and equipment. The
director of administrative services may in writing delegate any authority
granted to the director pursuant to this chapter with respect to property
valued at less than $5,000.00.
   (b)   Property with No Commercial Value. The city manager may authorize the
abandonment, destruction or donation to public bodies, charitable, civic or
nonprofit organizations, of city property which has no commercial value or of
which the estimated cost of continued care, handling, maintenance or storage
would exceed the estimated proceeds of sale. Such determination shall be made
in writing and countersigned by the director of administrative services.
   (c)   Donations to Nonprofit Support Organizations. Notwithstanding any
other provisions of this chapter, the city manager may adopt polices and
procedures authorizing the donation of surplus property that is no longer
suitable for use by the city to nonprofit organizations that are formed for the
purpose of supporting city programs. The city's donation of surplus property
shall be contingent on a written agreement that any profits from the sale of
such items shall be used for the purchase of equipment, books or capital
expenses related to the program supported by the nonprofit organization.
   (d)   Annual Report to Council. The city manager shall identify all property
donated to nonprofit agencies pursuant to subsection (b) or (c) above. In
January of each year, the city manager shall provide a report to the city
council that includes an inventory of the items donated by the city and all
contributions made to the city from nonprofit organizations that have received
surplus city property.
   (e)   The city manager may delegate any authority granted to the manager
pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. 5019 § 2, 2008: Ord. 4462 § 2, 1997: Ord. 3927 § 3 (part), 1989)
2.31.020   Police chief to receive unclaimed property.
   When lost, stolen, abandoned or otherwise unclaimed property or money,
except vehicles subject to registration under the Vehicle Code of the State of
California, comes into the possession of any employee or department of the
city, it shall be held for five days by such department and thereafter if
unclaimed shall be delivered to the police department. However, the police
department shall be notified immediately when weapons or contraband are found.
(Ord. 3927 § 3 (part), 1989)
2.31.030   Holding and storage of unclaimed property.
   When lost, stolen, abandoned or otherwise unclaimed property or money,
except vehicles subject to registration under the Vehicle Code of the State of
California, comes into possession of the police department, the department
shall hold and store such property in a safe place or with some responsible
person until it is claimed and all just and reasonable charges, if any, for
saving and storage thereof have been paid. The city manager shall establish
rules and regulations for the storage of such unclaimed property and shall
establish charges and fees for saving and storage of the same.
(Ord. 3927 § 3 (part), 1989)
2.31.040   Disposition of lost, stolen, or abandoned property other than
vehicles.
   (a)   If the owner or person entitled to the possession of lost, stolen, or
abandoned property or money fails to claim the property or money, within three
months, and fails to pay the charges and fees established for saving and
storage of the same, the police department may sell such property to the
highest bidder at public auction. Notice of such sale shall be given at least
five days before the time fixed therefor by publication once in a newspaper of
general circulation published in the city. The notice shall give the time and
place of such sale and generally describe the property to be sold. The city
manager may authorize the use of unclaimed property for city purposes.
   (b)   Each fiscal year, the city manager may withhold from sale at public
auction a number of the unclaimed bicycles with a cumulative value of not more
than $5,000.00, and turn over such unclaimed bicycles to any number of
charitable or nonprofit organizations, which are authorized under their
articles of incorporation to participate in programs or activities designed to
prevent juvenile delinquency and which are exempt from federal and state income
taxation, for use in any program or activity designed to prevent juvenile
delinquency. A written report of the number of unclaimed bicycles that are
withheld from sale at public auction and donated to charitable or nonprofit
organizations shall be made annually by the city manager to the city council.
(Ord. 4453 § 6, 1997: Ord. 4310 § 1, 1995: Ord. 3927 § 3 (part), 1989)
2.31.050   Abandoned vehicles.
   Abandoned vehicles on public or private property shall be disposed of as
provided in this code or in the Vehicle Code of the State of California.
(Ord. 3927 § 3 (part), 1989)
2.31.060   Finder may reclaim property or money.
   If the true owner does not appear during the time such property or money is
so held, and claim the property or money, it may be delivered back to the
finder, other than a city employee who found the same while performing his
regular duty, if such finder has served written notice upon the city that he
wishes to assert a claim to the property or the money as a finder, and if he
has complied with the requirements of the Civil Code governing the duties and
obligations of a finder.
(Ord. 3927 § 3 (part), 1989)
2.31.070   Unclaimed money to be deposited in general fund.
   All money so received by the chief of police and unclaimed shall be
deposited into the city within ten business days and held in trust on the books
of account of the city and if not delivered to the true owner during a six-
month period, or to the finder, shall thereafter be transferred to the general
fund.
(Ord. 3927 § 3 (part), 1989)
2.31.080   Disposition of proceeds of sale.
   After an auction of unclaimed property is completed, the proceeds of the
auction shall be delivered to the supervisor of revenue collections the next
business day following the auction (if the auction was conducted by city
employees), or according to the terms of the contract if the auction was
conducted under a contractual arrangement with a professional auctioneer. In no
case shall deposit occur more than ten business days after the auction date.
All proceeds shall be deposited to the credit of the general fund.
(Ord. 3927 § 3 (part), 1989)
2.31.090   Sale to vest title.
   On payment of the price bid for the property sold, delivery of the property
sold with a bill of sale signed by the manager of purchasing and contract
administration shall vest title in the purchaser.
(Ord. 4462 § 3, 1997: Ord. 3927 § 3 (part), 1989)
2.31.100   Proceedings where no bid.
   In any case where there is no bid offered for the property or if the highest
bid offered does not exceed the charges for saving, holding and storage and the
expenses of sale, the same shall become the property of the city as
compensation for expenses incurred, or if of no use or value to the city shall
be disposed of in such manner as the city manager directs.
(Ord. 3927 § 3 (part), 1989)
2.31.110   Dangerous or perishable property.
   Any property coming into possession of the chief of police which he
determines to be dangerous or perishable may be disposed of immediately,
without notice, in such manner as he determines to be in the public interest.
(Ord. 3927 § 3 (part), 1989)
2.31.120   Sections not applicable.
   The provisions of Sections
2.31.020 through
2.31.080 shall not be deemed to apply to property or money subject to
confiscation under the laws of the state of California or of the United States
of America, and shall apply to property or money held as evidence only when the
same is unclaimed by any person and no other provisions of law are applicable
concerning its disposition.
(Ord. 3927 § 3 (part), 1989)
Chapter 2.32
SALES AND USE TAX
Sections:
   
2.32.010   Short title.
   
2.32.020   Rate.
   
2.32.030   Operative date.
   
2.32.040   Purpose.
   
2.32.050   Contract with state.
   
2.32.060   Sales tax.
   
2.32.070   Place of sale.
   
2.32.080   Use tax.
   
2.32.090   Adoption of provisions of state law.
   
2.32.100   Limitations on adoption of state law.
   
2.32.110   Permit not required.
   
2.32.120   Exclusions and exemptions.
   
2.32.130   Exclusions and exemptions.
   
2.32.140   Application of provisions relating to exclusions and exemptions.
   
2.32.150   Amendments.
   
2.32.160   Enjoining collection forbidden.
   
2.32.170   Penalties.
   
2.32.180   Severability.
   
2.32.190   Repeals.
2.32.010   Short title.
   This chapter shall be known as the "Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax
Ordinance."
(Ord. 2756 § 1 (part), 1973)
2.32.020   Rate.
   The rate of sales tax and use tax imposed by this chapter shall be one
percent.
(Ord. 3604 § 1, 1985: Ord. 2756 § 1 (part), 1973)
2.32.030   Operative date.
   This chapter shall be operative on January 1, 1974.
(Ord. 2756 § 1 (part), 1973)
2.32.040   Purpose.
   The city council hereby declares that this chapter is adopted to achieve the
following, among other, purposes, and directs that the provisions hereof be
interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes:
   (a)   To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which complies with the
requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue
and Taxation Code;
   (b)   To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which incorporates provisions
identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the State of California
insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and
limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation
Code;
   (c)   To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which imposes a tax and
provides a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by the
California Department of Tax and Fee Administration in a manner that adapts
itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation
from, the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the
California Department of Tax and Fee Administration in administering and
collecting the California State Sales and Use Taxes; and
   (d)   To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which can be administered in a
manner that will, to the degree possible consistent with the provisions of Part
1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of
collecting city sales and use taxes and at the same time minimize the burden of
record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this
chapter.
(Ord. 5652 § 2, 2025: Ord. 2756 § 1 (part), 1973)
2.32.050   Contract with state.
   Prior to the operative date the city shall contract with the California
Department of Tax and Fee Administration to perform all functions incident to
the administration and operation of this chapter, provided, that if the city
shall not have contracted with the California Department of Tax and Fee
Administration prior to the operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract
and in such a case the operative date shall be the first day of the first
calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract rather than the
first day of the first calendar quarter following the adoption of this chapter.
(Ord. 5652 § 2, 2025: Ord. 2756 § 1 (part), 1973)
2.32.060   Sales tax.
   For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail a tax is
hereby imposed upon all retailers in the city at the rate stated in Section
2.32.020 of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible
personal property sold at retail in the city on and after the operative date.
(Ord. 2756 § 1 (part), 1973)
2.32.070   Place of sale.
   For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the
place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is
delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-state destination or to a
common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts
from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject
to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is
made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state
or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail
sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be
prescribed and adopted by the California Department of Tax and Fee
Administration.
(Ord. 5652 § 2, 2025: Ord. 2756 § 1 (part), 1973)
2.32.080   Use tax.
   An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in
the city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after
the operative date for storage, use or other consumption in the city at the
rate stated in Section
2.32.020 of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include
delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax
regardless of the place to which delivery is made.
(Ord. 2756 § 1 (part), 1973)
2.32.090   Adoption of provisions of state law.
   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except insofar as they are
inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and
Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and
Taxation Code are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter as though
fully set forth herein.
(Ord. 2756 § 1 (part), 1973)
2.32.100   Limitations on adoption of state law.
   In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and
Taxation Code, wherever the state of California is named or referred to as the
taxing agency, the name of the city of Palo Alto shall be substituted therefor.
The substitution, however, shall not be made when the word “state” is used as
part of the title of the State Controller, the State Treasurer, the State Board
of Control, the California Department of Tax and Fee Administration, the State
Treasury, or the Constitution of the State of California; the substitution
shall not be made when the result of that substitution would require action to
be taken by or against the city of Palo Alto, or any agency thereof rather than
by or against the California Department of Tax and Fee Administration, in
performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this
chapter; the substitution shall not be made in those sections, including, but
not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of
the state of California, where the result of the substitution would be to
provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use
or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be
exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain
subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the
Revenue and Taxation Code, or to impose this tax with respect to certain sales,
storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not
be subject to tax by the state under the said provisions of that Code; the
substitution shall not be made in Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last
sentence thereof), 671 l, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation
Code; and the substitution shall not be made for the word “State” in the phrase
“retailer engaged in business in this State” in Section 6203 or in the
definition of that phrase in Section 6203.
(Ord. 5652 § 2, 2025: Ord. 2756 § 1 (part), 1973)
2.32.110   Permit not required.
   If a sellers permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the
Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional seller's permit shall not be required
by this chapter.
(Ord. 2756 § 1 (part), 1973)
2.32.120   Exclusions and exemptions.
   There shall be excluded from the measure of tax:
   (a)   The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the state upon a
retailer or consumer.
   (b)   The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property,
the gross receipts from the sale of which has been subject to sales tax under a
sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2
of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county, or city in
this state.
   (c)   The gross receipts from sales to, and the storage, use or other
consumption of property purchased by, operators of common carriers and
waterborne vessels to be used or consumed in the operation of such common
carriers or waterborne vessels principally outside the city.
   (d)   The storage or use of tangible personal property in the transportation
or transmission of persons, property or communications, or in the generation,
transmission or distribution of electricity or in the manufacture, transmission
or distribution of gas in intrastate, interstate or foreign commerce by public
utilities which are regulated by the Public Utilities Commission of the State
of California.
(Ord. 2756 § 1 (part), 1973)
2.32.130   Exclusions and exemptions.
   (a)   The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax
imposed by the state of California upon a retailer or consumer.
   (b)   The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property,
the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a
sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2
of the California Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county, or
city, in this state shall be exempt from the tax due under this chapter.
   (c)   There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax
the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of
aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale
is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common
carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state,
the United States, or any foreign government.
   (d)   In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of
the California Revenue and Taxation Code the storage, use, or other consumption
of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or
consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft
as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a
certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of
this state, the United States, or any foreign government is exempted from the
use tax.
(Ord. 3495 § 1, 1983: Ord. 2756 § 1 (part), 1973)
2.32.140   Application of provisions relating to exclusions and exemptions.
   (a)   Section
2.32.130 shall become operative on January 1st of the year following the year
in which the California Department of Tax and Fee Administration adopts an
assessment ratio for state-assessed property which is identical to the ratio
which is required for local assessments by Section 401 of the Revenue and
Taxation Code, at which time Section
2.32.120 shall become operative.
   (b)   In the event that Section
2.32.130 becomes inoperative and the California Department of Tax and Fee
Administration subsequently adopts an assessment ratio for the state-assessed
property which is higher than the ratio which is required for local assessments
by Section 401 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, Section
2.32.120 shall become operative on the first day of the month next following
the month in which such higher ratio is adopted, at which time Section
2.32.130 shall be inoperative until the first day of the month following the
month in which the board again adopts an assessment ratio for state-assessed
property which is identical to the ratio required for local assessments by
Section 401 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, at which time Section
2.32.130 shall again become operative and Section
2.32.120 shall become inoperative.
(Ord. 5652 § 2, 2025: Ord. 2756 § 1 (part), 1973)
2.32.150   Amendments.
   All subsequent amendments of the Revenue and Taxation Code which relate to
the sales and use tax and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.5 of Division
2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code shall automatically become a part of this
chapter.
(Ord. 2756 § 1 (part), 1973)
2.32.160   Enjoining collection forbidden.
   No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall
issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or the
city, or against any officer of the state or the city, to prevent or enjoin the
collection under this chapter, or Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and
Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected.
(Ord. 2756 § 1 (part), 1973)
2.32.170   Penalties.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable as provided in
Section
1.08.010 of this code.
(Ord. 3881 § 2, 1989: Ord. 2756 § 1 (part), 1973)
2.32.180   Severability.
   If any provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or
circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of the chapter and the application
of such provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected
thereby.
(Ord. 2756 § 1 (part), 1973)
2.32.190   Repeals.
   Ordinance No. 1709 dated August 27, 1956, as amended by Ordinance No. 2062
dated November 27, 1961, is repealed; provided, however, that said ordinance,
as amended, shall remain applicable for the purposes of the administration of
said ordinance and the imposition of and the collection of tax with respect to
the sales of, and the storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal
property prior to January 1, 1974, the making of refunds, effecting credits,
the disposition of moneys collected, and for the commencement or continuance of
any action or proceeding under said ordinance.
(Ord. 2756 § 1 (part), 1973)
Chapter 2.33
TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX
Sections:
   
2.33.010   Definitions.
   
2.33.020   Tax imposed.
   
2.33.030   Exemptions.
   
2.33.040   Operator's duties.
   
2.33.050   Registration.
   
2.33.060   Reporting and remitting.
   
2.33.070   Penalties.
   
2.33.080   Failure to collect and report tax; determination of tax by
supervisor of revenue collections.
   
2.33.090   Appeal.
   
2.33.100   Records.
   
2.33.110   Refunds.
   
2.33.120   Actions to collect.
   
2.33.130   Violations; misdemeanor.
   
2.33.140   Third party rental transactions.
2.33.010   Definitions.
   Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions given in this
section govern the construction of this chapter:
   (a)   “Person” means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture,
association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company,
corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or
any other group or combination acting as a unit.
   (b)   “Hotel” means any structure, or any portion of any structure, in the
City of Palo Alto which is occupied or intended or designed for occupancy by
transients for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes, and includes any hotel,
inn, tourist home or house, motel, studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodginghouse,
morninghouse, apartment house, dormitory, public or private club, mobilehome or
house trailer at a fixed location, or other similar structure or portion
thereof, even if such structure is also used for other purposes, including
residential purposes.
   (c)   “Occupancy” means the use or possession, or the right to the use or
possession, of any room or rooms or portion thereof in any hotel for dwelling,
lodging or sleeping purposes.
   (d)   “Transient” means any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to
occupancy by reason of concession, permit, right of access, license or other
agreement for a period of thirty consecutive days or less, counting portions of
calendar days as full days. Any such person so occupying space in a hotel shall
be deemed to be a transient until the period of thirty days has expired unless
there is an agreement in writing between the operator and the occupant
providing for a longer period of occupancy.
   (e)   “Rent” means the total consideration paid by a transient, for the
occupancy of space in a hotel, whether or not received by the operator,
including, without limitation, transaction service fees and any unrefunded
advance reservation or other rental deposit. For purposes of this definition,
rent shall be valued in money, whether it is received in money, goods, labor or
otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property and services of
any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever.
   (f)   “Operator” means the person who is proprietor of the hotel, whether in
the capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee, or
any other capacity. Where the operator performs his or her functions through a
managing agent of any type or character other than an employee, the managing
agent shall also be deemed an operator for the purposes of this chapter and
shall have the same duties and liabilities as his or her principal. Compliance
with the provisions of this chapter by either the principal or the managing
agent shall, however, be considered to be compliance by both.
   (g)   “Rental agent” means any person other than an operator who collects
rent from a transient for the transient’s occupancy of a hotel.
(Ord. 5290 § 1 (part), 2014; Ord. 4032 § 1, 1991: Ord. 3704 § 1 (part), 1986:
Ord. 2567 § 1 (part), 1970)
2.33.020   Tax imposed.
   For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel, each transient is subject to
and shall pay a tax in the amount of fifteen and one-half percent of the rent
paid by the transient. Said tax constitutes a debt owed by the transient to the
city, which is extinguished only by payment to the operator or to the city or
to a rental agent pursuant to section
2.33.140. The transient shall pay the tax to the operator at the time the rent
is paid. If the rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the tax
shall be made with each installment. Any unpaid tax shall be due upon the
transient’s ceasing occupancy in the hotel. If for any reason the tax due is
not paid to the operator, the supervisor of revenue collections may require
that such tax shall be paid directly to the supervisor of revenue collections.
(Ord. 5457 § 1 (part), 2018: Ord. 5290 § 1 (part), 2014; Ord. 4983 § 1, 2007:
Ord. 3704 § 1 (part), 1986: Ord. 3425 § 1, 1983: Ord. 2928 § 1, 1976: Ord. 2567
§ 1 (part), 1970)
2.33.030   Exemptions.
   No tax shall be imposed upon:
   (a)   Any person as to whom, or any occupancy as to which, it is beyond the
power of the city to impose the tax herein provided;
   (b)   Any officer or employee of a foreign government who is exempt by
reason of express provision of federal law or international treaty;
   (c)   Any federal or state of California officer or employee on official
business who shall pay rent by warrant or check drawn on the treasury of the
United States or the state of California or provides written evidence of such
official business on a form approved in advance by the supervisor of revenue
collections. Copies of the documentation for each exemption claimed must be
submitted to the supervisor of revenue collections with each return made
pursuant to Section
2.33.060.
   No exemption shall be granted under this section except upon a claim
therefor made at the time rent is collected and under penalty of perjury upon a
form prescribed by the supervisor of revenue collections. Additionally, a copy
of such warrant or check and a copy of such claim form shall be submitted with
each return made pursuant to Section
2.33.060.
(Ord. 5290 § 1 (part), 2014; Ord. 3704 § 1 (part), 1986: Ord. 2567 § 1 (part),
1970)
2.33.040   Operator's duties.
   Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this ordinance to the same
extent and at the same time as the rent is collected from every transient. The
amount of tax shall be separately stated from the amount of the rent charged,
and each transient shall receive a receipt for payment from the operator. No
operator shall advertise or state in any manner, whether directly or
indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the
operator, or that it will not be added to the rent, or that, if added, any part
will be refunded except in the manner hereinafter provided.
(Ord. 5290 § 1 (part), 2014; Ord. 3704 § 1 (part), 1986: Ord. 2567 § 1 (part),
1970)
2.33.050   Registration.
   (a)   Within ten days after commencing business, each new or unregistered
operator of any hotel renting occupancy to transients shall present a valid
certificate of occupancy issued by the building official pursuant to Title 16
and apply for registration of said hotel with the supervisor of revenue
collections who will issue a "Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate" to
be at all times posted in a conspicuous place on the premises by such
registrant or any operator previously registered. The application shall require
such information as the supervisor of revenue collections deems necessary or
convenient to the collection of the tax imposed by this chapter. The supervisor
of revenue collections may require updating of application information from
time to time as he or she deems necessary or advisable. Registration under this
section shall lapse with the certificate of occupancy upon which it was issued.
Said certificate shall, among other things, state the following:
   (1)   The name of the operator;
   (2)   The address of the hotel;
   (3)   The date upon which the certificate was issued;
   (4)   "This Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate signifies that the
person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of
Chapter 2.33 of the Palo Alto Municipal Code 'Transient Occupancy Tax' by
registering with the supervisor of revenue collections for the purpose of
collecting from transients the Transient Occupancy Tax and remitting said tax
to the supervisor of revenue collections. This certificate does not authorize
any person to conduct any unlawful business or to conduct any lawful business
in an unlawful manner, or to operate a hotel without strictly complying with
all local applicable laws, including but not limited to those requiring a
permit from any board, commission, department or office of this city. This
certificate does not constitute a permit and is not transferable to a different
operator."
(Ord. 5290 § 1 (part), 2014; Ord. 3704 § 1 (part), 1986: Ord. 2567 § 1 (part),
1970)
2.33.060   Reporting and remitting.
   Each operator shall, on or before the last day of the month following the
close of the previous calendar month, or at the close of any shorter reporting
period which may be established by the supervisor of revenue collections, make
a return to the supervisor of revenue collections on forms provided by him or
her of the total rents charged to transients and the total rents paid by
transients and the amount of tax collected for transient occupancies. If no tax
was due or collected during the previous reporting period, the operator shall
file a return so stating under penalty of perjury. At the time the return is
filed, the full amount of the tax collected shall be remitted to the supervisor
of revenue collections. The supervisor of revenue collections may establish
shorter reporting periods for any certificate holder if he or she deems it
necessary in order to ensure collection of the tax, and he or she may require
further information in the return. Returns and payments are due immediately
upon cessation of business for any reason. All taxes collected by operators
pursuant to this chapter shall be held in trust for the account of the city
until payment thereof is made to the supervisor of revenue collections.
(Ord. 5290 § 1 (part), 2014; Ord. 3704 § 1 (part), 1986: Ord. 2567 § 1 (part),
1970)
2.33.070   Penalties.
   (a)   Original Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed
by this chapter within the time required shall pay a penalty of ten percent of
the amount of the tax which penalty amount shall be added to the amount of the
tax, for purposes of calculating additional penalties.
   (b)   Continued Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any delinquent
remittance on or before a period of thirty days following the date on which the
remittance first became delinquent shall pay a second delinquency penalty of
ten percent of the amount of the tax including the ten percent penalty first
imposed.
   (c)   Fraud or Misrepresentation. If the director of finance, in his or her
judgment. determines that the nonpayment of any remittance due under this
chapter is due to intentional conduct, misrepresentation or fraud, a penalty of
twenty-five percent of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition
to the penalties stated in subsections (a) and (b) of this section.
   (d)   Additional Penalty. In addition to the penalties imposed under
subsections (a) and (b) of this section, any operator who fails to remit any
tax imposed by this chapter shall pay a penalty of one percent per month or
fraction thereof, whichever is less, on the amount of the tax from the date on
which the remittance first became delinquent until paid.
   (e)   Penalties Merged with Tax. Every penalty imposed and such additional
penalties as accrue under the provisions of this section shall become a part of
the tax herein required to be paid.
(Ord. 5290 § 1 (part), 2014; Ord. 3704 § 1 (part), 1986: Ord. 2567 § 1 (part),
1970)
2.33.080   Failure to collect and report tax; determination of tax by
supervisor of revenue collections.
   If any operator fails or refuses to collect said tax and to make, within the
time provided in this chapter, any report and remittance of said tax or any
portion thereof required by this chapter, the supervisor of revenue collections
shall proceed in such manner as he or she may deem best to obtain facts and
information on which to base his or her estimate of the tax due. As soon as the
supervisor of revenue collections shall procure such facts and information as
he or she is able to obtain upon which to base the assessment of any tax
imposed by this chapter and payable by any operator who has failed or refused
to collect the same and to make such report and remittance, he or she shall
proceed to determine and assess against such operator the tax and penalties
provided by this chapter. In case such determination is made, the supervisor of
revenue and collections shall give a notice of the amount so assessed by
sending it personally or by depositing it in the United States mail, postage
prepaid, addressed to the operator so assessed at his or her last known place
of address.
   Such operator may within fourteen days after serving or mailing of such
notice make application in writing to the supervisor of revenue collections for
a hearing on the amount assessed. If application by an operator is not made
within the time prescribed, the tax and penalties, if any, determined by the
supervisor of revenue collections to be due shall become final and conclusive
and immediately due and payable. If such application is made, the supervisor of
revenue collections shall give not less than ten days’ written notice in the
manner prescribed herein to the operator to show cause at a time and place
fixed in said notice why said amount specified therein should not be fixed for
such tax and penalties. At such hearing, the operator may appear and offer
evidence why such specified tax and penalties should not be so fixed. After
such hearing, the supervisor of revenue collections shall determine the proper
tax to be remitted and shall thereafter give written notice to the operator in
the manner prescribed herein of such determination and the amount of such tax
and penalties. The amount determined to be due shall be payable after twenty
days of the serving or mailing of such determination unless an appeal is taken
as provided in Section
2.33.090.
(Ord. 5290 § 1 (part), 2014; Ord. 3704 § 1 (part), 1986: Ord. 2567 § 1 (part),
1970)
2.33.090   Appeal.
   Any operator aggrieved by any decision of the supervisor of revenue and
collections with respect to the amount of such tax and penalties, if any, may
appeal to the director of finance or his or her designee by filing a notice of
appeal with the city clerk within twenty days of the serving or mailing of the
determination of tax due. The director of finance or the designee shall fix a
time and place for hearing of such appeal, and give notice in writing to such
operator at his or her last known place of address. The findings of the
director of finance or the designee shall be final and conclusive and shall be
served upon the appellant in the manner prescribed above for service of notice
of hearing. Any amount found to be due shall be immediately due and payable
upon the service of notice.
(Ord. 5290 § 1 (part), 2014; Ord. 3704 § 1 (part), 1986: Ord. 2567 § 1 (part),
1970)
2.33.100   Records.
   It shall be the duty of every operator liable for the collection and payment
to the city of any tax imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve all records
as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he or she may have
been liable for the collection of and payment to the city. Said records shall
be kept or made available at one location within the limits of the city for a
period of three years. The supervisor of revenue collections and/or city
auditor or their designee shall have the right at any and all reasonable times,
to examine and audit said records for the purpose of determining the accuracy
thereof.
(Ord. 5290 § 1 (part), 2014; Ord. 3704 § 1 (part), 1986: Ord. 2567 § 1 (part),
1970)
2.33.110   Refunds.
   (a)   Claim Required. Prior to seeking judicial relief with respect to a
dispute regarding the amount of any tax, penalty, or interest collected or
received by the city under this chapter, an aggrieved taxpayer, fee payer,
operator, transient or any other person must comply with the provisions of
section
2.28.230 of this code.
   (b)   Operators. An operator may claim as an overpayment any tax previously
paid which was calculated on the basis of taxable consideration written off by
the operator as a bad debt in accordance with generally accepted accounting
principles and claimed as a deduction on a federal income tax return in
accordance with provisions of the Internal Revenue Code, and regulations issued
pursuant thereto. The bad debt claim may be taken as an adjustment to future
taxes due the city after the operator's procedure and forms for adjustment of
bad debt have been reviewed and approved by the supervisor of revenue
collections.
   (c)   Transients. A transient may only request a refund of taxes under this
chapter when the transient, having paid the tax to the operator, establishes
that the transient has been unable to obtain a refund from the operator who
collected the tax.
(Ord. 5290 § 1 (part), 2014; Ord. 5078 § 3, 2010: Ord. 3704 § 1 (part), 1986:
Ord. 2567 § 1 (part), 1970)
2.33.120   Actions to collect.
   Any tax required to be paid by any transient under the provisions of this
chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the transient to the city. Any such tax
collected by an operator which has not been paid to the city shall be deemed a
debt owed by the operator to the city. Any person owing money to the city under
the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to an action brought in the name
of the city for the recovery of such amount.
(Ord. 5290 § 1 (part), 2014; Ord. 3704 § 1 (part), 1986: Ord. 2567 § 1 (part),
1970)
2.33.130   Violations; misdemeanor.
   Any operator or other person who violates any of the provisions of this
chapter or who fails or refuses to register as required herein, or to furnish
any returns or other data required by the supervisor of revenue collections, or
who renders a false or fraudulent return or claim, is guilty of a misdemeanor,
and is punishable as provided in this code.
(Ord. 5290 § 1 (part), 2014; Ord. 3704 § 1 (part), 1986: Ord. 2567 § 1 (part),
1970)
2.33.140   Third party rental transactions.
   (a)   Any transient who pays rent to a rental agent instead of to an
operator shall, at the time the rent is paid, pay the tax to the rental agent
in the manner required by section
2.33.020. If for any reason the tax is not paid to the rental agent, it shall
be paid to the operator before the transient has ceased occupancy in the hotel
or paid directly to the supervisor of revenue collections pursuant to section
2.33.020. Any transient seeking a refund under section
2.33.110 of taxes paid to a rental agent must establish that the transient has
been unable to obtain a refund from the rental agent who collected the tax.
   (b)   Any rental agent who collects rent shall comply with all obligations
of the operator set forth in sections
2.33.040 and
2.33.100 of this chapter. The rental agent shall remit all collected taxes to
the operator before the deadline for the operator to remit the taxes to the
supervisor of revenue collections under section
2.33.060, and the rental agent shall provide the operator with copies of all
records required to be maintained by the operator pursuant to section
2.33.100 of this chapter, including records necessary for the operator to
comply with its obligations under this chapter.
   (c)   If the supervisor of revenue collection determines that a rental agent
has failed to collect, remit, or report any tax, the supervisor may take any
action against the rental agent that he or she may take against an operator
under sections
2.33.070 and
2.33.080 of this chapter subject to the requirements of those sections. If the
supervisor assesses unremitted taxes and penalties against the rental agent,
the rental agent shall be subject to the provisions of sections
2.33.080,
2.33.090,
2.33.110, and
2.33.120 of this chapter as if it were an operator. Nothing in this section
shall prohibit the supervisor from assessing the full amount of any unremitted
taxes and penalties solely against the operator in lieu of assessing some or
all of those taxes and penalties against the rental agent.
(Ord. 5290 § 1 (part), 2014)
Chapter 2.34
REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX
Sections:
   
2.34.010   Short title.
   
2.34.020   Imposition of tax.
   
2.34.030   Persons on whom tax imposed.
   
2.34.040   Security for debt.
   
2.34.050   Exemptions - Transfer to government agency.
   
2.34.060   Conveyances not subject to tax - Plans for reorganization or
adjustment.
   
2.34.070   Conveyances not subject to tax - Securities and Exchange Commission
orders.
   
2.34.080   Conveyances not subject to tax - Transfer or termination of
partnership.
   
2.34.090   Conveyances not subject to tax - Transfer to beneficiary or
mortgagee.
   
2.34.095   Conveyances not subject to tax - Release of ownership interest by a
co-owner.
   
2.34.100   Conveyances not subject to tax - Transfer of marital assets.
   
2.34.110   Administration by director of finance.
   
2.34.120   Due dates, delinquency, penalties, interest.
   
2.34.130   Declaration required.
   
2.34.140   Determination of deficiency.
   
2.34.150   Notice of determination.
   
2.34.160   Manner of giving notice.
   
2.34.170   Petition for redetermination.
   
2.34.180   Consideration of petition and hearing.
   
2.34.190   Modification of determined amount.
   
2.34.200   Finality of determination.
   
2.34.210   Tax deemed debt to city.
   
2.34.220   Refunds.
   
2.34.230   Tax roll parcel number.
2.34.010   Short title.
   (a)   This chapter shall be known as the "Real Property Transfer Tax
Ordinance of the City of Palo Alto." It is adopted pursuant to the authority
contained in Part 6.7 (commencing with Section 11901) of Division 2 of the
Revenue and Taxation Code of the State of California. It is also enacted
pursuant to the authority of Article II of the Charter of the city of Palo Alto
and other authority held as a chartered city.
   (b)   The tax imposed under this chapter is solely for the purpose of
raising revenues for the general governmental purposes of the city. All of the
proceeds from the tax imposed by this chapter shall be placed in the city's
general fund. This chapter is not enacted for regulatory purposes.
(Ord. 4073 § 2, 1992: Ord. 2398 § 1 (part), 1967)
2.34.020   Imposition of tax.
   (a)   There is hereby imposed on each deed instrument or writing
("instrument") by which any lands, interests in lands, tenements or other
realty ("realty") sold within the city of Palo Alto shall be granted, assigned,
transferred or otherwise conveyed to, or vested in ("conveyed"), the purchaser
or purchasers, or any other person or persons, by his, her, its or their
direction, when the value of the consideration exceeds $100.00, a tax at the
rate of $1.65 for each $500.00, or fractional part thereof, of the value of the
consideration.
   (b)   As used herein, "value of the consideration" means:
   (1)   The total consideration, valued in money of the United States, paid or
delivered or contracted to be paid or delivered in return for the grant,
assignment, transfer, or conveyance ("conveyance") of realty, including the
amount of any indebtedness, existing immediately prior to the conveyance which
is secured by a lien, deed of trust or other encumbrance ("encumbrance") on the
realty conveyed and which continues to be secured by such encumbrance after the
conveyance and also including the amount of any indebtedness which is secured
by an encumbrance given or placed upon the realty in connection with the
conveyance to secure the payment of the purchase price of any part thereof
which remains unpaid at the time of the conveyance; and
   (2)   The amount of any special assessment levied or imposed upon the realty
by a public body, district or agency, where the special assessment is an
encumbrance on the realty and the purchaser or transferee agrees to pay such
special assessment or takes the realty subject to the encumbrance of such
special assessment. The value of any encumbrance of a type other than those
which are hereinabove specifically included, existing immediately prior to, and
remaining after, the conveyance, shall not be included in determining the value
of the consideration. If the value of the consideration cannot be definitely
determined, or is left open to be fixed by future contingencies, "value of the
consideration" shall be deemed to mean the fair market value of the realty at
the time of conveyance after deducting the amount of any encumbrance, if any,
of a type which would be excluded in determining the value of the consideration
pursuant to the provisions of this Section
2.34.020.
(Ord. 4073 § 3, 1992: Ord. 2398 § 1 (part), 1967)
2.34.030   Persons on whom tax imposed.
   Any tax imposed pursuant to Section
2.34.020, shall be paid by any person who makes, signs or issues any instrument
subject to the tax, or for whose use or benefit the same is made, signed or
issued.
(Ord. 4073 § 4, 1992: Ord. 2398 § 1 (part), 1967)
2.34.040   Security for debt.
   Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to any instrument
given to secure an obligation or a debt. Nothing in this chapter shall be
deemed to exclude the amount of any such indebtedness from being included in
the "value of the consideration" in connection with any conveyance which is not
made solely to secure an obligation or a debt.
(Ord. 4073 § 5, 1992: Ord. 2398 § 1 (part), 1967)
2.34.050   Exemptions - Transfer to government agency.
   (a)   Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to the United
States or any agency or instrumentality thereof, any state or territory, or
political subdivision thereof, or the District of Columbia with respect to any
instrument to which the exempt agency is a party, or when the exempt agency is
accepting title, but the tax may be collected by assessment from any other
party liable therefor.
   (b)   Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply with respect
to any instrument by which realty is conveyed by the United States or any
agency or instrumentality thereof, any state or territory, or political
subdivision thereof, or the District of Columbia, pursuant to any agreement
whereby the purchaser agrees to immediately reconvey the realty to the exempt
agency.
   (c)   Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply with respect
to any instrument by which the United States or any agency or instrumentality
thereof, any state or territory, or political subdivision thereof, or the
District of Columbia, conveys to a nonprofit corporation realty, the
acquisition, construction, or improvement of which was financed or refinanced
by obligations issued by the nonprofit corporation on behalf of a government
agency, within the meaning of Section 1.103-1 (b) of Title 26 of the Code of
Federal Regulations, as amended.
(Ord. 4073 § 6, 1992: Ord. 2398 § 1 (part), 1967)
2.34.060   Conveyances not subject to tax - Plans for reorganization or
adjustment.
   (a)   Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to the
making, delivery or filing of instruments of conveyance to make effective any
plan of reorganization or adjustment:
   (1)   Continued under the Federal Bankruptcy Code, as amended;
   (2)   Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a
railroad corporation, as defined in subdivision (44) of Section 101 of Title 11
of the United States Code, as amended; or
   (3)   Effected through a mere change in identity, form or place of
organization. Subdivisions (1) to (3), inclusive, of this subsection shall only
apply if the making, delivery or filing of instruments of conveyance occurs
within five years from the date of such confirmation, approval or change.
(Ord. 4073 § 7, 1992: Ord. 2398 § 1 (part), 1967)
2.34.070   Conveyances not subject to tax - Securities and Exchange Commission
orders.
   (a)   Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to the making
or delivery of conveyances to make effective any order of the Securities and
Exchange Commission, as defined in subdivision (a) of Section 1083 of the
Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, but only if:
   (1)   The order of the Securities and Exchange Commission in obedience to
which such instrument of conveyance is made recites that such conveyance is
necessary or appropriate to effectuate the provisions of Section 79k of Title
15 of the United States Code, as amended, relating to the Public Utility
Holding Company Act of 1935, as amended;
   (2)   Such order specifies the realty which is ordered to be conveyed; and
   (3)   Such conveyance is made in obedience to such order.
(Ord. 4073 § 8, 1992: Ord. 2398 § 1 (part), 1967)
2.34.080   Conveyances not subject to tax - Transfer or termination of
partnership.
   (a)   In the case of any realty held by a partnership, no tax shall be
imposed pursuant to this chapter by reason of any conveyance of an interest in
a partnership or otherwise, if:
   (1)   Such partnership (or another partnership) is considered a continuing
partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of
1986, as amended; and
   (2)   Such continuing partnership continues to hold the realty concerned.
   (b)   If there is a termination of any partnership within the meaning of
Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, for purposes of
this chapter, such partnership shall be treated as having executed an
instrument whereby there was conveyed, for fair market value (exclusive of the
value of any encumbrance remaining thereon), all realty held by such
partnership at the time of such termination.
   (c)   Not more than one tax shall be imposed pursuant to this chapter by
reason of a termination described in subsection (b), and any conveyance
pursuant thereto, with respect to the realty held by such partnership at the
time of such termination.
(Ord. 4073 § 9, 1992: Ord. 2398 § 1 (part), 1967)
2.34.090   Conveyances not subject to tax - Transfer to beneficiary or
mortgagee.
   Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply with respect to any
instrument to a beneficiary or mortgagee, which is taken from the mortgagor or
trustor as a result of or in lieu of foreclosure. Such tax shall apply to the
extent that the value of the consideration exceeds the unpaid debt, including
accrued interest and cost of foreclosure. The consideration, unpaid debt amount
and identification of grantee as beneficiary or mortgagee shall be noted on the
instrument or stated in an affidavit or declaration under penalty of perjury
for tax purposes.
(Ord. 4073 § 10, 1992)
2.34.095   Conveyances not subject to tax - Release of ownership interest by a
co-owner.
   Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to the making,
delivery, or filing of an instrument by which a co-owner or the co-owners of
real property release his or her or their ownership interest to the other co-
owner or co-owners of the real property without receiving, directly or
indirectly, any monetary or other valuable consideration, where the co-owners
are co-borrowers under a loan to finance or refinance the acquisition of or the
construction of improvements upon the real property.
(Ord. 4279 § 1, 1995)
2.34.100   Conveyances not subject to tax - Transfer of marital assets.
   (a)   Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply with respect
to any instrument which purports to convey, divide, or allocate community,
quasi-community, or quasi-marital realty assets between spouses for the purpose
of effecting a division of community, quasi-community, or quasi-marital realty
which is required by a judgment decreeing a dissolution of the marriage or
legal separation by a judgment of nullity, or by any other judgment or order
rendered pursuant to Part 5 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 4 of the
Civil Code of the State of California, as amended, or by a written agreement
between the spouses, executed in contemplation of any such judgment or order,
whether or not the written agreement is incorporated as part of any of those
judgments or orders.
   (b)   Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply with respect
to any instrument which purports to convey, divide, or allocate community,
quasi-community, or quasi-marital realty assets or realty assets held in joint
tenancy or tenancy in common between spouses, provided:
   (1)   The owner-spouses acquired their respective interests in the same
transaction; and
   (2)   No consideration beyond a release from any indebtedness secured by the
interest in realty conveyed is received by the transferor-spouse in effecting
such conveyance.
   This subsection (b) shall not extend to the conveyance of realty assets
wholly owned by the transferor-spouse to a transferee-spouse.
   (c)   In order to qualify for the exemption provided in subsections (a) and
(b), the instrument shall include a written recital, signed by either spouse,
stating that the instrument is entitled to the exemption.
(Ord. 4073 § 11, 1992)
2.34.110   Administration by director of finance.
   (a)   The director of finance shall administer this chapter and shall
collect the tax imposed under this chapter and shall otherwise administer this
chapter. The director of finance may make such rules and regulations, not
inconsistent with the chapter, as he or she may deem reasonably necessary or
desirable to administer this chapter. In the administration of this chapter,
the director of finance shall interpret its provisions consistently with those
Documentary Stamp Tax Regulations adopted by the Internal Revenue Service of
the United States Treasury Department which relate to the Tax on Conveyances
and identified as Sections 47.4361-1, 47.4361-2 and 47.4362-1 of Part 47 of
Title 26 of the Code of Federal Regulations, as the same existed on November 8,
1967, except that for the purposes of this chapter:
   (1)   The term "realty" as used in the Treasury Regulations, shall be deemed
to mean "real property" as such term is defined by and under the laws of the
state of California.
   (2)   Those provisions of the Treasury Regulations providing for deduction
of the value of any encumbrance existing before the sale and not removed
thereby shall not apply.
   (3)   Those provisions of the Treasury Regulations relating to the rate of
the tax shall not apply.
   (4)   Those provisions of the Treasury Regulations which conflict with the
provisions of this chapter shall not apply.
(Ord. 4073 § 12, 1992)
2.34.120   Due dates, delinquency, penalties, interest.
   The tax imposed under this chapter is due and payable at the time the
instrument effecting a conveyance subject to the tax is delivered, and is
delinquent if unpaid at the time of recordation thereof. In the event that the
tax is not paid prior to becoming delinquent, a delinquency penalty of ten
percent of the amount of tax due shall accrue. In the event a portion of the
tax is unpaid prior to becoming delinquent, the penalty shall only accrue as to
the portion remaining unpaid. An additional penalty of ten percent shall accrue
if the tax remains unpaid on the ninetieth day following the date of the
original delinquency. Interest shall accrue at the rate of one percent a month,
or fraction thereof, on the amount of tax, exclusive of penalties, from the
date the tax becomes delinquent to the date of payment. Interest and penalty
accrued shall become part of the tax.
(Ord. 4073 § 13, 1992)
2.34.130   Declaration required.
   (a)   The tax imposed by this chapter shall be paid to the director of
finance by the persons referred to in Section
2.34.020. Payment shall be accompanied by a declaration of the amount of tax
due signed by the person paying the tax or by his or her agent. The declaration
shall include a statement that the value of the consideration on which the tax
due was computed includes all indebtedness secured by encumbrances remaining or
placed on the realty transferred at the time of transfer, and also includes all
special assessments on the realty which the purchaser or transferee agrees to
pay or which remain an encumbrance on the realty at the time of conveyance. The
declaration shall identify the instrument effecting the conveyance for which
the tax is being paid. The director of finance may require delivery to him or
her of a copy of such instrument whenever he or she deems such to be reasonably
necessary to adequately identify such writing or to administer the provisions
of this chapter. The director of finance may rely on the declaration as to the
amount of the tax due provided he or she has no reason to believe that the full
amount of the tax due is not shown on the declaration.
   (b)   Whenever the director of finance has reason to believe that the full
amount of tax due is not shown on the declaration or has not been paid, he or
she may, by notice served upon any person liable for the tax, require him or
her to furnish a true copy of his or her records relevant to the value of the
consideration or fair market value of the realty conveyed. Such notice may be
served at any time within three years after recordation of the instrument which
conveys such realty.
(Ord. 4073 § 14, 1992)
2.34.140   Determination of deficiency.
   (a)   If on the basis of such information as the director of finance
receives pursuant to subsection (b) of Section
2.34.130 or on the basis of such other relevant information that comes into his
or her possession, or both, he or she determines that the amount of tax due as
set forth in the declaration, or as paid, is insufficient, he or she may
recompute the tax due on the basis of such information.
   (b)   If the declaration required by Section
2.34.130 is not submitted, the director of finance may make an estimate of the
value of the consideration for the realty conveyed and determine the amount of
tax to be paid on the basis of any information in his or her possession or that
may come into his or her possession.
   (c)   One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due
with respect to any conveyance.
(Ord. 4073 § 15, 1992)
2.34.150   Notice of determination.
   The director of finance shall give notice to a person liable for payment of
the tax imposed under this chapter of his or her determination made under
Section
2.34.140. Such notice shall be given within three years after the recordation
of the instrument effecting the conveyance on which the tax deficiency
determination was made.
(Ord. 4073 § 16, 1992)
2.34.160   Manner of giving notice.
   Any notice required to be given by the director of finance under this
chapter may be served personally or by mail. If service is made by mail, it
shall be made by depositing the notice in the United States mail in a sealed
envelope with postage paid, addressed to the person on whom it is to be served
at his or her address as it appears in the records of the city or as
ascertained by the director of finance. The service is complete at the time of
the deposit of the notice in the United States mail without extension of time
for any reason.
(Ord. 4073 § 17, 1992)
2.34.170   Petition for redetermination.
   Any person against whom a determination is made under this chapter or any
person directly interested may petition for a redetermination within sixty days
after service upon the person of notice thereof. If a petition for
redetermination is not filed within the sixty day period, the determination
becomes final at the expiration of the period.
(Ord. 4073 § 18, 1992)
2.34.180   Consideration of petition and hearing.
   If a petition for redetermination is filed within the sixty-day period, the
director of finance shall reconsider the determination and, if the person has
so requested in his or her petition, shall grant the person an oral hearing,
and shall give him or her ten days' notice of the time and place of hearing.
The director of finance may designate one or more deputies for the purpose of
conducting hearings and may continue a hearing from time to time as may be
necessary.
(Ord. 4073 § 19, 1992)
2.34.190   Modification of determined amount.
   The director of finance may decrease or increase the amount of the
determination before it becomes final, but the amount may be increased only if
a claim for the increase is asserted by the director of finance at or before
the hearing.
(Ord. 4073 § 20, 1992)
2.34.200   Finality of determination.
   The order or decision of the director of finance upon a petition for
redetermination becomes final thirty days after service upon the petitioner of
notice thereof.
(Ord. 4073 § 21, 1992)
2.34.210   Tax deemed debt to city.
   The amount of any tax, penalty, and interest imposed under the provisions of
this chapter shall be deemed a debt to the city. Any person owing money to the
city under the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to an action brought
in the name of the city for the recovery of such amount.
(Ord. 4073 § 22, 1992)
2.34.220   Refunds.
   Claim Required. Prior to seeking judicial relief with respect to a dispute
regarding the amount of any tax, penalty, or interest collected or received by
the city under this chapter, an aggrieved taxpayer, fee payer or any other
person must comply with the provisions of section
2.28.230 of this code.
(Ord. 5078 § 4, 2010: Ord. 4073 § 23, 1992)
2.34.230   Tax roll parcel number.
   Each instrument by which realty sold is conveyed shall have noted upon it
the tax roll parcel number. This number shall be used for administrative and
procedural purposes only pursuant to this chapter, and will not be proof of
title. In the event of any conflict between the stated legal description noted
upon the document and the tax roll parcel number, the stated legal description
noted thereupon shall govern.
(Ord. 4073 § 24, 1992)
Chapter 2.35
UTILITY USERS TAX
Sections:
   
2.35.010   Short title.
   
2.35.020   Tax imposed.
   
2.35.030   Disposition of tax revenue.
   
2.35.040   Definitions.
   
2.35.050   Constitutional exemption.
   
2.35.060   Electricity users tax.
   
2.35.070   Gas users tax.
   
2.35.080   Water users tax.
   
2.35.090   Telecommunication users tax.
   
2.35.110   Council authorization to suspend collection of a portion of tax for
limited periods of time.
   
2.35.120   Collection of tax.
   
2.35.130   Reporting and remitting.
   
2.35.140   Penalty for delinquency.
   
2.35.150   Records.
   
2.35.160   Failure to pay tax - Administrative remedy.
   
2.35.170   Actions to collect.
   
2.35.180   Administrative rules, regulations and agreements.
   
2.35.190   Refunds.
   
2.35.200   Bundling taxable items with nontaxable items.
2.35.010   Short title.
   This chapter shall be known as the "Utility Users Tax."
(Ord. 5291 § 1 (part), 2014; Ord. 3781 § 1 (part), 1987)
2.35.020   Tax imposed.
   There is established and imposed, commencing on the effective date of the
ordinance codified in this chapter, a utility users tax at the rate set forth
in this chapter.
(Ord. 5291 § 1 (part), 2014; Ord. 3781 § 1 (part), 1987)
2.35.030   Disposition of tax revenue.
   The tax imposed by this chapter is for the purpose of raising revenues for
the general governmental purposes of the city. All of the proceeds from the tax
imposed by this chapter shall be placed in the city's general fund.
(Ord. 5291 § 1 (part), 2014; Ord. 3781 § 1 (part), 1987)
2.35.040   Definitions.
   (a)   Except where context otherwise requires, the definitions given in this
section govern the construction of this chapter:
   (1)   "City" means the city of Palo Alto.
   (2)   "Month" means a calendar month.
   (3)   "Person" means any natural person, firm, association, joint venture,
joint stock company, partnership of any kind, club, Massachusetts business or
common law trust or society, organization, corporation (foreign and domestic),
business trust of any kind, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or
employee of any of them.
   (4)   “Service supplier” means a person required to collect and remit a tax
imposed by this chapter and includes the city’s utilities department with
respect to a tax imposed on the use of gas, electricity and water.
   (5)   “Service user” means a person required to pay a tax imposed by this
chapter.
   (6)   “Utility tax year” means the period beginning on the effective date of
the ordinance codified in this chapter and ending June 30, 1988, for the
initial utility tax year. Thereafter, the utility tax year shall be the twelve-
month period beginning July 1st and ending June 30th of the next succeeding
calendar year.
(Ord. 5291 § 1 (part), 2014; Ord. 3781 § 1 (part), 1987)
2.35.050   Constitutional exemption.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as imposing a tax upon the city
of Palo Alto or any other person if imposition of such tax upon that person
would be in violation of the Constitution of the United States or that of the
state of California or any other statute or regulation that applies to charter
cities. The city may adopt an administrative policy to implement this
provision.
(Ord. 5291 § 1 (part), 2014; Ord. 3781 § 1 (part), 1987)
2.35.060   Electricity users tax.
   (a)   There is imposed a tax upon every person in the city using electricity
in the city. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of five
percent of the charges to a service user made for such electricity by a service
supplier. Said tax shall be paid by the person paying for such electricity.
   (b)   "Charges," as used in this section, shall include charges made for
metered energy and charges for service, including customer charges, service
charges, standby charges, charges for temporary services, demand charges, and
annual and monthly charges.
   (c)   As used in this section, the term "using electricity" shall not be
construed to mean the storage of such electricity by a person in a battery
owned or possessed by him for use in an automobile or other machinery or device
apart from the premises upon which the electricity was received; provided,
however, that the term shall include the receiving of such electricity for the
purpose of using it in the charging of batteries; nor shall the term include
the mere transmission or receiving of such electricity by a governmental agency
at a point within the city for resale.
(Ord. 5291 § 1 (part), 2014; Ord. 3781 § 1 (part), 1987)
2.35.070   Gas users tax.
   (a)   There is imposed a tax upon every person in the city using gas in the
city which is delivered through mains or pipes. The tax imposed by this section
shall be at the rate of five percent of the charges to a service user made for
such gas by a service supplier. Said tax shall be paid by the person paying for
such gas.
   (b)   "Charges," as used in this section, shall include charges made for
metered gas and charges for service, including customer charges, service
charges, demand charges, standby charges, charges for temporary service, and
annual and monthly charges.
   (c)   There shall be excluded from the base on which the tax imposed in this
section is computed charges made for gas which is to be resold and delivered
through mains or pipes and charges made for gas to be used in the generation of
electrical energy by a governmental agency.
(Ord. 5291 § 1 (part), 2014; Ord. 3781 § 1 (part), 1987)
2.35.080   Water users tax.
   (a)   There is imposed a tax upon every person in the city using water which
is delivered through mains or pipes in the city. The tax imposed by this
section shall be at the rate of five percent of the charges to a service user
made for such water by a service supplier, except as provided in Section
2.35.100. Said tax shall be paid by the person paying for such water.
   (b)   "Charges," as used in this section, shall include charges for metered
water and charges for service, including customer charges, service charges,
standby charges, charges for temporary service, and annual and monthly charges.
   (c)   There shall be excluded from the base on which the tax imposed in this
section is computed charges made for water which is to be resold and delivered
through mains or pipes and charges made for water used in the generation of
electrical energy by a governmental agency.
(Ord. 5291 § 1 (part), 2014; Ord. 3781 § 1 (part), 1987)
2.35.090   Telecommunications users tax.
   (a)   There is imposed a tax upon every person in the city, using telephone
communication services in the city. The tax imposed by this section shall be at
the rate of 4.75 percent of the charges made to a service user for such
services by a service supplier and shall be paid by the person paying for such
services.
   (b)   As used in this section, the term “charges” shall not include charges
for services paid for by inserting coins in a coin-operated telephone except
that where such coin-operated services are furnished for a guaranteed amount,
the amounts paid under such guarantee plus any fixed monthly or other periodic
charge shall be included in the base for computing the amount of tax due.
   (c)   The tax imposed by this section is intended to, and does, apply to all
charges billed to a telephone account having a situs in the city, irrespective
of whether a particular communication service originates and/or terminates
within the city. The situs shall be the service address, if known; otherwise
the billing address.
   (d)   The term “telephone communication services” means the transmission,
conveyance, or routing of voice, data, audio, video, or any other information
or signals to a point, or between or among points, whatever the technology
used, including, but not limited to, traditional telephone service, mobile
telecommunications service, and broadband service (e.g. digital subscriber line
(DSL), fiber optic, coaxial cable, and wireless broadband, including Wi-Fi,
WiMAX, and Wireless MESH) to the extent not prohibited by federal and/or state
law, now or in the future. “Telephone communication services” includes
transmission, conveyance, or routing in which computer processing applications
are used to act on the form, code or protocol of the content for purposes of
transmission, conveyance or routing without regard to whether such service is
refereed to as voice over internet protocol (VoIP) services or is classified by
the Federal Communications Commission as enhanced or value added, and includes
video and/or data service that is functionally integrated with “telephone
communication services.”
   (e)   The tax imposed by this section applies to all telephone communication
service however charged or billed, including, but not limited to prepaid
services, post-paid services, 800 services (or any other toll-free numbers), or
900 services.
   (f)   The tax imposed by this section applies to ancillary telephone
communication services, which are those services that enable or enhance access
to telephone communication services. Ancillary telephone communication services
include, but are not limited to, charges for connection, reconnection,
termination, movement, or change of telephone communication services; detailed
billing; central office and custom calling features (including but not limited
to call waiting, call forwarding, caller identification and three-way calling);
voice mail and other messaging services; directory assistance; access and line
charges; local number portability charges; text and instant messaging; and
conference calls.
   (g)   “Mobile telecommunication service” means commercial mobile radio
service, as defined in Section 20.3 of Title 47 of the Code of Federal
Regulations and as set forth in the Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing Act (4
U.S.C. Section 124) and the regulations thereunder.
   (h)   “Place of primary use” means the street address representative of
where the customer’s use of the telephone communications service primarily
occurs, which must be the residential street address or the primary business
street address of the customer.
   (i)   “Service address” means either (1) the location of the service user’s
telephone communication equipment from which the communication originates or
terminates, regardless of where the communication is billed or paid; or (2) if
the location of the equipment is unknown (e.g. mobile telecommunication service
or VoIP service), the service address means the location of the service user’s
place of primary use; or (3) for prepaid telephone communication service
“service address” means the point of sale of the services where the point of
sale is within the city, or if unknown, the known address of the service user
(e.g. billing address or location associated with the service number), which
locations shall be presumed to be the place of primary use.
   (j)   There is a rebuttable presumption that a telephone communication
service, which is billed to a billing or service address in the city, is used,
in whole or in part, within the city’s boundaries, and such service is subject
to taxation under this section. There is also a rebuttable presumption that a
prepaid telephone communication service sold within the city is primarily used,
in whole or in part, within the city and is therefore subject to taxation under
this section. If the billing address of the service user is different from the
service address, the service address of the service user shall be used for
purposes of imposing the tax. As used in this section, the term “charges” shall
include the value of any other services, credits, property of every kind of
nature, or other consideration provided by the service user in exchange for the
telephone communication service.
(Ord. 5291 § 1 (part), 2014; Ord. 3781 § 1 (part), 1987)
2.35.110   Council authorization to suspend collection of a portion of tax for
limited periods of time.
   The city council may from time to time determine to collect less than the
five percent tax imposed by Sections
2.35.060,
2.35.070,
2.35.080 and
2.35.090 from all service users and may suspend a portion of the maximum rates
by passage of an ordinance stating:
   (a)   The council's intention to suspend collection of a portion of said
tax;
   (b)   The duration of the suspension, which in no event shall exceed one
year;
   (c)   The exact portion of the tax, collection of which is being suspended.
   This rate suspension shall apply to all service users across the board and
shall be in effect for one year from the effective date of said ordinance.
(Ord. 5291 § 1 (part), 2014; Ord. 3781 § 1 (part), 1987)
2.35.120   Collection of tax.
   (a)   Every service supplier shall collect the amount of tax imposed by this
chapter from the service user.
   (b)   The tax shall be collected insofar as practicable at the same time as,
and along with, the collection of charges made in accordance with the regular
billing practice of the service supplier. Except in those cases where a service
user pays the full amount of said charges but does not pay any portion of a tax
imposed by this chapter, or where a service user has notified a service
supplier that he is refusing to pay a tax imposed by this chapter which said
service supplier is required to collect, if the amount paid by a service user
is less than the full amount of the charge and tax which has accrued for the
billing period, a proportionate share of both the charge and tax shall be
deemed to have been paid.
   (c)   The duty to collect the tax from a service user shall commence thirty
days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. If a
person receives more than one billing, one or more being for a different period
than another, the duty to collect shall arise separately for each billing
period.
(Ord. 5291 § 1 (part), 2014; Ord. 3781 § 1 (part), 1987)
2.35.130   Reporting and remitting.
   Each service supplier, shall, on or before the last day of each month, make
a return to the director of finance, on forms provided by him, stating the
amount of taxes billed by the service supplier during the preceding month. At
the time the return is filed, the full amount of the tax collected shall be
remitted to the director of finance. The director of finance may require
further information in the return. Returns and remittances are due immediately
upon cessation of business for any reason.
(Ord. 5291 § 1 (part), 2014; Ord. 3781 § 1 (part), 1987)
2.35.140   Penalty for delinquency.
   (a)   Taxes collected from a service user which are not remitted to the tax
administrator on or before the due dates provided in this chapter are
delinquent.
   (b)   Penalties for delinquency in remittance of any tax collected or any
deficiency in remittance, shall attach and be paid by the person required to
collect and remit at the rate of ten percent of the total tax collected or
imposed herein.
   (c)   The director of finance shall have power to impose additional
penalties upon persons required to collect and remit taxes under the provisions
of this chapter for fraud or negligence in reporting or remitting at the rate
of ten percent of the amount of the tax collected or as recomputed by the
director of finance.
   (d)   Every penalty imposed under the provisions of this section shall
become a part of the tax required to be remitted.
(Ord. 5291 § 1 (part), 2014; Ord. 3781 § 1 (part), 1987)
2.35.150   Records.
   It shall be the duty of every service supplier required to collect and remit
to the city any tax imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve, for a period
of three years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such
tax as such service supplier may have been required to collect and remit to the
city, which records the director of finance shall have the right to inspect at
all reasonable times.
(Ord. 5291 § 1 (part), 2014; Ord. 3781 § 1 (part), 1987)
2.35.160   Failure to pay tax - Administrative remedy.
   Whenever the director of finance determines that a service user has
deliberately withheld the amount of the tax owed by him from the amounts
remitted to a service supplier, or that a service user has failed to pay the
amount of the tax for a period or four or more billing periods, or whenever the
director of finance deems it in the best interest of the city, he shall relieve
the service supplier of the obligation to collect taxes due under this chapter
from certain named service users for specified billing periods. The director of
finance shall notify the service user that he has assumed responsibility to
collect the taxes due for the stated periods and demand payment of such taxes.
The notice shall be served on the service user by handing it to him personally
or by deposit of the notice in the United States mail, postage prepaid thereon,
addressed to the service user at the address to which billing was made by the
service supplier, or, should the service user have changed his address, to his
last known address. If a service user fails to remit the tax to the director of
finance within fifteen days from the date of the service of the notice upon
him, which shall be the date of mailing if service is not accomplished in
person, a penalty of twenty-five percent of the amount of the tax set forth in
the notice shall be imposed, but not less than $5.00. The penalty shall become
part of the tax herein required to be paid.
(Ord. 5291 § 1 (part), 2014; Ord. 3781 § 1 (part), 1987)
2.35.170   Actions to collect.
   Any tax required to be paid by a service user under the provisions of this
chapter shall be a debt owed by the service user to the city. Any such tax
collected from a service user which has not been remitted to the director of
finance shall be deemed a debt owed to the city by the person required to
collect and remit. Any person owing money to the city under the provisions of
this chapter shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the city for
the recovery of such amount including applicable penalties and attorneys' fees.
(Ord. 5291 § 1 (part), 2014; Ord. 3781 § 1 (part), 1987)
2.35.180   Administrative rules, regulations and agreements.
   The city manager has the authority to adopt rules and regulations not
inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter for the purpose of carrying
out and enforcing the payment, collection and remittance of any tax herein
imposed, and the city manager may also make administrative agreements to vary
the strict requirements of this chapter so that the collection of any tax
imposed herein may be made in conformance with the billing procedures of a
particular service supplier so long as the overall results of such agreements
result in collection of the tax in conformance with the general purpose and
scope of this chapter. A copy of such rules and regulations and a copy of any
such agreement shall be on file and available for public examination in the
office of the city clerk. Failure or refusal to comply with any such rules,
regulations or agreements promulgated under this section shall be deemed a
violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 5291 § 1 (part), 2014; Ord. 3781 § 1 (part), 1987)
2.35.190   Refunds.
   (a)   Claim Required. Prior to seeking judicial relief with respect to a
dispute regarding whether the amount of any tax has been overpaid, paid more
than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city under
this chapter, an aggrieved taxpayer, fee payer, service supplier, service user
or any other person must comply with the provisions of section
2.28.230 of this code.
   (b)   Service Suppliers. A service supplier may claim a refund or take as
credit against taxes collected and remitted, the amount overpaid, paid more
than once, or erroneously or illegally collected or received when it is
established in a manner prescribed by the director of finance that the service
user from whom the tax has been collected did not owe the tax; provided,
however, that neither a refund nor a credit shall be allowed unless the amount
of the tax so collected has either been refunded to the service user or
credited to charges subsequently payable by the service user to the service
supplier.
(Ord. 5291 § 1 (part), 2014; Ord. 5078 § 5, 2010: Ord. 3781 § 1 (part), 1987)
2.35.200   Bundling taxable items with nontaxable items.
   If any nontaxable charges are combined with and not separately stated from
taxable service charges on the customer’s bill or invoice of a service
supplier, the combined charges are subject to tax unless the service supplier
identifies, by reasonable and verifiable standards, the portions of the
combined charges that are nontaxable and taxable through the service supplier’s
books and records kept in the regular course of business, and in accordance
with generally accepted accounting principles, and not created and maintained
for tax purposes. If the service supplier offers a combination of taxable and
non-taxable services, and the charges are separately stated, then for taxation
purposes, the values assigned the taxable and non-taxable services shall be
based on its books and records kept in the regular course of business and in
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and not created and
maintained for tax purposes. The service supplier has the burden of proving the
proper valuation and apportionment of taxable and not-taxable charges.
(Ord. 5291 § 1 (part), 2014)
Chapter 2.36
PERSONNEL PROCEDURES
Sections:
   
2.36.010   Merit system.
   
2.36.020   Classification plan.
   
2.36.030   Declaration of intent to receive state aid for recruitment and
training of peace officers and public safety dispatchers.
   
2.36.040   Adherence to recruitment and training standards for peace officers
and public safety dispatchers.
2.36.010   Merit system.
   The city manager shall formulate and recommend to the council for its
approval rules and regulations pertaining to the operation of a merit personnel
program. These rules and regulations shall cover the promotion, demotion,
suspension, and release of personnel connected with the municipal service and
all other matters governing the status of employees and conditions of their
employment.
(Ord. 2146 (part), 1963: prior code § 2.601)
2.36.020   Classification plan.
   All positions of the municipal service shall be classified within a position
classification plan, which shall be maintained and operated by the city
manager.
(Ord. 2146 (part), 1963: prior code § 2.602)
2.36.030   Declaration of intent to receive state aid for recruitment and
training of peace officers and public safety dispatchers.
   The city of Palo Alto declares that it desires to qualify to receive aid
from the state of California under the provisions of Chapter 1 of Title 4, Part
4 of the California Penal Code.
(Ord. 4460 § 1, 1997: Ord. 1996 § 1, 1961)
2.36.040   Adherence to recruitment and training standards for peace officers
and public safety dispatchers.
   Pursuant to Section 13510(c), Section 13522 and Section 13525 of Chapter 1
of Title 4, Part 4 of the California Penal Code, the city of Palo Alto while
receiving aid from the state of California pursuant to said Chapter 1 will
adhere to the standards for recruitment and training of peace officers and
public safety dispatchers established by the California Commission on Peace
Officer Standards and Training. Pursuant to Section 13512 of Chapter 1 of Title
4, Part 4 of the California Penal Code, the Commission on Peace Officer
Standards and Training and its representatives may make such inquiries as
deemed appropriate by the commission to ascertain that its standards for
recruitment and training of peace officers and public safety dispatchers is
adhered to by the City of Palo Alto.
(Ord. 4460 § 2, 1997: Ord. 1996 § 2, 1961)
Chapter 2.37
BUSINESS TAX
Sections:
   
2.37.010   Title.
   
2.37.020   Definitions.
   
2.37.030   Obligation to pay business tax.
   
2.37.040   Imposition of business tax.
   
2.37.045   Order of calculations.
   
2.37.050   Annual adjustment of tax rate and cap.
   
2.37.060   Disposition of tax revenue.
   
2.37.070   Exemptions from tax.
   
2.37.080   Business tax offsets.
   
2.37.090   Quarterly tax payments.
   
2.37.100   Business tax filing for a new business.
   
2.37.110   Quarterly tax returns.
   
2.37.120   Agreements for installment payments.
   
2.37.130   Businesses operating in the same location.
   
2.37.140   Delinquent taxes (penalties and interest).
   
2.37.150   Administrative procedure to assess or correct tax.
   
2.37.160   General administrative remedy.
   
2.37.170   Appeals.
   
2.37.180   Constitutional apportionment.
   
2.37.190   Refunds.
   
2.37.200   Audits.
   
2.37.210   Maintenance and review of records.
   
2.37.220   Confidentiality of records.
   
2.37.230   Action to collect delinquent taxes.
   
2.37.240   Errors not binding on the city.
   
2.37.250   Dates.
   
2.37.260   Rules and regulations.
   
2.37.270   City council amendments.
   
2.37.280   Severability.
   
2.37.290   Savings clause.
   
2.37.300   Sunset.
2.37.010   Title.
   This chapter is the “City of Palo Alto Business Tax Ordinance.”
(Ord. 5581 § 1 (part), 2022)
2.37.020   Definitions.
   The definitions in this section apply to the words and phrases used in this
chapter unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.
   (a)   “Business” means any commercial enterprise, trade, calling, art,
vocation, profession, occupation, or means of livelihood, whether or not
carried on for gain or profit.
   (b)   “Business operator” means a person who transacts, maintains, manages,
operates, controls, engages in, conducts, carries on, or owns a business in the
city. It does not include the employee of a business who is not an owner or
proprietor of the business.
   (c)   “Calendar year” means the year beginning January 1 and ending December
31.
   (d)   “City” means the City of Palo Alto.
   (e)   “CPI Index” means the Consumer Price Index—All Urban Consumers for All
Items for the San Francisco-Oakland-Hayward Area or any successor to that index
designated by the Federal Bureau of Labor Statistics or the city council.
   (f)   Fiscal year” means the year beginning July 1 and ending June 30.
   (g)   “Fixed place of business” means a place of business located in the
city boundaries and occupied for the particular purpose of operating a
business.
   (h)   “Grocery store” means a business that exists for the primary purpose
of selling a range of food items to consumers for consumption off site, such as
canned foods; dry goods; fresh produce; fresh meats, fish, and poultry; and any
area that is not separately owned within the store where food is prepared and
served, including a bakery, deli, and meat and seafood departments, or as
otherwise defined in 14 CCR section 18982(a)(3), provided that any store that
combines grocery items with other retail products or services is a grocery
store for the purpose of this chapter only if two-thirds or more of the
occupied space is designated to the sale of grocery items as listed in this
section.
   (i)   “Hotel” has the meaning provided in Section
2.33.010.
   (j)   “Operate” means to conduct a business and includes all stages of
conducting a business from initial planning to the wind-down of a business,
whether or not a profit is being made.
   (k)   “Person” means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture,
association, corporation, limited liability company, estate, trust, receiver,
syndicate or other group or combination acting as a unit and includes the
plural as well as the singular number.
   (l)   “Quarter” means the three-month quarter of the fiscal year. The “first
quarter” is the months of July, August, and September; the “second quarter” is
the months of October, November, and December; the “third quarter” is the
months of January, February, and March; and the “fourth quarter” is the months
of April, May, and June. The term “same quarter of the previous fiscal year”
means the quarter of the same number in the previous fiscal year.
   (m)   “Square footage” means the rentable square footage used by a business
as specified in a business’s lease or, if the business floor space is owned by
the business, as calculated in the same manner as if the area was rented using
commonly accepted standards of measurement for leasing purposes such as the
Standard Methods of Measurement published by the Building Owners and Managers
Association (BOMA). Any method of measurement used must meet the following
minimum standards:
      (1)   It shall be computed by measuring to the inside finish of permanent
outer building walls and shall include space used by columns and projections
necessary to the building.
      (2)   It shall include both the area used by the business and a
proportionate share of the building service areas such as lobbies, corridors
and other common areas in a building unless assigned to another business for
tax calculation purposes.
      (3)   It shall not include vertical penetrations through the building
such as stairs, elevators, or heating, ventilation, air conditioning, utility,
or telephone systems, except on the lowest floor of stairs and elevators.
      (4)   For the business of renting or leasing property, it shall include
area used primarily for the business operator’s offices and operational
facilities.
      (5)   It shall not include residential uses, including multiple-family
use as defined in Section
18.04.030(102), two-family use as defined in Section
18.04.030(141), single-family residential use as defined in Section
18.04.030(86)(A)), mobile home park as defined in Section
18.04.030(97), residential care homes as defined in Section
18.04.030(124), supportive housing as defined in Section
18.04.030(135.5), transitional housing as defined in Section
18.04.030(138), emergency shelter as defined in Section
18.04.030(50), and any equivalent residential use defined by the city.
      (6)   It shall include hotel as defined in Section
18.04.030(73).
      (7)   Square footage for businesses with multiple locations will be
measured and tax assessed will be calculated based on the aggregate square
footage for the business for all locations in the city.
   (n)   “Tax administrator” means the director of administrative services, or
successor position, or their designee.
   (o)   “Transient occupancy tax” means the tax imposed under Section
2.33.020.
   (p)   “Transitory business” means a business that operates in the city for
less than 90 days in the course of one calendar year (such as seasonal sale
lots, special events, concerts/performances/circuses, filming, and party
rentals).
   (q)   “Vacant” means a severable portion of the physical location that a
business is occupying, such as an entire floor, a building, or a portion of a
floor with independent entrance and exit, that is free from any use, fixtures,
furniture, and equipment, and is immediately available for use by a new tenant
or owner.
(Ord. 5581 § 1 (part), 2022)
2.37.030   Obligation to pay business tax.
   (a)   It is unlawful for any business operator, either for themselves or for
any other person, to operate in the city any business taxed under this chapter
without paying all business tax required by this chapter.
   (b)   If a business has more than one business operator, then the payment of
the business tax by one business operator excuses any other business operators
from the obligation to pay the business tax for that period for which the tax
has been paid.
   (c)   The requirement to pay business tax is in addition to and separate
from the requirement to obtain a business registration certificate under
Section
4.60.030.
   (d)   The payment of business tax does not authorize the doing of any act
which the person or business paying the business tax is not otherwise entitled
to do and does not excuse the business from complying with other applicable
code requirements.
(Ord. 5581 § 1 (part), 2022)
2.37.040   Imposition of business tax.
   Any business operator operating a business at a fixed place of business in
the city must pay a business tax at the following rates:
   (a)   Beginning January 1, 2023, the tax shall be imposed at the following
rates:
      (1)   For the first 10,000 square feet occupied by a business in the
city, no tax shall be imposed.
      (2)   For each square foot occupied by a business in the city over 10,000
square feet, a monthly tax of three and three-quarter (3.75) cents per square
foot shall be imposed.
   (b)   Beginning January 1, 2025, the tax shall be imposed at the following
rates:
      (1)   For the first 10,000 square feet occupied by a business in the
city, no tax shall be imposed.
      (2)   For each square foot occupied by a business in the city over 10,000
square feet, a monthly tax of seven and one-half (7.5) cents per square foot
shall be imposed.
   (c)   The maximum amount of tax a business must pay is capped at $500,000
(five hundred thousand dollars) per fiscal year.
(Ord. 5581 § 1 (part), 2022)
2.37.045   Order of calculations.
   Tax owed shall be determined by applying the terms of this ordinance in the
following order: first, application of the tax rate in subdivisions (a) or (b)
of Section
2.37.040 to the square footage of the business; second, application of business
tax offsets as set forth in Section
2.37.080, if any; and third, application of the tax cap in subdivision (c) of
Section
2.37.040, if applicable.
(Ord. 5581 § 1 (part), 2022)
2.37.050   Annual adjustment of tax rate and cap.
   Beginning with the 2026-27 fiscal year, and each fiscal year thereafter, the
tax rate in subdivision (b)(2) of Section
2.37.040 and the cap in subdivision (c) of Section
2.37.040 shall be automatically increased by two and one-half percent (2.5%).
(Ord. 5581 § 1 (part), 2022)
2.37.060   Disposition of tax revenue.
   The tax imposed by this chapter is for the purpose of raising revenue for
the general governmental purposes of the city. All of the proceeds from the tax
imposed by this chapter shall be placed in the city’s general fund.
(Ord. 5581 § 1 (part), 2022)
2.37.070   Exemptions from tax.
   (a)   The following businesses are exempt from the tax imposed by this
chapter:
      (1)   Any business exempt from the tax by the laws of the United States
or the State of California;
      (2)   Grocery stores;
      (3)   Businesses that occupy or use 10,000 square feet or less in the
city; and
      (4)   Transitory businesses.
   (b)   If a business operator operates a single integrated business that has
two or more parts, one or more of which could be exempt from the tax imposed by
this chapter if operated as a separate business, the city may, at its
discretion, exempt from the tax any part of the business that would be exempt
if operated as a separate business, provided the business’s square footage can
be reasonably allocated between the parts. If the city determines that the
square footage cannot be reasonably allocated between the different parts of
the business, then the entire business shall be taxed, unless to do so would
violate a law of the United States or the State of California.
   (c)   A business that contends it is exempt under this section must apply to
the tax administrator for an exemption.
      (1)   The tax administrator may require a business claiming an exemption
to submit additional information to support the exemption. The request for
additional information must be made in writing and the information must be
provided within thirty (30) days.
      (2)   If the tax administrator determines that the business claiming an
exemption is not exempt, the tax administrator may make an initial
determination of the amount of tax due under subdivision (a) of Section
2.37.150.
(Ord. 5581 § 1 (part), 2022: Ord. 5607 § 3, 2024)
2.37.080   Business tax offsets.
   (a)   A business operator that operates a hotel in the city may deduct from
the business tax it owes for a quarter for the business of operating the hotel
an amount equal to the total transient occupancy tax collected and remitted to
the city in the same quarter of the previous fiscal year from transients
staying at the hotel.
   (b)   The business operator of a business that has discretion to determine
the location of the place of sale, place of use, or principal place of
negotiation for sales or use tax purposes and which exercises that discretion
and designates the city as the place of sale, place of use, or principal place
of negotiation for sales or use tax purposes which results in the city
receiving sales or use tax revenues that it would not otherwise have received,
but for the business’s exercise of its discretion to designate the city as the
place of sale, place of use, or principal place of negotiation for sales or use
tax purposes (“discretionary sales or use tax”) may deduct from the business
tax it owes for a quarter an amount equal to one half of the total sales tax or
use tax received by the city from the discretionary sales or use tax of that
business in the same quarter of the previous fiscal year. This offset can
offset up to, but no more than, 75% of the business’s quarterly business tax.
If any of the sales or use tax that served as a basis of an offset from
business tax is subsequently reallocated to another jurisdiction, the business
operator shall reimburse the city for the amount of the offset. This
reimbursement shall include all offsets within the five (5) years preceding the
date that a determination or decision is made to reallocate sales or use tax,
including the entirety of any quarter that falls partially within this five-
year period. The city and a business operator may enter into an agreement
implementing this section.
   (c)   A business operator of a business that has rights to property due to
property ownership, a ground lease, or a lease that permits subleasing, and
that is offering that property for sale or rent, may deduct from the business
tax owed for the business an amount equal to the business tax associated with
the square footage being offered for sale or rent, provided that the area to be
sold or rented is completely vacant and available for immediate occupancy.
   (d)   A business claiming an offset under this section must claim the offset
with its tax filing for the quarter for which the offset is claimed.
      (1)   If the information necessary for a business to claim an offset is
not available, the business may defer claiming an offset for up to one year or
for another period of time set by written agreement with the city.
      (2)   The tax administrator may require a business claiming an offset to
submit additional information to support the claim of the offset. The request
for additional information must be made in writing and the information must be
provided within thirty (30) days.
      (3)   If the tax administrator determines that an offset claimed by a
business is incorrect, the tax administrator may make an initial determination
of the amount, if any, of the offset and the amount of tax due under
subdivision (a) of Section
2.37.150.
(Ord. 5581 § 1 (part), 2022: Ord. 5607 § 4, 2024)
2.37.090   Quarterly tax payments.
   (a)   The tax imposed by this chapter shall be paid quarterly. The tax for
each quarter is due the first day of the following quarter and is delinquent
thirty (30) days later.
   (b)   For the first quarter in which a business begins operating in the
city, the business’s tax shall be prorated for the number of days that the
business was operating in the quarter.
   (c)   For the last quarter in which a business operates in the city before
closing, the business’s tax shall be prorated for the number of days that the
business was operating in the quarter.
(Ord. 5581 § 1 (part), 2022)
2.37.100   Business tax filing for a new business.
   When a business begins operating in the city for the first time, the
business operator must provide the tax administrator with the following
information, verified by the business operator as true and correct under
penalty of perjury of the laws of the State of California, before beginning the
operation of the business in the city:
   (a)   The name of the business and the address or addresses at which it will
be operating in the city;
   (b)   The date on which the business will begin operating;
   (c)   The nature of the business’s activities;
   (d)   The square footage in which the business will be operating in the
city; and
   (e)   Any other information required by the tax administrator that is
reasonably required to administer this
Chapter 2.37.
(Ord. 5581 § 1 (part), 2022)
2.37.110   Quarterly tax returns.
   With each quarterly tax payment, a business operator must submit a quarterly
tax return which contains the following information, verified by the business
operator as true and correct under penalty of perjury of the laws of the State
of California:
   (a)   The name of the business and the address or addresses at which it is
operating in the city;
   (b)   The nature of the business’s activities;
   (c)   The square footage in which the business is operating in the city;
   (d)   If the business operator claims an offset under Section
2.37.080, sufficient information and documentation to establish the business’s
right to the offset and the amount of the offset;
   (e)   Any other information required by the tax administrator; and
   (f)   The amount of tax due based on the square footage of the business.
(Ord. 5581 § 1 (part), 2022)
2.37.120   Agreements for installment payments.
   The tax administrator may enter into an agreement with a business operator,
or may adopt regulations that apply to all or a group of business operators, to
allow payment of the tax on a more or less frequent basis.
(Ord. 5581 § 1 (part), 2022)
2.37.130   Businesses operating in the same location.
   (a)   Each business operator operating a business in a location where one or
more other businesses are also operating is obligated to pay business tax
measured by the square footage occupied by that business.
   (b)   The payment of business tax by a business operator absolves any other
business operator from having to pay business tax measured by the same square
footage.
   (c)   Two or more business operators that are operating businesses in the
same square footage may contractually agree which business will pay the
business tax measured by that square footage.
(Ord. 5581 § 1 (part), 2022)
2.37.140   Delinquent taxes (penalties and interest).
   (a)   When a tax becomes delinquent, a penalty of 10% of the amount of the
delinquent tax will be added to the amount of tax due. If the tax remains
unpaid sixty (60) days after becoming delinquent, an additional penalty of 25%
of the amount of the delinquent tax (excluding accrued interest and the initial
penalty) will be added to the amount of tax due.
   (b)   On the first of each month that a tax is delinquent, interest in the
amount of 1.5% of the delinquent amount, excluding penalties and interest, will
be added to the amount of tax due.
   (c)   A business operator may apply to the tax administrator for a reduction
or waiver of any accrued penalties or interest, and the tax administrator may
reduce or waive any accrued penalties or interest upon a finding of good cause.
(Ord. 5581 § 1 (part), 2022)
2.37.150   Administrative procedure to assess or correct tax.
   (a)   If the tax administrator determines that a business operator has
incorrectly reported any information to the city or has not paid all or any of
the tax, penalties, or interest that are due, the tax administrator may, using
any information available to the tax administrator, issue an initial
determination stating what the tax administrator believes to be the correct
information and, if new or additional tax, penalties, or interest are due, how
much tax, penalties, or interest are due. An initial determination must be
issued within five (5) years of the last day of the quarter to which the
initial determination applies, except in the case of an audit conducted under
Section
2.37.200, in which case it must be issued within ninety (90) days of the
completion of the audit and can apply to any of the quarters that were subject
to the audit. The initial determination shall be served on the business
operator either personally or by U.S. mail to the most recent address for the
business operator in the tax administrator’s records. Service is effective upon
deposit of the initial determination in the U.S. mail.
   (b)   A business operator affected by an initial determination may within
thirty (30) days of service of an initial determination contest the initial
determination and request a hearing before the tax administrator by filing with
the tax administrator a written request for a hearing. The further accrual of
penalties and interest shall be tolled upon the filing of a request for a
hearing. If a business operator does not contest an initial determination and
request a hearing with the tax administrator within thirty (30) days of service
of the initial determination, the initial determination shall become final and
cannot be appealed.
   (c)   If a business operator timely contests an initial determination and
requests a hearing, the tax administrator shall set a hearing within sixty (60)
days of the filing of the request for a hearing. Notice of the hearing shall be
served on the business operator either personally or by U.S. mail to the most
recent address for the business operator in the tax administrator’s records.
   (d)   At the hearing the business operator may present evidence and argument
regarding the initial determination to show why the initial determination is
incorrect and to show what the determination of the tax administrator should
be. Within sixty (60) day after the close of the hearing, the tax administrator
shall serve a final determination, setting forth the tax administrator’s
determination of the facts and issues that were the subject of the initial
determination. The final determination shall be served on the business operator
either personally or by U.S. mail to the most recent address for the business
operator in the tax administrator’s records. Service is effective upon deposit
of the final determination in the U.S. mail. Unless an appeal of a final
determination is filed under Section
2.37.170, any penalties or interest tolled under subdivision (b) of this
section will resume accruing ten (10) days after the service of the final
determination.
(Ord. 5581 § 1 (part), 2022: Ord. 5607 § 5, 2024)
2.37.160   General administrative remedy.
   (a)   Any person affected by a decision of the tax administrator (“the
challenger”), except for decisions under Section
2.37.150, may challenge that decision by filing a written objection to the
decision with the tax administrator. The objection must be filed within thirty
(30) days of the issuance of the decision being challenged. If the tax
administrator was required to provide notice of the decision, then the time to
file an objection to the decision begins to run from the date of service of the
notice of the decision. The tax administrator shall serve a written response to
the objection within thirty (30) days of the filing of the objection, which
period can be extended by the tax administrator for an additional thirty (30)
days. The tax administrator’s response to the objection shall be served on the
challenger either personally or by U.S. mail to the most recent address for the
challenger in the tax administrator’s records.
   (b)   The challenger may request a hearing on the tax administrator’s
response to the objection by filing a request for a hearing with the tax
administrator within thirty (30) days of service of the response to the
objection. If a timely request for a hearing on a response to the objection is
filed with the tax administrator, the tax administrator shall set a hearing
within sixty (60) days of the filing of the request for a hearing. Notice of
the hearing shall be served on the challenger either personally or by U.S. mail
to the most recent address for the challenger in the tax administrator’s
records.
   (c)   At the hearing the challenger may present evidence and argument
regarding the decision being challenged to show why the decision is incorrect
and to show what it should be. Within sixty (60) days after the close of the
hearing, which the tax administrator may extend for an additional sixty (60)
days, the tax administrator shall serve a final determination on the decision,
setting forth the tax administrator’s determination of the decision that was
challenged. The final determination shall be served on the challenger either
personally or by U.S. mail to the most recent address for the challenger in the
tax administrator’s records. Service is effective upon deposit of the final
determination in the U.S. mail.
(Ord. 5581 § 1 (part), 2022)
2.37.170   Appeals.
   (a)   A final determination of the tax administrator under Section
2.37.150, subdivision (d), or Section
2.37.160, subdivision (c), can be appealed to the city manager by filing a
written notice of appeal with the city manager within thirty (30) days of
service of the notice of the final determination being appealed.
   (b)   Only a business operator who files a timely request for a hearing on
an initial determination under Section
2.37.150 and participates in the hearing or a challenger who files an objection
to a decision and files a request for a hearing on the response to the
objection under Section
2.37.160 and participates in the hearing can file an appeal under this section.
   (c)   If a timely appeal is filed with the city manager, the city manager,
or the city manager’s designee, shall set a hearing within sixty (60) days of
the filing of the appeal, which may be extended by the city manager for an
additional thirty (30) days. Notice of the hearing shall be served on the
appellant either personally or by U.S. mail to the most recent address for the
challenger in the tax administrator’s records. The tolling of the accrual of
penalties or interest under Section
2.37.150, subdivision (b), shall continue upon the timely filing of an appeal
under this section.
   (d)   At the hearing the appellant and the tax administrator may present
evidence and argument regarding the decision being appealed to show why the
decision is correct or incorrect and to show what it should be. Within sixty
(60) days after the close of The hearing, which the city manager or the city
manager’s designee may extend for an additional sixty (60) days, the city
manager or the city manager’s designee shall serve a written decision, setting
forth the resolution of the appeal. The decision shall be served on the
appellant either personally or by U.S. mail to the most recent address for the
appellant in the city manager’s records. Service is effective upon deposit of
the decision in the U.S. mail. Any penalties and interest that were tolled
under Section
2.37.150, subdivision (b), shall resume accruing ten (10) days after the
service of the decision.
   (e)   A decision of the city manager, or the city manager’s designee, served
under subdivision (d) of this section is subject to judicial review under
Sections 1094.5 and 1094.6 of the Code of Civil Procedure with a writ petition
filed in the appropriate court within ninety (90) days of the service of the
written decision. Any tax, penalties, or interest determined by the decision to
be owed to the city by the appellant must be paid to the city as a precondition
to filing a writ petition challenging the decision, but a claim for a refund
under Section
2.37.190 does not have to be filed before filing a writ petition.
(Ord. 5581 § 1 (part), 2022)
2.37.180   Constitutional apportionment.
   (a)   No tax imposed by this chapter shall be applied to a business operator
so as to constitute an undue burden on interstate commerce or intercity
commerce or be violative of the equal protection or due process clauses of the
United States or California constitutions.
   (b)   A business operator who contends that the application of a tax imposed
by this chapter on the business operator constitutes an undue burden on
interstate commerce or intercity commerce or violates the equal protection or
due process clauses of the United States or California constitutions may apply
to the tax administrator for an apportionment of the tax imposed on the
business operator that would remove the constitutional violation by filing a
written request with the tax administrator that explains the factual and legal
basis for the claimed constitutional violation and proposes a method of
apportionment that would resolve the alleged constitutional violations. The
application for apportionment shall be filed in advance or within one year of
the date the quarterly return was due.
   (c)   The tax administrator, in consultation with city attorney, shall
review the application and within sixty (60) days of the filing of the
application, which deadline may be extended for an additional sixty (60) days,
issue a decision on the application. The decision on the application shall be
served on the business operator either personally or by U.S. mail to the most
recent address for the challenger in the tax administrator’s records. The
decision can be challenged under Section
2.37.160.
(Ord. 5581 § 1 (part), 2022: Ord. 5607 § 6, 2024)
2.37.190   Refunds.
   (a)   A business operator who believes that any tax, penalty, or interest
has been illegally, erroneously, or mistakenly paid to, collected by, or
otherwise received by the city may file a claim for a refund of the amount of
tax, penalty, or interest claimed to have been improperly received by the city.
   (b)   The claim must be filed with the tax administrator and signed under
penalty of perjury by the business operator. The claim must state:
      (1)   The legal and factual basis for the refund claim;
      (2)   The amount of tax, penalty, or interest allegedly improperly
received by the city;
      (3)   The date or dates that the improper payments were made to the city;
and
      (4)   The address of the claimant.
   (c)   The claim must be filed with the tax administrator within two (2)
years of the date of the allegedly improper payment to the city.
   (d)   The tax administrator shall provide a written decision on the claim
within thirty (30) days of the filing of the claim by serving the decision on
the claimant either personally or by U.S. mail to the address provided in the
claim. Service is effective upon deposit of the response in the U.S. mail.
   (e)   A claimant may challenge the tax administrator’s decision on a refund
claim under Section
2.37.160.
   (f)   This section does not apply to:
      (1)   A claim for a refund arising out of a decision of the tax
administrator, city manager, or city manager’s designee under Sections
2.37.150,
2.37.160,
2.37.170, or
2.37.190; or
      (2)   A claim that could have been asserted by the claimant, but was not,
under Sections
2.37.150,
2.37.160,
2.37.170, or
2.37.180.
(Ord. 5581 § 1 (part), 2022; Ord. 5607 § 7, 2024)
2.37.200   Audits.
   (a)   The tax administrator may conduct an audit of any business operator to
ensure proper compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
   (b)   To initiate an audit the tax administrator shall provide written
notice to the business operator that is the subject of the audit of the
initiation of the audit by serving the notice personally or by U.S. mail to the
most recent address for the business operator in the tax administrator’s
records. The notice shall state the period of time subject to the audit.
   (c)   Notice of the initiation of an audit for a quarter for which either a
business tax filing for a new business or quarterly tax return was submitted
under Section
2.37.100 or Section
2.37.110 must be served within three (3) years of the last day of the quarter
to which the filing or return applied.
   (d)   Notice of the initiation of an audit for a quarter for which neither a
business tax filing for a new business nor a quarterly tax return was submitted
under Section
2.37.100 or Section
2.37.110, but for which the business was registered as a business under Section
4.60.030, must be served within five (5) years of the last day of the quarter
for which the filing or return should have been filed.
   (e)   Notice of the initiation of an audit for a quarter for which neither a
business tax filing for a new business nor a quarterly tax return was submitted
under Section
2.37.100 or Section
2.37.110, and for which the business was not registered as a business under
Section
4.60.030, must be served within seven (7) years of the last day of the quarter
for which the filing or return should have been filed.
   (f)   Upon completion of an audit, the tax administrator may make an initial
determination under subdivision (a) of Section
2.37.150 of any taxes, penalties, and interest determined to be owed and not
paid for the audit period. The initial determination must be issued within
ninety (90) days of the completion of the audit. If a business operator subject
to audit is unable or unwilling to provide sufficient records to enable the tax
administrator to verify compliance with this chapter, the tax administrator is
authorized to make a reasonable estimate of the amount of tax due and the
reasonable estimate shall be entitled to a rebuttable presumption of
correctness.
(Ord. 5581 § 1 (part), 2022)
2.37.210   Maintenance and review of records.
   (a)   Business operators must maintain for six (6) years records of square
footage and information necessary to calculate the tax. If the tax
administrator serves notice of the initiation of an audit, the information
pertinent for the quarters subject to the audit must be maintained until the
conclusion of the audit.
   (b)   The tax administrator may with reasonable notice inspect the premises
and records of the business operator.
   (c)   The tax administrator may request the city council to issue an
administrative subpoena for records of a business operator or other persons
with relevant information.
(Ord. 5581 § 1 (part), 2022)
2.37.220   Confidentiality of records.
   All documents submitted to the city by a business operator under this
chapter and all documents of a business operator inspected by the tax
administrator in the conduct of an audit are presumed to be confidential and
will not be subject to public inspection to the fullest extent allowed by law
and must be maintained so that the contents of the documents will not become
known except to persons charged with the administration of this chapter.
Confidential documents may be shared with consultants retained by the city to
aid in the administration of this chapter, provided the consultants agree to
maintain the confidentiality of the documents. However, nothing in this section
precludes the city from aggregating information and releasing it in a manner
that does not identify any particular business or connect any information with
a particular business.
(Ord. 5581 § 1 (part), 2022)
2.37.230   Action to collect delinquent taxes.
   (a)   Any tax, penalty, and interest imposed on a business operator under
this chapter is a debt owed by the business operator to the city, which may be
recovered in an action filed by the city in a court of competent jurisdiction.
   (b)   An action under this section shall be filed within three (3) years of
an initial determination becoming final under subdivision (b) of Section
2.37.150, the issuance of a final determination under subdivision (d) of
Section
2.37.150 that is not appealed, the issuance of a final determination under
subdivision (c) of Section
2.37.160 that is not appealed, or the issuance of a decision under subdivision
(d) of Section
2.37.170.
   (c)   During the pendency of an action filed under this section, interest
will continue to accrue under subdivision (b) of Section
2.37.140 until the entry of judgment.
   (d)   Before filing an action, the city may serve the business operator
either personally or by U.S. mail at the most recent address for the business
operator in the tax administrator’s records with notice of the pending action
and give the business operator fifteen (15) days to pay all of the delinquent
taxes, penalties, and fees. If all of the of the delinquent taxes, penalties,
and fees are not paid within the fifteen-day period, then an additional penalty
of 25% of the amount of the delinquent tax (including accrued penalties and
interest) shall be added to the total delinquency and may be recovered in the
action.
(Ord. 5581 § 1 (part), 2022)
2.37.240   Errors not binding on the city.
   No error by the tax administrator or any other officer, employee, or agent
of the city in the application of this chapter shall prevent, prejudice, or
estop the collection by or for the city of the full amount of tax owed by any
person under this chapter.
(Ord. 5581 § 1 (part), 2022)
2.37.250   Dates.
   If the last day for the performance of any act under this chapter is a
Saturday, Sunday, or holiday recognized by the city, then the date for the
performance of that act is extended to the next day that is not a Saturday,
Sunday, or holiday recognized by the city.
(Ord. 5581 § 1 (part), 2022)
2.37.260   Rules and regulations.
   (a)   The tax administrator may adopt rules and regulations that are not
inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter as may be necessary to aid in
the application and enforcement of this chapter.
   (b)   The tax administrator may adopt rules providing for the service or
filing of any notices, filings, returns, or submittals required by this
chapter. These rules may provide alternative means for serving or filing any
notice, filing, return, or submittal, and may clarify the method of serving or
filing any notice, filing, return, or submittal provided for in this chapter.
(Ord. 5581 § 1 (part), 2022)
2.37.270   City council amendments.
   (a)   The city council may amend this chapter in any way it deems necessary
without the approval of the electorate, provided the amendment does not
increase the amount of tax that any person would pay.
   (b)   Any amendment to this chapter that would reduce the amount of tax any
taxpayer would pay, either temporarily or permanently, must be approved by two-
thirds (2/3) of the members of the city council.
   (c)   Notwithstanding subdivision (a) of this section, the city council may
with the approval of two-thirds (2/3) of its members and without approval of
the electorate reduce, revise, or eliminate any of the business tax offsets in
Section
2.37.080.
(Ord. 5581 § 1 (part), 2022)
2.37.280   Severability.
   If any word, phrase, sentence, part, section, subsection, or other portion
of this chapter, or any application thereof to any person or circumstance is
declared void, unconstitutional, or invalid for any reason, then such word,
phrase, sentence, part, section, subsection, or other portion, or the
prescribed application thereof, shall be severable, and the remaining
provisions of this chapter, and all applications thereof, not having been
declared void, unconstitutional or invalid, shall remain in full force and
effect. The People of the City of Palo Alto hereby declare that they would have
passed this ordinance, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause and
phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections,
subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases had been declared invalid or
unconstitutional.
(Ord. 5581 § 1 (part), 2022)
2.37.290   Savings clause.
   No section, clause, part, or provision of this chapter shall be construed as
requiring the payment of any tax that would be in violation of the Constitution
or laws of the United States of America or of the Constitution or laws of the
State of California.
(Ord. 5581 § 1 (part), 2022)
2.37.300   Sunset.
   The tax imposed by this chapter shall cease to be imposed on January 1,
2058.
(Ord. 5581 § 1 (part), 2022)
Chapter 2.40
MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS
Sections:
   
2.40.010   Procedure for municipal elections.
   
2.40.015   Mail ballot elections.
   
2.40.020   Canvass of election returns.
   
2.40.030   Filing of nomination petitions.
   
2.40.035   Printing full text of proposed ordinance or measure in the sample
ballot.
   
2.40.040   Contributions and contributors.
   
2.40.050   Anonymous contributions.
   
2.40.060   Disclosure in campaign statements.
   
2.40.065   Electronic filing of campaign statements
   
2.40.070   Election campaigns - Voluntary expenditure ceiling.
   
2.40.080   No use of board or commission titles in ballot arguments.
2.40.010   Procedure for municipal elections.
   Except as otherwise provided in this code, all elections called and held in
the city shall be held and conducted in manner and form as required by the
general laws of the state governing elections within municipalities.
(Ord. 2146 (part), 1963: prior code § 2.701)
2.40.015   Mail ballot elections.
   (a)   The city council is authorized to conduct elections wholly by mail
ballot as described in subsection (b) of this section. The city council shall
determine whether an election will be conducted by mail at the time the
election is called. Actions of the city council pursuant to this section shall
be set forth in a resolution approved at a regular or special meeting of the
city council.
   (b)   The following items may be the subject of a mail ballot election:
   (1)   Any election to approve a special tax as required or authorized by
Article XIII C of the California Constitution.
   (2)   Any election to approve a property-related fee or charge as required
or authorized by Article XIII D of the California Constitution.
   (3)   Any assessment ballot proceeding required or authorized by Article
XIII D of the California Constitution; provided, however, that such a
proceeding shall be denominated an "assessment ballot proceeding" rather than
an election.
   (c)   Elections authorized by this section shall not occur on the same date
as a statewide direct primary election or statewide general election.
   (d)   Elections authorized by this section shall be deemed to be special
elections within the meaning of Section 3 of Article III of the Charter of the
City of Palo Alto and shall be conducted in accordance with special provisions
as may be adopted by resolution of the city council with respect to assessment
ballot proceedings and elections for property-related fees and charges, and,
with respect to elections on taxes, in accordance with the provisions for mail
ballot elections set forth in Elections Code Sections 4100 and following, as
now exist or may hereafter be amended, and in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter.
(Ord. 4647 § 2, 2000)
2.40.020   Canvass of election returns.
   When the council acts as a canvassing board to canvass election returns, it
shall meet for that purpose and duly canvass the election returns at its next
regular meeting or at a special meeting called for that purpose.
(Ord. 2146 (part), 1963: prior code § 2.702)
2.40.030   Filing of nomination petitions.
   Any person otherwise qualified may be a candidate for an elective office at
any election, regular or special, by filing with the clerk within the time
prescribed in the Elections Code of California a petition signed by at least
twenty-five qualified and registered voters. Any duly established candidacy
filing fee shall be waived for each candidate who files a petition signed by at
least four qualified or registered voters for each dollar of such filing fee.
(Ord. 4046 § 1, 1991: Ord. 2146 (part), 1963: prior code § 2.703)
2.40.035   Printing full text of proposed ordinance or measure in the sample
ballot.
   (a)   Whenever any ordinance or measure is to be submitted to the electors
at any municipal election, the city clerk shall cause a ballot question and the
full text of the ordinance or measure to be printed in the sample ballot. The
city clerk shall refer the ordinance or measure to the city attorney for
preparation of the ballot question. The ballot question may differ from any
other title of the ordinance or measure, and shall express the purpose of the
ordinance or measure.
   (b)   If the ordinance or measure exceeds fifty pages when printed or typed
single-spaced with not less than 12-point type, the city clerk shall cause a
summary of the full text of the ordinance or measure to be prepared and printed
in the sample ballot. The city clerk shall refer the ordinance or measure to
the city attorney who shall prepare a true and impartial summary of the full
text of the ordinance or measure in such language that the summary shall
neither be an argument, nor be likely to create prejudice, for or against the
proposed measure.
   (c)   In the event the full text of the ordinance or measure is not printed
on the ballot, nor in the voter information portion of the sample ballot, there
shall be printed immediately below the summary, in no less than 10-point bold
type, a legend substantially as follows:
The above statement is an impartial summary of the [ordinance or measure
title]. If you desire a copy of the ordinance or measure, please call the Palo
Alto City Clerk's Office at [insert telephone number] and a copy will be mailed
at no cost to you.
(Ord. 4434 § 2, 1997: Ord. 3748 § 1, 1987)
2.40.040   Contributions and contributors.
   The city clerk shall post online on the city's public website within five
days of the date on which campaign statements are required to be filed in
accordance with applicable California and local laws, rules and regulations,
including the rules and regulations of the California Fair Political Practices
Commission, the name of each person and committee from whom a contribution or
contributions totaling $50.00 or more have been received, the amounts each
person or committee contributed, and the candidates or committees which
received such amounts, as such information appear on the campaign statements
filed within the six-month period prior to the election pursuant to Article 2,
(commencing with Section 84200) of the Government Code.
   For the purposes of this section, the definitions contained in Chapter 2
(commencing with Section 82000) of the Government Code apply.
(Ord. 5045 § 1, 2009: Ord. 3189 § 1, 1980: Ord. 2843 § 1, 1975)
2.40.050   Anonymous contributions.
   No person shall make an anonymous contribution or contributions to a
candidate, committee, or any other person totaling $50.00 or more in a calendar
year. An anonymous contribution between $50.00 and $100.00 shall not be kept by
the intended recipient, but instead shall be promptly paid to the city clerk
for deposit in the general fund of this city.
(Ord. 3189 § 2, 1980)
2.40.060   Disclosure in campaign statements.
   Each campaign statement required to be filed by Article 2 of Chapter 4 of
the Political Reform Act of 1974, shall contain, in addition to any other
required information:
   (a)   The total amount of contributions received during the period covered
by the campaign statement from persons who have given less than $50.00.
   (b)   The full name of each person from whom a contribution or contributions
totaling between fifty and $100.00 has been received, together with the
contributor's street address, occupation, and the name of the contributor's
employer, if any, or the principal place of business if the contributor is
self-employed, the amount of the contribution, and the date the contribution
was received.
(Ord. 3189 § 3, 1980)
2.40.065   Electronic filing of campaign statements.
   (a)   Any elected officer, candidate, committee, or other person required to
file statements, reports or other documents described by Chapter 4 (Campaign
Disclosure) of Title 9 (Political Reform) of the California Government Code,
and that has received contributions and made expenditures of $1,000 or more,
shall electronically file such statements using procedures established by the
city clerk.
   (b)   Once an elected officer, candidate, committee, or other person files a
statement, report, or other document electronically pursuant to subsection (a),
all future statements, reports, or other documents on behalf of that filer
shall be filed electronically.
   (c)   In any instance in which an original statement, report, or other
document must be filed with the California Secretary of State and a copy of
that statement, report, or other document is required to be filed with the city
clerk, the filer may, but is not required to file the copy electronically.
   (d)   If the city clerk's electronic system is not capable of accepting a
particular type of statement, report, or other document, an elected officer,
candidate, committee, or other person shall file that document with the city
clerk in an alternative format.
(Ord. 5249 § 2, 2014)
2.40.070   Election campaigns - Voluntary expenditure ceiling.
   *   Editor's Note: Ordinance 4424, establishing this section, was suspended
from enforcement by City Council on June 15, 1999.
   (a)   Pursuant to Government Code Section 85400(c), a voluntary expenditure
ceiling is established for each candidate for each election to city elective
office in the amount of $14,000.00.
   (b)   Before accepting any contributions, each candidate for city elective
office shall file with the city clerk a statement of acceptance or rejection of
the voluntary expenditure ceiling established herein.
   (c)   No candidate for city elective office who accepts the voluntary
expenditure ceiling and no controlled campaign committee of such a candidate
shall make campaign expenditures in excess of the voluntary expenditure ceiling
established in this section.
   (d)   Each candidate who rejects the voluntary expenditure ceiling shall be
subject to the contribution limit set forth in Government Code Section 85301,
as the same may be amended from time to time.
   (e)   Each candidate who accepts the voluntary expenditure ceiling shall be
subject to the contribution limit set forth in Government Code Section 85402,
and not the contribution limit set forth in Government Code Section 85301, as
either section may be amended from time to time. In addition, as to each such
candidate, the city clerk shall provide notification to voters that the
candidate has accepted the voluntary expenditure ceiling established herein, as
required by Government Code Section 85602 and applicable regulations.
   (f)   Except as provided herein, the provisions of the Political Reform Act
of 1974, Government Code Sections 81000, et seq., and the California Political
Reform Act of 1996, Government Code Sections 85100, et seq., and applicable
regulations adopted pursuant to such acts, as the same may be amended from time
to time, shall govern the interpretation and application of this section.
   (g)   The penalties and remedies for violations of this section shall be
those set forth in the Political Reform Act of 1974, the California Political
Reform Act of 1974, the California Political Reform Act of 1996, and applicable
regulations adopted pursuant to such acts.
(Ord. 4424 § 1, 1997)
2.40.080   No use of board or commission titles in ballot arguments.
   No city board or commission member may use his or her board or commission
title when signing a ballot argument for or against an ordinance or measure. If
an argument is submitted to the city clerk with such a title in the signature,
the title shall be omitted from the ballot argument signature.
(Ord. 4837 § 2, 2004)
Chapter 2.44
OFFICIAL NEWSPAPER
Sections:
   
2.44.010   Official newspaper.
2.44.010   Official newspaper.
   Any newspaper designated and authorized to make a publication shall be
deemed the official newspaper for the work so ordered; provided, however, that
when publication of any resolution or ordinance is required by state law, the
newspaper must be qualified for such publications as by state law provided.
(Ord. 2146 (part), 1963: prior code § 2.705)
Chapter 2.48
SOLAR TAX CREDIT
Sections:
   
2.48.010   Utilities department solar program - Permit issuance authorization.
2.48.010   Utilities department solar program - Permit issuance authorization.
   The city council hereby establishes that the city's utilities department
solar program is a municipal solar utility within the meaning of California
Revenue and Taxation Code Section 17052.5 and related sections. The utilities
department solar program is hereby authorized to issue permits for purposes of
the Revenue and Taxation Code upon the submittal to and approval by council of
a program for the issuance of such permits.
(Ord. 3404 § 1, 1982)
Chapter 2.49
ELECTRONIC SIGNATURES
Sections:
   
2.49.010   Electronic signatures
2.49.010   Electronic signatures.
   (a)   In any document used or accepted by the city in which a signature is
required, the city shall not deny the force and effect of an electronic
signature if:
   (1)   The identity of the person using the electronic signature is capable
of verification; and
   (2)   The signature is linked to the document in such a manner that it is
readily ascertainable if the document is changed after the signature is
applied.
   (b)   The City Manager or his or her designee shall establish a list of
technologies or vendors that presumptively meet the requirements of subsection
(a).
   (c)   The City Manager shall determine the level of security required for
various classes of documents, including classes of documents for which the city
may accept electronic signatures that do not meet one or more of the
requirements of subsection (a).
(Ord. 5205 § 2, 2013)
Title 3 RESERVED
Title 4 BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS*
Chapters:
   
4.04   General Provisions
   
4.10   Licenses Obtained by Application to Chief of Police
   
4.12   Sidewalk Vendors
   
4.18   License Obtained by Application to Poundmaster
   
4.30   Soliciting Funds
   
4.32   Soliciting Information for Commercial Purposes
   
4.34   Closing Out Sales
   
4.38   Reserved
   
4.39   Private Intrusion and Fire Alarms
   
4.42   Taxicabs and Other For-Hire Vehicles
   
4.46   Reserved
   
4.48   Reserved
   
4.51   Bingo Games
   
4.52   Billiard Rooms, Cardrooms and Bowling Alleys
   
4.54   Massage Establishments
   
4.55   Adult Entertainment Establishments
   
4.56   Hot Tub/Sauna Establishments
   
4.57   Firearms Dealers
   
4.58   Narcotics Paraphernalia Sale and Display
   
4.59   Pet Shops
   
4.60   Business Registration Program
   
4.62   Citywide Minimum Wage
   
4.64   Permits for Retailers of Tobacco Products
   *   For drive-in restaurants - See
Chapter 5.10 of this code. For state law as to authority of cities to license
for revenue and regulation purposes - See Gov. C. A. § 37101. As to authority
of a city to license in exercise of police power and for purposes of regulation
- See Business and Professions Code, § 16000. As to licensing by cities
generally - See Business and Professions Code, §§ 16000 to 16003.
Chapter 4.04
GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sections:
   
4.04.010   Definitions.
   
4.04.020   License or permit required.
   
4.04.030   Application for license or permit.
   
4.04.040   Investigation.
   
4.04.050   Temporary license and permit.
   
4.04.060   Issuance of licenses and permits.
   
4.04.070   Term, renewal, credit.
   
4.04.080   Fees.
   
4.04.090   License and permit not transferable.
   
4.04.100   Display of license and permit.
   
4.04.110   Denial of application - Probationary license and permit.
   
4.04.120   Reapplication after denial.
   
4.04.130   Procedure for license and permit violations.
   
4.04.140   Grounds for denial, probation, and disciplinary action.
   
4.04.150   Hearing rules.
   
4.04.160   Refund of fee.
   
4.04.170   Authority after suspension, cancellation, invalidation, or
expiration.
   
4.04.180   Return of license and permit.
   
4.04.190   Interstate commerce.
   
4.04.200   Exemptions.
   
4.04.210   Reserved.
   *   Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history: Prior code §§ 3.01 - 3.15,
adopted by Ordinance No. 1603, and as amended by Ordinance Nos. 2389, 2566 and
2669.
4.04.010   Definitions.
   (a)   For the purpose of this title, unless it is plainly evident from the
context that a different meaning is intended, certain terms used herein are
defined as follows:
   (1)   "Cancellation" means that the license or permit is terminated without
prejudice and that the holder immediately may apply for another license or
permit. Cancellation of a license or permit may be made only when specifically
authorized in this code or when a license or permit has been issued in error or
voluntarily surrendered to the city.
   (2)   "Conviction" means the entry of a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to
a crime, a forfeiture of bail for a crime, or a finding of guilty of, or a
conviction of, a crime when the time for appeal has elapsed or the judgment of
conviction has been affirmed on appeal.
   (3)   "Invalidation" means that the license or permit has been adjudged
invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction or is rendered invalid by
operation of law.
   (4)   "Licensee" means a person licensed under any of the provisions of this
title.
   (5)   "Permittee" means a person holding a permit under any of the
provisions of this title.
   (6)   "Revocation" means that the license or permit is terminated with
prejudice and that a new license or permit may not be obtained until the
revocation period ends.
   (7)   "Suspension" means that the license or permit is temporarily withdrawn
with prejudice and is reinstated when the suspension period ends.
(Ord. 2755 § 1 (part), 1973)
4.04.020   License or permit required.
   No person shall commence or engage in, act in the capacity of, advertise, or
assume to act in any business, occupation, or activity for which a license or
permit is required under this title until he has first obtained and paid for a
license or permit therefor or when such license or permit has been cancelled,
suspended, revoked, or invalidated or has expired.
(Ord. 2755 § 1 (part), 1973)
4.04.030   Application for license or permit.
   Application for a new or renewed license or permit shall be made to the
officer or his designee specified under the provisions of the applicable
chapter of this title, on the form provided by such officer.
(Ord. 2755 § 1 (part), 1973)
4.04.040   Investigation.
   It shall be the duty of the officer to whom an application for a new or
renewed license or permit is made to make such investigation of the applicant
and the proposed business, occupation, or activity as such officer deems
necessary for the protection of the public.
(Ord. 2755 § 1 (part), 1973)
4.04.050   Temporary license and permit.
   Pending the approval or denial of an application for a new or renewed
license or permit, the officer to whom application has been made may approve a
no-fee temporary license or temporary permit for a period not to exceed three
months if the circumstances warrant such action. Such temporary license or
temporary permit shall be cancelled automatically and shall be invalid when the
applicant's license or permit has been issued or the application therefor has
been denied.
(Ord. 2755 § 1 (part), 1973)
4.04.060   Issuance of licenses and permits.
   (a)   Issuance. Upon the approval by the appropriate officer of a regular,
temporary, or probationary license or permit and upon the payment of any
applicable fee, the treasurer or his designee shall issue and deliver to the
applicant his license or permit. Such license or permit shall contain the
following information:
   (1)   The name and address of the licensee or permittee;
   (2)   The name of the business or the trade name of any product represented
by the license or permit;
   (3)   A description of the business, occupation, or activity engaged in;
   (4)   The address of the premises for which the license or permit is issued,
if any;
   (5)   The date of issuance;
   (6)   The date the license or permit is effective;
   (7)   The date of expiration;
   (8)   The amount of the fee paid including penalties;
   (9)   The state vehicle license number and other identifying description of
the vehicle if the business, occupation, or activity for which the license or
permit is issued is conducted from or with such vehicle;
   (10)   When applicable, a designation that the license or permit is
temporary or probationary.
   (b)   Records. The treasurer or his designee shall keep a record of all
licenses and permits issued and all conditions attached thereto.
(Ord. 2755 § 1 (part), 1973)
4.04.070   Term, renewal, credit.
   (a)   Term. A license may be issued for a term of one day, one quarter, or
one year, as specified in this title, excepting temporary licenses which may be
issued for any period of time up to three months. One-day licenses shall expire
at midnight on the day for which they were issued. Unless otherwise specified
in the provisions covering a particular license, quarterly licenses shall
expire on March 31st, June 30th, September 30th, or December 31st, and annual
licenses shall expire on June 30th. Permits may be issued for the terms
designated under the provisions of the applicable chapter of this title.
   (b)   Renewal. Every application for the renewal of a license or permit
shall be made at least fifteen days prior to the expiration date of such
license or permit.
   (c)   Credit. The treasurer shall collect the license or permit fee in full
for the original term specified. If a quarterly or annual license is issued for
less than three months or twelve months respectively, the treasurer, upon the
renewal of such license, shall allow a pro rata credit for that period of time
in the original term which preceded the date of issuance of the license or
permit.
(Ord. 2755 § 1 (part), 1973)
4.04.080   Fees.
   (a)   Debt to City. The amount of any license or permit fee imposed under
any section of this title shall be deemed a debt owing to the city at the time
of the commencement of the business, occupation, or activity requiring such
license or permit fee and payment thereof.
   (b)   Delinquent Fees. All license and permit fees delinquent for thirty
days or more shall be subject to a charge of fifty percent of the original fee,
which charge shall be added to the amount of the fee collected; provided,
however, the minimum charge shall be as set forth in the municipal fee
schedule.
(Ord. 2960 § 4, 1976: Ord. 2755 § 1 (part), 1973)
4.04.090   License and permit not transferable.
   Unless otherwise provided, no license or permit issued under the provisions
of this title shall be assigned or transferred in any manner, nor does it
authorize any person other than the one therein mentioned to engage in the
business, occupation, or activity for which such license or permit was issued.
(Ord. 2755 § 1 (part), 1973)
4.04.100   Display of license and permit.
   Each person having obtained a license or permit under the provisions of this
title shall forthwith exhibit the same as required by the provisions of the
applicable chapter of this title or in a conspicuous public location in the
place of business for which said license or permit is in effect. Any peddler,
solicitor, or other person who has no established place of business in the city
shall carry his license or permit and shall exhibit the same when so requested
when engaged in the activity for which the license or permit was obtained.
(Ord. 2755 § 1 (part), 1973)
4.04.110   Denial of application - Probationary license and permit.
   (a)   Grounds. The ground or grounds for the denial of an application for a
new or renewed license or permit or for the approval of a probationary license
or permit shall be those specified in Section
4.04.140 of this chapter.
   (b)   Probationary License or Permit. If the officer to whom application has
been made has cause to deny the application, then he shall approve a
probationary license or permit, subject to conditions to be observed in the
exercise of the privilege granted, when such a probationary license or permit
is feasible and would not be detrimental to the public interest. The conditions
shall be in the public interest, shall be suitable to the qualifications of the
applicant as disclosed by the application or the investigation thereof, and
shall be related to the cause existing for the denial of the application.
   (c)   Denial of License or Permit. If the officer to whom application has
been made has cause to deny the application and determines that it would not be
feasible or in the public interest to approve a probationary license or permit,
then he shall deny the application.
   (d)   Transmittal of Decision. The decision either to issue a probationary
license or permit or to deny the application shall be given to the applicant in
writing, setting forth specifically the ground or grounds upon which the
decision is based, the pertinent code section or sections, and a brief
statement of the factual matters in support thereof. The decision shall be
mailed, postage prepaid, addressed to the applicant at his last known address,
or it shall be delivered to the applicant personally.
   (e)   Appeal to City Manager. Within ten days from the deposit of the
decision in the mail or from its receipt by the applicant, whichever occurs
first, the applicant may appeal in writing to the city manager, setting forth
with particularity the ground or grounds for the appeal.
   (f)   Hearing on Appeal. The city manager shall set a time and place for the
hearing on the appeal not later than ten days from the date the appeal was
received by the city manager. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter.
   (g)   Disposition of Appeal. After the hearing on the appeal, the city
manager may refer the matter back to the originating officer for a new
investigation and decision, may affirm the decision of the originating officer,
may approve a probationary license or permit as provided in this section, or
may approve the application with no conditions. The decision of the city
manager shall be final.
   (h)   Vehicles for Hire. This section shall not apply to driver's permits
for vehicles for hire.
(Ord. 2755 § 1 (part), 1973)
4.04.120   Reapplication after denial.
   An applicant whose application for a new or renewed license or permit has
been denied may reapply for such license or permit after a period of not less
than one year has elapsed from the date such denial was deposited in the mail
or received by the applicant, whichever occurs first. An earlier reapplication
may be made if accompanied by satisfactory evidence that the ground or grounds
for the denial of the application no longer exist.
(Ord. 2755 § 1 (part), 1973)
4.04.130   Procedure for license and permit violations.
   (a)   Grounds. The ground or grounds for disciplinary action against a
licensee or permittee shall be those specified in Section
4.04.140 of this chapter.
   (b)   Notice of Hearing. A notice of the hearing shall be given to the
licensee or permittee by the city manager in writing, setting forth the time,
and place of the hearing, the ground or grounds upon which the hearing is
based, the pertinent code section or sections, and a brief statement of the
factual matters in support thereof. The notice shall be mailed, postage
prepaid, addressed to the licensee or permittee at his last known address, or
it shall be delivered to the licensee or permittee personally, at least ten
days prior to the hearing date.
   (c)   Hearing Procedure. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter.
   (d)   Suspension Prior to Hearing. Whenever the city manager finds that the
public health or safety requires it, he immediately may suspend any license or
permit pending a hearing or a notice of a hearing upon twenty-four hours'
written notice served in the same manner as the notice of the hearing.
   (e)   Disposition of the Case.
   (1)   Disciplinary Action. If the city manager, after the hearing, finds
that cause exists for disciplinary action, he shall impose one of the
following:
   (A)   A warning;
   (B)   A revocation of the license or permit and approval of a probationary
license or permit;
   (C)   Suspension of the license or permit for a specified period not to
exceed six months;
   (D)   Revocation of the license or permit for a specified period not to
exceed five years.
   (2)   Transmittal of Decision. Within ten days of the hearing the city
manager shall render his opinion in writing, stating his findings and the
action taken, if any. This opinion shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the
licensee or permittee at his last known address, or delivered to the licensee
or permittee personally.
   (f)   No Appeal. The decision of the city manager shall be final.
   (g)   Vehicles for Hire. This section shall not apply to driver's permits
for vehicles for hire.
(Ord. 2755 § 1 (part), 1973)
4.04.140   Grounds for denial, probation, and disciplinary action.
   (a)   An application for a license or permit may be denied, a probationary
license or permit may be denied and a licensee or permittee may be subjected to
disciplinary action for any of the following causes arising from the acts or
omissions of the applicant, licensee, or permittee either before or after the
license or permit is issued or of his employee or agent:
   (1)   Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement in applying for a new or
renewed license or permit;
   (2)   Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement in conducting a business
or occupation;
   (3)   Any relevant violation of this code;
   (4)   Conviction of any crime within the past five years where the trait
shown is inconsistent with carrying on the business, occupation, or activity
for the benefit of the public;
   (5)   Conducting the business, occupation, or activity for which the license
or permit is issued in an unlawful, unjust, or inequitable manner;
   (6)   Conducting the business, occupation, or activity for which the license
or permit is issued in a manner determined to constitute an immediate threat or
menace to the health or safety of the public. Failure to correct objectionable
conditions constituting a public nuisance within a reasonable time after lawful
notice from a governmental entity shall be prima facie proof thereof;
   (7)   Failure to abide by the disciplinary action imposed by the appropriate
city officer;
   (8)   Being committed or adjudged insane, mentally ill, or incompetent by a
court of competent jurisdiction until a subsequent adjudication of competency
or restoration to capacity.
(Ord. 3947 § 3, 1990: Ord. 2755 § 1 (part), 1973)
4.04.150   Hearing rules.
   All parties involved shall have the right to offer testimonial, documentary,
and tangible evidence bearing on the issues, to be represented by counsel, and
to confront and cross-examine any witnesses against them. Any hearing under
this title may be continued for a reasonable time for the convenience of a
party or a witness.
(Ord. 2755 § 1 (part), 1973)
4.04.160   Refund of fee.
   No refund or rebate of a license or permit fee shall be allowed by reason of
the fact that the licensee or permittee discontinues the activity prior to the
expiration of the term or that the license or permit is suspended or revoked
prior to the expiration of the term.
(Ord. 2755 § 1 (part), 1973)
4.04.170   Authority after suspension, cancellation, invalidation, or
expiration.
   The suspension, cancellation, invalidation, or expiration of a license or
permit issued under this title shall not prevent any proceedings to investigate
such license or permit, any action to revoke or suspend such license or permit,
any disciplinary proceeding against such licensee or permittee, or any
disciplinary action against such licensee or permittee.
(Ord. 2755 § 1 (part), 1973)
4.04.180   Return of license and permit.
   In the event that a license or permit issued under the provisions of this
title is cancelled, suspended, revoked, or invalidated, the licensee or
permittee shall forward it to the officer who issued it not later than the end
of the third business day after notification of such cancellation, suspension,
revocation, or invalidation.
(Ord. 2755 § 1 (part), 1973)
4.04.190   Interstate commerce.
   (a)   Every person claiming to be entitled to exemption from payment of any
license or permit fee provided for in this title on the ground that such fee
casts a burden upon his right to engage in commerce with foreign nations or
among the several states shall file an affidavit or a declaration under penalty
of perjury with the treasurer or his designee describing the interstate or
other character of his business which entitled him to such exemption. Such
affidavit or declaration shall contain:
   (1)   Name and location of the company or firm for which orders are to be
solicited;
   (2)   Name and address of the nearest local or state manager;
   (3)   Kind of goods, wares or merchandise to be delivered and the place from
which the goods are to be shipped or forwarded;
   (4)   Method of solicitation or taking orders;
   (5)   Location of any warehouse, factory, or plant within the state;
   (6)   Method of delivery;
   (7)   Name and residence of the applicant;
   (8)   Any other information which the applicant has bearing on his claim of
exemption.
   (b)   A copy of the order blank, contract form, or other papers used by the
applicant in taking orders shall be attached to the affidavit.
   (c)   A service charge as set forth in the municipal fee schedule shall be
charged for processing such application and shall be paid at the time of filing
the affidavit.
   (d)   No such applicant shall receive the license or permit without payment
of the license or permit fee provided for in this title unless a certificate of
exemption first has been issued to the applicant by the treasurer. In the event
the treasurer refuses to issue such certificate, the applicant may, within ten
days after such refusal, appeal to the city manager, who shall hear his appeal
in accordance with the procedure set forth in this chapter governing the
refusal of licenses.
(Ord. 2960 § 5, 1976: Ord. 2755 § 1 (part), 1973)
4.04.200   Exemptions.
   Unless otherwise expressly provided, no license or permit shall be required
of any person conducting any business, occupation, or activity which is carried
on wholly for charitable, education, fraternal, political, recreational, or
religious purposes and from which profit is not derived, directly or
indirectly, by any individual, firm or corporation. Solicitations for a
contribution of funds for a charitable, political, religious, educational,
community, recreational or similar nonprofit purpose shall be subject to
Chapter 4.30, but shall not be subject to other provisions of this title.
(Ord. 3368 § 1, 1982: Ord. 2755 § 1 (part), 1973)
4.04.210   Reserved.
   (Repealed by Ord. 4453 § 32, 1997)
Chapter 4.10
SOLICITORS, PEDDLERS, PAWNBROKERS, SECONDHAND DEALERS, AND OTHER BUSINESSES
REGULATED BY POLICE
Sections:
   
4.10.010   Application to chief of police.
   
4.10.020   Solicitor defined.
   
4.10.025   Peddler defined.
   
4.10.030   Reserved.
   
4.10.035   Reserved.
   
4.10.040   Reserved.
   
4.10.045   Reserved.
   
4.10.050   Solicitors and peddlers - regulations.
   
4.10.051   Reserved.
   
4.10.052   Reserved.
   
4.10.055   Reserved.
   
4.10.057   Reserved.
   
4.10.058   Reserved.
   
4.10.060   Reserved.
   
4.10.070   Circuses, carnivals and traveling shows.
   
4.10.080   Reserved.
   
4.10.090   Reserved.
   
4.10.100   Fee exemption under Business and Professions Code section 16001.
   
4.10.110   Reserved.
   
4.10.120   Reserved.
   
4.10.130   Reserved.
   
4.10.140   Reserved.
   
4.10.150   Reserved.
   
4.10.160   Reserved.
   
4.10.170   Reserved.
   
4.10.180   Reserved.
   
4.10.190   Reserved.
   
4.10.200   Pawnbrokers prohibited.
   
4.10.210   Secondhand dealer defined.
   
4.10.220   Secondhand tangible personal property defined.
   
4.10.225   Secondhand dealer - license required.
   
4.10.230   Secondhand dealers - regulations.
   
4.10.240   Reserved.
   
4.10.250   Reserved.
   
4.10.260   Reserved.
   
4.10.270   Reserved.
   
4.10.280   Reserved.
   *   For regulations concerning billiard and pool rooms, card rooms and
bowling alleys, see
Chapter 4.52 of this code.
4.10.010   Application to chief of police.
   Applications for licenses described in this chapter shall be made to the
chief of police and shall be sworn and in writing and shall be on a form
designated by the Police Department.
(Ord. 5610 § 2 (part), 2024; Ord. 1603 (part), 1955: prior code § 4.01)
4.10.020   Solicitor defined.
   A "solicitor" is any person, whether a resident of the city or not,
traveling either by foot, wagon, automobile, motor truck or any other type of
conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street,
taking or attempting to take orders for sale of goods, wares and merchandise,
personal property of any nature whatsoever, for future delivery, or for
services, whether or not such individual has, carries or exposes for sale a
sample of the subject of such sale or whether he is collecting advance payments
on such sales or not.
(Ord. 1603 (part), 1955: prior code § 4.02A)
4.10.025   Peddler defined.
   A "peddler" is a person, whether a resident of the city or not, traveling by
foot, wagon, automotive vehicle or any other type of conveyance, from place to
place, from house to house, or from street to street, carrying, conveying or
transporting goods, wares, merchandise, fruits, garden truck, farm products or
provisions, offering and exposing the same for sale, or making sales and
delivering articles to purchasers. The word "peddler" includes the words
"hawker" and "huckster."
(Ord. 3720 § 2, 1986: Ord. 1603 (part), 1955: prior code § 4.02B)
4.10.030   Reserved.
   (Repealed by Ord. 5610 § 2 (part), 2024)
4.10.035   Reserved.
   (Repealed by Ord. 5610 § 2 (part), 2024)
4.10.040   Reserved.
   (Repealed by Ord. 5610 § 2 (part), 2024)
4.10.045   Reserved.
   (Repealed by Ord. 5610 § 2 (part), 2024)
4.10.050   Solicitors and peddlers - regulations.
   (a)   No peddler or solicitor, nor any person in his behalf, shall shout,
make an outcry, blow a horn, ring a bell or use any sound device or musical
instrument, including any loud-speaking radio or sound-amplifying system, upon
any of the streets, alleys, parks or other public places of the city or upon
any private premises in the city where sound of sufficient volume is emitted or
produced therefrom to be capable of being plainly heard upon the streets,
avenues, alleys, parks or other public places, for the purpose of attracting
attention to any goods, wares or merchandise which such licensee proposed to
sell.
   (b)   No peddler or solicitor shall have any exclusive right to any location
in the public streets, nor shall he be permitted a stationary location, nor
shall he be permitted to operate in any congested area where his operations
might impede or inconvenience the public. For the purpose of this title, the
judgment of a police officer, exercised in good faith, shall be deemed
conclusive as to whether the area is congested or the public impeded or
inconvenienced.
   (c)   No person shall sell or offer for sale goods, wares or merchandise
from vehicles upon any of the public streets of the city; provided, however,
that the prohibition contained in this section does not include the peddling
from door to door from vehicles of fresh food products of farm or garden, nor
bona fide deliveries of goods, wares, merchandise or food made on a regular
route to regular customers.
   (d)   No person shall solicit or peddle from six p.m. to nine a.m., or at
any time when a sign has been posted on a building stating: “No solicitors or
peddlers,” except that a solicitor or peddler may call upon the occupant of a
residence at other times when he has received express prior permission from
such occupant to do so.
(Ord. 5610 § 2 (part), 2024; Ord. 4220 § 1, 1994: Ord. 4181 § 1, 1993: Ord.
3720 § 6, 1986: Ord. 3593 § 1, 1985: Ord. 2681 § 2, 1972: Ord. 2357, 1967: Ord.
1603 (part), 1955: prior code § 4.04)
4.10.051   Reserved.*
   *   Editor's Note: Former Section
4.10.051, pertaining to a limited exception to regulations regarding hours of
solicitation, was originally adopted by Section 1 of Ordinance 3758. As
adopted, the ordinance was set to expire August 13, 1988, and was formally
repealed by § 9 of Ordinance 4453, 1997.
4.10.052   Reserved.*
   *   Editor's Note: Former Section
4.10.052, pertaining to regulations for peddlers at the World Cup Soccer Games
containing portions of Ordinance Nos. 4181 and 4220 was repealed July 18, 1994
in accordance with Section 7 of Ordinance 4181 and Section 6 of Ordinance 4220.
4.10.055   Reserved.
   (Repealed by Ord. 5610 § 2 (part), 2024)
4.10.057   Reserved.
   (Repealed by Ord. 5610 § 2 (part), 2024)
4.10.058   Reserved.*
   *   Editor's Note: Former Section
4.10.058 pertaining to regulations for pushcart vendors at the World Cup Soccer
Games, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance Nos.
4181 and 4220 was repealed July 18, 1994 in accordance with Section 7 of
Ordinance 4181 and Section 6 of Ordinance 4220.
4.10.060   Reserved.
   (Repealed by Ord. 4453 § 10, 1997)
4.10.070   Circuses, carnivals and traveling shows.
   Every person conducting a circus, carnival, traveling show, rodeo, or any
other like or similar exhibition or amusement shall obtain a special event
permit and pay a fee as set forth in the municipal fee schedule.
(Ord. 5610 § 2 (part), 2024; Ord. 2960 § 8, 1976: Ord. 1603 (part), 1955: prior
code § 4.06)
4.10.080   Reserved.
   (Repealed by Ord. 4453 § 11, 1997)
4.10.090   Reserved.
   (Repealed by Ord. 5610 § 2 (part), 2024)
4.10.100   Fee exemption under Business and Professions Code section 16001.
   In order to claim a fee exemption as a veteran, as specified in Sections
16001 and 16001.5 of the Business and Professions Code of the state, or any
license fee exemption required by state or federal law, the applicant shall
file with the city an affidavit or a declaration under penalty of perjury, on
the form provided by him, establishing the facts entitling the applicant to
such fee exemption. The city may require proof of such facts. The denial of the
application and any appeal from such denial shall be governed by the procedures
in
Chapter 4.04 of this title.
(Ord. 5610 § 2 (part), 2024; Ord. 2754 § 4, 1973)
4.10.110   Reserved.
   (Repealed by Ord. 5610 § 2 (part), 2024)
4.10.120   Reserved.
   (Repealed by Ord. 5610 § 2 (part), 2024)
4.10.130   Reserved.
   (Repealed by Ord. 5610 § 2 (part), 2024)
4.10.140   Reserved.
   (Repealed by Ord. 5610 § 2 (part), 2024)
4.10.150   Reserved.
   (Repealed by Ord. 5610 § 2 (part), 2024)
4.10.160   Reserved.
   (Repealed by Ord. 4453 § 12, 1997)
4.10.170   Reserved.
   (Repealed by Ord. 4453 § 13, 1997)
4.10.180   Reserved.
   (Repealed by Ord. 4453 § 14, 1997)
4.10.190   Reserved.
   (Repealed by Ord. 4453 § 15, 1997)
4.10.200   Pawnbrokers prohibited.
   It is unlawful for anyone to carry on the business of pawnbroker within the
city. For the purpose of this section, a pawnbroker shall have the same meaning
as defined in California Financial Code section 21000.
(Ord. 5610 § 2 (part), 2024; Ord. 3288 § 1 (part), 1981)
4.10.210   Secondhand dealer defined.
   “Secondhand dealer” shall have the same meaning as defined in California
Business and Professions Code section 21625 et seq.
(Ord. 5610 § 2 (part), 2024; Ord. 3288 § 1 (part), 1981)
4.10.220   Secondhand tangible personal property defined.
   “Secondhand tangible personal property” shall have the same meaning as
defined in California Business and Professions Code section 21625 et seq.
(Ord. 5610 § 2 (part), 2024; Ord. 3288 § 1 (part), 1981)
4.10.225   Secondhand dealer – license required.
   A license is required to operate as a secondhand dealer. Applications must
be made to the Chief of Police and are subject to all requirements in state and
local law, including Business and Professions Code section 21625 et seq. and
the provisions of this chapter. Any fee authorized by the Municipal Fee
Schedule and/or state law must be paid prior to issuance of the license.
(Ord. 5610 § 2 (part), 2024)
4.10.230   Secondhand dealers - regulations.
   Secondhand dealers must follow all applicable laws, including Business and
Professions Code section 21625 et seq.
(Ord. 5610 § 2 (part), 2024; Ord. 3288 § 1 (part), 1981)
4.10.240   Reserved.
   (Repealed by Ord. 5610 § 2 (part), 2024)
4.10.250   Reserved.
   (Repealed by Ord. 5610 § 2 (part), 2024)
4.10.260   Reserved.
   (Repealed by Ord. 5610 § 2 (part), 2024)
4.10.270   Reserved.
   (Repealed by Ord. 5610 § 2 (part), 2024)
4.10.280   Reserved.
Chapter 4.12
SIDEWALK VENDORS
Sections:
   
4.12.010   Purpose.
   
4.12.020   Definitions.
   
4.12.030   General.
   
4.12.040   Placement and operation requirements.
   
4.12.050   Sidewalk vendors in parks.
 
   
4.12.060   Violations and penalties.
4.12.010   Purpose.
   This
Chapter 4.12 implements a sidewalk vendor program as permitted by Government
Code
section 51306 et seq.
(Ord. 5610 § 3 (part), 2024)
4.12.020   Definitions.
   (a)   “Sidewalk vendor” means a person who sells food or merchandise from a
pushcart, stand, display, pedal-driven cart, wagon, showcase, rack, or other
nonmotorized conveyance, or from one’s person, upon a public sidewalk or other
city-owned pedestrian path.
   (b)   “Roaming sidewalk vendor” means a sidewalk vendor who moves from place
to place and stops only to complete a transaction.
   (c)   “Stationary sidewalk vendor” means a sidewalk vendor who vends from a
fixed location.
(Ord. 5610 § 3 (part), 2024)
4.12.030   General.
   Sidewalk vendors are permitted except:
   (a)   Within 100 feet of the outer perimeter of a permitted certified
farmers’ market or a permitted swap meet during the limited operating hours of
that certified farmers’ market or swap meet. A “certified farmers’ market”
means a location operated in accordance with Chapter 10.5 (commencing with
Section 47000) of Division 17 of the Food and Agricultural Code and any
regulations adopted pursuant to that chapter. A “swap meet” means a location
operated in accordance with Article 6 (commencing with Section 21660) of
Chapter 9 of Division 8 of the Business and Professions Code, and any
regulations adopted pursuant to that article.
   (b)   Within 100 feet of the outer perimeter of an area designated for a
temporary special permit issued by the city, provided that any notice, business
interruption mitigation, or other rights provided to affected businesses or
property owners under the city’s temporary special permit are also provided to
any sidewalk vendors specifically permitted to operate in the area, if
applicable. For purposes of this subsection, a temporary special permit is a
permit issued by the city for the temporary use of, or encroachment on, the
sidewalk or other public area, including, but not limited to, an encroachment
permit, special event permit, or temporary event permit, for purposes
including, but not limited to, filming, parades, or outdoor concerts. A
prohibition of sidewalk vendors pursuant to this subsection shall only be
effective for the limited duration of the temporary special permit.
   (c)   Within 100 feet of the outer perimeter of a school during in-person
instructional time.
   (d)   Within zones that are exclusively residential as defined in
Chapter 18 (Zoning) of the Palo Alto Municipal Code. This subsection (d) shall
only apply to stationary sidewalk vendors.
   (e)   In city owned or operated parks in which the city has signed an
agreement for concessions that exclusively permits the sale of food or
merchandise by the concessionaire.
(Ord. 5610 § 3 (part), 2024)
4.12.040   Placement and operation requirements.
   (a)   No sidewalk vendor shall be located in a manner that:
   (1)   Impedes access to any city inspection, maintenance and operational
devices or controls;
   (2)   Blocks curbside access to a loading zone, as defined in Section
10.40.010;
   (3)   Impedes pedestrian access from curbside vehicles to the adjacent
sidewalk;
   (4)   Impedes the use of sidewalk bumps or other tactile paving by use of
the visually impaired;
   (5)   Impedes access to a driveway;
   (6)   Is situated between a duly permitted parklet or other on-street use
and the adjacent storefront.
   (b)   No sidewalk vendor shall be permitted on a public sidewalk within a
distance of ten feet from corner curb lines and corner crosswalks.
   (c)   In areas zoned community commercial (CC), commercial downtown (CD) and
in areas of the downtown zoned public facility (PF), no sidewalk vendor shall
be permitted within a minimum sidewalk clearance width of eight feet between
fixed objects, planter wells and/or curbs. Other than in the above locations,
the minimum sidewalk clearance width for a sidewalk vendor shall be at least
half of the sidewalk but not less than three feet.
   (d)   Sidewalk vendors shall be considered “retail” businesses for the
purpose of Section
18.42.040 (Late Night Uses and Activities) and shall be subject to its
provisions. Sidewalk vendors in violation of Section 18.42.040 shall be subject
to the penalties in Section
4.12.060.
   (e)   Sidewalk vendors shall possess a valid California Department of Tax
and Fee Administration seller’s permit and any other permit or license required
by law, including a permit from the County of Santa Clara for mobile food
facilities, if applicable.
   (f)   Sidewalk vendors shall follow all other generally applicable laws.
   (g)   The City Manager or designee may promulgate regulations regarding the
size, placement, safety, and operational requirements or restrictions of
sidewalk vendors.
(Ord. 5610 § 3 (part), 2024)
4.12.050   Sidewalk vendors in parks.
   (a)   Notwithstanding Section
22.04.160 (Commercial Activities and Solicitation), a sidewalk
vendor may operate in city parks, including those dedicated in
Chapter 22.08 (Park Dedications), unless specifically restricted pursuant to
statute or regulation.
   (b)   Following the procedure in Section
22.04.030 (Compliance Required), the City Manager may promulgate regulations
regulating the time, place, and manner of sidewalk vending in parks owned or
operated by the city if the requirements are any of the following:
   (1)   Directly related to objective health, safety, or welfare concerns;
   (2)   Necessary to ensure the public’s use and enjoyment of natural
resources and recreational opportunities; or
   (3)   Necessary to prevent an undue concentration of commercial activity
that unreasonably interferes with the scenic and natural character of the park.
   (c)   It shall be a violation for any person to violate any provision in the
regulations authorized by subsection (b) of this section. Violators will be
subject to the penalties in Section 4.12.060.
(Ord. 5610 § 3 (part), 2024)
4.12.060   Violations and penalties.
   (a)   A person found to be in violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter or any regulations authorized by this chapter shall be subject to the
following penalties:
   (1)   An administrative fine of one hundred dollars ($100) for a first
violation.
   (2)   An administrative fine of two hundred dollars ($200) for a second
violation within one year of the first violation.
   (3)   An administrative fine of five hundred dollars ($500) for each
additional violation within one year of the first violation.
   (4)   The city may prohibit a sidewalk vendor from operating in the city for
one year upon the fourth violation or subsequent violations within one year of
the first violation in addition to an administrative fine of five hundred
dollars ($500).
   (b)   Failure to pay an administrative fine pursuant to subdivision (a) or
(b) shall not be punishable as an infraction or misdemeanor. Additional fines,
fees, assessments, or any other financial conditions beyond those authorized in
subdivision (a) and (b) shall not be assessed.
   (c)   When assessing an administrative fine pursuant to subdivision (a) and
(b), the hearing officer shall take into consideration the person’s ability to
pay the fine. The city shall provide the person with notice of his or her right
to request an ability-to-pay determination and shall make available
instructions or other materials for requesting an ability-to-pay determination.
The person may request an ability-to-pay determination at adjudication or while
the judgment remains unpaid, including when a case is delinquent or has been
referred to a comprehensive collection program.
   (d)   If the person meets the criteria described in subdivision (a) or (b)
of California Government Code section 68632, the city shall accept, in full
satisfaction, 20% of the administrative fine imposed pursuant to subdivisions
(a) and (b).
   (e)   The hearing officer may allow the person to complete community service
in lieu of paying the total administrative fine, may waive the administrative
fine, or may offer an alternative disposition.
(Ord. 5610 § 3 (part), 2024)
Chapter 4.18
LICENSE OBTAINED BY APPLICATION TO POUNDMASTER
Sections:
   
4.18.010   Application to superintendent of animal services.
   
4.18.020   Rules and regulations.
   
4.18.030   Pet shop.
   
4.18.040   Dog or cat kennel.
   
4.18.050   Miscellaneous licenses - Fees.
   
4.18.060   Revocation of license for improper care of animals.
4.18.010   Application to superintendent of animal services.
   Application for licenses for business described in this chapter shall be
made in writing to the superintendent of animal services and shall contain such
information as he shall require.
(Ord. 2669 § 4, 1972: Ord. 1603 (part), 1955: prior code § 5.01)
4.18.020   Rules and regulations.
   The chief of police is authorized and empowered to adopt, with the approval
of the city manager, such rules and regulations as are reasonably necessary to
carry out the purposes of this chapter, and to insure the maintenance of
approved and humane conditions at any place for which a license is granted
under this chapter. A copy of such rules and regulations shall be furnished to
each applicant for a license upon the filing of his application.
(Ord. 2528 § 13, 1969: Ord. 1603 (part), 1955: prior code § 5.02)
4.18.030   Pet shop.
   (a)   A "pet shop" is any store or department of any store or any place of
business where dogs, cats, monkeys, birds, reptiles or any other animals are
kept for sale, for hire or sold.
   (b)   The fee for a pet shop license shall be as set forth in the municipal
fee schedule.
(Ord. 2960 § 14, 1976: Ord. 1603 (part), 1955: prior code § 5.03)
4.18.040   Dog or cat kennel.
   (a)   A "dog kennel" is any lot, building, structure or premises where three
or more dogs are kept.
   (b)   A "cat kennel" is any lot, building, structure, enclosure or premises
where four or more cats are kept.
   (c)   The fee for a dog or cat kennel license shall be as set forth in the
municipal fee schedule.
   (d)   It is unlawful to maintain a dog or cat kennel in which dogs or cats
are kept for sale within the city limits except within the territory zoned as
agricultural district.
(Ord. 2960 § 15, 1976: Ord. 1603 (part), 1955: prior code § 5.04)
4.18.050   Miscellaneous licenses - Fees.
   (a)   The fee for the following licenses issued under this chapter shall be
as set forth in the municipal fee schedule:
   (1)   Traveling menagerie not in connection with a licensed circus;
   (2)   Pet show, dog show, cat show or other temporary animal exhibition not
in connection with a performance at a regularly licensed theater;
   (3)   Zoo or other permanent collection of animals for exhibition;
   (4)   Pony ring or pony ride;
   (5)   Riding academy;
   (6)   Livery stable, boarding stable or other animal rental establishment.
(Ord. 2960 § 16, 1976: Ord. 1603 (part), 1955: prior code § 5.05)
4.18.060   Revocation of license for improper care of animals.
   (a)   In addition to the grounds for revocation of a business license
specified in Section
4.04.140, any license issued under this chapter may be revoked under the
procedure set forth in Section
4.04.140 if it should appear:
   (1)   That the licensee, his agent or employee has at the place for which
the license was issued failed to provide any animal, fowl or reptile in his
possession, care or control with proper and sufficient food, drink, shelter or
protection, or subjected any such animal, fowl or reptile to needless
suffering, unnecessary cruelty or abuse;
   (2)   That the licensee, his agent or employee has failed to maintain the
premises in a clean and sanitary condition.
(Ord. 1603 (part), 1955: prior code § 5.06)
Chapter 4.30
SOLICITING FUNDS*
Sections:
   
4.30.010   Reserved.
   
4.30.020   Reserved.
   
4.30.030   Reserved.
   
4.30.040   Reserved.
   
4.30.050   Reserved.
   
4.30.060   Reserved.
   
4.30.070   Reserved.
   
4.30.080   Reserved.
   
4.30.090   Reserved.
   
4.30.100   Conduct of solicitations.
   
4.30.110   Severability.
   *   Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history: Prior code §§ 4.08 and 4.09, as
adopted by Ordinance No. 1603, and as amended by Ordinance Nos. 2403, 2681 § 3,
and 2753.
4.30.010   Reserved.
   (Repealed by Ord. 5610 § 4 (part), 2024)
4.30.020   Reserved.
   (Repealed by Ord. 5610 § 4 (part), 2024)
4.30.030   Reserved.
   (Repealed by Ord. 5610 § 4 (part), 2024)
4.30.040   Reserved.
   (Repealed by Ord. 5610 § 4 (part), 2024)
4.30.050   Reserved.
   (Repealed by Ord. 5610 § 4 (part), 2024)
4.30.060   Reserved.
   (Repealed by Ord. 5610 § 4 (part), 2024)
4.30.070   Reserved.
   (Repealed by Ord. 5610 § 4 (part), 2024)
4.30.080   Reserved.
   (Repealed by Ord. 5610 § 4 (part), 2024)
4.30.090   Reserved.
   (Repealed by Ord. 5610 § 4 (part), 2024)
4.30.100   Conduct of solicitations.
   (a)   No person shall solicit funds at any time at any building where there
is a posted sign stating "No solicitors," or words to that effect, except that
a licensed solicitor may call upon an occupant of a building when he has
received express prior permission from such occupant to do so.
   (b)   No person shall solicit funds in any congested area where the
solicitation activity impedes the public. For the purpose of this section, the
judgment of a police officer, exercised in good faith, shall be deemed
conclusive as to whether the area is congested or the public impeded.
(Ord. 3484 § 1, 1983: Ord. 3368 § 2 (part), 1982)
4.30.110   Severability.
   If any provision or clause of this chapter or the application thereof to any
person or circumstance is held to be unconstitutional or to be otherwise
invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not
affect other chapter provisions, and clauses of this chapter are declared to be
severable.
(Ord. 3368 § 2 (part), 1982)
Chapter 4.32
SOLICITING INFORMATION FOR COMMERCIAL PURPOSES
Sections:
   
4.32.010   Definitions.
   
4.32.020   Reserved.
   
4.32.030   Reserved.
   
4.32.040   Reserved.
   
4.32.050   Reserved.
   
4.32.060   Reserved.
   
4.32.070   Reserved.
   
4.32.080   Reserved.
   
4.32.090   Reserved.
   
4.32.100   Restrictions on methods of solicitation.
   
4.32.110   Hours of solicitation.
4.32.010   Definitions.
   (a)   For the purpose of this chapter, unless it is plainly evident from the
context that a different meaning is intended, certain terms used in this
chapter are defined as follows:
   (1)   "Interviewee" means a person from whom information is requested by a
solicitor as defined in this chapter.
   (2)   "Soliciting" means requesting information on the background,
occupation, economic status, social status, religious status, political status,
attitudes, viewpoints, occupants of a residence, telephone number, address,
furnishings, or the like of another person for the purpose of compiling such
information as raw data or refined data into a document, record, book, or
directory to be sold, or to be used wholly or in part for a commercial purpose.
   (3)   "Solicitor" means the person soliciting as defined in this chapter.
(Ord. 2752 § 1 (part), 1973)
4.32.020   Reserved.
   (Repealed by Ord. 5610 § 5 (part), 2024)
4.32.030   Reserved.
   (Repealed by Ord. 5610 § 5 (part), 2024)
4.32.040   Reserved.
   (Repealed by Ord. 5610 § 5 (part), 2024)
4.32.050   Reserved.
   (Repealed by Ord. 5610 § 5 (part), 2024)
4.32.060   Reserved.
   (Repealed by Ord. 5610 § 5 (part), 2024)
4.32.070   Reserved.
   (Repealed by Ord. 5610 § 5 (part), 2024)
4.32.080   Reserved.
   (Repealed by Ord. 5610 § 5 (part), 2024)
4.32.090   Reserved.
   (Repealed by Ord. 5610 § 5 (part), 2024)
4.32.100   Restrictions on methods of solicitation.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for a solicitor to do any of the following:
   (1)   Falsely represent, directly or by implication, that the information is
being solicited on behalf of a governmental organization;
   (2)   Threaten, directly or by implication, that the information requested
will be solicited from sources other than the interviewee if the interviewee
does not provide the information;
   (3)   Without the express prior permission of an occupant, solicit at any
residence address or apartment complex where there is posted a sign stating:
"No solicitors or peddlers."
(Ord. 2752 § 1 (part), 1973)
4.32.110   Hours of solicitation.
   No person shall solicit information from six p.m. to nine a.m.; provided,
however, a solicitor may call upon the occupant of a residence during such
hours when he has received express prior permission from such occupant to do
so.
(Ord. 3755 § 1, 1987: Ord. 2752 § 1 (part), 1973)
Chapter 4.34
CLOSING OUT SALES
Sections:
   
4.34.010   Definitions.
   
4.34.020   Permit required.
   
4.34.030   Application for and granting of permit.
   
4.34.040   Conditions of permit.
   
4.34.050   Rules and regulations.
   
4.34.060   Loss of identity.
   
4.34.070   Enforcement.
   
4.34.080   Records.
   
4.34.090   Exemptions.
4.34.010   Definitions.
   (a)   For the purpose of this chapter only the following words and terms
shall be deemed to mean and be construed as follows:
   (1)   Sale.
   (A)   Any sale of, or any offer to sell, to the public or any group thereof,
goods, wares or merchandise on order, in transit or in stock, in connection
with a declared purpose as set forth by advertising that such sale is
anticipatory to or to avoid the termination, liquidation, revision, wind-up,
discontinuance, removal, dissolution or abandonment of the business or that
portion of the business conducted at any location; and
   (B)   All sales advertised in any manner calculated to convey to the public
the belief that upon the disposal of the goods to be placed on sale, the
business or that portion thereof being conducted at any location will cease, be
removed, be interrupted, discontinued or changed; and
   (C)   All sales advertised to be "Adjuster's Sale," "Adjustment Sale,"
"Assignee's Sale," "Bankrupt Sale," "Benefit of Administrator's Sale," "Benefit
of Creditor's Sale," "Benefit of Trustees' Sale," "Building Coming Down Sale,"
"Closing Out Sale," "Creditors' Committee Sale," "Creditors' Sale," "Damaged
Goods Sale," "End Sale," "Executor's Sale," "Final Days Sale," "Fire Sale,"
"Forced Out Sale," "Forced Out of Business Sale," "Insolvent Sale," "Insurance
Salvage Sale," "Liquidation Sale," "Loss of Lease Sale," "Mortgage Sale,"
"Outselling Sale," "Receiver's Sale," "Reorganization Sale," "Salvage Sale,"
"Selling Out Sale," "Smoke Sale," "Smoke and Water Sale," "Trustee's Sale,"
"Quitting Business Sale," "Wholesale Closing Out Sale," "We Quit Sale," "We
Give Up Sale," "Fixtures for Sale," or advertised by any other expression or
characterization closely similar to any of the foregoing and calculated to
convey the same meaning; and
   (D)   All sales advertised in a manner calculated to indicate that the
goods, wares or merchandise to be sold, or any part thereof, have been involved
in any business failure or have been derived from a business which has failed,
been closed, discontinued or liquidated; and
   (E)   All sales accompanied by notices or advertising indicating that the
premises are available for purchase or lease or otherwise to be vacated; and
   (F)   All sales accompanied by advertising indicating a business emergency
or failure affecting the seller of any previous holder of the goods to be
disposed of.
   (2)   "Advertise," "advertisement," "advertising," "publish," "publication"
means any and all means, whether oral, written, lettered or printed, used for
conveying to the public notice of the conduct of a sale as defined herein, or
notice of intention to conduct such sale, including but not limited to oral or
written announcements by proclamation or outcry, newspaper advertisement,
magazine advertisement, handbill, written or printed display, billboard
display, poster and radio announcement.
   (3)   "Permit" means a permit issued pursuant to this chapter.
   (4)   "Permittee" means any person to whom a permit has been issued pursuant
to this chapter.
(Ord. 1611 (part), 1955: prior code § 4.21)
4.34.020   Permit required.
   No person shall hereafter publish or conduct any sale of the type herein
defined without first obtaining a permit therefor from the chief of police in
the manner hereinafter provided in this chapter.
(Ord. 1611 (part), 1955: prior code § 4.22)
4.34.030   Application for and granting of permit.
   (a)   No permit to grant a sale as defined herein shall be granted except
upon written application to the chief of police, signed and verified before a
person authorized to administer oaths, by the person who intends to conduct
such sale, and each application shall set forth and contain the following
information:
   (1)   Description, by street location, and kind of building of the location
at which the sale is to be held;
   (2)   The nature of the occupancy, whether by ownership, lease or sublease,
and if by lease or sublease, the effective date of the termination of such
tenancy;
   (3)   A copy of all advertisements proposed to be used in connection with
such sale, and a statement of the means or methods of advertising to be used in
advertising such sale;
   (4)   The facts in regard to the insurance, bankruptcy, insolvency,
assignment, mortgage foreclosure, administration, receivership, trusteeship,
removal, executorship removal, or other cause advertised to be the reason for
the proposed sale;
   (5)   An inventory or statement, in such form and in such detail as the
chief of police may require, setting forth the amount and description of goods,
wares and merchandise to be sold at such sale and, when required by the chief
of police, the date of acquisition of such goods, wares or merchandise, and the
persons from whom obtained and the place from which said goods were last taken.
   (b)   The chief of police may require that all goods, wares and merchandise
listed upon the inventory or statement shall be so described in detail by
manufacturer's name and lot number, the individual number of articles so
numbered, colors, sizes and otherwise, that the identity of such goods with the
goods listed on such inventory can be readily determined.
   (c)   Upon the filing of the application, the chief of police may make or
cause to be made an examination, audit or investigation of the applicant and
his affairs, in relation to the proposed sale.
   (d)   If the chief of police finds that the statements in the application
are true, that the inventory is complete, that the advertising set forth is not
false, fraudulent, deceptive or misleading in any respect, and that the methods
to be used by the applicant in conducting the sale are not such as, in the
opinion of the chief of police, will work a fraud upon the purchasers, the
chief of police shall issue to the applicant a permit to conduct such sale in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter, otherwise, the chief of police
shall deny the application and refuse the permit. The chief of police may
refuse a permit because of the insufficiency of the information set forth in
the application, but in such event the chief of police shall grant the
applicant permission to file an amended application.
   (e)   No application for any such permit shall be accepted by the chief of
police for filing unless accompanied by a filing fee as set forth in the
municipal fee schedule, no part of which shall be refundable.
   (f)   Each permit issued under the provisions of this chapter shall have
printed, written or stamped on the face thereof the following:
   "This permit is granted by the chief of police of the city of Palo Alto and
accepted by the permittee upon the condition that such permittee comply with
and abide by all the provisions of
Chapter 4.34 of Palo Alto Municipal Code," with a line thereunder for signature
by the permittee and a witness.
   (g)   At the time of the delivery of the permit, such statement must be
signed by the permittee in the presence of an employee of the city who shall
sign as a witness.
(Ord. 2960 § 18, 1976: Ord. 1611 (part), 1955: prior code § 4.23)
4.34.040   Conditions of permit.
   Any permit issued under the provisions of this chapter shall authorize the
one type of sale named in the application, at the place named therein, for a
period of not more than sixty calendar days, and shall permit the sale of goods
only which are set out in said application, all of which goods throughout the
duration of the sale must be definitely separated from any other goods
displayed at or within the store or place of business, and all advertising,
signs, or notices referring to or calling attention to the sale must be
confined to the display, or displays of goods involved in the sale; provided,
however, that the chief of police may, upon a verified application therefor,
renew said permit for a period of not to exceed thirty days, upon the payment
of a renewal fee in the amount set forth in the municipal fee schedule. Such
verified petition for renewal shall set forth a complete list of goods listed
in the original application and remaining unsold, and shall not contain any
goods, wares, or merchandise not named in such original application. Upon
receipt of such application for renewal, the chief of police shall cause an
investigation to be made at once, and if satisfied of the truth of the
statements therein contained, the chief of police shall grant such renewal,
which shall be endorsed and signed as provided for the original permit. The
chief of police may renew any original permit in the manner provided in this
section not to exceed two times, upon the payment of the sum set forth in the
municipal fee schedule for each such renewal; provided, however, that the chief
of police may not issue permits or renewals which will allow the conduct of any
sale or sales of any kind or kinds named in this chapter at any one location
for more than one hundred twenty calendar days in any one twelve-month period.
(Ord. 2960 § 19, 1976; Ord. 1611 (part), 1955: prior code § 4.24)
4.34.050   Rules and regulations.
   (a)   Such permit shall be valid only for the advertising, representation
and sale of the particular goods, wares or merchandise described in the
original application therefor, and at the particular time, and particular place
stated therein, and by the particular applicant, and any renewal, replenishment
or substitution of such goods, wares or merchandise, or change of such time or
place for such sale, or change of person conducting the sale, is unlawful and
renders such permit void. No person in contemplation of conducting any such
sale or special sale, or during the continuance of such a sale, shall order any
goods, wares or merchandise for the purpose of selling them at such sale, and
any unusual purchase or additions to the stock of such goods, wares or
merchandise within sixty days before the filing of such application for a
license to conduct such a sale shall be presumptive evidence that such purchase
or additions were made in contemplation of such sale and for the purpose of
selling them at such sale.
   (b)   Each sale of goods, wares or merchandise as were not inventoried and
described in the original application constitutes a separate offense under this
chapter.
(Ord. 1611 (part), 1955: prior code § 4.25)
4.34.060   Loss of identity.
   Any removal of any goods, wares or merchandise inventoried and described in
the original application form from the place of sale mentioned in such
application shall cause such goods to lose their identity as the stock of any
of the sales defined in this chapter, and no permits thereafter will be issued
for the conducting of a sale of any such goods, wares or merchandise in such
manner as to identify them with the store, store name, store owner or location
referred to in the original application.
(Ord. 1611 (part), 1955: prior code § 4.26)
4.34.070   Enforcement.
   Upon commencement and throughout the duration of any sale, as herein
defined, the said permit shall be prominently displayed near the entrance to
the premises. A duplicate original of the application and stock list pursuant
to which such permit was issued shall at all times be available to the chief of
police, or to his inspector and investigators, and the permittee shall permit
such inspector and investigators to examine all merchandise in the premises for
comparison with such stock list.
(Ord. 1611 (part), 1955: prior code § 4.27)
4.34.080   Records.
   Suitable books and records shall be kept by the permittee and shall at all
times be available to the inspector and investigators. At the close of the
business each day the stock list attached to the application shall be revised
and those items disposed of during such day shall be so marked thereon.
(Ord. 1611 (part), 1955: prior code § 4.28)
4.34.090   Exemptions.
   (a)   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to or affect the
following persons:
   (1)   Persons acting pursuant to an order or process of a court of competent
jurisdiction;
   (2)   Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public
officers such as sheriffs and marshals;
   (3)   Duly licensed auctioneers, selling at auction;
   (4)   Any publisher of a newspaper, magazine or other publication who
publishes any such advertisement in good faith, without knowledge of its false,
deceptive or misleading character, or without knowledge that the provisions of
this chapter have not been complied with;
   (5)   Persons engaged in the business of buying and selling secondhand,
distressed, bankrupt or liquidated stock or similar merchandise in bulk lots
for purposes of resale and having a fixed place of business for such purpose in
the city of Palo Alto.
(Ord. 1611 (part), 1955: prior code § 4.29)
Chapter 4.38
RESERVED
*   Editor's Note: Section 16 of Ordinance 4453, 1997, renumbered Ch. 4.38 to
be Ch. 9.26. Most provisions of former Ch. 4.38 were repealed by Ordinance
4453; provisions still in effect, formerly codified herein, may be referred to
in said Ch. 9.26, Private Patrol Services.
Chapter 4.39
PRIVATE INTRUSION AND FIRE ALARMS*
Sections:
   
4.39.010   Findings and purpose.
   
4.39.020   Definitions.
   
4.39.025   Requirements for all alarm systems.
   
4.39.030   Limitations on audible alarm systems.
   
4.39.040   Reserved.
   
4.39.050   Back-up power supply.
   
4.39.060   Registration of alarm.
   
4.39.070   Alarm tests.
   
4.39.080   False alarm service charges.
   
4.39.090   Suspension of response; reinstatement.
   
4.39.100   Appeal.
   
4.39.110   Enforcement.
   *   Prior Ordinance History: Ordinance 3909 was previously codified herein,
and was not specifically repealed by adoption of Ord. 4726.
4.39.010   Findings and purpose.
   (a)   The city council finds and declares that:
   (1)   There are a substantial number of alarms of possible criminal activity
that come into the Palo Alto police department and preventable false fire
alarms that come into the Palo Alto fire department. These alarms average in
excess of four hundred per month for the police department and one hundred per
month for the fire department. It is the policy and practice of the Palo Alto
police and fire departments to respond to all alarms except those which are
known to be false and to report on all alarms genuine or false. Most alarms are
false. Most false alarms are the result of improper maintenance or improper or
careless use of an alarm system.
   (2)   False alarms needlessly divert limited police and fire resources from
genuine alarms and other emergencies. Police officers and fire crews responding
to false alarms are not available to carry out other public safety duties. In
the interest of using limited resources most effectively, the number of false
alarms can and must be reduced.
   (3)   The purpose of this chapter is to reduce the dangers and diversions of
false alarms and to encourage alarm users to maintain their systems in good
working order and to use them properly thereby conserving police and fire
personnel time and increasing protection for all Palo Alto citizens.
   (4)   Where the alarm system in question is a fire alarm, the enforcement
official for the city shall be the fire chief or his or her designee. For all
other alarm systems, the enforcement official shall be the chief of police or
his or her designee.
(Ord. 5441 § 1 (part), 2018: Ord. 4726 § 2 (part), 2002)
4.39.020   Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms used herein are defined as
follows:
   (a)   “Alarm administrator” means a person or persons designated by the city
(police chief and fire chief) to administer the provisions of this chapter.
   (b)   “Alarm business” means any person operating for any consideration who
is engaged in the installation, maintenance, alteration or servicing of alarm
systems or who responds to such alarm systems.
   (c)   “Alarm user awareness class” means a class conducted for the purpose
of educating alarm users about the responsible use, operation, and maintenance
of alarm systems and the problems created by false alarms.
   (d)   “Alarm system” means an assembly of equipment and devices arranged to
signal the presence of any condition upon premises within the city of Palo Alto
to which the police and fire department normally responds. The term “alarm
system” shall include equipment which is designed to detect an emergency, or
which is designed to be activated by a person to report an emergency. Alarm
systems include, but are not limited to, local alarm systems, direct connection
systems, central station alarm systems and automatic telephone dialing systems.
Alarm systems shall not include audible alarms affixed to automobiles.
   (e)   “Alarm user” means any person who owns, leases, is the agent of the
owner or lessee of, or otherwise is in possession or control of a premises on
which an alarm system has been installed and operates.
   (f)   “Audible alarm system” means an alarm system which is capable of being
heard outdoors when it is activated.
   (g)   “Automatic telephone dialing alarm system” means an alarm system which
utilizes a device which automatically transmits a pre-recorded message over
telephone lines to a number in the city’s communications center.
   (h)   “Central station alarm system” means an alarm system which transmits
the alarm signal to a facility where operators monitor the system and
retransmit the signal to the city’s communications center.
   (i)   “Direct connection alarm system” means an alarm system which transmits
an alarm signal directly to the city’s communications center.
   (j)   “False alarm” means an alarm signal resulting in a response by the
police or fire departments when an emergency does not exist. An alarm shall be
presumed false if the responding police or fire personnel do not locate any
evidence of an intrusion, the commission of an unlawful act, a fire, or other
emergency on the premises which might have caused the alarm to sound. Alarms
caused by earthquakes, hurricanes, tornadoes, or other “violent” acts of
nature, shall not be deemed false alarms.
   (k)   “Local alarm system” means an alarm system which is operated by the
user who is normally responsible for its operation. The alarm signal is
annunciated only on the premises, does not emit an audible signal, and is not
monitored by a third party monitoring provider.
   (l)   “Person” means and includes an individual, partnership, unincorporated
association or corporation.
   (m)   “Premises” means any land and building located within the city except
land or buildings owned or leased by the federal government, State of
California or any political subdivision of the state, or by any municipal
corporation or special district.
(Ord. 5441 § 1 (part), 2018: Ord. 4726 § 2 (part), 2002)
4.39.025   Requirements for all alarm systems.
   (a)   Before requesting a police or fire response, an alarm system
monitoring company shall attempt to contact the alarm site and/or alarm user by
telephone and/or other means, whether or not actual contact with a person is
made, to determine whether an alarm signal is valid. A second call shall be
made to an alternate number provided by the alarm user if the first attempt
fails. EXCEPTION: In case of a fire, panic, or robbery-in-progress alarm or in
cases where a crime-in-progress has been verified as defined in ANSI/CSAA CS-V-
01-2016 (or current version).
   (b)   Equipment and installation methods shall comply with all appropriate
nationally recognized testing laboratories and American National Standards
Institute (ANSI) requirements.
   (c)   It shall be unlawful for automatic telephone dialing devices to dial
any phone number used by the City of Palo Alto.
(Ord. 5441 § 1 (part), 2018)
4.39.030   Limitations on audible alarm systems.
   (a)   It is unlawful to install, sell or use an alarm system which, upon
activation, emits a sound similar to a siren in use on public emergency
vehicles or for public emergency vehicles or for public disaster warning
purposes. For the purposes of this section, any variable pitch siren as opposed
to steady pitch, shall be considered to emit a sound similar to the sound
emitted by a public emergency vehicle. This section does not apply to sirens
mounted inside a building which cannot be heard outside the building.
   (b)   It is unlawful to operate an audible alarm system which does not shut
off within a maximum time of ten minutes from the time of activation.
(Ord. 4726 § 2 (part), 2002)
4.39.040   Reserved.
4.39.050   Back-up power supply.
   Any alarm system shall be supplied with an uninterrupted power supply in
such a manner that the failure or interruption of the normal electric utility
service will not activate the alarm system. The power supply must be capable of
at least four hours of operation.
(Ord. 4726 § 2 (part), 2002)
4.39.060   Registration of alarm.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful to operate, or cause to be operated, an alarm
system on any premises in the City of Palo Alto without an alarm registration.
An alarm user shall register with the police department or fire department
alarm administrator, by filling out a registration form with his home address,
and business and residence telephone numbers. In addition, he shall provide the
police or fire department with a list of persons responsible for the premises
protected by the alarm system. This list shall contain at least three names,
one of which may be that of the alarm business maintaining the alarm system.
The list shall be kept current by the alarm user and shall supply home and
business telephone numbers of responsible persons. In addition, the
registration form shall contain any information deemed necessary by the chief
of police or fire chief to carry out the purposes of this chapter. A fee
adopted in the municipal fee schedule shall be charged for registration. Any
information contained in this form shall be confidential and shall not
constitute a public record. An alarm registration shall be valid for a period
of one year from the date of issuance unless sooner revoked.
   (b)   Upon request by the police or fire department alarm administrator, the
alarm user, or a responsible party, shall proceed to the scene of the alarm
within thirty minutes and render any necessary service. Such service shall
include, but not be limited to, opening the premises so that said premises may
be searched by responding police officers or fire crews.
(Ord. 5441 § 1 (part), 2018: Ord. 4726 § 2 (part), 2002)
4.39.070   Alarm tests.
   An alarm user, or alarm business, shall notify the public safety
communication center prior to any service, test, repair, maintenance,
adjustment, or installation of an alarm system which would normally result in a
police or fire response. Any alarm activated, where such prior notice has been
given, shall not constitute a false alarm.
(Ord. 5441 § 1 (part), 2018: Ord. 4726 § 2 (part), 2002)
4.39.080   False alarm service charges.
   (a)   There is imposed upon every alarm user whose alarm system causes three
or more false alarms within twelve months a false alarm service charge. A
separate charge shall be imposed for each false alarm in excess of two as set
forth in the municipal fee schedule. When the alarm business or alarm user
notifies the public safety communication center that there is not an existing
situation at the alarm site requiring emergency services response, within three
minutes of dispatch and prior to emergency personnel arriving at the scene, no
fee will be assessed.
   (b)   Service charges shall be due and payable and are delinquent after
thirty days of the mailing of a bill from the city. Interest for delinquency in
remittance of any service charge or any deficiency in remittance shall attach
at the rate of ten percent each month on the delinquent or deficient charge,
but such interest shall not be compounded.
   (c)   Debt to City. All fees and charges levied pursuant to this chapter
shall constitute a valid and subsisting debt in favor of the city and against
the alarm user for whom services were rendered. If the amount remains unpaid, a
civil action may be filed with the appropriate court for the amount due
together with any interest or penalties, any related charges and fees accrued
due to nonpayment, and all fees and charges required to file and pursue such
civil action.
   (d)   An alarm user may appeal any alarm service charge under this section
by submitting a letter of appeal to the police or fire department alarm
administrator explaining the basis for the appeal within fifteen days of the
mailing of the bill for that service charge. While the appeal is pending, the
bill shall not be due and payable. An administrative hearing officer shall set
a time and place for a hearing on the appeal within fifteen days after receipt
of the letter of appeal. Failure to file a timely letter of appeal shall be a
waiver of the alarm user’s right to a hearing; however, the administrative
hearing officer may set a date for a hearing if there is cause to believe that
it might encourage substantial cooperation from the alarm user. At the time and
place set for the hearing upon the appeal, the administrative hearing officer
shall hear evidence as to whether the alarm service charge should be imposed in
whole or in part. The burden of proof shall be upon the appellant to show that
there was no substantial evidence that the alarm service charge was properly
imposed as provided in this chapter. Within ten days after the conclusion of
the hearing, the administrative hearing officer shall render a decision on the
appeal. The decision shall be final. Notification of the decision shall be
mailed to the appellant within three days of the decision. If the appeal is
denied, the notification shall inform the alarm user of the exact date that the
alarm service charge shall become due and payable, which date shall in no event
be sooner than five days after notice of the decision has been mailed.
   (e)   In addition to any service charges or fees imposed by authority of
this chapter, an alarm user may also be subject to penalties for violating any
of the mandatory requirements of the chapter or
Chapter 15.04, as provided in
Chapters 1.12 and
1.16 of this code.
(Ord. 5441 § 1 (part), 2018: Ord. 5402 § 2, 2016; Ord. 4726 § 2 (part), 2002)
4.39.090   Suspension of response; reinstatement.
   (a)   The city may discontinue response of emergency services personnel if
the city determines that:
   (1)   There is any violation of this chapter;
   (2)   There is a false statement of material matter in the application for
permit;
   (3)   An alarm system has generated seven or more false alarms during any
twelve month period;
   (4)   The permit holder has failed to make payment of any service fee,
permit fee, late fee or suspension fee assessed under this article within
ninety days of the assessment.
   (b)   The city may resume emergency services response upon the alarm holder
submitting satisfactory proof of all of the following, at the discretion of the
police or fire department alarm administrator:
   (1)   Proof the alarm system has been inspected and the measures taken to
ensure the alarm system is in good working order. Measures taken may require
the alarm user repair, upgrade or modify the alarm system to be compliant with
this chapter.
   (2)   Proof the alarm user has been retrained on the use of the alarm system
and procedures for contacting the alarm business in the case of false
activation.
   (3)   The alarm user successfully completes an on-line alarm awareness class
and test.
   (4)   All fees and fines are paid in full including the reinstatement fee of
fifty dollars ($50.00).
(Ord. 5441 § 1 (part), 2018: Ord. 5402 § 3, 2016; Ord. 4726 § 2 (part), 2002)
4.39.100   Appeal.
   An alarm user whose alarm registration has been denied or revoked by the
city, may appeal that decision.
   (a)   Letter of Appeal. Such alarm user must file a letter of appeal with
the police or fire department alarm administrator within fifteen days of the
mailing of the letter of notification of denial or revocation. While the appeal
is pending, the alarm user’s registration shall not be revoked, but an appeal
shall not affect the denial of an alarm registration.
   (b)   Setting of Hearing. If the alarm user files a timely letter of appeal,
an administrative hearing officer shall set a time and place for a hearing on
the appeal. The date set for hearing shall be no more than sixty days after the
city’s receipt of the letter of appeal. Failure to file a timely letter of
appeal shall be a waiver of the alarm user’s right to a hearing; however, the
administrative hearing officer may set a date for a hearing if there is cause
to believe that it might encourage substantial cooperation from the alarm user.
   (c)   Hearing. At the time and place set for the hearing upon the appeal,
the administrative hearing officer shall hear evidence from the appellant and/
or any other interested party. The burden of proof shall be upon the appellant
to show that there was no substantial evidence to support disconnection the
denial or revocation of the alarm registration.
   (d)   Decision. Within ten calendar days after the conclusion of the
hearing, the administrative hearing officer shall render a decision on the
appeal. The decision shall be final. Notification of the decision shall be
mailed to the appellant within three days of the decision. If the appeal of an
alarm registration revocation is denied, the notification shall inform the
alarm user of the exact date that revocation of the alarm registration shall
commence which shall in no event be sooner than five days after notice of the
decision has been mailed.
(Ord. 5441 § 1 (part), 2018: Ord. 4726 § 2 (part), 2002)
4.39.110   Enforcement.
   (a)   The amount of any service charge imposed by authority of this chapter
shall be deemed a debt owing to the city. Proceedings may be instituted by the
city in a court of competent jurisdiction to secure a judgment for the amount
due.
   (b)   It is unlawful for any person, or business entity to install, operate
or maintain an alarm system contrary to or in violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter. Any person or business entity violating any of the
mandatory requirements of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable as
provided in Section
1.08.010 of this code, and may additionally be subject to administrative
penalties as provided in
Chapters 1.12 and
1.16 of this code.
(Ord. 5441 § 1 (part), 2018: Ord. 4726 § 2 (part), 2002)
Chapter 4.42
TAXICABS AND OTHER FOR-HIRE VEHICLES
Sections:
   
4.42.010   Definitions.
   
4.42.020   Certificate of public convenience and necessity.
   
4.42.030   Hearing after filing of application.
   
4.42.040   Proof of public convenience and necessity.
   
4.42.050   Certificate not transferable - Change in ownership.
   
4.42.060   Revocation of certificates.
   
4.42.070   Duties of certificate holder - Annual renewal.
   
4.42.080   Liability insurance - Indemnity.
   
4.42.085   Testing of drivers for controlled substances and alcohol.
   
4.42.090   Vehicle permits.
   
4.42.100   Driver's permit required.
   
4.42.110   Application for driver's permit.
   
4.42.120   Eligibility of driver's permit.
   
4.42.130   Driver's permit, form, display, use.
   
4.42.140   Revocation or suspension of permits.
   
4.42.150   Hearing.
   
4.42.160   Reserved.
   
4.42.170   Identification of taxicabs.
   
4.42.180   Signs or advertisements on taxicabs.
   
4.42.190   Taxi meters.
   
4.42.200   Schedule of rates, display.
   
4.42.210   Interference with inspection - Inspection of vehicles.
   
4.42.220   Operating regulations.
   
4.42.230   Maintenance of vehicles.
   
4.42.240   Permits not transferable.
   
4.42.250   Duties of city.
4.42.010   Definitions.
   For the purpose of this chapter, unless it is plainly evident from the
context that a different meaning is intended, certain terms used herein are
defined as follows:
   (a)   "ADA paratransit provider" means a taxicab or public transportation
vehicle operator that provides paratransit services to eligible individuals
with disabilities in order to effectuate the Americans with Disabilities Act of
1990 under contract with any government agency or under contract with a broker
designated by any government agency. An ADA paratransit provider, while in the
performance of providing paratransit services under such government contract
controls shall be exempt from the regulatory requirements of this
Chapter 4.42.
   (b)   "Certificate holder" means any person, partnership, firm, association
or corporation to whom a certificate of public convenience and necessity is
issued.
   (c)   "Driver" means a person in direct and immediate possession or charge
of driving or operating a taxicab, or public transportation vehicle.
   (d)   "Owner" means any person, firm, association or corporation having
proprietary control of or right to proprietary control of any vehicle as herein
defined.
   (e)   "Public transportation vehicle" means every for-hire, unmetered
automobile or motor-propelled vehicle having a seating capacity of no more than
five persons, excluding driver, used in the business of transporting passengers
over the streets of this city, irrespective of whether such operations extend
beyond the city, and which is not regulated by the public utilities commission.
   (f)   "Street" or "highway" means a way or place of whatever nature publicly
maintained and opened to the use of vehicular traffic.
   (g)   “Substantially located” shall have the same meaning as defined in
Government Code section 53075.5, as amended from time to time.
   (h)   “Taxicab” means a motor-propelled vehicle available on a twenty-four
hour a day basis used for the transportation of passengers who direct the route
to be traveled over the streets, and not operated over a fixed route, for
compensation fixed by a taxi meter in accordance with the distance traveled
and/or the time elapsed.
   (i)   “Taximeter” means any instrument or device approved for use under the
applicable laws of the state of California, which mechanically or
electronically calculates the charge for the use of a taxicab. The taximeter
registers such charge by means of figures, including dollars and cents,
calculated by an initial charge and thereafter a charge for distance traveled,
and/or waiting time.
(Ord. 5454 § 2 (part), 2018: Ord. 4341 § 3, 1996: Ord. 4223 § 1, 1994: Ord.
3286 § 1 (part), 1981)
4.42.020   Certificate of public convenience and necessity.
   (a)   It is unlawful for any person, partnership, firm, association or
corporation, or the like that is substantially located within the city to
provide taxicab or public transportation vehicle service in this city without a
certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to this chapter
by the city manager or his/her designee.
(Ord. 5454 § 2 (part), 2018: Ord. 4341 § 4, 1996: Ord. 4223 § 2, 1994: Ord.
3286 § 1 (part), 1981)
4.42.030   Hearing after filing of application.
   Applicants shall furnish such information as may be required by the hearing
officer upon forms to be furnished by the police department. A public hearing
on the question of issuance of a certificate of public convenience and
necessity shall be held within sixty days after filing of a completed
application with the police department. Said hearing shall be held before the
city manager or his/her designee. Notice of said hearing shall be included in
two consecutive council packets and shall be advertised in a newspaper of
general circulation.
(Ord. 3286 § 1 (part), 1981)
4.42.040   Proof of public convenience and necessity.
   (a)   Applicant shall have the burden of proving:
   (1)   That there is a public demand for additional service or that service
to the public will be improved by the issuance of a certificate to the
applicant;
   (2)   That applicant has sufficient experience and assets to properly
conduct such a business;
   (3)   That traffic conditions or hazards will not be appreciably increased
or parking problems made worse.
   (b)   The decision of the hearing officer shall be final and nonappealable.
If denied, the applicant shall not file for a certificate of public convenience
and necessity for six months from date of denial.
(Ord. 3286 § 1 (part), 1981)
4.42.050   Certificate not transferable - Change in ownership.
   No certificate shall be assignable or transferable. If ownership in excess
of thirty-three percent of the business, whether corporate stock, partnership
interest, or otherwise, changes, a new certificate must be obtained.
(Ord. 3286 § 1 (part), 1981)
4.42.060   Revocation of certificates.
   Certificates of public convenience and necessity may be revoked for any
cause which would have warranted denial thereof in the first instance, for a
failure to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter, a failure to
comply with any conditions imposed upon the certificate or in any instance
where operations have ceased for ten consecutive days. If a certificate of
public convenience and necessity is granted, and operation of the service for
which the certificate is granted does not commence within four months of the
date of the approval thereof, the certificate shall be automatically null and
void. Any revocation herein shall be held before the city manager or a
representative of such person; ten days' written notice shall be provided to
the certificate holder and the certificate holder shall have the opportunity to
present at the hearing any evidence deemed relevant by the hearing officer. The
decision of the hearing officer shall be final and nonappealable. If revoked,
the applicant shall not file for a certificate of public convenience and
necessity for six months from date of revocation.
(Ord. 3286 § 1 (part), 1981)
4.42.070   Duties of certificate holder - Annual renewal.
   (a)   Certificate holders shall render a service to the public desiring to
use taxicabs and public transportation vehicles. Taxicab companies shall keep
their place of business open twenty-four hours a day for the purpose of
receiving calls and dispatching vehicles.
   (b)   Certificate holders shall answer all requests received by them for
services inside the corporate limits as soon as practicable; and, if the
service cannot be rendered within a reasonable time, the certificate holder
shall inform the prospective passenger how long it will be before the call can
be answered and give the reason therefor. Any certificate may be revoked after
hearing when a certificate holder refuses to accept a request for service
anywhere within the corporate limits of the city, having vehicles and drivers
available for service.
   (c)   Certificate holders shall be responsible for the business authorized
by the certificate, including dispatch services. A certificate holder shall
assure that the vehicles operated by the certificate holder are operable and in
safe condition. A certificate holder shall be responsible to provide
sufficient, permitted drivers to operate the business in accordance with the
requirements of the certificate and this chapter.
   (d)   Notice of change of business or dispatch address or of telephone
number shall be provided the police department at least seventy-two hours
before said change is effected.
   (e)   Each certificate holder must renew the certificate annually. Upon
payment of the nonrefundable administrative fees provided in the municipal fee
schedule, the police department shall issue an annual renewal.
   (f)   Each certificate holder shall comply with the requirements for
permitted taxicab companies as found in California Government Code section
53075.5(h), as amended.
(Ord. 5454 § 2 (part), 2018: Ord. 4223 § 3, 1994: Ord. 3286 81 (part), 1981)
4.42.080   Liability insurance - Indemnity.
   (a)   No certificate of public convenience and necessity shall be issued or
continued in operation unless there is in full force and effect a policy of
comprehensive automobile liability insurance in a form prescribed by the risk
manager, executed by an insurance company approved by the risk manager with a
Best’s Key Rating of not less than “A VII,” unless otherwise approved by the
risk manager, whereby the owner and driver of each of the vehicles operating
pursuant to the certificate as well as the holder of the certificate of public
convenience and necessity are insured against liability for damage to property
and for injury to or death of any person as a result of the ownership operation
or other use thereof. The minimum liability limits shall not be less than one
million dollars combined single limit per occurrence applicable to all owned,
non-owned and hired vehicles; provided, however, that a higher amount and/or
broader coverage may be required by the city if deemed necessary.
   (b)   Such policy of insurance shall contain an endorsement providing that
the policy will not be cancelled until notice in writing has been given to the
city, addressed in care of the Chief of Police, P.O. Box 10250, Palo Alto,
California 94303, at least thirty days immediately prior to the time such
cancellation becomes effective.
   (c)   Such policy of insurance shall name the city, its officers, agents and
employees as additional insureds.
   (d)   Certificate holders, vehicle owners and drivers shall indemnify,
defend and hold harmless the city, its officers, agents and employees, from any
loss, liability, claim, injury or damage arising or alleged to arise from the
willful or negligent acts or omissions of the certificate holder, vehicle owner
or driver in connection with the provision of transportation service pursuant
to the certificate.
(Ord. 5454 § 2 (part), 2018: Ord. 4223 § 4, 1994: Ord. 3286 § 1 (part), 1981)
4.42.085   Testing of drivers for controlled substances and alcohol.
   (a)   Each holder of a certificate of public convenience and necessity shall
maintain a mandatory controlled substance and alcohol testing certification
program that:
   (1)   Conforms to Part 40 (commencing with Section 40.1) of Title 49 of the
Code of Federal Regulations, except that the driver shall show a valid
California driver’s license at the time and place of testing, for all drivers
of vehicles operated under the certificate; and
   (2)   Contains requirements for rehabilitation and for return-to-duty and
follow-up testing and other requirements conforming substantially to Part 382
of Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations;
   (3)   Under the program and the requirements of this section, a negative
test for alcohol means an alcohol screening test showing a breath alcohol
concentration of less than 0.02 percent.
   (b)   No certificate of public convenience and necessity shall be issued or
renewed unless the holder at the time of certificate issuance or renewal:
   (1)   Files with the police department a certification that the holder
maintains a mandatory controlled substance and alcohol testing certification
program that complies with the requirements of subsection (a) of this section;
and
   (2)   Files with the police department a certification that, prior to
employment with the holder of a certificate of public convenience and
necessity, each driver of vehicles operated under the certificate has tested
negatively for controlled substances under a mandatory controlled substance
testing certification program conforming to Part 40 (commencing with Section
40.1)of Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations; and
   (3)   Files with the police department a certification that each driver of
vehicles operated under the certificate has tested negatively for controlled
substances and alcohol under a mandatory controlled substance and alcohol
testing certification program conforming to Part 40 (commencing with Section
40.1) of Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations.
   (c)   No driver’s permit shall be issued or renewed unless the applicant and
the certificate holder for which the driver is authorized to operate a vehicle
both certify that the driver is in compliance with a mandatory controlled
substance and alcohol testing certification program conforming to Part 40 of
Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations.
   (d)   Any negative test result from another jurisdiction shall be accepted
for one year as meeting the requirement for certificate renewal subsection (b)
of this section if the driver has not tested positive subsequent to a negative
result.
   (e)   All test results are confidential and shall not be released without
consent of the driver, except as authorized or required by law.
   (f)   No evidence derived from a positive test result pursuant to this
section shall be admissible in a criminal prosecution concerning unlawful
possession, sale, or distribution of controlled substances.
   (g)   Self-employed independent drivers shall be responsible for compliance
with, and shall pay all costs of this program with regard to themselves.
Employing certificate holders shall be responsible for compliance with, and
shall pay all costs of, this program with respect to their employees and
potential employees, except that a certificate holder may require employees who
test positive to pay the costs of rehabilitation and return-to-duty and follow
up testing.
   (h)   Upon request, the city shall give certificate holders and potential
certificate holders a list of the consortia certified pursuant to Part 382
(commencing with Section 382.101) of Title 49 of the Code of Federal
Regulations that the city knows offers tests in or near the city.
(Ord. 5454 § 2 (part), 2018: Ord. 4341 § 2, 1996)
4.42.090   Vehicle permits.
   (a)   No vehicle may legally be operated under any certificate of public
convenience and necessity unless such vehicle has been duly permitted in
accordance with this section. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate
any vehicle described in Section
4.42.010, or for any certificate holder or any person who owns or controls any
such vehicle to allow such vehicle to be driven which has not been duly
permitted in accordance with this section.
   (b)   The certificate holder shall apply for an annual permit for each
vehicle proposed to be operated, up to the maximum number permitted by the
certificate. Upon payment of the nonrefundable fee provided in the municipal
fee schedule, and upon submitting proof that each vehicle has passed the annual
inspection provided for in Section
4.42.210, the police department shall issue a permit for each vehicle.
   (c)   Each vehicle permit shall be valid for one year, so long as the
certificate under which the vehicles are permitted is in force and effect, and
the vehicle continues to be insured according to the requirements of Section
4.42.080.
   (d)   A copy of the permit shall be posted in the vehicle in a place
designated by the police department that is visible to passengers.
(Ord. 5454 § 2 (part), 2018: Ord. 4223 § 5, 1994: Ord. 3286 § 1 (part), 1981)
4.42.100   Driver's permit required.
   No person shall operate any vehicle described in Section
4.42.010 upon the streets of the city and no person who owns or controls any
such vehicle shall permit it to be so driven and no such vehicle licensed by
the city shall be so driven unless the driver of the vehicle has first obtained
and has then in force a driver's permit issued under the provisions of this
chapter.
(Ord. 3286 § 1 (part), 1981)
4.42.110   Application for driver's permit.
   (a)   Any person may apply to the city for a permit to operate a vehicle
defined in Section
4.42.010 by filing with the police department, upon forms supplied by the city,
an application containing the following information:
   (1)   Name, address and age of applicant;
   (2)   Convictions, if any, in the courts of any state of the United States
or in any United States court within five years prior to application;
   (3)   The endorsement of the certificate holder by whom the applicant is to
be employed as a driver;
   (4)   Number and expiration date of state of California driver's license;
   (5)   Such other information regarding the health, mentality and experience
of the applicant as may be necessary or desirable to enable the police
department to ascertain applicant's qualification for a driver's permit.
(Ord. 3286 § 1 (part), 1981)
4.42.120   Eligibility of driver's permit.
   (a)   Upon receipt of an application for a driver's permit the police
department shall conduct an investigation of the applicant and, on the basis of
such investigation, shall either approve or deny the application. No permit
shall be issued to any of the following persons:
   (1)   Any person under the age of eighteen years;
   (2)   Any person convicted of any felony or misdemeanor offense which is
reasonably and directly related to the functions involved in the operation of
motor vehicles for hire and indicates potential risk to the public. This
restriction shall apply only to felony or misdemeanor convictions occurring
within five years of the date of application;
   (3)   Any person convicted of hit-and-run driving, of reckless driving, or
of driving a vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating liquor and/or
any drug within six months of the application, or upon conviction of any two or
more of these offenses within five years of the date of application. However,
no permit shall be issued to any person convicted of any offense described
herein if such person was driving a motor vehicle for hire at the time the
offense was committed;
   (4)   Any person not possessing a valid state of California driver's license
of the class required by state law for the type of motor vehicle for hire the
applicant intends to drive;
   (5)   The provisions of Section
4.04.140 of this title shall be applicable to any person applying for a permit
hereunder.
   (b)   The restrictions in Section
4.42.120(a) shall apply to persons possessing driver's permits and persons
seeking renewal of such permits. Driver's permits shall be subject at all times
to revocation or suspension as set forth in this chapter.
(Ord. 3286 § 1 (part), 1981)
4.42.130   Driver's permit, form, display, use.
   (a)   Upon approval of an application for a driver's permit and upon payment
of the nonrefundable fee provided for in the municipal fee schedule, the police
department shall issue a permit to the applicant. It shall bear the name and
photograph of the applicant, date of expiration of the permit, and the name of
the certificate holder for which the driver is authorized to operate a vehicle.
Such permit shall be mailed to the certificate holder named therein and shall
be valid only so long as said driver continues in the employ of such
certificate holder.
   (b)   Such permit shall be displayed in the vehicle being driven by the
permittee in such a place as to be in full view of all passengers in such
vehicle.
   (c)   Upon the termination of any driver’s employment, the certificate
holder by whom such driver has been employed shall immediately give the police
department written notice of such termination, and the reasons therefor. Upon
termination, the permittee shall immediately surrender said driver’s permit to
the chief of police for cancellation.
(Ord. 5454 § 2 (part), 2018: Ord. 4223 § 6, 1994: Ord. 3286 § 1 (part), 1981)
4.42.140   Revocation or suspension of permits.
   (a)   Any person issued a driver's permit who subsequently is convicted of
any felony or misdemeanor offense or who ceases to possess a valid state of
California driver's license of the class required by state law for the type of
motor vehicle for hire such person drives shall immediately so inform his or
her employer and the chief of police.
   (b)   The chief of police may revoke any driver's permit if such driver
becomes ineligible for the permit. The permit holder may request a hearing as
provided in Section
4.42.150.
   (c)   The chief of police may revoke or suspend any driver's permit if the
driver's State of California Department of Motor Vehicles record includes four
or more moving violations within the preceding twelve-month period or if the
chief of police determines that the driver is a danger to the public safety.
The permit holder may request a hearing as provided in Section
4.42.150; however, the driver may be suspended pending said hearing.
(Ord. 3286 § 1 (part), 1981)
4.42.150   Hearing.
   (a)   Every driver whose application has been denied or whose permit has
been revoked shall have the right to a hearing before the chief of police or
his/her designee prior to final denial and prior to revocation.
   (b)   The chief of police shall give the applicant or permit holder written
notice of intent to deny the application or to revoke the driver's permit. The
notice shall set forth the ground or grounds for the chief of police's
intention to deny or revoke, and shall inform the applicant or permit holder
that he or she has ten days from the date of receipt of the notice to file a
written request for a hearing. The application may be denied or the permit may
be revoked if a hearing request is not received within the ten-day period.
   (c)   If the applicant or permit holder files a timely hearing request, the
chief of police shall set a time and place for the hearing. All parties
involved shall have the right to offer testimonial, documentary and tangible
evidence bearing on the issues and to be represented by counsel. The decision
of the chief of police whether to deny the application or revoke or suspend the
permit is final and nonappealable.
(Ord. 3286 § 1 (part), 1981)
4.42.160   Reserved.
4.42.170   Identification of taxicabs.
   Every taxicab operated in the city shall bear the following identification:
   The certificate holder's trade name, monogram or insignia, as approved by
the police department, together with a cab number and the certificate holder's
telephone number or numbers painted upon the metal portion of the outside of
each side of the taxicab and the cab number and certificate holder's telephone
number or numbers painted upon the outside rear panel of the taxicabs. All
lettering mentioned in this section shall be not less than two and one-fourth
inches in height.
(Ord. 3286 § 1 (part), 1981)
4.42.180   Signs or advertisements on taxicabs.
   (a)   In addition to the identification required by Section
4.42.170, taxicabs may bear the following signs or advertisements:
   (1)   A metal sign bearing the words "FOR HIRE" and being no longer than six
inches by nine inches;
   (2)   A sign attached to the top of the cab bearing the word "VACANT" and
being no longer than two and one-half inches by nine inches;
   (3)   Advertisements not exceeding twelve square feet in total area subject
to the rules and regulations of the chief of police.
(Ord. 3286 § 1 (part), 1981)
4.42.190   Taximeters.
   (a)   All taxicabs operated under the authority of this chapter, except as
provided in subsection (c), shall be equipped with taximeters of the type or
technology approved by the California Division of Measurement Standards and
that complies with California Business and Professions Code section 12500.5 and
with all regulations established pursuant to Business and Professions Code
section 12107, located in the vehicle so as to render the figures visible to to
the passengers at all times, day and night. After sundown, the face of the
taximeter shall be illuminated. Such taximeter shall be subject to inspection
from time to time by the police department and the police department shall
require the certificate holder to discontinue the operation of any taxicab in
which the taximeter is found to calculate inaccurately until such taximeter is
replaced by one approved by the police department or is adjusted accurately.
   (b)   It is unlawful for a taxicab driver, while carrying passengers, to
display the flag or the device attached to the taximeter in such position as to
denote that the vehicle is for hire, to cause the taximeter to record when the
vehicle is not actually employed, to fail to cause the device on the taximeter
to be placed into a nonrecording position at the termination of each and every
service, or to charge any fare other than that recorded on the taximeter.
   (c)   Taxicab service may be prearranged with the use of a mobile device
application or internet online service. The fare charged shall not exceed the
scheduled rate filed by the certificate holder under Section
4.42.200. The application or internet online service shall display the fare to
the customer prior to booking in lieu of the posting as required under Section
4.42.200. An “application” shall mean a self- contained program or piece of
software application designed to fulfill requests for dispatch services that is
downloadable by a user to a computer or mobile device. Taxicabs providing
prearranged service under this subsection are exempt from the taximeter
requirements stated in subsections (a) and (b), but must calculate fares using
a type of device or technology approved by the California Division of
Measurement Standards that complies with California Business and Professions
Code section 12500.5 and with all regulations established pursuant to Business
and Professions Code section 12107.
(Ord. 5454 § 2 (part), 2018: Ord. 5429 § 1, 2018: Ord. 3286 § 1 (part), 1981)
4.42.200   Schedule of rates, display.
   The certificate holder shall file, with the application for a certificate, a
true and correct schedule of rates to be charged for the transportation of
passengers in any and all vehicles operated by said certificate holder. Except
for prearranged services as provided in Section
4.42.190(c), a schedule of such charges shall be posted conspicuously in each
vehicle operated by said certificate holder. The rates shall not be changed or
modified in any manner without first filing the changed or modified rates with
the chief of police thirty days prior to the effective date of such change or
modification.
(Ord. 5429 § 2, 2018: Ord. 3286 § 1 (part), 1981)
4.42.210   Interference with inspection - Inspection of vehicles.
   (a)   It is unlawful for a certificate holder, owner or driver of any
vehicle defined in this chapter and operated in the city to interfere with or
prohibit any police officer of the city or any person designated by the chief
of police from at any time inspecting or thoroughly examining any such vehicle
or any taximeter used upon any taxicab.
   (b)   The certificate holder of each vehicle for which a permit has been
issued in accordance with this chapter shall cause to have each such vehicle
inspected annually by the police department at times to be determined by the
chief of police at a facility that is certified by the National Institute for
Automotive Service Excellence or a facility registered with the California
Bureau of Automotive Repair. The cost of such inspections shall be included in
the permit fee described in Section
4.42.090.
(Ord. 5454 § 2 (part), 2018: Ord. 4223 § 7, 1994: Ord. 3286 § 1 (part), 1981)
4.42.220   Operating regulations.
   (a)   Direct Route. Any driver employed to carry any passenger to a definite
point shall take the most direct route which will carry the passenger safely
and expeditiously to the point of destination.
   (b)   Receipt. Every driver shall, if requested, give a correct receipt upon
payment of the correct fare.
   (c)   Interference with Vehicular Traffic Prohibited. Vehicles shall not be
operated over public streets in search of or soliciting prospective passengers
for hire in such a manner as to interfere with vehicular traffic.
   (d)   Capacity. No driver shall accept, take into the vehicle or transport
any larger number of passengers than the rated seating capacity of the vehicle.
   (e)   Refusal to Carry Passengers. It is unlawful for any driver operating
under a permit issued pursuant to the terms of this chapter to refuse, when the
vehicle is in service, to transport any person who represents himself or
herself for carriage in a sober and orderly manner and for a lawful purpose.
   (f)   Solicitation of Passengers. It is unlawful for any driver to leave the
side of the vehicle to solicit passengers or to solicit passengers in a louder
tone of voice than that used in ordinary conversation.
(Ord. 3286 § 1 (part), 1981)
4.42.230   Maintenance of vehicles.
   (a)   It shall be the responsibility of the certificate holder to assure
that every vehicle operating under its certificate is in safe working order.
   (b)   The interior and exterior of each vehicle shall be clean and well
maintained and meet California Vehicle Code requirements at all times when in
operation.
(Ord. 3286 § 1 (part), 1981)
4.42.240   Permits not transferable.
   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter no permit issued under the
provisions of this chapter may be sold, assigned, or otherwise transferred
without the approval of the chief of police.
(Ord. 3286 § 1 (part), 1981)
4.42.250   Duties of city.
   No duty described in this chapter shall be considered a mandatory duty for
purposes of the California Torts Claim Act, Government Code Sections 815 et
seq. Specifically, the failure of the city to inspect any vehicle authorized as
a taxicab or other vehicle for hire pursuant to this chapter or the negligent
inspection of any such vehicle by the city shall not create liability under
this chapter upon city.
(Ord. 3286 § 1 (part), 1981)
Chapter 4.46
RESERVED*
*   Editor's Note: Chapter 4.46, Public Dances, previously codified herein, was
repealed in its entirety by Section 31 of Ordinance No. 4453.
Chapter 4.48
RESERVED*
*   Editor's Note: Chapter 4.48, Trampoline Centers, previously codified
herein, was repealed in its entirety by Section 7 of Ordinance No. 4453.
Chapter 4.51
BINGO GAMES
Sections:
   
4.51.010   Purpose and authority.
   
4.51.020   Bingo defined.
   
4.51.030   Organizations permitted to conduct bingo games.
   
4.51.040   Applications.
   
4.51.050   Minors.
   
4.51.060   Where bingo may be conducted.
   
4.51.070   Open to the public.
   
4.51.080   Staffing and operation.
   
4.51.090   Financial interest.
   
4.51.100   Separate fund.
   
4.51.110   Physical presence at bingo game required.
   
4.51.120   Total value of prizes.
   
4.51.130   Time of operation.
   
4.51.140   Authority to inspect.
   
4.51.150   Notice to police.
   
4.51.160   Individual license requirements.
   
4.51.170   Term and transferability of licenses.
   
4.51.180   Grounds for disciplinary action.
   
4.51.190   Attendance limited to occupancy capacity.
   
4.51.200   Size of game.
   
4.51.210   Wage, profit or salary.
   
4.51.220   Annual report.
   
4.51.230   Prohibited locations.
   
4.51.240   Equipment.
   
4.51.250   Required parking.
4.51.010   Purpose and authority.
   This chapter is enacted pursuant to Article IV, Section 19(c), and Article
XI, Sections 5 and 7 of the Constitution of the state, and Section 326.5 of the
California Penal Code, or successor legislation, as the same may be amended
from time to time.
(Ord. 2969 § 1 (part), 1977)
4.51.020   Bingo defined.
   As used in this chapter, "bingo" means a game of chance in which prizes are
awarded on the basis of designated numbers or symbols on a card which conform
to numbers or symbols selected at random.
(Ord. 2969 § 1 (part), 1977)
4.51.030   Organizations permitted to conduct bingo games.
   No person, organization or other legal entity shall conduct, share in the
profits from, authorize, supervise, promote, or provide any service to a bingo
game within the city, with or without compensation, except under license from
the chief of police, as provided in this chapter. Only an organization
furnishing a certificate or other formal indicia from the California Franchise
Tax Board and the United States Internal Revenue Service stating that such
organization is exempted from the payment of the bank and corporation tax by
Section 23701d of the Revenue and Taxation Code and a contribution or gift to
which would be a charitable contribution under Section 170(c)(2) of the
Internal Revenue Code of 1954 is entitled to apply for such a license.
(Ord. 2969 § 1 (part), 1977)
4.51.040   Applications.
   All applications and other proceedings shall be made to the chief of police,
between eight a.m. and five p.m. Monday through Friday, except holidays,
pursuant to and subject to
Chapter 4.04. Any license which is issued shall be subject to this chapter, in
addition to any requirements or conditions of
Chapter 4.04 and the laws of the state of California.
(Ord. 2969 § 1 (part), 1977)
4.51.050   Minors.
   No minors shall be allowed to participate in any bingo game.
(Ord. 2969 § 1 (part), 1977)
4.51.060   Where bingo may be conducted.
   A nonprofit, charitable organization shall conduct a bingo game only on
property owned or leased by it, and which property is used by such organization
for its principal office or for performance of the purposes for which the
organization is organized, on a regular, continual basis.
(Ord. 2969 § 1 (part), 1977)
4.51.070   Open to the public.
   All bingo games shall be open to the public, not solely to the members of
the nonprofit charitable organization.
(Ord. 2969 § 1 (part), 1977)
4.51.080   Staffing and operation.
   A bingo game shall be operated and staffed only by licensed members of the
nonprofit charitable organization which organized it. Such members shall not
receive a profit, wage, or salary from any bingo game. Only the organization
authorized to conduct a bingo game shall operate such game, or participate in
the promotion, supervision or any other phase of such game.
(Ord. 2969 § 1 (part), 1977)
4.51.090   Financial interest.
   No individual, corporation, partnership, or other legal entity except the
organization authorized to conduct a bingo game shall hold a financial interest
in the conduct of such bingo game.
(Ord. 2969 § 1 (part), 1977)
4.51.100   Separate fund.
   All profits derived from a bingo game shall be kept in a special fund or
account and shall not be commingled with any other fund or account.
(Ord. 2969 § 1 (part), 1977)
4.51.110   Physical presence at bingo game required.
   No person shall be allowed to participate in a bingo game, unless the person
is physically present at the time and place in which the bingo game is being
conducted.
(Ord. 2969 § 1 (part), 1977)
4.51.120   Total value of prizes.
   The total value of prizes awarded during the conduct of any bingo games
shall not exceed two hundred fifty dollars in cash or kind, or both, for each
separate game which is held.
(Ord. 2969 § 1 (part), 1977)
4.51.130   Time of operation.
   Bingo games shall be conducted only during the hours of noon to eleven p.m.
No organization may conduct, authorize, supervise, promote, or share in the
profits from a bingo game more than one day in any seven-day period.
(Ord. 2969 § 1 (part), 1977)
4.51.140   Authority to inspect.
   The chief of police or his designee shall have the authority to inspect the
premises and records of a licensee relating to bingo games at any reasonable
time, including, but not limited to, times during which games are being
conducted, to insure that the operation of bingo games does not constitute a
violation of California or United States law or of this code. All records
relating to bingo games shall be maintained for at least three years. Failure
to permit such inspection upon reasonable notice shall be grounds for
revocation or suspension of the license.
(Ord. 2969 § 1 (part), 1977)
4.51.150   Notice to police.
   Not less than twenty-four hours in advance of the scheduled commencement
time of any bingo game, the licensee shall notify the Palo Alto police
department that such game will be conducted. Any licensee may file a written
statement with the department specifying fixed days and times upon which bingo
games shall be conducted, and the day or time of bingo games shall not be
changed from that shown on the written notice without an amended written notice
being filed with the department, or the alternative means of compliance
specified in this section.
(Ord. 2969 § 1 (part), 1977)
4.51.160   Individual license requirements.
   (a)   Each applicant for an individual license shall state the name, date of
birth, and such other information required by the chief of police. No licensee
shall be permitted to play in a bingo game for which the license is issued.
   (b)   Fees for the issuance or renewal of the license required in this
chapter shall be as specified in the municipal fee schedule.
(Ord. 2969 § 1 (part), 1977)
4.51.170   Term and transferability of licenses.
   Any license issued under this chapter shall not be transferable. Licenses
shall be good for one year from the date of issuance, or until suspended or
revoked.
(Ord. 2969 § 1 (part), 1977)
4.51.180   Grounds for disciplinary action.
   In addition to those grounds specified in
Chapter 4.04, or the laws of the state of California, applications may be
denied, suspended or revoked whenever the licensee, applicant, or any person
listed under Section
4.51.160 has been convicted of any public offense involving bingo, or enjoined
from violation thereof, or has within the last five years been convicted of any
crime involving lotteries, gambling, larceny, perjury, bribery, extortion,
fraud, or similar criminal offense.
(Ord. 2969 § 1 (part), 1977)
4.51.190   Attendance limited to occupancy capacity.
   Notwithstanding the requirement that any bingo game be open to the public,
attendance at any bingo game shall be limited to the occupancy capacity of the
room in which such game is conducted, as determined by the fire chief of the
city and the building official in accordance with applicable laws and
regulations. Seats or spaces shall not be reserved for any person except for
the handicapped. All applicable provisions of the municipal code relating to
health, safety and general welfare shall be met by licensee before conducting a
bingo game.
(Ord. 2969 § 1 (part), 1977)
4.51.200   Size of game.
   No bingo game shall be conducted except in a room wherein the persons
drawing and calling out the letters and numbers are visible to every person
playing the game without the aid of mechanical devices. No mechanical device
shall be used to transmit the image or voice of the person drawing or calling
the numbers, or the numbers themselves, to any room other than the room in
which the game is being played.
(Ord. 2969 § 1 (part), 1977)
4.51.210   Wage, profit or salary.
   It is a misdemeanor under Section 326.5(b) of the Penal Code of the state
for any person to receive a profit, wage or salary from any bingo game
authorized under this chapter. A violation of said provision is punishable by a
fine not to exceed ten thousand dollars, which fine shall be deposited in the
general fund of the city.
(Ord. 2969 § 1 (part), 1977)
4.51.220   Annual report.
   Each organization licensed to conduct a bingo game shall file with the
police chief of the city, not later than thirty days after the close of its
fiscal year, or the expiration, suspension or revocation of the license issued
under this chapter, whichever occurs earlier:
   (a)   Detailed financial report containing any changes in the information
previously furnished to the city for issuance of the license, or otherwise;
   (b)   The total amount of money received from the operation of bingo games
during the period covered;
   (c)   The total amount paid out in prizes, detailed costs to the
organization for the operation of bingo games; and
   (d)   Such other information as may be required or requested by the city
manager.
   All of said information is subject to audit at such reasonable times and
places as may be requested by the city auditor. Any expenses for such audit,
whether conducted by the city auditor or a contractor or other designee working
under his direction, shall be the responsibility of the licensee.
(Ord. 3514 § 23, 1984: Ord. 3507 § 23, 1984: Ord. 2969 § 1 (part), 1977)
4.51.230   Prohibited locations.
   No license for a bingo game may be issued to any organization or for any
premises in which there is any type of license for the sale or consumption of
alcoholic beverages, except a club defined under Section 23423 of the
California Business and Professions Code or successor legislation, on condition
that no alcoholic beverage be sold or consumed in the room in which bingo games
are played during such games, or any license issued under Chapters
4.46,
4.52,
4.54, or
4.55.
(Ord. 2969 § 1 (part), 1977)
4.51.240   Equipment.
   All equipment used in any bingo game shall be owned free and clear by the
organization sponsoring the game.
(Ord. 2969 § 1 (part), 1977)
4.51.250   Required parking.
   The number of persons permitted to play any bingo game in the R-1 zone shall
not exceed the number of off-street parking spaces provided by the licensee
multiplied by three, irrespective of whether the occupancy limit of the room in
which bingo games are played is greater. The number of persons permitted to
play any bingo game shall be noted upon the license. The licensee shall have
the affirmative duty to require players to use the off-street parking, and may
deny admission to the game for any person not so complying.
(Ord. 2969 § 1 (part), 1977)
Chapter 4.52
BILLIARD ROOMS, CARDROOMS AND BOWLING ALLEYS*
Sections:
   
4.52.010   Definitions.
   
4.52.020   Licenses required.
   
4.52.030   Contents of license applications.
   
4.52.040   Minors on premises.
   
4.52.050   Hours of operation for billiard rooms.
   
4.52.060   Unauthorized use of premises - Offensive conduct in and around
premises prohibited.
   
4.52.070   Free access to officers.
   
4.52.080   Personnel.
   
4.52.090   Operational requirements.
   
4.52.100   Denial, suspension or revocation of license - Other penalties.
   
4.52.110   License term and fee.
   
4.52.120   Regulations for existing cardrooms.
   *   Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history: Prior code §§ 9.01 - 9.10, and
as amended by Ordinance Nos. 1980, 2089, 2328, 2341, 2442, 2863, 2922, 2960,
2999, 3017 and 3113.
4.52.010   Definitions.
   The following words and phrases, whenever used in this chapter, shall be
construed as defined in this section:
   (a)   "Billiard room" means any establishment open to the public for the
lawful playing of billiards, pool, snooker, and other similar games, whether or
not the tables for playing such games are of regulation size and regardless of
whether the playing of such games constitutes the principal business upon the
premises.
   (b)   "Bowling establishment" means any establishment within a building or
structure in which is located one or more bowling alleys which are open to the
public.
(Ord. 4128 § 1 (part), 1993)
4.52.020   Licenses required.
   After May 13, 1967, no person shall construct, install, expand, operate or
maintain a billiard room or bowling establishment, including those in existence
or operation prior to April 13, 1967, without obtaining a license to do so. The
provisions of
Chapter 4.04 shall apply to the licensing of such rooms and establishments and
to the renewal, suspension, or revocation of licenses.
(Ord. 4128 § 1 (part), 1993)
4.52.030   Contents of license applications.
   Any person desiring a license for a billiard room, bowling establishment, or
any combination thereof, shall file an application for a license with the chief
of police. In addition to the requirements of
Chapter 4.04, the application shall contain the following:
   (a)   Whether the premises is to be used as a billiard room, bowling
establishment, or combination thereof;
   (b)   Whether alcoholic beverages are to be sold on the premises;
   (c)   The name, address, and/or principal place of business of the
applicant;
   (d)   The business capacity of the applicant (corporation, partnership, sole
proprietorship or other);
   (e)   The name, address and age of manager or managers;
   (f)   Location;
   (g)   Proposed hours of operation;
   (h)   The land use zone applicable to the proposed facility;
   (i)   Such other information respecting the proposed facility as the chief
of police shall deem reasonably necessary to effectuate the purposes of this
chapter and to arrive at a fair determination of whether there is or will be
compliance with the terms of this code.
(Ord. 4128 § 1 (part), 1993)
4.52.040   Minors on premises.
   It is unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen to be upon the
premises of any billiard room or bowling establishment, and no person owning or
operating such place shall permit any minor to be upon such prem-ises, except
as hereinafter provided:
   (a)   Persons at least sixteen years of age, but under eighteen years, may
be permitted upon the premises from eight a.m. until twelve midnight.
   (b)   Persons under the age of sixteen years may be permitted upon the
premises until ten p.m.
   (c)   Any owner or operator may establish more restrictive hours for minors,
or exclude minors.
   (d)   The chief of police may require more restrictive hours for minors, or
exclude mi-nors, if he determines that inadequate precau-tions exist to prevent
the sale, possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages by minors on such
premises.
(Ord. 4642 § 2, 2000: Ord. 4128 § 1 (part), 1993)
4.52.050   Hours of operation for billiard rooms.
   (a)   General Provision. Billiard rooms shall remain closed from two a.m. to
five a.m., except as provided in this chapter.
   (b)   Exceptions. The chief of police may, upon written application
therefor, in such form and containing information as the chief requires, issue
a special permit to any person, firm, corporation, association or other legal
entity, holding a valid permit for a billiard room, allowing the permit holder
the right to remain open longer hours than specified in Section
4.52.030, providing that:
   (1)   The billiard room is on the ground floor;
   (2)   At least fifty percent of the front wall is of clear glass,
unobstructed by blinds, screens, shades or other devices. For the purpose of
this subsection, "front wall" means that wall facing the street or, if there is
no such wall, that wall facing the area provided for public parking for
patrons;
   (3)   No alcoholic beverages are sold or consumed on the premises during
such extended hours;
   (4)   The general decor, illumination, atmosphere and environment shall be,
in the opinion of the chief of police, compatible to the public peace, order,
and welfare.
(Ord. 4128 § 1 (part), 1993)
4.52.060   Unauthorized use of premises - Offensive conduct in and around
premises prohibited.
   (a)   The licensee shall have the right to refuse admission to anyone. Those
to whom admission is refused shall leave the premises immediately and shall not
return for a period of at least twenty-four hours.
   (b)   No licensee shall harbor, admit or permit to enter or remain on the
premises any person under the influence of narcotics, or any intoxicated
person; and no such person shall enter upon or remain upon such premises.
(Ord. 4453 § 8, 1997: Ord. 4128 § 1 (part), 1993)
4.52.070   Free access to officers.
   No licensee, or any other person shall prevent any city, state or federal
peace or fire prevention officer, or building official or inspector, charged
with the duty of enforcing the laws of their respective jurisdiction, from
having free access to the premises at all times it is open to the public, and
at all other reasonable times.
(Ord. 4128 § 1 (part), 1993)
4.52.080   Personnel.
   (a)   No person shall operate a billiard room or bowling establishment
unless there is present, at all times it is open to the public, at least one
person twenty-one years of age or older who is devoting his entire time and
attention to the activity on the premises.
   (b)   No person shall be employed in any capacity at any billiard room or
bowling establishment unless such person:
   (1)   Is at least eighteen years of age;
   (2)   Is of good character;
   (3)   Has read Sections
4.52.050 -
4.52.080.
(Ord. 4128 § 1 (part), 1993)
4.52.090   Operational requirements.
   (a)   All games in billiard rooms and bowling establishments shall be
carried on in a single well-lighted and well-ventilated room in plain view of
all persons.
   (b)   All billiard rooms and bowling alleys shall be on the ground floor and
have at least one entrance and exit opening upon either the public street or
upon the parking area facing the public street.
   (c)   All billiard rooms commencing operation after April 13, 1967 shall
conform to the following: At least fifty percent of the front wall shall be of
clear glass, unobstructed by shades, screens or blinds. "Front wall" means that
wall facing and visible from the street; if there is no such wall, then that
wall facing and visible from the parking area provided for patrons.
(Ord. 4128 § 1 (part), 1993)
4.52.100   Denial, suspension or revocation of license - Other penalties.
   (a)   The provisions of
Chapter 4.04, as well as this chapter, apply to denials, suspensions or
revocations of any license required by this chapter. In addition to the general
grounds set forth in Section
4.04.140, the following constitute grounds for the denial, suspension, or
revocation of a license:
   (1)   The applicant or licensee made a material misstatement in the
application for a license or permit;
   (2)   The applicant or licensee has, within five years immediately preceding
the date of the filing of the application or the date of initiation of any
revocation or suspension proceedings, been convicted in a court of competent
jurisdiction for violation of any federal, state or other law, ordinance,
regulation or requirement related to gambling.
   (b)   In addition to any other remedy provided by
Chapter 4.04, the city manager shall have the right, for any violation of the
duties of a licensee, to impose a curfew from the hours of twelve midnight to
eight a.m., or such lesser time as he or she may deem appropriate.
   (c)   Violations of any section of this chapter are misdemeanors.
(Ord. 4128 § 1 (part), 1993)
4.52.110   License term and fee.
   Licenses required by this chapter shall be issued for one year. The annual
fees shall be as set forth in the municipal fee schedule. Any application for a
license required by this chapter shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee as
set forth in the municipal fee schedule.
(Ord. 4128 § 1 (part), 1993)
4.52.120   Regulations for existing cardrooms.
   After the effective date of the chapter establishing this section, no person
shall construct, install, relocate, or expand a cardroom, including any
cardroom in existence or operation on the effective date of said chapter,
provided, that any cardroom lawfully operating on the effective date of said
chapter may continue thereafter to operate only pursuant to this section; and
provided, further, that all cardrooms shall be prohibited as of July 20, 1993;
and it shall be unlawful to operate a cardroom in the city on and after July
20, 1993.
   (a)   Cardroom Defined. "Cardroom" means any gaming club open to the public
for the lawful playing of cards, regardless of whether the tables, chairs, and
other furniture and fixtures are temporary or permanent, or at times used for
other purposes. "Gaming club" shall have the meaning set forth in the "The
Gaming Registration Act," California Business and Professions Code, Chapter 5
of Division 8, as it may from time to time be amended.
   (b)   Licenses and Permits Required.
   (1)   The provisions of
Chapter 4.04 of this code shall apply to the licensing of cardrooms and to the
renewal, suspension, or revocation of licenses.
   (2)   All dealers and other employees of a cardroom involved in the gaming
or gambling operation in said cardroom shall obtain a dealer permit.
   (c)   Contents of License and Permit Applications.
   (1)   Any person desiring a license for a cardroom shall file an application
for a license with the chief of police. In addition to the requirements of
Chapter 4.04 of this code, the application shall contain the following:
   (i)   Whether alcoholic beverages are to be sold on the premises;
   (ii)   The name, address, and/or principal place of business of the
applicant;
   (iii)   The business capacity of the applicant (corporation, partnership,
sole proprietorship or other);
   (iv)   The name, address and age of manager or managers;
   (v)   Location;
   (vi)   Proposed hours of operation;
   (vii)   The land use zone applicable to the proposed facility;
   (viii)   Such other information respecting the proposed facility as the
chief of police shall deem reasonably necessary to effectuate the purposes of
this section and to arrive at a fair determination of whether there is or will
be compliance with the terms of this code.
   (2)   Any person desiring a dealer permit for employment in a cardroom shall
file an application for permit with the chief of police. In addition to the
requirements of
Chapter 4.04 of this code, the application shall contain the following:
   (i)   The name and location of the cardroom where the applicant intends to
work;
   (ii)   The name and address of the applicant;
   (iii)   The proposed employment capacity of the applicant at the cardroom
named in subsection (b)(1) above;
   (iv)   Such other information or identification as the chief of police deems
reasonably necessary to effectuate the purposes of this section.
   (d)   No Minors on Premises. It is unlawful for any minor to be upon the
premises of any cardroom, and no person owning or operating such place shall
permit any minor to be upon such premises.
   (e)   Hours of Operation. Cardrooms shall remain closed from two a.m. to
five a.m., except as otherwise provided in this section.
   (f)   Unauthorized Use of Premises - Offensive Conduct in and Around
Premises Prohibited.
   (1)   No licensee shall permit or otherwise allow any conduct, activity, or
condition upon the premises which singly or collectively are so noisy or
otherwise offensive as to disturb the quiet and good order of the premises or
of the neighborhood.
   (2)   The licensee shall have the right to refuse admission to anyone. Those
to whom admission is refused shall leave the premises immediately and shall not
return for a period of at least twenty-four hours.
   (3)   No licensee shall harbor, admit or permit to enter or remain on the
premises any lewd or dissolute person, or any person under the influence of
narcotics, or any intoxicated person; and no such person shall enter upon or
remain upon such premises.
   (g)   Free Access to Officers. No licensee, or any other person, shall
prevent any city, state or federal peace or fire prevention officer, or
building official or inspector, charged with the duty of enforcing the laws of
their respective jurisdiction, from having free access to the premises at all
times it is open to the public, and at all other reasonable times.
   (h)   Personnel.
   (1)   No person shall operate a cardroom unless there is present, at all
times it is open to the public, at least one person twenty-one years of age or
older who is devoting his or her entire time and attention to the activity on
the premises.
   (2)   No person shall be employed in any capacity at any cardroom unless
such person:
   (i)   Is at least eighteen years of age;
   (ii)   Is of good character;
   (iii)   Has read subsections (e)-(h) of this section.
   (i)   Operational Requirements.
   (1)   All games in cardrooms shall be carried on in a single well-lighted
and well-ventilated room in plain view of all persons.
   (2)   All cardrooms shall be on the ground floor and have at least one
entrance and exit opening upon either the public street or upon the parking
area facing the public street.
   (j)   Denial, Suspension or Revocation of License - Other Penalties.
   (1)   The provisions of
Chapter 4.04 of this code, as well as this section, apply to denials,
suspensions or revocations of any license or permit required by these
regulations. In addition to the general grounds set forth in subsection (m) of
this section, the following constitute grounds for the denial, suspension, or
revocation of a cardroom license or dealer permit:
   (i)   The applicant, licensee or permittee made a material misstatement in
the application for a license or permit;
   (ii)   The applicant, licensee or permittee has, within five years
immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application or the date of
initiation of any revocation or suspension proceedings, been convicted in a
court of competent jurisdiction for violation of any federal, state or other
law, ordinance, regulation or requirement related to gambling;
   (iii)   The operation of a cardroom as proposed by the applicant, if
permitted, would not comply with all applicable laws including, but not limited
to, all city ordinances and regulations or, in the case of a licensee or
permittee, that the actual operation of the cardroom or conduct by permittee
does not comply with all such laws;
   (iv)   The operation of the proposed cardroom is likely to be, or the actual
operation of a cardroom or conduct of permittee is, injurious to the health,
safety, welfare, and interest of the people of the city;
   (v)   The applicant is lacking in the background and qualifications to
conduct a bona fide cardroom;
   (vi)   The applicant, licensee, or permittee has violated any provision of
this section, or of any ordinance, law, rule or regulation of this or any other
public agency which regulates the operation of cardrooms.
   (2)   In addition to any other remedy provided by
Chapter 4.04 of this code, the city manager shall have the right, for any
violation of the duties of a licensee, to impose a curfew from the hours of
twelve midnight to eight a.m., or such lesser time as he or she may deem
appropriate.
   (3)   Violations of any section of these regulations are misdemeanors.
   (k)   License and Permit Term and Fee. Licenses and permits required by this
section shall be issued for one year, provided, that no permit shall be valid
after July 20, 1993. The annual fees shall be as set forth in the municipal fee
schedule per table for a cardroom license and for a dealer permit. All fees are
nonrefundable.
   (l)   Table Limit. The number of tables in any cardroom licensed as of the
effective date of the chapter establishing this section shall not be increased,
except that any such cardroom may have up to five tables. No cardroom shall
have more than thirteen tables. A "table" is defined as an area in which a
single game is played, not exceeding eight players plus a dealer.
   (m)   Limit on Locations. No cardroom shall be allowed in the following
locations:
   (1)   Within two hundred fifty feet of the exterior property limits of any
public or private elementary school, junior high school or high school;
   (2)   Within two hundred fifty feet of the exterior limits of any district
where residential use is the principal permitted use, including all R
districts, HDA and O-S zones, and any P-C or P-F districts where the principal
use permitted or maintained is residential, or any successor zones; or
   (3)   Within one thousand two hundred feet of the exterior property limits
of any other premises lawfully occupied by a cardroom, a massage establishment,
any establishment subject to the provisions of
Chapter 4.55 of this code, except theaters, or by a hot tub/sauna
establishment. All distances referred to in this section shall be measured
between the closest points on the exterior property lines, or area boundaries
of the parcel, or areas involved, except that when a cardroom occupies one unit
of a multi-unit structure located on a single parcel, distances shall be
measured from the exterior boundaries of the unit so occupied.
   (n)   Financial Disclosure. Every cardroom licensee and every applicant for
a cardroom license shall disclose the following information:
   (1)   If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall
be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation, together with
the names and residence addresses of each of its officers, directors, and each
stockholder holding more than five percent of the stock of the corporation. If
the applicant is a partnership, the application shall set forth the name and
residence address of each of the partners, including limited partners. If one
or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this section
pertaining to a corporate applicant shall apply. The names and addresses of
every person deriving a profit, or holding any position of management or
control shall be disclosed.
   (2)   A sale or transfer of any interest in a cardroom, which interest would
be required to be reported upon application for a cardroom license, shall be
reported to the chief of police prior to such sale or transfer. The chief of
police shall investigate any person receiving any interest in a cardroom as a
result of such sale or transfer, and if such person satisfies the requirements
relating to cardroom license applicants, the chief of police shall give written
approval to such transfer or sale. A nonrefundable fee as set forth in the
municipal fee schedule shall be paid to the city for the investigation by the
chief of police necessitated by each such sale or transfer.
   (3)   All indebtedness of the cardroom business exceeding one percent of the
book value of the business shall be disclosed in writing to the chief of police
within ten days after such indebtedness exists, excluding indebtedness from
commercial lending institutions or trade creditors.
   (o)   Loans Prohibited. No cardroom licensee, nor any other person required
to disclose information under these regulations, shall loan money or any other
thing of value or representing value to any player at any game in a cardroom.
   (p)   Notification of Terminated Employees. Every cardroom licensee shall
notify the chief of police within two working days after any employee is
terminated for any reason.
   (q)   House Players Prohibited. No cardroom licensee, nor any person
employed in a cardroom, shall play any game in a cardroom in the city, whether
off duty or not, and without regard to whether such person is employed, staked
or financed by a cardroom licensee or any person required to disclose
information under this section.
   (r)   Incentives Prohibited. No cardroom licensee shall furnish any gratuity
or incentive to any player in a cardroom, or to any person, as an inducement to
play or to continue playing. Such incentives or gratuities include, but are not
limited to alcoholic beverages, food, coffee, chips, or any other thing of
value. The term "incentive or gratuity" means without charge to the recipient,
or at a price or other consideration below that normally charged by the
establishment for such item.
(Ord. 4128 § 2, 1993)
Chapter 4.54
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
Sections:
   
4.54.010   Purpose and intent.
   
4.54.020   Definitions.
   
4.54.030   Massage establishment permit required.
   
4.54.040   Massage establishment permit application fee; renewal.
   
4.54.050   Application for massage establishment permit.
   
4.54.060   Massage technician permit required.
   
4.54.065   Education requirements.
   
4.54.070   Massage technician application fee.
   
4.54.080   Application for massage technician permit.
   
4.54.090   Massage technician trainee.
   
4.54.100   Appeal.
   
4.54.110   Massage establishment facilities and operations requirements.
   
4.54.120   Inspection by officials.
   
4.54.130   Business name.
   
4.54.140   Business location change.
   
4.54.150   Sale or transfer of massage establishment interest.
   
4.54.160   Display of permits, permits.
   
4.54.170   Exemptions.
   
4.54.180   Grounds for denial, probation, and disciplinary action.
   
4.54.190   Hearing.
   
4.54.200   Application to existing establishments and technicians.
   
4.54.210   Application of other code provisions.
4.54.010   Purpose and intent.
   It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to provide for the orderly
regulation of massage establishments and massage technicians, as defined in
this chapter, in the interests of the public health, safety, and welfare by
providing certain minimum building, sanitation and health standards for massage
establishments, and by providing certain minimum qualifications for the
operators of massage establishments and for massage technicians and massage
technician trainees. Unless otherwise indicated, the requirements of this Code
shall not apply to massage practitioners and therapists certified by the
California Massage Therapy Council (CAMTC) or establishments in which the
owners and all practitioners are CAMTC certified.
(Ord. 5162 § 1, 2012; Ord. 2833 § 1 (part), 1974)
4.54.020   Definitions.
   (a)   For the purpose of this chapter, unless the context clearly requires a
different meaning, the words, terms and phrases set forth in this section shall
have the meanings given them in this section:
   (1)   “Massage” means any method of pressure on, or friction against, or
stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating or stimulating the
external parts of the human body with the hands or with the aid of any
mechanical or electrical apparatus, or other appliances or devices, with or
without such supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, liniment, antiseptic, oil,
powder, cream, lotion, ointment or other similar preparations.
   (2)   “Massage technician” means any person who administers massages, baths
or health treatments involving massage or baths as the principal functions to
another person for any consideration whatsoever.
   (3)   “Massage technician trainee” means a student who works in a massage
establishment under the supervision and direction of a massage technician who
has received a permit issued under the provisions of this chapter.
   (4)   “Massage establishment” means any establishment with more than one
massage technician having a fixed place of business where any, firm,
association, partnership, corporation, joint venture or combination of
individuals engages in, conducts, carries on or permits to be engaged in,
conducted or carried on massages, baths or health treatments involving massage
or baths, where massage is part of primary function of the business.
   (5)   “Sole Proprietor Massage establishment” means any owner-operated
establishment having a fixed place of business where an individual, carries on
or permits to be engaged in, conducted or carried on massages, baths or health
treatments involving
massage or baths as the principal functions.
   (6)   “Recognized school of massage” means any school or institution of
learning which teaches the theory, ethics, practice, profession and work of
massage. The student shall possess a diploma or certificate of graduation from
such school or institution of learning following the successful completion of
such course of study or learning, and which school has been approved pursuant
to California Education Code Section 29025, or, if said school is not located
in California, has complied with standards commensurate with those required in
said Section 29025. Any school or institution of learning offering or allowing
correspondence course credit not requiring actual attendance at class, or
courses of a massage technician not approved by the California State Department
of Education shall not be deemed a "recognized school of massage."
   (7)   “Reflexology”. Reflexology is the application of specific pressure by
the use of the practitioner's hands, thumb, and fingers to reflex points in the
client's hands, feet, or ears using alternating pressure, and such techniques
as thumb walking, finger walking, hook and back up, and rotation on a reflex.
   (8)   “Permit” means the permit to engage in the activities of a massage
technician or a massage technician trainee as required by this chapter.
   (9)   “Person” means any individual, firm, association, partnership,
corporation, joint venture or combination of individuals.
   (10)   “California Massage Therapy Council” (CAMTC) means the governing
nonprofit board that is authorized to evaluate qualifications of massage
therapists and issue certification in the State of California.
   (11)   “Accessory Technician Permit”. A technician who is not a sole
proprietorship may be eligible to receive an accessory technician permit. This
permit will allow massage to be conducted within a business that is not a
massage establishment, provided the following requirements are met:
   (A)   The technician must provide the police department with sufficient
evidence to demonstrate that he or she is an independent contractor or an
employee of the business.
   (B)   The business is not in the regular business of providing massage.
   (C)   The technician must obtain a massage technician permit as required by
section
4.54.060 of this code.
   (12)   “Noncertified massage practitioner”. A massage practitioner who
performs massage in an open and common room without partitions, and the
individual in receipt of the massage remains fully clothed and does not disrobe
except below the knee. A noncertified practitioner must: (1) apply for and
obtain a noncertified practitioner certificate; and (2) post the noncertified
practitioner certificate in a conspicuous place in such a manner that it can be
easily seen by persons entering the establishment.
   (13)   “Noncertified massage establishment permit”. A massage establishment
permit issued to an establishment at which all the massage practitioners are
noncertified practitioners. The same requirements applicable to massage
establishment permits are applicable to noncertified massage establishment
permits.
(Ord. 5161 § 2, 2012: Ord. 2833 § 1 (part), 1974)
4.54.030   Massage establishment permit required.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided, it is unlawful for any person to engage
in, conduct or carry on, in or upon any premises within the city the operation
of massage establishment without a permit obtained from the chief of police, as
required by this chapter. All requirements applicable to a massage
establishment permit are applicable to a noncertified massage establishment
permit. A massage establishment permit shall be issued to any person who has
complied with the requirements of Sections
4.54.050 and
4.54.110 of this chapter, and all other applicable provisions of this code or
state law, as applicable; unless grounds for denial of such permit are found to
exist. In addition to those set forth in Section
4.04.140, grounds for denial include:
   (1)   The applicant made a material misstatement in the application for a
permit;
   (2)   The applicant has, within five years immediately preceding the date of
the filing of the application, been convicted in a court of competent
jurisdiction of an offense involving conduct which requires registration under
California Penal Code Section 290, or any violations of Sections 311 through
311.7, 313.1, 314, 315, 316, 318 or 647(a), 647(b), 647(d), or 647(h) of the
California Penal Code, or of any offense involving theft of property or
violence;
   (3)   That the operation of a massage establishment, as proposed by the
applicant if permitted, would not comply with all applicable laws including,
but not limited to, all city ordinances and regulations;
   (4)   That the operation of the proposed massage establishment is likely to
be injurious to the health, safety, welfare, and interest of the people of the
city;
   (5)   That the applicant is lacking in the background and qualifications to
conduct a bona fide massage establishment; or
   (6)   That the applicant has violated any provision of this chapter, or of
any similar ordinance, law, rule or regulation of another public agency which
regulates the operation of massage establishments.
   (7)   That the CAMTC has revoked, suspended, or denied the applicant a
permit.
(Ord. 5161 § 3, 2012: Ord. 3113 § 4, 1979: Ord. 2946 § 1, 1976: Ord. 2921 § 9,
1976: Ord. 2833 § 1 (part), 1974)
4.54.040   Massage establishment permit application fee; renewal.
   (a)   Any application for a permit to operate a massage establishment shall
be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee as set forth in the municipal fee
schedule. The application fee shall be used to defray, in part, the costs of
investigation and report, and is not made in lieu of any other fees or taxes
required under this code.
   (b)   A permit to operate a massage establishment shall be renewed annually.
The renewal fee shall be as set forth in the municipal fee schedule. In
addition, the massage technician must also submit valid identification, massage
certification and a completed new permit application.
(Ord. 5161 § 4, 2012: Ord. 2960 § 27, 1976: Ord. 2921 § 1, 1976: Ord. 2833 § 1
(part), 1974)
4.54.050   Application for massage establishment permit.
   (a)   Any application for a permit to operate a massage establishment shall
be made with the chief of police. Within thirty working days following receipt
of a completed application and LiveScan results, the chief of police shall
either issue the permit or mail a written statement of his reasons for denial
thereof. The application shall set forth the exact nature of the massage bath
or health treatment to be administered, the proposed place of business and
facilities therefore, and the name and address of each applicant. The chief of
police may request the applicant to allow fingerprints to be taken when needed
for the purpose of establishing identification. In addition to the requirements
of
Chapter 4.04 and this section, any applicant shall furnish the following items:
   (1)   The address of the proposed location;
   (2)   The previous addresses of applicant, if any, for a period of three
years immediately prior to the date of the application and the dates of
residence at each;
   (3)   Written proof that the applicant is at least eighteen years of age;
   (4)   Applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and hair;
   (5)   Two recent passport photos;
   (6)   Business, occupation or employment history of the applicant for the
three years immediately preceding the date of the application;
   (7)   If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall
be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation, together with
the names and residence addresses of each of its officers, directors, and each
stockholder holding more than five percent of the stock of the corporation. If
the applicant is a partnership, the application shall set forth the name and
residence address of each of the partners, including limited partners. If one
or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this section
pertaining to a corporate applicant shall apply;
   (8)   The names and residence addresses of all persons currently employed or
intended to be employed in the massage establishment, regardless of the nature
of the employment, other than any person permitted pursuant to Section
4.54.060, along with the proposed or actual nature of the work performed or to
be performed, and recent passport-size photographs, suitable to the police
officer or designee processing the application, of each such employee. The
chief of police may require such employee to allow fingerprints to betaken for
the purpose of identification. Any applicant or permitee shall notify the city
in writing of the names, addresses and nature of the work, of any new
employees, within five days of such employment, and supply the photographs
described in this subsection. Such new employees shall allow fingerprints to be
taken for the purpose of identification upon request. "Employee" includes every
owner, partner, manager, supervisor and worker, whether paid or not, who
renders personal services of any nature in the operation of a massage
establishment;
   (9)   Such other information as may be deemed necessary by the chief of
police.
   (b)   Proof of malpractice insurance coverage or equivalent with a minimum
of $100,000 coverage shall be required within 30 days of permit issuance.
(Ord. 5161 § 5, 2012: Ord. 2946 § 2, 1976: Ord. 2921 § 9, 1976: Ord. 2833 § 1
(part), 1974)
4.54.060   Massage technician permit required.
   (a)   It is unlawful for any person to act as a massage technician or a
massage technician trainee unless such person holds a valid permit issued by
the chief of police or a certification from the CAMTC. A massage technician
permit shall be issued to any person who has fulfilled the requirements of
Section
4.54.080, and all other provisions of this code or state law, as applicable;
unless grounds for denial of such permit are found to exist. In addition to
those set forth in Section 4.04.140, grounds for denial include:
   (1)   The applicant made a material misstatement in the application for a
permit;
   (2)   The applicant has, within five years immediately precedingthe date of
the filing of the application, been convicted in a court of competent
jurisdiction of an offense involving conduct which requires registration under
California Penal Code Section 290, or any violations of Sections 311 through
311.7, 313.1, 314, 315, 316, 318 or 647(a), 647(b), 647(d), or 647(h) of the
California Penal Code, or of any offense involving theft of property or
violence;
   (3)   That the issuance of the permit is likely to be injurious to the
health, safety, welfare, and interest of the people of the city;
   (4)   That the applicant is lacking in the background and qualifications to
act as a massage technician; or
   (5)   That the applicant has violated any provision of this chapter, or of
any similar ordinance, law, rule or regulation of another public agency which
regulates the operation of massage establishments or massage technicians.
   (6)   That the CAMTC has revoked, suspended, or denied the applicant a
permit.
   (b)   A permit issued by the chief of police is not required for any massage
technician and massage establishments if the owners and all technicians are
massage practitioners or therapists, who are operating under a valid
certificate issued by the Massage Therapist Organization (also known as the
California Massage Therapy Council), per Chapter 10.5 (Commencing with Section
4600) of Division 2 of the California Business and Professions Code relating to
massage therapy, provided however, that such person and business shall not be
exempted from this Article if Chapter 10.5 is repealed. However notification of
the CAMTC certification number must still be made to the police department
where the CAMTC permit holder is working.
(Ord. 5161 § 6, 2012: Ord. 3113 § 5, 1979: Ord. 2921 §§ 2, 9, 1976: Ord. 2833 §
1 (part), 1974)
4.54.065   Education Requirements.
   (a)   General educational requirements. Except as indicated below, all
applicants for a Massage Technician permit must meet the following educational
standards to qualify for such permit, at the discretion of the Chief of Police:
   (1)   Possession of a diploma or certificate of completion from a
"recognized school of massage" which shows satisfactory completion of a
resident course of study of a minimum of two hundred (200) verifiable hours on
the theory, ethics, history, practice, and/or methods of massage therapy,
including the study of anatomy, physiology and hygiene.
   (b)   Exemptions from educational requirements. The following persons are
exempt from the educational requirements set forth in subsection (a) above:
   (1)   Holders of Massage Establishment business permits and Massage
Technician business permits issued by the City before the effective date of
this Chapter shall have a period of eighteen (18) months from the effective
date of this Chapter to satisfy the educational requirements set forth in
subsection (a) above.
   (2)   Eighteen (18) months from the effective date of this ordinance, any
therapist who does not have the required 200 hours of education will not be
permitted to practice massage in Palo Alto. However, the chief of police may
provide special consideration on a case-by-case basis to those massage
technicians who can prove through documentation that they are currently
enrolled in coursework associated with massage therapy and compliance of the
200 hour requirement is expected within a reasonable amount of time.
   (3)   Applicants for noncertified massage practitioner permits or applicants
for noncertified massage establishments permits.
(Ord. 5161 § 7, 2012)
4.54.070   Massage technician application fee.
   Any application for a permit to act as a massage technician shall be
accompanied by a nonrefundable fee as set forth in the municipal fee schedule.
A massage technician permit shall be renewed annually. The renewal fee shall be
as set forth in the municipal fee schedule. Any person who applies for a permit
to operate a massage establishment and who desires to act as a massage
technician within said establishment shall not be required to furnish the
information set forth in Section
4.54.080.
(Ord. 5161 § 8, 2012: Ord. 2960 § 28, 1976: Ord. 2921 § 3, 1976: Ord. 2833 § 1
(part), 1974)
4.54.080   Application for massage technician permit.
   (a)   Any application for a permit to act as a massage technician shall be
made with the chief of police. Within thirty working days following receipt of
a completed application and LiveScan results, the chief of police shall either
issue the permit, or mail a written statement of his reasons for denial
thereof. If he takes neither action, the permit shall be deemed to be issued.
The chief of police may request the applicant to furnish fingerprints when
needed for the purpose of establishing identification. In addition to the
requirements of
Chapter 4.04, the applicant shall furnish the following items:
   (1)   Name, residence address and telephone number;
   (2)   Social security number and driver's license number, if any;
   (3)   Applicant's weight, height, color of hair and eyes;
   (4)   Two recent passport photos of applicant;
   (5)   Written evidence that the applicant is at least eighteen years of age;
   (6)   Business, occupation or employment of the applicant for the three
years immediately preceding the date of application;
   (7)   The name and address of the establishment where the applicant is to be
employed, and the name of the owner or operator of the same. Any massage
technician granted a permit pursuant to this section must report a change in
massage establishment employment within five days of said change;
   (8)   The name and address of the "recognized school of massage" attended,
the date attended, and a copy of the diploma or certificate of graduation
awarded to the applicant, or other documentation showing the applicant has
completed 200 hours.
(Ord. 5161 § 9, 2012: Ord. 2921 §§ 4, 9, 1976: Ord. 2833 § 1 (part) 1974)
4.54.090   Massage technician trainee.
   (a)   Any person desiring to obtain a permit to act as a massage technician
trainee shall make an application to the chief of police. Within thirty working
days following receipt of a completed application and having received LiveScan
results, the chief of police shall either issue the permit, or mail a written
statement of his reasons for denial thereof. If he takes neither action, the
permit shall be deemed to be issued. A massage technician trainee permit shall
be issued to any person who has fulfilled all the requirements of Section
4.54.080, except item (8), and who produces written proof that the applicant is
currently enrolled in a "recognized school of massage", as defined in this
chapter; of the date the applicant enrolled in the recognized school of
massage; and the scheduled date of graduation; and that the applicant has
completed at least fifty hours of instruction and the date this instruction was
completed; provided the applicant submits a letter signed by the owner or
manager of a permitted massage establishment stating his immediate intent to
employ the applicant to do massage as a trainee working under the direct
supervision and control of a massage technician who has received a permit under
the provisions of this chapter unless:
   (1)   The applicant knowingly made a material misstatement in the
application for the trainee permit; or
   (2)   The applicant has, within five years immediately preceding the date of
the filing of the application, been convicted in a court of competent
jurisdiction of an offense involving conduct which requires registration under
California Penal Code Section 290, or any violation of Sections 311 through
311.7, 313.1, 314,315, 316,318 or 647(a), 647(b), 647(d) or 647(h) of the
California Penal Code or of any offense involving theft of property. No fee
shall be required of a massage technician trainee applicant. The trainee must
at all times comply with the laws relating to massage establishments, and the
failure to comply may render the trainee ineligible to obtain a massage
technician permit. Any massage technician trainee who, during the life of the
trainee permit, completes the instruction required of a massage technician,
shall be issued a massage technician permit upon payment of a massage
technician application fee as set forth in the municipal fee schedule.
(Ord. 5161 § 10, 2012: Ord. 2960 § 29, 1976: Ord. 2921 §§ 5, 9, 1976: Ord. 2833
§ 1 (part), 1974)
4.54.100   Appeal.
   In the event a permit or permit application has been denied, the applicant
shall proceed pursuant to the appeal and hearing provision in
Chapter 4.04.
(Ord. 5161 § 11, 2012: Ord. 2833 § 1 (part), 1974)
4.54.110   Massage establishment facilities and operations requirements.
   (a)   Except as otherwise indicated, all massage establishments,
includingthose certified by CAMTC, shall comply with the following facilities
and operations requirements:
   (1)   Massage establishments shall comply with all code requirements.
   (2)   A minimum of one toilet and wash basin shall be provided in every
massage establishment.
   (3)   Cabinets or other covered space shall be provided for the storage of
clean linen. Approved receptacles shall be provided for the storage of all
soiled linen and paper towels.
   (4)   Minimum ventilation shall be provided in accordance with the building
code of the city. To allow for adequate ventilation in cubicles, rooms and
areas provided for patrons' use, which are not serviced directly by required
window or mechanical systems of ventilation, partitions shall be constructed so
that the height of partition does not exceed seventy-five percent of the floor-
to-ceiling height of the area in which they are located.
   (5)   All plumbing and electrical installations shall be installed under
permit and inspection of the building inspection department, and such
installations shall be installed in accordance with the Uniform Building Code
and the Uniform Plumbing Code.
   (6)   The walls in all rooms where water or steam baths are given shall have
a washable, mold-resistant surface.
   (7)   All lavatories or wash basins shall be provided with hot and cold
running water, soap and single-service towels and/or hot-air hand dryers.
   (8)   Every portion of a massage establishment, including appliances,
apparatus and personnel, shall be kept clean and operated in a sanitary
condition.
   (9)   All massage establishments shall provide clean and sanitary towels,
sheets and linens in sufficient quantity. Towels, sheets and linens shall not
be used by more than one person. Reuse of such linen is prohibited unless the
same has first been laundered. Heavy white paper may be substituted for sheets;
provided, that such paper is used once for each person and then discarded into
a sanitary receptacle.
   (10)   All walls, ceilings, floors, pools, showers, bathtubs, steam rooms
and all other physical facilities for the establishment must be in good repair
and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. Wet and dry heat rooms, steam
or vapor rooms, or steam or vapor cabinets, shower compartments and toilet
rooms shall be thoroughly cleaned and disinfected each day the business is in
operation. Bathtubs shall be thoroughly cleaned and disinfected after each use.
   (11)   Disinfecting agents and sterilizing equipment shall be provided for
any instruments used in performing acts of massage and said instruments shall
be disinfected and sterilized after each use.
   (12)   Pads used on massage tables shall be covered with durable, washable
plastic or other acceptable waterproof material.
   (13)   (A)   To protect patrons from potential health and sanitary hazards,
all employees, massage technicians and massage technician trainees shall be
clean and shall perform all services on the premises in full, clean outer
garments.
   (B)   Exception. A massage technician may perform services wearing no
clothing or wearing less than full outer garments when teaching a class
gathered to learn the theory, practice, or work of massage, and when said class
consists in part of massage by the technician or members of the gathered class.
The following items, (14) through (17), shall not apply to CAMTC certified
establishments:
   (14)   Each service offered, the price thereof, and the minimum length of
time such service shall be performed shall be posted or shall be available in a
conspicuous public location in each massage establishment. All letters and
numbers shall be capitals, and not smaller than 14 point font.
   (15)   (A)   Massage establishments shall close and remain closed from
eleven p.m.(11p.m.) to nine a.m. (9:00 a.m.)
   (B)   After one year of operation a massage establishment may be exempted
from the hours restrictions of this section by the chief of police upon a
written request which details the factual reasons supporting good cause for the
exemption. The chief of police, in determining what constitutes good cause for
this exemption from the hours restrictions, shall consider and weight the
following factors:
   (i)   The criteria outlined in Section
4.04.140 of
Chapter 4.04;
   (ii)   The criteria outlined in Section
4.54.030 of this chapter;
   (iii)   The impact which the massage establishment has had on the health,
safety, and welfare of the local community, including, but not limited to,
parking and traffic congestion;
   (iv)   The massage establishment's compliance or noncompliance with all
federal, state, and local laws, including, but not limited to, this municipal
code. If, upon review of those factors, the chief of police determines that
good cause does exist for the requested exemption, the chief may then exempt
the particular massage establishment from the hours restrictions of this
section. However, in no event shall any massage establishment close later than
two a.m. nor open earlier than six a.m.
   (C)   The exemption from the hours restrictions of this section shall be
subject to review and renewal annually at the same time as the renewal of the
underlying permit and the same factual showing shall be made as that required
for the initial exemption. The chief shall not grant an hours exemption unless
said establishment has maintained the criteria specified in Section
4.54.110(a)(16)(B).
   (16)   (Client record keeping by establishments deleted)
   (17)   Off-premises Massage Prohibited. Except as otherwise provided, no
person, shall engage in any of the services permitted under this chapter at any
place other than an establishment permitted pursuant to
Chapter 4.54.
(Ord. 5161 § 12, 2012: Ord. 4642 § 3, 2000: Ord. 3592 § 1, 1985: Ord. 3113 § 6,
1979: Ord. 3095 § 1, 1978: Ord. 2946 § 3, 1976: Ord. 2921 § 6, 1976: Ord. 2833
§ 1 (part), 1974)
4.54.120   Inspection by officials.
   Any and all investigating officials of the city shall have the right to
enter massage establishments from time to time during regular business hours to
make reasonable inspections to observe and enforce compliance with building,
fire, electrical, plumbing or health regulations. A warrant shall be obtained
whenever required by law.
(Ord. 5161 § 13, 2012: Ord. 2833 § 1 (part), 1974)
4.54.130   Business name.
   No person permitted to operate a massage establishment shall operate under
any name or conduct business under any designation not specified in the permit.
(Ord. 5161 § 14, 2012: Ord. 2833 § 1 (part), 1974)
4.54.140   Business location change.
   Upon a change of location of a massage establishment, an application to the
chief of police shall be made, and such application shall be granted, provided
all applicable provisions of this code are complied with and a change of
location fee as set forth in the municipal fee schedule to defray, in part, the
costs of investigation and report, has been paid to the city.
(Ord. 5161 § 15, 2012: Ord. 2960 § 30, 1976: Ord. 2921 §§ 7, 9, 1976: Ord. 2833
§ 1 (part), 1974)
4.54.150   Sale or transfer of massage establishment interest.
   A sale or transfer of any interest in a massage establishment, which
interest would be reported as required in this chapter upon application for a
massage establishment permit, shall be reported to the chief of police within
ten days of such sale or transfer. The chief of police shall investigate any
person receiving any interest in a massage establishment as a result of such
sale or transfer, and if such person satisfies the requirements relating to
massage establishment permit applicants, the existing permit shall be endorsed
to include such person. A fee as set forth in the municipal fee schedule shall
be paid to the city for the investigation by the chief of police necessitated
by each such sale or transfer.
(Ord. 5161 § 16, 2012: Ord. 2960 § 31, 1976: Ord. 2921 §§ 8, 9, 1976: Ord. 2833
§ 1 (part), 1974)
4.54.160   Display of permits, permits.
   The owner or operator of a massage establishment shall display the massage
establishment permit and the permit of each and every massage technician or
massage technician trainee employed in the establishment in an open and
conspicuous place on the premises or keep the permits together in a designated
area, such that the permits are easily accessible for inspection. Passport-size
photographs of permittees shall be affixed to the respective permits on display
pursuant to this section. Home addresses of massage technicians and massage
technician trainees need not be displayed. A fine for continued violation will
be collected in an amount to be determined by resolution of the City Council.
(Ord. 5161 § 17, 2012: Ord. 2833 § 1 (part), 1974)
4.54.170   Exemptions.
   The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to the following classes of
individuals while engaged in the performance of the duties of their respective
professions:
   (1)   Physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths or physical therapists
who are duly permitted to practice their respective professions in the state of
California;
   (2)   Nurses registered under the laws of the state of California;
   (3)   Barbers and beauticians who are duly permitted under the laws of the
state of California.
   (4)   Reflexologists performing reflexology; however any reflexologist
engaged in massage shall be required to comply with the provisions of this
Chapter.
(Ord. 5161 § 18, 2012: Ord. 2833 § 1 (part), 1974)
4.54.180   Grounds for denial, probation, and disciplinary action.
   In addition to any provisions of this chapter, the grounds set forth in
Section
4.04.140 shall apply to permits and permits required under this chapter. Any
circumstances constituting grounds for denial shall also constitute grounds for
revocation, suspension or disciplinary action.
(Ord. 5161 § 19, 2012: Ord. 3113 § 7, 1979: Ord. 2833 § 1 (part), 1974)
4.54.190   Hearing.
   Any permittee whose permit has been suspended or revoked shall proceed
pursuant to the appeal and hearing provisions of Chapter 4.04.
(Ord. 5161 § 20, 2012: Ord. 2833 § 1 (part), 1974)
4.54.200   Application to existing establishments and technicians.
   All operators of existing massage bath or health treatment establishments,
and all persons engaged in giving massage, bathing and health treatments in the
city upon the effective date of this chapter shall begin the application
process and comply with all application and other requirements within sixty
(60) days following the effective date of this chapter.
(Ord. 5161 § 21, 2012: Ord. 2833 § 1 (part), 1974)
4.54.210   Application of other code provisions.
   
Chapters 1.08 and
4.04 shall apply to the subject matter of this chapter in all respects,
including those not specifically mentioned in this chapter.
(Ord. 5161 § 22, 2012: Ord. 2833 § 1 (part), 1974)
Chapter 4.55
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS
Sections:
   
4.55.010   Purpose and intent.
   
4.55.020   Definitions.
   
4.55.030   Adult entertainment establishment license required.
   
4.55.040   Adult entertainment establishment license application fee.
   
4.55.050   Application for adult entertainment establishment license.
   
4.55.060   Appeal.
   
4.55.070   Adult entertainment facilities and operation requirements.
   
4.55.075   Additional facilities and operation requirements.
   
4.55.080   Inspection by officials.
   
4.55.090   Business name.
   
4.55.100   Business location change.
   
4.55.110   Transfer of interest.
   
4.55.120   Display of licenses.
   
4.55.130   Hearing.
   
4.55.140   Application of existing establishments.
   
4.55.150   Application of other code provisions.
4.55.010   Purpose and intent.
   It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to provide for the orderly
regulation of adult entertainment establishments, as defined in this chapter,
in the interests of the public health, safety and welfare by providing certain
minimum building, sanitation, health and related standards and regulations for
adult entertainment establishments, and by providing standards for operators of
adult entertainment establishments.
(Ord. 2946 § 4 (part), 1976)
4.55.020   Definitions.
   For the purpose of this chapter, unless the context clearly requires a
different meaning, the words, terms and phrases set forth in this section have
the meaning given them in this section.
   (a)   "Adult entertainment enterprise" means:
   (1)   Any business activity wherein is furnished for a fee or charge or
other like consideration the opportunity to paint, feel, handle, touch, to be
in the presence of, be entertained by the unclothed body or the unclothed
portion of the body of another person, or be so painted, felt, handled, touched
or observed by another person, or to observe, view or photograph any such
activity, and shall include, but not be limited to the following business
activities and activities similar thereto: nude encounter studios, adult or
nude dance studios, adult or nude exhibitions, peep shows, nude wrestling
centers, and adult or nude art or photograph studios. "Unclothed portion of the
body" means a state of dress so as to expose the female breast below a point
immediately above the top of the areola, male or female genitals, pubic areas,
buttocks, or female breast with only the nipple and areola covered.
   (2)   Any business activity wherein a substantial part of the commercial
operation consists of the sale or dissemination of paraphernalia and apparatus
which aid or assist in the stimulation and/or performance of sexual activities.
   (3)   Adult theaters are included within the terms "adult entertainment
enterprise" and "adult entertainment establishment." An "adult theater" is a
commercial establishment in which for any form of consideration, films, motion
pictures, video cassettes, video tapes, laser discs, slides, or similar
photographic or electronic reproductions are regularly shown and which are
characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities"
or "specified anatomical areas," or to which minors are not admitted, or with
respect to which advertising for said pictures is contained in the adult
theaters section of local newspapers, or in which sexual intercourse, oral
copulation, masturbation, homosexual acts or other specified sexual activities
are actually shown, or simulated.
   (4)   Adult book stores are within the terms "adult entertainment
enterprise" and "adult entertainment establishment." "Adult book store" means
any premises in which twenty percent or more of the titles offered or to which
twenty percent or more of the actual display area of the store is devoted to
merchandise, which books, magazines, periodicals or merchandise depict or
describe specified sexual activity, or to which any of the advertising for such
titles is made in the adult theaters section of local newspapers. This section
does not apply to displays of up to ten periodicals in the premises in which
sales of the same are incidental to other business.
   (5)   Adult arcades are included within the terms "adult entertainment
enterprise" and "adult entertainment establishment." "Adult arcade" means any
place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated,
currency operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or
mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors,
television sets, monitors, receivers, transmitters, video cassette players, or
other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer
persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are
distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of "specified
sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas."
   (6)   Adult video stores are included within the terms "adult entertainment
enterprise" and "adult entertainment establishment." "Adult video store" means
a commercial establishment which, as one of its principal business purposes (as
evidenced by the fact that twenty percent or more of the articles or titles
offered or to which twenty percent or more of the actual display area of the
store is devoted, whichever is less), offers for sale or rental for any form of
consideration any one or more of the following:
   (A)   Photographs, films, motion pictures, laser discs, video cassettes,
video tapes or video reproductions, slides, or other visual representations
which depict or describe "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical
areas"; or
   (B)   Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use in
connection with "specified sexual activities."
   (7)   Adult cabarets are included within the terms "adult entertainment
enterprise" and "adult entertainment establishment." "Adult cabaret" means a
nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial establishment which regularly
features:
   (A)   Persons who appear in a state of nudity; or
   (B)   Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of
"specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities"; or
   (C)   Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic
reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of
"specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas."
   (8)   "Specified anatomical areas" mean human genitals in a state of sexual
arousal.
   (9)   "Specified sexual activities" mean and include any of the following:
   (A)   The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks, anus, or female breasts;
   (B)   Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy;
   (C)   Masturbation, actual or simulated; or
   (D)   Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the
activities set forth in subsections (a)(9)(A) through (a)(9)(C) above.
   (10)   "Substantial enlargement of an adult entertainment enterprise" means
the increase in floor area occupied by the business by more than ten percent,
as the floor area exists on the effective date of the ordinance codified in
this section.
   (11)   The following are specifically excluded from the meaning of the term
"adult entertainment enterprise":
   (A)   Physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths or physical therapists
who are duly licensed to practice their respective professions in the state of
California;
   (B)   Nurses registered under the laws of the state of California;
   (C)   Trainers of any amateur, semiprofessional or professional athlete, or
athletic team;
   (D)   Barbers and beauticians who are duly licensed under the laws of the
state of California;
   (E)   Any activity conducted or sponsored by any school district or other
public agency; and
   (F)   Any activity conducted by a person pursuant to any license issued by
the state of California or any agency thereof charged with the responsibility
of licensing, prescribing standards for and supervising such activity or
profession.
   (b)   "Adult entertainment establishment" means any establishment or place
of business where any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation,
joint venture or combination of individuals engages in, conducts, operates,
carries on or permits to be engaged in, conducted, operated or carried on any
adult entertainment enterprise regardless of whether any other use is also
conducted on the premises.
   (c)   "Employee" means every owner, partner, manager, supervisor and worker,
whether paid or not, who renders personal services of any nature in the conduct
of the adult entertainment enterprise.
   (d)   "License" means the business license to operate an adult entertainment
establishment as required by this chapter.
   (e)   "Person" means any individual, firm, association, partnership,
corporation, joint venture or combination of individuals.
(Ord. 3944 § 2, 1990: Ord. 2946 § 4 (part). 1976)
4.55.030   Adult entertainment establishment license required.
   It is unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct, or carry on, in or upon
any premises within the city the operation of an adult entertainment
establishment without the license obtained from the chief of police as required
by this chapter. An adult entertainment license shall be issued to any person
who has complied with the requirements of Sections
4.55.050,
4.55.070 and all other applicable provisions of this code, unless grounds for
denial of such license are found to exist. In addition to those set forth in
Section
4.04.140, grounds for denial include:
   (a)   The applicant made a material misstatement in the application for a
license;
   (b)   The applicant has, within five years immediately preceding the date of
the filing of the application, been convicted in a court of competent
jurisdiction of an offense involving conduct which requires registration under
California Penal Code Section 290, or any violation of Sections 311 through
311.7, 313.1, 314, 315, 316, 318 or 647(b), 647(d), or 647(h) of the California
Penal Code, or of any offense involving theft of property or violence. The
basis for denial stated in this subsection (b) shall not apply to adult
theaters, adult bookstores, adult arcades or adult video stores. Prior to
denying a license under this chapter for either of said activities by reason of
such conviction, the chief of police shall make a finding that by reason of the
nature of the conviction or underlying facts, or by reason of the anticipated
nature of the activities to be carried out under the license applied for, or by
reason of any other relevant factors, the issuance of such license would be
inconsistent with the general health, safety and welfare;
   (c)   That the operation of an adult entertainment establishment, as
proposed by the applicant, if permitted, would not comply with all applicable
laws including, but not limited to, all city ordinances and regulations;
   (d)   That the applicant has violated any provision of this chapter, or of
any similar ordinance, law, rule or regulation of another public agency which
regulates the operation of adult entertainment establishments.
(Ord. 3947 § 2, 1990: Ord. 3113 § 8, 1979: Ord. 2946 § 4 (part), 1976)
4.55.040   Adult entertainment establishment license application fee.
   Any application for a license to operate an adult entertainment
establishment shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee as set forth in the
municipal fee schedule. The application fee shall be used to defray, in part,
administrative costs incurred in the processing of such application, and is not
made in lieu of any other fees or taxes required under this code. A license to
operate an adult entertainment establishment shall be renewed annually. The
nonrefundable renewal fee shall be as set forth in the municipal fee schedule.
(Ord. 2960 § 32, 1976: Ord. 2946 § 4 (part), 1976)
4.55.050   Application for adult entertainment establishment license.
   Any application for a license to operate an adult entertainment
establishment shall be made with the chief of police. Within thirty working
days following receipt of a completed application, the chief of police shall
either issue the license or mail a written statement of his reasons for denial
thereof. The application shall set forth the exact nature of the activities
proposed to be conducted, the proposed place of business and facilities
therefor, and the name and address of each applicant. The chief of police may
require the applicant to allow fingerprints to be taken for the purpose of
establishing identification. In addition to the requirements of
Chapter 4.04 and the foregoing, any applicant shall furnish the following
information:
   (a)   The previous addresses of each applicant, if any, for a period of
three years immediately prior to the date of the application and the dates of
residence of each;
   (b)   Written proof that the applicant is at least eighteen years of age;
   (c)   The applicant shall allow the police department official who processes
the application to take photographs of the applicant;
   (d)   Applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and hair;
   (e)   Business, occupation or employment history of the applicant for the
three years immediately preceding the date of the application;
   (f)   If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall
be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation, together with
the names and residence addresses of each of its officers, directors, and each
stockholder holding more than five percent of the stock of the corporation
along with the amount of stock held. If the applicant is a partnership, the
application shall set forth the name and residence address of each of the
partners, including limited partners. If one or more of the partners is a
corporation, the provisions of this section pertaining to a corporate applicant
shall apply;
   (g)   The names and residence addresses of all persons currently employed or
intended to be employed in the adult entertainment establishment, regardless of
the nature of employment, along with the proposed or actual nature of the work
performed or to be performed and recent passport-size photographs of each
employee, suitable to the police department official processing the
application. The chief of police may require each such employee to allow
fingerprints to be taken for the purpose of identification. Any applicant or
licensee shall notify the city in writing of the names and addresses and shall
supply such photographs of any new employees within five days of such
employment. Such new employees shall allow fingerprints to be taken for
identification purposes;
   (h)   Such other information as may be deemed necessary by the chief of
police.
(Ord. 2946 § 4 (part), 1976)
4.55.060   Appeal.
   In the event a license application has been denied, the applicant shall
proceed pursuant to the appeal and hearing provisions in
Chapter 4.04.
(Ord. 2946 § 4 (part), 1976)
4.55.070   Adult entertainment facilities and operation requirements.
   All adult entertainment establishments shall comply with the following
facilities and operations requirements:
   (a)   Such establishments shall comply with all code requirements.
   (b)   A minimum of one tub or shower, and one toilet and washbasin shall be
provided in every such establishment, except that this provision shall not
apply to adult bookstores, adult theaters, adult arcades, or adult video
stores, unless the establishments offer other adult entertainment in addition
to the goods and services described in the definitions of those terms.
   (c)   Cabinets or other covered spaces shall be provided for the storage of
clean linen, where necessary. Approved receptacles shall be provided for the
storage of all soiled linen and paper towels, if any.
   (d)   Minimum ventilation shall be provided in accordance with the building
code of the city. To allow for adequate ventilation in cubicles, rooms and
areas provided for patrons' use, which are not serviced directly by required
window or mechanical systems of ventilation, partitions shall be constructed so
that the height of partitions does not exceed seventy-five percent of the
floor-to-ceiling height of the area in which they are located, provided that
cubicles or rooms are allowed in light of the provisions of Section
4.55.075.
   (e)   All plumbing and electrical installations shall be installed under
permit and inspection of the building inspection department, and such
installations shall be installed in accordance with the Uniform Building Code
and the Uniform Plumbing Code.
   (f)   The walls in all rooms where water or steam baths are given shall have
a washable, mold-resistant surface.
   (g)   All lavatories or washbasins shall be provided with hot and cold
running water, soap and single-service towels in wall-mounted dispensers.
   (h)   Security deposit facilities capable of being locked by the patron or a
security bag that may be carried by the patron shall be available for the
protection of valuables of the patrons, except that this provision shall not
apply to adult bookstores, adult theaters, adult arcades, or adult video
stores.
   (i)   Every portion of the establishment, including appliances, apparatus
and personnel, shall be kept clean and operated in a sanitary condition.
   (j)   All such establishments shall be provided with clean and sanitary
towels, sheets and linens in sufficient quantity. Towels, sheets and linens
shall not be used by more than one person. Reuse of such linen is prohibited
unless the same has first been laundered. Heavy white paper may be substituted
for sheets provided that such paper is used once for each person and then
discarded into a sanitary receptacle. The provisions of this subsection shall
not apply to adult bookstores, adult theaters, adult arcades, or adult video
stores.
   (k)   All walls, ceilings, floors, pools, showers, bathtubs, steam rooms and
all other physical facilities for the establishment must be in good repair and
maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. Wet and dry heat rooms, steam or
vapor rooms, or steam or vapor cabinets, shower compartments and toilet rooms,
if any, shall be thoroughly cleaned and disinfected each day the business is in
operation. Bathtubs, if any, shall be thoroughly cleaned and disinfected after
each use.
   (l)   Disinfecting agents and sterilizing equipment shall be provided for
any instruments used in performing any services involving contact with any
patron, and said instruments shall be disinfected and sterilized after each
use.
   (m)   Pads used on any tables shall be covered with durable, washable
plastic or other acceptable waterproof material.
   (n)   Each service offered, the price thereof, and the minimum length of
time such service shall be performed shall be posted in a conspicuous public
location in each establishment, except that the provisions of this subsection
shall not apply to adult bookstores, adult theaters, adult arcades, or adult
video stores. All letters and numbers shall be capitals, and not less than one-
half inch in height.
   (o)   Adult entertainment establishments shall close and remain closed from
eleven p.m. to nine a.m.
   (p)   No adult entertainment establishment shall be allowed:
   (1)   Within two hundred fifty feet of the exterior property limits of any
public or private elementary school, junior high school or high school;
   (2)   Within two hundred fifty feet of the exterior limits of any district
where residential use is the principal permitted use, including R and RM
districts, O-S districts, and any P-C or P-F districts where the principal use
permitted or maintained is residential; or
   (3)   Within twelve hundred feet of the exterior property limits of any
other premises lawfully occupied by an adult entertainment establishment, a
cardroom, massage establishment or hot tub/sauna establishment. For the purpose
of determining compliance with standard (3), as to, between, and with respect
to establishments lawfully in operation on September 27, 1976, priority between
such existing establishments shall be assigned in accordance with the dates
upon which said establishments commenced such lawful operation, priority being
given to the establishment having the earliest of such dates. In the event any
dispute arises regarding said date, the applicant shall have the obligation to
establish the date on which he commenced lawful operation. All distances
referred to in this section shall be measured between the closest points on the
exterior property lines or area boundaries of the parcels or areas involved,
except that when an enterprise subject to the provisions of this section
occupies one unit of a multi-unit structure located on a single parcel,
distances shall be measured from the exterior boundaries of the units so
occupied.
(Ord. 3947 § 1, 1990: Ord. 3113 § 9, 1979: Ord. 2946 § 4 (part), 1976)
4.55.075   Additional facilities and operation requirements.
   No adult entertainment enterprise or adult entertainment establishment shall
be partitioned or divided into any private booth or cubicle accessible to
limited numbers of patrons of the establishment and shielded from the view of
other persons within the establishment where such booth or cubicle is used or
to be used for any of the following:
   (a)   The presentation, exhibition, featuring, or viewing of anything
described in Section
4.55.020(a)(9);
   (b)   The participation of any activity described in Section
4.55.020(a)(1);
   (c)   The viewing of any films, video cassettes, other visual media, any
theatrical or artistic performance, or the reading of any book, magazine or
publication described in Sections
4.55.020(a)(3),
4.55.020(a)(4),
4.55.020(a)(5), or
4.55.020(a)(6).
(Ord. 3944 § 3, 1990)
4.55.080   Inspection by officials.
   Any and all investigating officials of the city shall have the right to
enter adult entertainment establishments from time to time during regular
business hours to make reasonable inspections to observe and enforce compliance
with building, fire, electrical, plumbing, health regulations or provisions of
this chapter. A warrant shall be obtained whenever required by law.
(Ord. 2946 § 4 (part), 1976)
4.55.090   Business name.
   No person licensed to operate an adult entertainment establishment shall
operate under any name or conduct business under any designation not specified
in the license.
(Ord. 2946 § 4, (part), 1976)
4.55.100   Business location change.
   Upon a change of location of an adult entertainment establishment, an
application to the chief of police shall be made, and such application shall be
granted; provided, all applicable provisions of this code are complied with and
a change of location fee as set forth in the municipal fee schedule to defray,
in part, the administrative costs incurred has been paid to this city.
(Ord. 2960 § 32A, 1976: Ord. 2946 § 4 (part), 1976)
4.55.110   Transfer of interest.
   No license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be
assigned or transferred in any manner, nor shall any person other than those
therein mentioned engage in the enterprise for which the license is issued. As
used in this section, transfer includes, but is not limited to, any
modification of a business entity operating an enterprise, or otherwise
required to be disclosed pursuant to Section
4.55.050(f), including transfer of more than ten percent of the stock of any
corporation.
(Ord. 2946 § 4 (part), 1976)
4.55.120   Display of licenses.
   The owner or operator of an adult entertainment establishment shall display
the establishment license in an open and conspicuous place on the premises.
Passport-size photographs of the licensee shall be affixed to the license on
display pursuant to this section.
(Ord. 2946 § 4 (part), 1976)
4.55.130   Hearing.
   Any licensee whose license has been suspended or revoked shall proceed
pursuant to the appeal and hearing provisions of
Chapter 4.04.
(Ord. 2946 § 4 (part), 1976)
4.55.140   Application of existing establishments.
   Any operators of any establishment subject to the provisions of this
chapter, and legally doing business on the effective date of this chapter shall
comply with all application and other requirements within sixty days of the
effective date of this chapter. Any such establishment which after application
is denied a license under Section
4.55.050 by the city solely by reason of its noncompliance with Section
4.55.070(p), shall comply with all provisions of this section and obtain such
license within three years of the effective date of this chapter; provided,
however, that any such establishment which intends in any way to transfer
ownership or alter or change the nature of any such adult entertainment
establishment on or after the effective date of this section shall obtain a
license pursuant to this chapter prior to such transfer, alteration or change.
Any such use which, at the expiration of said period is not in compliance with
the provisions of this chapter and in possession of a validly issued license
shall at that time discontinue and abate the operation of said enterprise. Any
establishment legally existing on the effective date of this chapter and which
is denied a license solely by reason of its noncompliance with Section
4.55.070(p), and for which a license would otherwise be issued, shall be issued
a limited-term license, which shall contain a statement on its face that said
use is being continued pursuant to the provisions of this section and stating
the expiration date of the period of lawful operation and that said limited-
term license shall not be renewed beyond said date. Any establishment operating
pursuant to such limited-term license shall be subject to all provisions of
this chapter except for the provision of Section
4.55.070(p) as provided herein.
(Ord. 2946 § 4 (part), 1976)
4.55.150   Application of other code provisions.
   
Chapter 4.04 shall apply to the subject matter of this chapter in all respects,
including those not specifically mentioned in this chapter. Any circumstances
constituting grounds for denial shall also constitute grounds for revocation,
suspension or disciplinary action.
(Ord. 3113 § 10, 1979: Ord. 2946 § 4 (part), 1976)
Chapter 4.56
HOT TUB/SAUNA ESTABLISHMENTS
Sections:
   
4.56.010   Purpose and intent.
   
4.56.020   Definitions.
   
4.56.030   Hot tub/sauna establishment license required.
   
4.56.040   Hot tub/sauna establishment license application fee.
   
4.56.050   Application for hot tub/sauna establishment license.
   
4.56.060   Hot tub/sauna establishment employee permit required.
   
4.56.070   Hot tub/sauna establishment employee application fee.
   
4.56.080   Application for hot tub/sauna establishment employee permit.
   
4.56.090   Appeal.
   
4.56.100   Hot tub/sauna establishment and operations requirements.
   
4.56.110   Inspection by officials.
   
4.56.120   Business name.
   
4.56.130   Business location change.
   
4.56.140   Sale or transfer of hot tub/sauna establishment interest.
   
4.56.150   Display of permits, licenses.
   
4.56.160   Grounds for denial, probation, and disciplinary action.
   
4.56.170   Hearing.
   
4.56.180   Application to existing establishments and employees.
   
4.56.190   Application of other code provisions.
   
4.56.200   Employment of persons under the age of eighteen years prohibited.
4.56.010   Purpose and intent.
   It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to provide for the orderly
regulation of hot tub/sauna establishments and hot tub/sauna establishment
employees, as defined in this chapter in the interests of the public health,
safety and welfare by providing certain minimum building, sanitation and health
standards for hot tub/sauna establishments and by providing certain minimum
standards and regulations regarding the conduct and activities of the owners
and employees of hot tub/sauna establishments.
(Ord. 3113 § 1 (part), 1979)
4.56.020   Definitions.
   For the purpose of this chapter, unless the context clearly requires a
different meaning, the words, terms, and phrases set forth in this section
shall have the meanings given them in this section:
   (a)   "Hot tub/sauna establishment" means any establishment having a fixed
place of business where any person, as defined in this section, for
compensation, engages in, conducts, carries on or permits to be engaged in,
conducted or carried on any of the following as the principal functions;
provided, that any establishment wherein any employee provides any services
defined as massage or adult entertainment by Sections
4.54.020 or
4.55.020 shall be licensed pursuant to the provisions of
Chapters 4.54 or
4.55, respectively.
   (1)   Where Russian, Turkish, Finnish, Swedish, hot air, vapor, electric
cabinet, steam, mineral, sweat, salt, Japanese, sauna, fomentation, alcohol or
baths of any kind whatsoever are furnished or made available; and/or
   (2)   Where the public has access, on a rental basis, to private rooms or
suites located within the establishment, in which are located or provided hot
tubs, jacuzzis, saunas, showers, similar and/or related facilities, or any
combination thereof.
   The term "hot tub/sauna establishment" does not include licensed hospitals,
nursing homes, sanitaria, or individuals holding a valid certificate to
practice the healing arts under the laws of the state of California, or
individuals working under the direction of any such certificated persons. The
term "hot tub/sauna establishment" does not include any type of a privately
owned and operated health spa, gymnasium or exercise facility where the primary
purpose of the establishment is the offering of exercise or physical fitness
equipment and facilities to prospective patrons; even though such establishment
may have, on its premises, facilities for hot baths, and/or hot tubs, jacuzzis,
saunas and related facilities for the incidental use of patrons.
   (b)   "Hot tub/sauna establishment employee" means every owner, partner,
manager, supervisor, employee or any other person, whether paid or not, who
renders personal services of any type in the operation of a hot tub/sauna
establishment.
   (c)   "License" means the license to operate a hot/tub sauna establishment
as required by this chapter.
   (d)   "Permit" means the permit to engage in the activities of a hot tub/
sauna establishment employee as required by this chapter.
   (e)   "Person" means any individual, partnership, firm, association. joint
venture, corporation. or combination of individuals.
   Whenever, in this chapter, the singular form of any of the terms defined in
this section is used, the same includes the plural form of such term.
(Ord. 3113 § 1 (part), 1979)
4.56.030   Hot tub/sauna establishment license required.
   It is unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct or carry on, in or upon
any premises within the city the operation of a hot tub/sauna establishment
without the license obtained from the chief of police as required by this
chapter. A. hot tub/sauna establishment license shall be issued to any person
who has complied with the requirements of Sections
4.56.050 and
4.56.110, and all applicable provisions of the code; unless grounds for denial
of such license are found to exist. In addition to those set forth in Section
4.04.140, grounds for denial shall include:
   (a)   The applicant made a material misstatement in the application for a
license;
   (b)   The applicant has, within five years immediately preceding the date of
the filing of the application, been convicted in a court of competent
jurisdiction of an offense involving conduct which requires registration under
California Penal Code Section 290, or any violations of Sections 311 through
311.7, 313.1, 314, 315, 316, 318, or 647(a), 647(b), 647(d), or 647(h) of the
California Penal Code, or of any offense involving theft of property or
violence;
   (c)   That the operation of a hot tub/sauna establishment, as proposed by
the applicant, if permitted, would not comply with all applicable laws
including, but not limited to, all city ordinances and regulations;
   (d)   That the operation of the proposed hot tub/sauna establishment is
likely to be injurious to the health, safety and welfare of the people of the
city;
   (e)   That the applicant is lacking in the background and qualifications to
conduct a bona fide hot tub/sauna establishment; or
   (f)   That the applicant has violated any provision of this chapter, or of
any similar ordinance, law, rule or regulation of another public agency which
regulates the operation of hot tub/sauna or related establishments.
(Ord. 3113 § 1 (part), 1979)
4.56.040   Hot tub/sauna establishment license application fee.
   Any application for a license to operate a hot tub/sauna establishment shall
be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee as set forth in the municipal fee
schedule. The application fee shall be used to defray, in part, the costs of
investigation and report, and is not made in lieu of any other fees or taxes
required under this code. A license to operate a hot tub/sauna establishment
shall be renewed annually. The renewal fee shall be as set forth in the
municipal fee schedule.
(Ord. 3113 § 1 (part), 1979)
4.56.050   Application for hot tub/sauna establishment license.
   Any application for a license to operate a hot tub/sauna establishment shall
be made with the chief of police. Within thirty working days following receipt
of a completed application, the chief of police shall either issue the permit
or mail a written statement of his reasons for denial thereof. The application
shall set forth the exact nature of the hot tub/sauna operations or activities
to be conducted, the proposed place of business and facilities therefor, and
the name and address of each applicant. In addition to the requirements of
Chapter 4.04 and this section, any applicant shall furnish the following
information:
   (a)   The previous address of applicant, if any, for a period of three years
immediately prior to the date of the application and the dates of residence at
each;
   (b)   Written proof that the applicant is at least eighteen years of age;
   (c)   Applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and hair;
   (d)   The applicant shall allow the police department official processing
the application to take photographs and fingerprints of the applicant;
   (e)   Business, occupation or employment history of the applicant for the
three years immediately preceding the date of the application;
   (f)   If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall
be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation, together with
the names and residence addresses of each of its officers, directors, and each
stockholder holding more than five percent of the stock of the corporation. If
the applicant is a partnership, the application shall set forth the name and
residence address of each of the partners, including limited partners. If one
or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this section
pertaining to a corporate applicant shall apply;
   (g)   The names and residence addresses of all persons currently employed or
intended to be employed in the hot tub/sauna establishment, regardless of the
nature of the employment, other than any person licensed pursuant to Section
4.56.060, along with the proposed or actual nature of the work performed or to
be performed, and recent passport-size photographs, suitable to the police
department official processing the application, of each such employee. All such
employees shall be requested to obtain the permit specified in Section
4.56.060. Any applicant or licensee shall notify the city in writing of the
names, addresses, and nature of the work, of any new or proposed employees, and
supply the photographs described in this subsection upon determining to employ
such person. No such person shall commence such employment until a permit has
been obtained as specified in Section
4.56.060. "Employee" means "hot tub/sauna establishment employee" as defined
herein. It shall be unlawful for any licensee to employ any hot tub/sauna
establishment employee who does not possess a valid permit provided for in
Section
4.56.020. Any licensee shall notify the chief of police in writing of the
termination of employment of any employee, whether terminated by the licensee
or employee, within five days of such termination;
   (h)   Such other information as may be deemed necessary by the chief of
police.
(Ord. 3113 § 1 (part), 1979)
4.56.060   Hot tub/sauna establishment employee permit required.
   It is unlawful for any person to act as a hot tub/sauna establishment
employee unless such person holds a valid permit issued by the chief of police.
A hot tub/sauna establishment employee permit shall be issued to any person who
has fulfilled the requirements of Section
4.56.080, and all other applicable provisions of this code; unless grounds for
denial of such permit are found to exist. In addition to those set forth in
Section
4.04.140, grounds for denial shall include:
   (a)   The applicant made a material misstatement in the application for the
permit;
   (b)   The applicant, within five years immediately preceding the date of the
filing of the application, has been convicted in a court of competent
jurisdiction of any offense involving conduct which requires registration under
California Penal Code Section 290, or any violation of Sections 311 through
311.7, 313.1, 314, 315, 316, 318 or 647(a), 647(b), 647(d), or 647(h) of the
California Penal Code or of any offense involving theft of property;
   (c)   The issuance of the permit is likely to be injurious to the health,
safety, welfare, and interest of the people of the city;
   (d)   The applicant has previously violated any provision of this chapter,
or of any similar ordinance, law, rule or regulation of another public agency
which regulates the operation of hot tub/sauna establishments or hot tub/sauna
establishment employees;
   (e)   The applicant is under eighteen years of age.
(Ord. 3113 § 1 (part), 1979)
4.56.070   Hot tub/sauna establishment employee application fee.
   Any application for a permit to act as hot tub/sauna establishment employee
shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee as set forth in the municipal fee
schedule. A hot tub/sauna establishment employee permit shall be renewed
annually. The renewal fee shall be as set forth in the municipal fee schedule.
Any person who applies for a license to operate a hot tub/sauna establishment
and who desires to act as a hot tub/sauna establishment employee within said
establishment shall not be required to pay the fee required by the municipal
fee schedule, but shall be required to furnish the information set forth in
Section
4.56.080.
(Ord. 4642 § 4, 2000: Ord. 3113 § 1 (part), 1979)
4.56.080   Application for hot tub/sauna establishment employee permit.
   Any application for a permit to act as a hot tub/sauna establishment
employee shall be made with the chief of police. Within thirty working days
following receipt of a completed application, the chief of police shall either
issue the permit, or mail a written statement of his reason for denial thereof.
The chief of police may require the applicant to allow fingerprints to be
taken. In addition to the requirements of
Chapter 4.04, the applicant shall furnish the following information:
   (a)   Name, residence address and telephone number;
   (b)   Social security number and driver's license number if any;
   (c)   Applicant's weight, height, color of hair and eyes;
   (d)   The applicant shall furnish a recent photograph of applicant to the
police department official who processes the application;
   (e)   Written evidence that the applicant is at least eighteen years of age;
   (f)   Business, occupation or employment of the applicant for the three
years immediately preceding the date of application;
   (g)   The name and address of the establishment where the applicant is to be
employed, and the name of the owner or operator of the same. Any hot tub/sauna
establishment employee granted a permit pursuant to this section must report
any change in hot tub/sauna establishment employment within five days of said
change;
   (h)   Whether such person has ever been convicted of any crime mentioned in
Section
4.56.060. If any person has been so convicted, a statement must be made giving
the place and court in which said conviction was had, the specific charge or
charges under which the conviction was obtained, and the sentence imposed as a
result of such conviction;
   (i)   Such other information as may be deemed necessary by the chief of
police.
(Ord. 3113 § 1 (part), 1979)
4.56.090   Appeal.
   In the event a permit or license application has been denied, the applicant
shall proceed pursuant to the appeal and hearing provision of
Chapter 4.04.
(Ord. 3113 § 1 (part), 1979)
4.56.100   Hot tub/sauna establishment and operations requirements.
   All hot tub/sauna establishments shall comply with the following facilities
and operations requirements and each of the requirements listed in this section
shall be conditions of any hot tub/sauna establishment license which is issued
pursuant to the requirements of this chapter:
   (a)   Hot tub/sauna establishments shall comply with all applicable
provisions of this code and with all applicable health and sanitation laws,
rules and regulations of the county of Santa Clara and state of California.
   (b)   Toilet and lavatory facilities shall be provided for employees and
patrons of a hot tub/sauna establishment in a number and type not less than the
minimum number and type specified in the applicable code section for such type
of use.
   (c)   A manager or other supervisory representative of the licensee shall be
and remain on the premises of the licensed hot tub/sauna establishment at all
times during the operating hours of the establishment. The licensee shall
furnish the chief of police with a list of all persons authorized by licensee
to act as manager or representative of the licensee. Any change in said list
shall be reported to the chief of police immediately.
   (d)   All suites and rooms within hot tub/sauna establishments, for the use
of patrons, shall be provided with clean laundered sheets, towels and linens in
sufficient quantities which shall be laundered between consecutive uses thereof
and stored in an approved sanitary manner. The same sheets, towels and linens
shall not be used in excess of one rental period. No sheets, towels or linens
shall be laundered or dried in any hot tub/sauna establishment unless such
establishment is provided with approved laundry facilities comparable to
commercial laundering facilities, for such laundering and drying. Approved
receptacles shall be provided for the storage of soiled sheets, linens, and
towels. Heavy white paper may be substituted for sheets; provided that such
paper is used once for each person and then discarded into a sanitary
receptacle.
   (e)   All walls, ceilings, floors, pools, showers, bathtubs, hot tubs,
jacuzzis, saunas, steam rooms, and all other physical facilities within the
establishment must be in good repair and maintained in a clean and sanitary
condition. Wet and dry heat rooms, steam or vapor rooms, or steam or vapor
cabinets, shower compartments, bathrooms, toilet rooms, saunas, jacuzzis, hot
tubs, and individual suites shall be thoroughly cleaned and disinfected each
day the business is in operation. Bathtubs (not including hot tubs) shall be
cleaned and thoroughly disinfected after each use. Not more than one hot tub or
similar water-holding device shall be operated from the same heating or
filtering device or any similar mechanism unless each such hot tub or other
similar device is capable of being emptied and refilled independent of any
other hot tub.
   (f)   The walls in all rooms where water or steam baths are given shall have
a washable, mold-resistant surface.
   (g)   All lavatories or wash basins shall be provided with hot and cold
running water, soap and single-service towels in wall-mounted dispensers.
   (h)   Cabinets or other covered space shall be provided for the storage of
clean linen.
   (i)   To protect patrons from potential health and sanitary hazards, all hot
tub/sauna establishment employees shall be clean and shall perform all services
on the premises in full, clean outer garments.
   (j)   Security deposit facilities capable of being locked by the patron or a
waterproof security bag that may be carried by the patron shall be available
for the protection of the valuables of the patron.
   (k)   Each service or facility offered, the price thereof, and the minimum
length of time such service shall be performed shall be posted in a conspicuous
public location within the hot tub/sauna establishment. If the hot tub/sauna
establishment contains within it one or more individual rooms or suites, the
hourly rental rate for such individual rooms or suites shall also be posted in
a conspicuous public location, along with the minimum and maximum periods of
time such individual rooms or suites can be rented. All letters and numbers
shall be capitals, and not less than one-half inch in height.
   (l)   No mirrors of any type shall be placed at any location within or
inside the hot tub/sauna establishment unless the approval of the chief of
police has first been obtained; provided, however, that if the hot tub/sauna
establishment is comprised of one or more individual rooms or suites, a small
mirror, not more than three square feet in size, may be placed on the interior
of such room or suite on the door leading from such individual room or suite
into any interior hallway within such establishment, or such other comparable
location not visible from the exterior of such individual room or suite when
the door thereto is open as may be approved by the chief of police.
   (m)   If the hot tub/sauna establishment is comprised of one or more
individual rooms or suites which are rented to patrons, the interior of any
such individual room or suite shall not be visible from any point outside the
room or suite when the door leading from such individual room or suite into any
interior hallway is closed.
   (n)   No alcoholic beverages of any type shall be permitted to be brought
into or consumed within or upon the premises or property of any hot tub/sauna
establishment.
   (o)   No nudity shall be permitted or allowed to occur in any interior
hallways of the establishment, or in any other open patron area or areas
located within the hot tub/sauna establishment. Nudity shall only be permitted
or allowed within the confines of an individual room or suite located within
the establishment and then only by the patrons who have rented such room or
suite.
   (p)   No individual under the age of eighteen years shall be allowed to
enter into or to remain upon or within the premises of any hot tub/sauna
establishment unless such individual is accompanied by his or her parent or
guardian.
   (q)   All hot tub/sauna establishment employees, while on duty:
   (1)   Shall remain fully clothed at all times;
   (2)   Shall not remain inside any of the individual rooms or suites with any
patrons of the establishment while the doors leading to the hallways from such
rooms or suites are closed. Said doors shall remain closed at all times during
which the individual room or suite is occupied and utilized by any patron;
   (3)   Shall not perform, for compensation or otherwise, any type of personal
services for the patrons of the establishment, which personal services consist
of the touching of any part of the body of a patron with any part of the
employee's body, or any implement utilized by an employee.
   (r)   (1) Hot tub/sauna establishments shall close and remain closed from
eleven p.m. to nine a.m.
   (2)   After one year of operation, a hot tub/sauna establishment may be
exempted from the hours restrictions of this section by the chief of police
upon a written request which details the factual reasons supporting good cause
for the exemption. The chief of police, in determining what constitutes good
cause for this exemption from the hours restrictions, shall consider and weight
the following factors:
   (A)   The criteria outlined in Section
4.04.140 of
Chapter 4.04;
   (B)   The criteria outlined in Section
4.56.030 of this chapter;
   (C)   The impact which the hot tub/sauna establishment has had on the
health, safety, and welfare of the local community, including, but not limited
to, parking and traffic congestion;
   (D)   The hot tub/sauna establishment's compliance or noncompliance with all
federal, state, and local laws, including, but not limited to, this municipal
code.
   If, upon review of these factors, the chief of police determines that good
cause does exist for the requested exemption, the chief may then exempt the
particular hot tub/sauna establishment from the hours restrictions of this
section. However, in no event shall any hot tub/sauna establishment close later
than two a.m. nor open earlier than six a.m.
   (3)   The exemption from the hours restrictions of this section shall be
subject to review and renewal annually at the same time as the renewal of the
underlying license and the same factual showing shall be made as that required
for the initial exemption. The chief shall not grant an hours exemption unless
said establishment has maintained the criteria specified in Section
4.56.100(r)(2).
   (s)   No hot tub/sauna establishment shall be allowed in the following
locations:
   (1)   Within two hundred fifty feet of the exterior property limits of any
public or private elementary school, junior high school or high school;
   (2)   Within two hundred fifty feet of the exterior limits of any district
where residential use is the principal permitted use, including all R and RM
districts, O-S districts, and any P-C or P-F districts where the principal use
permitted or maintained is residential; or
   (3)   Within twelve hundred feet of the exterior property limits of any
other premises lawfully occupied by a hot tub/sauna establishment or by any
establishment subject to the provisions of
Chapters 4.54 or
4.55, or any cardroom licensed pursuant to
Chapter 4.52. Notwithstanding the provisions of this subdivision, subject to
all other provisions of this chapter, a hot tub/sauna establishment license may
be issued for an establishment located within twelve hundred feet of another
hot tub/sauna establishment, an establishment subject to the provisions of
Chapters 4.54 or
4.55, or any cardroom licensed pursuant to
Chapter 4.52 if the applicant has obtained, and has in effect, a valid
conditional use permit pursuant to
Chapter 18.76 (Permits and Approvals). Application for a license under this
chapter shall be made and processed prior to an application for a use permit.
In the event it is determined that a license under this chapter would be issued
for the provisions of this subdivision, the application for a use permit shall
then be processed. A license under this chapter shall not be issued until
completion of the use permit application process. In the case of such an
application, the time limit for action on a hot tub/sauna establishment license
application contained in Section
4.56.050 shall be automatically extended as necessary to follow processing of
the use permit application. For the purpose of determining compliance with
standard (3), as to, between and with respect to establishments lawfully in
operation on the effective date of this section, priority between such existing
establishments shall be assigned in accordance with the dates upon which said
establishments commenced such lawful operations. In the event any dispute
arises regarding said dates, the applicant shall have the obligation to
establish the date on which he commenced lawful operation.
   Any hot tub/sauna establishment lawfully in operation on the effective date
of this section shall, within sixty days of said date apply to the chief of
police for a determination as to compliance with the provisions of this
section. Said application shall be in such form as prescribed by the chief of
police.
   Any hot tub/sauna establishment legally existing on the effective date of
this subsection and which is not in compliance with the provisions of this
subsection shall comply with said provisions within three years of the
effective date of this subsection; provided, however, that any such
establishment which intends to in any way transfer ownership or alter or change
the nature of any such hot tub/sauna establishment on or after the effective
date of this subsection shall comply with the provisions of this subsection
prior to such transfer, alteration or change. Any such use which at the
expiration of said period is not in compliance with the provisions of this
subsection shall at that time discontinue and abate its operation.
   Any hot tub/sauna establishment lawfully in operation upon the effective
date of this subsection failing to comply with the provisions of this
subsection shall be issued a limited-term license containing a statement on its
face reciting such noncompliance and the date by which compliance must be
accomplished, and that said license shall not be renewed beyond said date.
   All distances referred to in this subsection shall be measured between the
closest points on the exterior property lines or area boundaries of the parcels
or areas involved, except that when a hot tub/sauna establishment subject to
the provisions of this section occupies one unit of a multi-unit structure
located on a single parcel, distances shall be measured from the exterior
boundaries of the unit so occupied.
(Ord. 4826 § 3, 2004: Ord. 3592 § 2, 1985: Ord. 3113 § 1 (part), 1979)
4.56.110   Inspection by officials.
   Any and all investigating officials of the city shall have the right to
enter hot tub/sauna establishments from time to time during regular business
hours to make reasonable inspections to observe and enforce compliance with
building, fire, electrical, plumbing or health regulations. A warrant shall be
obtained whenever required by law.
(Ord. 4642 § 5, 2000: Ord. 3113 § 1 (part), 1979)
4.56.120   Business name.
   No person licensed to operate a hot tub/sauna establishment shall operate
under any name or conduct business under any designation not specified in the
license.
(Ord. 3113 § 1 (part), 1979)
4.56.130   Business location change.
   Upon a change of location of a hot tub/sauna establishment, an application
to the chief of police shall be made in the same form as an original
application, and such application shall be granted, provided all applicable
provisions of this code are complied with as in the case of an original
application, and a change of location fee as set forth in the municipal fee
schedule to defray, in part, the costs of investigation and report has been
paid to the city.
(Ord. 3113 § 1 (part), 1979)
4.56.140   Sale or transfer of hot tub/sauna establishment interest.
   A sale or transfer of any interest in a hot tub/sauna establishment, which
interest would be reported as required in this chapter upon application for a
hot tub/sauna establishment license, shall be reported to the chief of police
within ten days of such sale or transfer. The chief of police shall investigate
any person receiving any interest in a hot tub/sauna establishment as a result
of such sale or transfer, and if such person satisfies the requirements
relating to hot tub/sauna establishment license applicants, the existing
license shall be endorsed to include such person. A fee as set forth in the
municipal fee schedule shall be paid to the city for the investigation by the
chief of police necessitated by each such sale or transfer.
(Ord. 3113 § 1 (part), 1979)
4.56.150   Display of permits, licenses.
   The owner or operator of a hot tub/sauna establishment shall display the hot
tub/sauna establishment license and the permit of each and every hot tub/sauna
establishment employee employed in the establishment in an open and conspicuous
place on the premises. Passport-size photographs of the licensee and permittees
shall be affixed to the respective license and permits on display pursuant to
this section. Home addresses of hot tub/sauna establishment employees need not
be displayed.
(Ord. 3113 § 1 (part), 1979)
4.56.160   Grounds for denial, probation, and disciplinary action.
   In addition to any provisions contained in this chapter, the provisions of
Section
4.04.140 shall apply to licenses and permits required under this chapter. Any
circumstances constituting grounds for denial shall also constitute grounds for
revocation, suspension or disciplinary action.
(Ord. 3113 § 1 (part), 1979)
4.56.170   Hearing.
   Any licensee or permittee whose license or permit has been suspended or
revoked shall proceed pursuant to the appeal and hearing provisions of
Chapter 4.04.
(Ord. 3113 § 1 (part), 1979)
4.56.180   Application to existing establishments and employees.
   All operators of existing hot tub/sauna establishments, and all hot tub/
sauna establishment employees in the city upon the effective date of this
chapter shall comply with all application and other requirements within thirty
days following the effective date of this chapter.
(Ord. 3113 § 1 (part), 1979)
4.56.190   Application of other code provisions.
   
Chapter 4.04 shall apply to the subject matter of this chapter in all respects,
including those not specifically mentioned in this chapter.
(Ord. 3113 § 1 (part), 1979)
4.56.200   Employment of persons under the age of eighteen years prohibited.
   No licensee shall employ, hire or retain the services of any individual who
is under the age of eighteen years old. No licensee shall knowingly employ,
hire or retain the services of, or continue to employ or retain, any individual
who has been convicted of any of the offenses set forth in subsection (b) of
Section
4.56.060, or who has failed to obtain the permit required by Section
4.56.060.
(Ord. 3113 § 1 (part), 1979)
Chapter 4.57
FIREARMS DEALERS*
Sections:
   
4.57.010   Definitions.
   
4.57.020   Permit - Required.
   
4.57.030   Application - Form - Fees.
   
4.57.040   Application - Investigation.
   
4.57.050   Application - Denial.
   
4.57.060   Permit - Form.
   
4.57.070   Permit - Duration - Renewal.
   
4.57.080   Permit - Assignment.
   
4.57.090   Permit - Conditions.
   
4.57.095   Business and security regulations.
   
4.57.100   Permit - Grounds for revocation.
   
4.57.110   Permit - Hearing.
   
4.57.120   Permit - Liability insurance.
   
4.57.130   Permit - Authority to inspect.
   
4.57.140   Compliance.
   
4.57.150   Severability.
   *   Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history: Ordinance No. 3845.
4.57.010   Definitions.
   (a)   In addition to those words and phrases defined in Section
4.04.010 of this code, the following words and phrases, whenever used in this
chapter, shall be construed as defined in this section:
   (1)   "Chief of police" means the chief of police or his or her designee.
   (2)   "City" means the city of Palo Alto.
   (3)   "Firearms dealer" means a person engaged in the business of selling,
transferring, or leasing, or advertising for, sale, transfer, or lease, or
offering or exposing for sale, transfer, or lease, any firearm.
   (4)   "Department" means the California Department of Justice.
   (5)   "Engaged in the business" means the conduct of a business by the
selling, transferring, or leasing of any firearm; or the preparation for such
conduct of business as evidenced by the securing of applicable federal or state
licenses; or the holding of one's self out as engaged in the business of
selling, transferring, or leasing of any firearm; or the selling, transferring,
or leasing of any firearms in quantity, in series or in individual
transactions, or in any other manner indicative of trade.
   (6)   "Person" means natural person, association, partnership, firm, or
corporation.
   (7)   "Firearm" means any revolver, rifle, shotgun or any other device
designed to be used as a weapon, from which a projectile is expelled through a
barrel by the force of an explosion or any other form of combustion. A
"firearm" includes any device defined as a firearm by the California Penal Code
as said definition now reads or may hereafter be amended to read.
(Ord. 4351 § 2 (part), 1996)
4.57.020   Permit - Required.
   No person shall engage in the business of selling, transferring or leasing,
or advertising for sale, transfer or lease, or offering or exposing for sale,
transfer or lease within this city any firearm unless that person has been
issued a permit pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 4351 § 2 (part), 1996)
4.57.030   Application - Form - Fees.
   (a)   An applicant for a permit under this chapter shall file with the chief
of police a sworn application in writing, on a form to be furnished by the
city, and the applicant and officers, employees, and agents thereof shall be
photographed and fingerprinted by the chief of police. The applicant shall
provide all information requested, including proof of compliance with all
applicable federal, state, and local laws when required by the chief of police,
or the application will not be deemed complete. The application shall be
accompanied by a nonrefundable fee as set forth in the municipal fee schedule.
   (b)   Any person proposing to engage in business as a firearms dealer within
this city shall secure the applicable federal license and shall have thirty
calendar days after approval of such federal license to apply for a city permit
in compliance with the provision of this chapter and shall not engage in the
business as a firearms dealer within the city until the city permit is issued.
(Ord. 4351 § 2 (part), 1996)
4.57.040   Application - Investigation.
   The chief of police shall conduct an appropriate investigation of the
applicant to determine for the protection of the public safety whether the
permit may be issued. The chief of police may require additional information of
an applicant which he or she deems necessary to complete the investigation.
(Ord. 4351 § 2 (part), 1996)
4.57.050   Application - Denial.
   (a)   The chief of police shall issue a firearms dealer permit to an
applicant unless he or she finds any of the following:
   (1)   The applicant, or an officer, employee, or agent thereof is under the
age of twenty-one years;
   (2)   The applicant is not licensed as required by all applicable federal,
state, and local laws;
   (3)   The applicant, or an officer, employee, or agent thereof has had a
similar type of permit previously revoked or denied for good cause within the
immediately preceding year;
   (4)   The applicant, or an officer, employee, or agent thereof has knowingly
made any false or misleading statement of a material fact or omission of a
material fact in the application for a permit;
   (5)   The applicant, or an officer, employee, or agent thereof has been
convicted of:
   (A)   Any offense so as to disqualify the applicant, or an officer,
employee, or agent thereof from owning or possessing a firearm under applicable
federal, state, and local laws,
   (B)   Any offense relating to the manufacture, sale, possession, use, or
registration of any firearm or dangerous or deadly weapon,
   (C)   Any offense involving the use of force or violence upon the person of
another,
   (D)   Any offense involving theft, fraud, dishonesty, or deceit,
   (E)   Any offense involving the manufacture, sale, possession, or use of any
controlled substance as defined by the California Health and Safety Code as
said definition now reads or may hereafter be amended to read;
   (6)   The applicant, or an officer, employee, or agent thereof is an
unlawful user of any controlled substance as defined by the California Health
and Safety Code as said definition now reads or may hereafter be amended to
read, or is an excessive user of alcohol, to the extent that such use would
impair his or her fitness to be a firearms dealer;
   (7)   The applicant, or an officer, employee, or agent thereof has been
adjudicated as a mental defective, or has been committed to a mental
institution, or suffers from any psychological disturbance which would impair
his or her fitness to be a firearms dealer;
   (8)   The operation of the business as proposed will not comply with all
applicable federal, state, and local laws;
   (9)   The business as proposed will be operated in the following locations:
   (A)   Within a zoning district in which retail service is not a permitted or
conditional use,
   (B)   Within a zoning district in which residential use is the principal
permitted or maintained use, or within two hundred fifty feet of the exterior
limits of any such district,
   (C)   On or within two hundred fifty feet of the exterior limits of any
other premises occupied by a public or private day care center or day care
home, elementary school, junior high school, or high school,
   (D)   On or within one thousand two-hundred feet of the exterior limits of
any other premises occupied by a dealer in firearms, a cardroom, a massage
establishment, and adult entertainment establishment, or a hot tub/sauna
establishment. Priority between such existing establishments shall be assigned
in accordance with the dates upon which such establishments commenced such
lawful operation, priority being given to the establishment having the earliest
of such dates. In the event any dispute arises regarding said date, the
applicant shall have the obligation to establish the date on which he or she
commenced lawful operation.
   All distances referred to in this subsection shall be measured between the
closest points on the exterior property lines or area boundaries of the parcels
or areas involved, except that when a dealer in firearms subject to the
provisions of this chapter occupies one unit of a multi-unit structure located
on a single parcel, distances shall be measured from the exterior boundaries of
the unit occupied. This subsection shall supersede any and all conflicting
provisions regulating home occupations set out in Title 18 of this code;
   (10)   The applicant, or an officer, employee, or agent thereof does not
have and/or cannot provide evidence of, a possessory interest in the property
at which the proposed business will be conducted;
   (11)   The operation of the firearm dealer business as proposed in the
application for the permit will violate any applicable building, fire, health
or zoning requirements set forth in this code;
   (12)   Any ground for denial specified in Section
4.04.140 of this code.
(Ord. 4351 § 2 (part), 1996)
4.57.060   Permit - Form.
   All permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall be in the form prescribed
by the Attorney General of the State of California.
(Ord. 4351 § 2 (part), 1996)
4.57.070   Permit - Duration - Renewal.
   All permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire one year after the
date of issuance; provided, however, that such permits may be renewed by the
chief of police for additional periods of one year upon approval of an
application for renewal by the chief of police and payment of the renewal fee.
Such renewal application must be received by the chief of police, in completed
form, no later than forty-five days prior to the expiration of the current
permit.
(Ord. 4351 § 2 (part), 1996)
4.57.080   Permit - Assignment.
   The assignment or attempt to assign any permit issued pursuant to this
chapter is unlawful and any such assignment or attempt to assign a permit shall
render the permit null and void.
(Ord. 4351 § 2 (part), 1996)
4.57.090   Permit - Conditions.
   (a)   Any permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to all of
the following conditions, the breach of any of which shall be sufficient cause
for revocation of the permit by the chief of police:
   (1)   The business shall be engaged-in only in the building located at the
street address designated in the permit, and only by such persons as specified
in the permit; the business may also be engaged-in at such other locations or
events as are authorized by federal and state law provided that such location
or event conforms to the requirements of this code; any changes to the approved
location or to the persons authorized to act as officers, employees, or agents
of the permittee in engaging in the business during the term of the permit must
be approved by the chief of police;
   (2)   The permit or a copy thereof, certified by the chief of police, shall
be displayed on the premises where it can easily be seen;
   (3)   The permittee shall comply with all federal and state firearms laws.
   Any permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to such
additional conditions as the chief of police finds are reasonably related to
the purposes of this chapter.
(Ord. 4351 § 2 (part), 1996)
4.57.095   Business and security regulations.
   (a)   All firearm dealers and officers, employees or agents of the firearm
dealer, shall comply with all provisions of California Penal Code Section 12071
regarding business regulations and building specifications for firearm
security.
   (b)   All sellers of firearms shall protect such firearms from theft during
business hours in the following manner:
   (1)   All firearms shall be displayed in locked cabinets, a secured rack, or
a storage area so that access to firearms is controlled by the dealer or an
employee, to the exclusion of all others.
   (2)   The firearm dealer or the dealer's agent or employee shall be present
when a prospective buyer or seller is handling any firearm prior to sale and
delivery of the firearm.
(Ord. 4351 § 2 (part), 1996)
4.57.100   Permit - Grounds for revocation.
   In addition to any provisions contained in this chapter, the provisions of
Section
4.04.140 of this code shall apply to revocation of permits required under this
chapter. Any circumstances constituting grounds for denial shall also
constitute grounds for revocation.
(Ord. 4351 § 2 (part), 1996)
4.57.110   Permit - Hearing.
   (a)   Any person whose application for a permit has been denied, or whose
permit has been revoked pursuant to the provision of this chapter, shall have
the right to a hearing before the chief of police prior to final denial or
prior to revocation.
   (b)   The chief of police shall give the applicant or permittee written
notice of his or her intent to deny the application or to revoke the permit.
The notice shall set forth the ground or grounds for the chief of police's
intent to deny the application or to revoke the permit, and shall inform the
applicant or permittee that he or she has ten days from the date of receipt of
the notice to file a written request for a hearing. The application may be
denied or the permit revoked if a written hearing request is not received
within the ten-day period.
   (c)   If the applicant or permittee files a timely hearing request, the
chief of police shall set a time and place for the hearing. All parties
involved shall have the right to offer testimony, documentary and tangible
evidence bearing on the issues, to be represented by counsel, and to confront
and cross-examine any witnesses against them. The decision of the chief of
police whether to deny the application or revoke the permit is final and
nonappealable.
(Ord. 4351 § 2 (part), 1996)
4.57.120   Permit - Liability insurance.
   No permit shall be issued or continued pursuant to this chapter unless there
is in full force and effect a policy of insurance in such form as the city
attorney and risk manager deem proper, executed by an insurance company
approved by the city attorney and risk manager, whereby the applicant or
permittee is insured against liability for damage to property and for injury to
or death of any person as a result of the sale, transfer, or lease, or
advertising for sale, transfer, or lease, or offering or exposing for sale,
transfer, or lease any firearm. The minimum liability limits shall not be less
than one million dollars for damage to or destruction of property in any one
incident, and one million dollars for the death of or injury to any one person;
provided, however, that additional amounts may be required by the city attorney
and risk manager if deemed necessary. Such policy of insurance shall contain an
endorsement providing that the policy will not be cancelled until notice in
writing has been given to the city, addressed in care of the chief of police,
275 Forest Avenue, Palo Alto, California, 94301, at least thirty days
immediately prior to the time such cancellation becomes effective. Further,
such policy of insurance shall name the city, its officers, agents, and
employees as additional insureds. Additionally, applicants and permittee shall
indemnify, defend, and hold harmless the city, its officers, agents and
employees, from claims arising from the negligence of the applicant or
permittee.
(Ord. 4351 § 2 (part), 1996)
4.57.130   Permit - Authority to inspect.
   Any and all investigating officials of the city shall have the right to
enter the building designated in the permit from time to time during regular
business hours to make reasonable inspections to observe and enforce compliance
with building, mechanical, fire, electrical, plumbing, or health regulations,
or provisions of this chapter. A police investigator may conduct compliance
inspections to ensure conformance with all federal, state, and local laws, and
the provisions of this chapter. A warrant shall be obtained whenever required
by law.
(Ord. 4351 § 2 (part), 1996)
4.57.140   Compliance.
   Any person engaging in the business of selling, transferring, or leasing, or
advertising for sale, transfer or lease, or offering or exposing for sale,
transfer or lease, any firearm on the effective date of the ordinance codified
in this chapter shall have a period of sixty days after such effective date to
comply with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 4351 § 2 (part), 1996)
4.57.150   Severability.
   This chapter shall be enforced to the full extent of the authority of the
city of Palo Alto. If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence or word of
this chapter is deemed to be invalid or beyond the authority of the city of
Palo Alto, either on its face or as applied, the invalidity of such provision
shall not affect the other sections, subsections, paragraphs, sentences, or
words of this chapter, and the applications thereof; and to that end, the
section, subsections, paragraphs, sentences and words of this chapter shall be
deemed severable.
(Ord. 4351 § 2 (part), 1996)
Chapter 4.58
NARCOTICS PARAPHERNALIA SALE AND DISPLAY*
Sections:
   
4.58.010   Definition.
   
4.58.020   Minors restricted.
   
4.58.030   Sale and display rooms.
   
4.58.040   Public nuisance.
   
4.58.050   Violations.
   *   Editor's Note: Chapter 4.58, formerly codified as Chapter 9.57 of this
code, was renumbered and relocated by Section 45 of Ordinance 4453.
4.58.010   Definition.
   For purposes of this chapter, "narcotics paraphernalia" consists of any
device, contrivance, instrument or paraphernalia for smoking or injecting or
consuming marijuana, hashish, PCP, or any controlled substance, as defined in
the Health and Safety Code of the State of California, other than prescription
drugs and devices to ingest or inject prescription drugs. This definition
includes, but is not limited to, such items as coke spoons, water pipes, hash
pipes, roach clips, and opium pipes. This definition does not include cigarette
papers or cigarette rolling machines.
(Ord. 4453 § 45 (part), 1997: Ord. 3199 § 1 (part), 1980)
4.58.020   Minors restricted.
   No person, including, but not limited to, an owner, manager, proprietor, or
salesperson of any place of business selling or displaying for the purpose of
sale any narcotics paraphernalia, shall sell or permit to be sold any narcotics
paraphernalia to any person under the age of eighteen years.
(Ord. 4453 § 45 (part), 1997: Ord. 3199 § 1 (part), 1980)
4.58.030   Sale and display rooms.
   No person shall sell or offer for sale at any place of business to which the
public is invited narcotics paraphernalia, except within a separate room or
enclosure to which minors under the age of eighteen years who are not
accompanied by a parent or legal guardian are excluded. Each entrance to such
room or enclosure shall have a sign posted with reasonably visible and legible
words to the effect that (1) narcotics paraphernalia are being offered for sale
in such room or enclosure; and (2) minors under age eighteen years are excluded
unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian. No person shall permit any
minor under the age of eighteen years to enter, visit, or remain in any such
room or enclosure unless such minor is accompanied by a parent or legal
guardian.
(Ord. 4453 § 45 (part), 1997: Ord. 3199 § 1 (part), 1980)
4.58.040   Public nuisance.
   Any violation of this chapter is a public nuisance and may be abated in
accordance with
Chapter 9.56 of this code and/or Section 731 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
(Ord. 4453 § 45 (part), 1997: Ord. 3199 § 1 (part), 1980)
4.58.050   Violations.
   Violations of Sections
4.58.020 and/or
4.58.030 are misdemeanors.
(Ord. 4453 § 45 (part), 1997: Ord. 3199 § 1 (part), 1980)
Chapter 4.59
PET SHOPS*
Sections:
   
4.59.010   Housing facilities.
   
4.59.020   Sanitation.
   
4.59.030   Food.
   
4.59.040   Name and telephone number notification.
   
4.59.050   Sale of dangerous or wild animals.
   
4.59.060   Diseased and injured animals.
   
4.59.070   Dead animals.
   
4.59.080   Permit required - Pet shop and boarding kennel.
   
4.59.090   Permit required - Grooming shop.
   
4.59.095   Sale of kittens and puppies.
   
4.59.100   Sale of raccoons.
   
4.59.105   Sale of rabbits, chicks, ducklings.
   *   Editor's Note: Chapter 4.59, formerly codified as Chapter 6.22 of this
code, was renumbered and relocated by Section 36 of Ordinance 4453.
4.59.010   Housing facilities.
   (a)   Every person who owns, conducts or operates a pet shop shall keep each
animal in a housing facility which is structurally sound and in good repair to
protect the animal from injury and to restrict entrance of other animals. This
provision shall not be construed to prohibit the keeping of more than one
animal in a single housing facility, so long as such multiple housing does not
create a threat to the safety of any of the animals so housed.
   (b)   Said facilities shall be constructed so as to prevent escape of the
animals kept therein.
   (c)   Said facilities shall be of sufficient size to provide adequate and
proper housing for the animals kept therein.
   (d)   Said facilities shall provide temperature and ventilation control of a
nature compatible with the needs of the animals kept therein.
(Ord. 4453 § 36 (part), 1997: Ord. 2910 § 2 (part), 1976)
4.59.020   Sanitation.
   (a)   Every person who owns, conducts or operates a pet shop shall comply
with the following:
   (1)   All animals and all premises, enclosures or structures wherein animals
are kept shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition, free from all
obnoxious odors, substances and flies.
   (2)   All animals and all premises, enclosures or structures wherein animals
are kept shall be thoroughly cleaned, and all debris, refuse, manure, urine,
waste food, or other removable material shall be removed therefrom every day or
more often as necessary to effect compliance with the provisions of subsection
(a)(1) of this section. Daily cleaning of animals, premises, enclosures or
structures shall be completed prior to the time that the pet shop is open to
the public for business. Nothing in this section shall prevent continuous
cleaning of the animals, premises, structures or enclosures when the pet shop
is open to the public, and after compliance with all of the above.
(Ord. 4453 § 36 (part), 1997: Ord. 3257 § 6 (part), 1981: Ord. 2910 § 2 (part),
1976)
4.59.030   Food.
   Every person who owns, conducts or operates a pet shop shall supply each
animal therein with sufficient good and wholesome food and fresh water as often
as the feeding habits of the animal require. Food so supplied each animal shall
be of a nature compatible with the dietary habits and needs of the animal.
(Ord. 4453 § 36 (part), 1997: Ord. 2910 § 2 (part), 1976)
4.59.040   Name and telephone number notification.
   Every person who owns, conducts, or operates a pet shop shall provide the
police department and the superintendent of the animal center with the names,
current address and phone numbers of persons to be notified during any hour of
the day or night who will proceed at once to the location so as to permit entry
to the premises by the animal control officers or the police officers of the
city in the event of an emergency situation.
(Ord. 4453 § 36 (part), 1997: Ord. 3257 § 6 (part), 1981: Ord. 2910 § 2 (part),
1976)
4.59.050   Sale of dangerous or wild animals.
   No person who owns, conducts or operates a pet shop shall sell a dangerous
or wild animal, as defined in Section
6.28.010 of this code, without first ascertaining the place of residence of the
prospective purchaser of such animals. If the prospective purchaser resides in
the city, the prospective purchaser shall be advised that he must obtain a
permit pursuant to Section
6.28.040 of this code before he may purchase such dangerous or wild animal.
(Ord. 4453 § 36 (part), 1997: Ord. 2910 § 2 (part), 1976)
4.59.060   Diseased and injured animals.
   Every person who owns, conducts or operates a pet shop shall take reasonable
care to display or release for sale, trade or adoption only those animals which
are free of disease or injuries. The superintendent of the animal center or his
designated appointee may order any animal which is sick, diseased, or injured
to be removed from display.
(Ord. 4453 § 36 (part), 1997: Ord. 3257 § 6 (part), 1981)
4.59.070   Dead animals.
   Every person who owns, conducts or operates a pet shop shall remove any dead
animals from display on a daily basis, or more often as necessary.
(Ord. 4453 § 36 (part), 1997: Ord. 3257 § 6 (part), 1981)
4.59.080   Permit required - Pet shop and boarding kennel.
   Every person who owns a pet shop or boarding kennel shall secure a permit
for operation of same. The fee for such permit shall be as set forth in the
municipal fee schedule. Conditions to secure the purposes of this chapter may
be imposed upon a permit at the time of issuance or such later date that the
superintendent of animal control deems necessary. Unannounced routine
inspections of the pet shop or boarding kennel shall be required by the
superintendent of animal control to insure compliance with this chapter. Such
inspections shall be an automatic condition of permit approval.
(Ord. 4453 § 36 (part), 1997: Ord. 3257 § 6 (part), 1981)
4.59.090   Permit required - Grooming shop.
   Every person who owns, conducts, or operates a grooming shop shall secure a
permit for operation of same. "Grooming shop" means any person, firm or
corporation operating an establishment where live animals are groomed as a
business. The fee for such permit shall be as set forth in the municipal fee
schedule. Conditions to secure the purposes of this chapter may be imposed upon
a permit at the time of issuance or such later date that the superintendent of
animal control deems necessary. Unannounced routine inspections of the grooming
shop shall be required by the superintendent of animal control to insure
compliance with this chapter. Such inspections shall be an automatic condition
of permit approval.
(Ord. 4453 § 36 (part), 1997: Ord. 3257 § 6 (part), 1981)
4.59.095   Sale of kittens and puppies.
   No person who owns, operates, conducts, or is employed by a pet shop shall
display, sell, offer for sale, barter, or give away any kitten or puppy under
eight weeks of age.
(Ord. 4453 § 36 (part), 1997: Ord. 3257 § 6 (part), 1981)
4.59.100   Sale of raccoons.
   No person who owns, operates, conducts, or is employed by a pet shop shall
display, sell, or offer for sale any raccoon.
(Ord. 4453 § 36 (part), 1997: Ord. 3257 § 6 (part), 1981)
4.59.105   Sale of rabbits, chicks, ducklings.
   No person shall sell, offer for sale, barter, or give away any rabbits, baby
chicks, ducklings, or other fowl under four weeks of age in any quantity less
than six.
(Ord. 4453 § 36 (part), 1997: Ord. 3257 § 6 (part), 1981)
Chapter 4.60
BUSINESS REGISTRATION PROGRAM
Sections:
   
4.60.010   Purpose.
   
4.60.020   Definitions.
   
4.60.030   Business registration requirement.
   
4.60.040   Exemptions from business registration.
   
4.60.050   Fee required.
   
4.60.060   Application procedures.
   
4.60.070   Contents of business registration certificate.
   
4.60.080   Term and annual renewal of business registration.
   
4.60.090   Refunds.
   
4.60.100   Rules and regulations.
   
4.60.120   Penalties and remedies.
4.60.010   Purpose.
   The purpose of this chapter is to establish a regulatory mechanism to
maintain an accurate record of businesses conducting business in the city in
order (1) to develop recommendations on land uses; (2) to better coordinate
transportation programs; (3) to assist in zoning compliance and (4) to gather
statistical information for other city purposes. This chapter is not intended
to apply to home based or transitory businesses.
(Ord. 5279 § 1 (part), 2014)
4.60.020   Definitions.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings set forth in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
   (a)   "Business" means any commercial enterprise, trade, calling, vocation,
profession, occupation, or means of livelihood, whether or not carried on for
gain or profit.
   (b)   "Business registration certificate" means a written statement issued
by the city to a business owner as evidence of registering a business in the
city.
   (c)   "Fixed place of business" means a place of business located in the
city boundaries and occupied for the particular purpose of conducting business.
   (d)   "Home based business" means a home occupation as defined in Section
18.04.030.
   (e)   "Person" means and includes any business owner, individual, firm, co-
partnership, joint venture, association, corporation, estate, business trust,
or any other group or combination acting as a unit.
   (f)   "Transitory business" means a business that is carried on for a short
duration (such as pumpkin sales, special events, and filming) or a business
that does not have a fixed place of business within Palo Alto (such as
landscaping or construction contractors based in other cities).
(Ord. 5279 § 1 (part), 2014)
4.60.030   Business registration requirement.
   (a)   No person shall conduct any business in a fixed place of business
without first having obtained a business registration certificate, paid the
applicable business registration fee and complied with all applicable
provisions of this chapter.
   (b)   The issuance of a business registration certificate under this chapter
shall not excuse the business from complying with other applicable Code
requirements.
   (c)   A business registration certificate shall not be transferable.
(Ord. 5279 § 1 (part), 2014)
4.60.040   Exemptions from business registration.
   The following types of businesses are exempt from this chapter:
   (a)   Home based business.
   (b)   Transitory business.
   (c)   Non-profit organizations having less than one full time equivalent
employee.
   (d)   Businesses having less than one full time equivalent employee.
   (e)   Religious organizations which operate a worship hall but have no other
ancillary facilities or services. For purposes of this exception ancillary
facilities or services include but are not limited to religious or educational
classrooms, gift shops, and daycare services.
(Ord. 5379 § 1, 2016: Ord. 5279 § 1 (part), 2014)
4.60.050   Fee required.
   (a)   Every person engaging in business in the city shall pay a business
registration fee as prescribed by resolution adopted by the city council.
   (b)   The business registration fee is not a revenue raising device, but
shall bear a reasonable relationship to the service to be performed by the city
and the costs incurred by the city in reviewing, processing and acting upon the
application.
   (c)   The city council shall, from time to time, review the resolution
fixing the business registration fee and may revoke, modify, adjust, add or
determine any amount or rate of such business registration fee.
(Ord. 5279 § 1 (part), 2014)
4.60.060   Application procedures.
   Every person operating a business in the city shall apply to obtain a
business registration certificate on a form prescribed by the city. Upon
receipt of a completed application and any fee required, the city shall process
the application and issue a business registration certificate. The application
may be reviewed by other city departments or governmental agencies to determine
if the business premises to be occupied meet the requirements of federal,
state, and local laws.
(Ord. 5279 § 1 (part), 2014)
4.60.070   Contents of business registration certificate.
   (a)   Upon receipt of a completed application and payment of the prescribed
business registration fee, the city shall issue to the applicant a business
registration certificate which shall contain the following:
   (1)   Name of business;
   (2)   Business location;
   (3)   Expiration date;
   (4)   Certificate Number; and
   (5)   Such other information as deemed necessary by the city.
   (b)   A separate certificate may be obtained for each and every branch
establishment or separate place of business in which a business is carried on.
(Ord. 5279 § 1 (part), 2014)
4.60.080   Term and annual renewal of business registration.
   (a)   Term. A business registration certificate shall be effective for no
more than one year. Unless otherwise specified, all certificates shall expire
on March 31st. Business registration fees shall be due and payable annually in
advance.
   (b)   Renewal. Business registration certificates shall be renewed annually
on a form prescribed by the city. Every application for the renewal of a
certificate shall be made at least fifteen days prior to the expiration date of
such license. Any person applying to renew a business registration shall submit
to the city a completed renewal application and pay the renewal fee.
   (c)   Alternative Periods. If deemed necessary, the city may establish
alternative registration periods for businesses.
(Ord. 5279 § 1 (part), 2014)
4.60.090   Refunds.
   No business registration fees or penalties collected shall be refundable.
(Ord. 5279 § 1 (part), 2014)
4.60.100   Rules and regulations.
   The City Manager may adopt rules and regulations from time to time to
implement this chapter. Implementing rules and regulations shall not be
inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 5279 § 1 (part), 2014)
4.60.120   Penalties and remedies.
   (a)   Penalties for Delinquency. Any person engaging in business in the city
that fails to secure a business registration certificate before commencing
business in the city or fails to timely renew their license shall pay, in
addition to the amount of the license fee, a penalty in an amount to be
determined by ordinance or resolution.
   (b)   Action to Collect. If a business fails to comply with the fee
requirements of this action, the city may refer the matter to a collection
agency and/or the city attorney may file a civil action against any business.
Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section, should court action be required
to collect any business registration fee and/or penalties, an additional
penalty shall be charged equal to the cost incurred by the city for court
action, including but not limited to reasonable attorney fees. All penalties
shall be added to the business registration fee and shall become due and
payable along with the delinquent business registration fee.
   (c)   Remedies Cumulative. All remedies prescribed under this Chapter shall
be cumulative and the use of one or more remedies by the city shall not bar the
use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this
Chapter.
(Ord. 5279 § 1 (part), 2014)
Chapter 4.62
CITYWIDE MINIMUM WAGE
Sections:
   
4.62.010   Purpose.
   
4.62.020   Definitions.
   
4.62.030   Minimum wage.
   
4.62.040   Exempt organizations.
   
4.62.050   Waiver through collective bargaining.
   
4.62.060   Notice, posting and payroll records.
   
4.62.070   Retaliation prohibited.
   
4.62.080   Implementation.
   
4.62.090   Enforcement.
   
4.62.100   Relationship to other requirements.
4.62.010   Purpose.
   This ordinance shall be known as the "Minimum Wage Ordinance."
(Ord. 5355 § 1 (part), 2015)
4.62.020   Definitions.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings set forth in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
   (a)   "City" shall mean City of Palo Alto or any agency designated by the
City of Palo Alto to perform various investigative, enforcement and informal
resolution functions pursuant to this chapter.
   (b)   "Employee" shall mean any person who:
   (1)   In a calendar week performs at least two hours of work for an employer
as defined below; and
   (2)   Qualifies as an employee entitled to payment of a minimum wage from
any employer under the California minimum wage law, as provided under Sec. 1197
of the California Labor Code and wage orders published by the California
Industrial Welfare Commission, or is a participant in a welfare-to-work
program.
   (c)   "Employer" shall mean any person, including corporate officers or
executives, as defined in Sec. 18 of the California Labor Code, who directly or
indirectly through any other person, including through the services of a
temporary employment agency, staffing agency, or similar entity, employs or
exercises control over the wages, hours, or working conditions of any employee
and who is either subject to the city's business registry requirements,
conducts business in Palo Alto or maintains a business facility in the city.
   (d)   "Minimum wage" shall have the meaning set forth in Section
4.62.030 of this chapter.
   (e)   "Welfare-to-Work Program" shall mean the CalWORKs program, and the
Santa Clara County Works Program (SCC Works) employment assistance program, and
any successor programs that are substantially similar to them.
(Ord. 5355 § 1 (part), 2015)
4.62.030   Minimum wage.
   (a)   Employers shall pay employees no less than the minimum wage set forth
in this section for each hour worked within the geographic boundaries of the
City of Palo Alto.
   (b)   The minimum wage shall be an hourly rate of eleven dollars ($11.00)
through December 31, 2016. On January 1, 2017, the minimum wage shall be an
hourly rate of twelve dollars ($12.00). On January 1, 2018, the minimum wage
shall be an hourly rate of thirteen dollars and fifty cents ($13.50). On
January 1, 2019, the minimum wage shall be an hourly rate of fifteen dollars
($15.00). To prevent inflation from eroding its value, beginning on January 1,
2020, and each January 1st thereafter, the minimum wage shall increase by an
amount corresponding to the increase, if any, in the cost of living, not to
exceed 5%. The prior year's increase in the cost of living shall be measured by
the percentage increase, if any, as of August of the immediately preceding year
of the Bay Area Consumer Price Index (Urban Wage Earners and Clerical Workers,
San Francisco- Oakland-San Jose, CA for All Items) or its successor index as
published by the U.S. Department of Labor or its successor agency, with the
amount of the minimum wage increase rounded to the nearest multiple of five
cents ($.05). If there is no net increase in the cost of living, the minimum
wage shall remain unchanged for that year. The adjusted minimum wage shall be
announced by October 1st of each year, or as soon as practicable thereafter if
the Consumer Price Index for August has not yet been published, and shall
become effective as the new minimum wage on January 1st of each year.
   (c)   A violation for unlawfully failing to pay the minimum wage shall be
deemed to continue from the date immediately following the date that the wages
were due and payable as provided in Part 1 (commencing with Sec. 200) of
Division 2 of the California Labor Code, to the date immediately preceding the
date the wages are paid in full.
(Ord. 5452 § 1, 2018: Ord. 5388 § 1, 2016: Ord. 5355 § 1 (part), 2015)
4.62.040   Exempt organizations.
   (a)   State, federal and county agencies, including school districts, shall
not be required to pay minimum wage when the work performed is related to their
governmental function. However, for work that is not related to their
governmental function, including, but not limited to: booster or gift shops,
non-K-12 cafeterias, on-site concessions and similar operations, minimum wage
shall be required to be paid. Minimum wage shall also be required to be paid by
lessees or renters of facilities or space from an exempt organization.
   (b)   Any organization claiming "auxiliary organization" status under
California Education Code Sec. 89901 or Sec. 72670(c) shall not be required to
pay minimum wage. The organization, upon request of the city, shall provide
documentary proof of its auxiliary organization status.
(Ord. 5355 § 1 (part), 2015)
4.62.050   Waiver through collective bargaining.
   To the extent required by federal law, all or any portion of the applicable
requirements of this chapter may be waived in a bona fide collective bargaining
agreement, provided that such waiver is explicitly set forth in such agreement
in clear and unambiguous terms.
(Ord. 5355 § 1 (part), 2015)
4.62.060   Notice, posting and payroll records.
   (a)   By December 1 of each year, the city shall publish and make available
to employers a bulletin announcing the adjusted minimum wage rate for the
upcoming year, which shall take effect on January 1 of each year. In
conjunction with this bulletin, the city shall, by December 1 of each year,
publish and make available to employers, in all languages spoken by more than
five percent of the work force in the city, a notice suitable for posting by
employers in the workplace informing employees of the current minimum wage rate
and of their rights under this chapter.
   (b)   Every employer shall post in a conspicuous place at any workplace or
job site where any employee works the notice published each year by the city
informing employees of the current minimum wage rate and of their rights under
this chapter. Every employer shall post such notices in any language spoken by
at least five percent of the employees at the workplace or job site. Every
employer shall also provide each employee at the time of hire with the
employer's name, address and telephone number in writing.
   (c)   Employers shall retain payroll records pertaining to employees for a
period of four years, and shall allow the city access to such records, with
appropriate notice and at a mutually agreeable time, to monitor compliance with
the requirements of this chapter. Where an employer does not maintain or retain
adequate records documenting wages paid or does not allow the city reasonable
access to such records, the employee's account of how much he or she was paid
shall be presumed to be accurate, absent clear and convincing evidence
otherwise.
(Ord. 5355 § 1 (part), 2015)
4.62.070   Retaliation prohibited.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for an employer or any other party to
discriminate in any manner or take adverse action against any person in
retaliation for exercising rights protected under this chapter. Rights
protected under this chapter include, but are not limited to: the right to file
a complaint or inform any person about any party's alleged noncompliance with
this chapter; and the right to inform any person of his or her potential rights
under this chapter and to assist him or her in asserting such rights.
Protections of this chapter shall apply to any person who mistakenly, but in
good faith, alleges noncompliance with this chapter.
   (b)   Taking adverse action against a person within ninety days of the
person's exercise of rights protected under this chapter shall raise a
rebuttable presumption of having done so in retaliation for the exercise of
such rights.
(Ord. 5355 § 1 (part), 2015)
4.62.080   Implementation.
   (a)   Guidelines. The city manager or designee shall be authorized to
coordinate implementation and enforcement of this chapter and may promulgate
appropriate guidelines or rules for such purposes. Any guidelines or rules
promulgated by the city shall have the force and effect of law and may be
relied on by employers, employees and other parties to determine their rights
and responsibilities under this chapter. Any guidelines or rules may establish
procedures for ensuring fair, efficient and cost effective implementation of
this article, including supplementary procedures for helping to inform
employees of their rights under this chapter, for monitoring employer
compliance with this chapter and for providing administrative hearings to
determine whether an employer or other person has violated the requirements of
this chapter.
   (b)   Reporting Violations. An employee or any other person may report to
the city in writing any suspected violation of this chapter. The city shall
encourage reporting pursuant to this subsection by keeping confidential, to the
maximum extent permitted by applicable laws, the name and other identifying
information of the employee or person reporting the violation, provided,
however, that with the authorization of such person, the city may disclose his
or her name and identifying information as necessary to enforce this chapter or
other employee protection laws. In order to further encourage reporting by
employees, if the city notifies an employer that the city is investigating a
complaint, the city shall require the employer to post or otherwise notify its
employees that the city is conducting an investigation, using a form provided
by the city.
   (c)   Investigation. The city shall be responsible for investigating any
possible violations of this chapter by an employer or other person. The city
shall have the authority to inspect workplaces, interview persons and request
the city attorney to subpoena books, papers, records or other items relevant to
the enforcement of this chapter.
   (d)   Informal Resolution. The city shall make every effort to resolve
complaints informally, in a timely manner, and shall have a policy that the
city shall take no more than one year to resolve any matter before initiating
an enforcement action. The failure of the city to meet these time lines within
one year shall not be grounds for closure or dismissal of the complaint.
(Ord. 5355 § 1 (part), 2015)
4.62.090   Enforcement.
   (a)   Where prompt compliance is not forthcoming, the city shall take any
appropriate enforcement action to secure compliance. In addition to all other
civil remedies, the city may enforce this ordinance pursuant to Title 1 of the
Palo Alto Municipal Code. To secure compliance, the city may use the following
enforcement measures:
   (1)   The city may issue an administrative citation with a daily fine for
each day or portion thereof and for each employee or person as to whom the
violation occurred or continued.
   (2)   The city may issue an administrative compliance order.
   (3)   The city may initiate a civil action for injunctive relief and damages
and civil penalties in a court of competent jurisdiction.
   (b)   Any person aggrieved by a violation of this chapter, any entity a
member of which is aggrieved by a violation of this article or any other person
or entity acting on behalf of the public as provided for under applicable state
law may bring a civil action in a court of competent jurisdiction against the
employer or other person violating this chapter and, upon prevailing, shall be
awarded reasonable attorneys' fees and costs and shall be entitled to such
legal or equitable relief as may be appropriate to remedy the violation
including, without limitation, the payment of any back wages unlawfully
withheld, the payment of an additional sum as a civil penalty in the amount of
fifty dollars ($50) to each employee or person whose rights under this chapter
were violated for each day that the violation occurred or continued,
reinstatement in employment and/or injunctive relief; provided, however, that
any person or entity enforcing this chapter on behalf of the public as provided
for under applicable state law shall, upon prevailing, be entitled only to
equitable, injunctive or restitutionary relief to employees, and reasonable
attorneys' fees and costs.
   (c)   This section shall not be construed to limit an employee's right to
bring legal action for a violation of any other laws concerning wages, hours or
other standards or rights, nor shall exhaustion of remedies under this chapter
be a prerequisite to the assertion of any right.
   (d)   Except where prohibited by state or federal law, city agencies or
departments may revoke or suspend any registration certificates, permits or
licenses held or requested by the employer until such time as the violation is
remedied.
   (e)   Relief. The remedies for violation of this chapter include, but are
not limited to:
   (1)   Reinstatement, and the payment of back wages unlawfully withheld, and
the payment of an additional sum as a civil penalty in the amount of fifty
dollars ($50) to each employee or person whose rights under this chapter were
violated for each day or portion thereof that the violation occurred or
continued, and fines imposed pursuant to other provisions of this code or state
law.
   (2)   Interest on all due and unpaid wages at the rate of interest specified
in subdivision (b) of Sec. 3289 of the California Civil Code, which shall
accrue from the date that the wages were due and payable as provided in Part 1
(commencing with Sec. 200) of Division 2 of the California Labor Code, to the
date the wages are paid in full.
   (3)   Reimbursement of the city's administrative costs of enforcement and
reasonable attorney's fees.
   (f)   Posted Notice. If a repeated violation of this chapter has been
finally determined, the city may require the employer to post public notice of
the employer's failure to comply in a form determined by the city.
(Ord. 5355 § 1 (part), 2015)
4.62.100   Relationship to other requirements.
   This chapter provides for payment of a local minimum wage and shall not be
construed to preempt or otherwise limit or affect the applicability of any
other law, regulation, requirement, policy or standard that provides for
payment of higher or supplemental wages or benefits, or that extends other
protections.
(Ord. 5355 § 1 (part), 2015)
Chapter 4.64
PERMITS FOR RETAILERS OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS
Sections:
   
4.64.010   Intent.
   
4.64.020   Definitions.
   
4.64.030   Requirements and prohibitions.
   
4.64.040   Eligibility requirements for a permit.
   
4.64.050   Application procedure.
   
4.64.060   Permit issuance, denial, and revocation.
   
4.64.070   Permit term, conditions, renewal, and expiration.
   
4.64.080   Permits nontransferable.
   
4.64.090   Permit conveys a limited, conditional privilege.
   
4.64.100   Fees.
   
4.64.110   Compliance monitoring.
   
4.64.120   Prevention of underage sales.
   
4.64.130   Penalties for a violation by a retailer with a permit.
   
4.64.140   Penalties for retailing without a permit.
   
4.64.150   Appeals.
   
4.64.160   Enforcement.
   
4.64.170   No conflict with federal or state law.
4.64.010   Intent.
   (a)   This chapter is adopted to:
      (1)   Ensure compliance with the business standards and practices of the
city;
      (2)   Encourage responsible retailing of tobacco products;
      (3)   Discourage violations of laws related to tobacco products,
especially those that prohibit or discourage the sale or distribution of
tobacco products and electronic cigarette products to individuals under twenty-
one;
      (4)   Respond to a new wave of addiction to electronic cigarette
products;
      (5)   Reduce vulnerability to unexplained illnesses associated with
electronic cigarette products; and
      (6)   Protect the public health and welfare.
   (b)   This chapter does not expand or reduce the degree to which the acts
regulated by federal or state law are criminally proscribed or alter the
penalties provided by such laws.
(Ord. 5633 § 2 (part), 2024: Ord. 5502 § 2 (part), 2020: Ord. 5418 § 2 (part),
2017)
4.64.020   Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
   (a)   "Arm's length transaction" means a sale in good faith and for valuable
consideration that reflects the fair market value in the open market between
two or more informed and willing parties, neither of which is under any
compulsion to participate in the transaction. A sale between relatives, related
companies or partners, or a sale for which a significant purpose is avoiding
the effect of the violations of this chapter is not an arm's length
transaction.
   (b)   "Department" means the County of Santa Clara's Department of
Environmental Health and any agency or person designated by the Director of the
Department of Environmental Health to enforce or administer the provisions of
this chapter.
   (c)   "Distribute or distribution" means the transfer, by any person other
than a common carrier, of a tobacco product to another person for sale or
personal consumption.
   (d)   "Electronic cigarette products" means any of the following products:
      (1)   Any device or delivery system that can be used to deliver nicotine
in aerosolized or vaporized form, including, but not limited to, an e-
cigarette, e-cigar, e-pipe, vape pen, or e-hookah.
      (2)   Any component, part, or accessory of such a device or delivery
system that is used during its operation.
      (3)   Any flavored or unflavored liquid or substance containing nicotine,
whether sold separately or sold in combination with any device or delivery
system that could be used to deliver nicotine in aerosolized or vaporized form.
      (4)   Any product for use in an electronic nicotine device or delivery
system whether or not it contains nicotine or tobacco or is derived from
nicotine or tobacco.
      (5)   Electronic cigarette products shall not include any battery,
battery charger, carrying case, or other accessory not used in the operation of
the device if sold separately. Electronic cigarette products shall not include
any product that has been approved by the United States Food and Drug
Administration for sale as a tobacco cessation product or for other therapeutic
purposes where that product is marketed and sold solely for such approved use.
See 21 U.S.C. § 387(a). As used in this subsection, nicotine does not include
any food products as that term is defined pursuant to California Revenue and
Taxation Code Section 6359.
   (e)   “Hearing officer” shall mean the hearing officer appointed by the
department in accordance with County of Santa Clara Ordinance Code (“County
Ordinance Code”) section A38-4.
   (f)   “Impound” means the legal control exercised by the department over the
use, sale, disposal, or removal of any tobacco products.
   (g)   "Ownership" means possession of a ten percent or greater interest in
the stock, assets, or income of a business, other than a security interest for
the repayment of debt. Notwithstanding any other definition in this code, an
owner means a person who possesses ownership.
   (h)   "Permit" means a valid permit issued by the Department to a person to
act as a retailer.
   (i)   "Retailer" means any person who sells or distributes tobacco products
for any form of consideration, whether or not they possess a current permit.
Retailing shall mean the doing of any of these actions. This definition is
without regard to the quantity of tobacco products sold or distributed.
   (j)   "School" means a public or private elementary, middle, junior high, or
high school.
   (k)   "Sale and sold" includes any sale, exchange, barter or offer for sale.
   (l)   "Tobacco product" means (unless specifically noted elsewhere) any
product subject to Subchapter IX (21 U.S.C. § 387 et seq. ("Subchapter IX")) of
the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act. (See 21 U.S.C. § 387a(b) (products
subject to Subchapter IX); 21 C.F.R. §§ 1100.1-1100.3 (tobacco products subject
to Subchapter IX) and electronic cigarette products. Products subject to
Subchapter IXinclude, but are not limited to, cigarettes, cigarette tobacco,
roll-your-own tobacco, smokeless tobacco, cigars, pipe tobacco, and waterpipe
tobacco. Products that are not subject to Subchapter IX include accessories of
tobacco products, such as, but not limited to, ashtrays, spittoons, and
conventional matches and lighters that solely provide an external heat source
to initiate but not maintain combustion of a tobacco product.
(Ord. 5633 § 2 (part), 2024: Ord. 5502 § 2 (part), 2020: Ord. 5418 § 2 (part),
2017)
4.64.030   Requirements and prohibitions.
   (a)   Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to act as a
retailer without first obtaining and maintaining a permit pursuant to this
chapter for each location at which retailing occurs.
   (b)   Lawful business operation. It shall be a violation of this chapter for
any retailer to violate any local, state, or federal law applicable to tobacco
products or the retailing of such tobacco products.
   (c)   Display of permit. Each permit shall be prominently displayed in a
publicly visible place at the location identified in the permit.
   (d)   Notice of minimum age for purchase of tobacco products. Retailers
shall post conspicuously, at each point of purchase, a notice stating that
selling tobacco products to anyone under twenty-one years of age is illegal and
subject to penalties. Such notice shall be subject to the approval of the
department.
   (e)   Positive identification required. No retailer shall sell or distribute
a tobacco product to another individual without first examining the
individual's identification to confirm that the individual is at least the
minimum age required under state law to purchase and possess the tobacco
product.
   (f)   Minimum age for individuals selling tobacco products. No individual
who is younger than the minimum age established by state law for the purchase
or possession of tobacco products shall engage in retailing.
   (g)   False and misleading advertising prohibited. A retailer without a
permit:
      (1)   Shall keep all tobacco products out of public view.
      (2)   Shall not display any advertisement relating to tobacco products
that promotes the sale or distribution of such products from the retailer's
location or that could lead a reasonable consumer to believe that tobacco
products can be obtained at that location.
   (h)   Limitation on storefront advertising. No more than fifteen percent of
the square footage of the windows and clear doors of a physical storefront used
for retailing tobacco products shall bear advertising or signs of any sort, and
all advertising and signage shall be placed and maintained in a manner that
ensures that law enforcement personnel have a clear and unobstructed view of
the interior of the premises, including the area in which the cash registers
are maintained, from the exterior public sidewalk or entrance to the premises.
However, this latter requirement of this subsection (h) shall not apply to an
establishment where there are no windows or clear doors, or where existing
windows are located only at a height that precludes a view of the interior of
the premises by an individual standing outside the premises.
   (i)   Flavored tobacco products.
      (1)   No retailer shall sell a tobacco product containing, as a
constituent or additive, an artificial or natural flavor or aroma (other than
tobacco) or an herb or spice, including but not limited to strawberry, grape,
orange, clove, cinnamon, pineapple, vanilla, coconut, licorice, cocoa,
chocolate, cherry, mint, menthol, or coffee, that is a characterizing flavor or
aroma of the tobacco product, smoke, or vapor produced by the tobacco product.
      (2)   A tobacco product shall be subject to a rebuttable presumption that
the product is prohibited by paragraph (1) of this subsection if:
         (A)   The product's manufacturer or any other person associated with
the manufacture or sale of tobacco products makes or disseminates public
statements or claims to the effect that the product has or produces a
characterizing flavor or aroma, other than tobacco; or
         (B)   The product's label, labeling, or packaging includes a statement
or claim–including any text and/or images used to communicate information–that
the product has or produces a characterizing flavor or aroma, other than
tobacco.
   (j)   Vending machines prohibited. No tobacco product shall be sold or
distributed to the public from a vending machine or appliance, or any other
coin or token operated mechanical device designed or used for vending purposes,
including, but not limited to, machines or devices that use remote control
locking mechanisms.
   (k)   Prohibition on sale or distribution of tobacco products to individuals
under twenty-one. No retailer shall sell or distribute any tobacco product to
any individual who is under twenty-one years of age.
   (l)   Prohibition on sale or distribution of electronic cigarette products.
No person, whether or not issued a permit, shall sell or distribute electronic
cigarette products.
(Ord. 5633 § 2 (part), 2024: Ord. 5502 § 2 (part), 2020: Ord. 5418 § 2 (part),
2017)
4.64.040   Eligibility requirements for a permit.
   (a)   No permit may be issued to authorize retailing at or from other than a
fixed location. For example, retailing by persons on foot or from vehicles is
prohibited.
   (b)   No permit may be issued to authorize retailing at a temporary or
recurring temporary event. For example, retailing at flea markets and farmers'
markets is prohibited.
   (c)   No permit may be issued to authorize retailing at any location where
the profession of pharmacy is practiced by a pharmacist licensed by the state
in accordance with the Business and Professions Code and where prescription
drugs are offered for sale.
   (d)   No permit may be issued to authorize retailing at any location within
1,000 feet of a school, as measured by a straight line between any point along
the property line of any parcel on which a school is located and any point
along the perimeter of the permit applicant's proposed business location;
provided, however, that the prohibition contained in this subsection (d) shall
not apply to the following:
      (1)   Any retailer of tobacco products (as such term was defined in the
predecessor Ordinance No. 5418) operating lawfully on June 30, 2018 provided
that the retailer obtained a permit prior to July 1, 2020 pursuant to Sections
4.64.050 and
4.64.060, and timely renewed its permit pursuant to Section
4.64.070(b);
      (2)   Any retailer of electronic smoking devices (as such term was
defined in the predecessor Ordinance No. 5418) operating lawfully on June 30,
2018 provided that the retailer obtained a permit prior to July 1, 2020
pursuant to Sections 4.64.050 and 4.64.060, and timely renews its permit
pursuant to Section
4.64.070(b); however, any such retailer is subject to the prohibition on the
sale and distribution of electronic cigarette products established in Section
4.64.030(l); and
      (3)   Any lawfully operating retailer of tobacco products that would
otherwise become ineligible to receive or renew a permit due to the creation or
relocation of a school.
   (e)   No permit may be issued to authorize retailing at a location which is
within 500 feet of a location occupied by another retailer, as measured by a
straight line between any point along the perimeter of an existing retailer's
business location and any point along the perimeter of the permit applicant's
proposed business location; provided, however, that the prohibition contained
in this subsection (e) shall not apply to:
      (1)   Any retailer of tobacco products (as such term was defined in the
predecessor Ordinance No. 5418) operating lawfully on June 30, 2018 provided
that the retailer obtained a permit prior to July 1, 2020 pursuant to Sections
4.64.050 and
4.64.060, and timely renews its permit pursuant to Section
4.64.070(b); and
      (2)   Any retailer of electronic smoking devices (as such term was
defined in the predecessor Ordinance No. 5418) operating lawfully on June 30,
2018 provided that the retailer obtained a permit prior to July 1, 2020
pursuant to Sections
4.64.050 and
4.64.060, and timely renews its permit pursuant to Section
4.64.070(b); however, any such retailer is subject to the prohibition on the
sale and distribution of electronic cigarette products established in Section
4.64.030(l).
   (f)   Any exemption granted to a retailer pursuant to subsections (d) and
(e) shall cease to apply upon the earlier of the following to occur:
      (1)   The retailer fails to timely renew the permit pursuant to Section
4.64.070(b).
      (2)   A new person obtains ownership in the business.
(Ord. 5633 § 2 (part), 2024: Ord. 5502 § 2 (part), 2020: Ord. 5418 § 2 (part),
2017)
4.64.050   Application procedure.
   (a)   It is the responsibility of each retailer to be informed of all laws
applicable to retailing, including those laws affecting the issuance of a
permit. No retailer may rely on the issuance of a permit as a determination by
the city or County of Santa Clara that the retailer has complied with all laws
applicable to retailing. A permit issued contrary to this chapter, contrary to
any other law, or on the basis of false or misleading information supplied by a
retailer shall be revoked pursuant to Section
4.64.060.
   (b)   All permit applications shall be submitted on a form supplied by the
department.
   (c)   A permitted retailer shall inform the department in writing of any
change in the information submitted on an application for a permit within
fourteen calendar days of a change.
   (d)   All information specified in an application pursuant to this section
shall be subject to disclosure under the California Public Records Act
(Government Code Section 6250 et seq.) or any other applicable law, subject to
the laws' exemptions.
(Ord. 5633 § 2 (part), 2024: Ord. 5502 § 2 (part), 2020: Ord. 5418 § 2 (part),
2017)
4.64.060   Permit issuance, denial, and revocation.
   (a)   Upon the receipt of a complete application for a permit, the
application fee, and the annual permit fee, the department shall issue a permit
unless substantial evidence demonstrates that one or more of the following
bases for denial exists:
      (1)   The information presented in the application is inaccurate or
false.
      (2)   The application seeks authorization for retailing at a location for
which this chapter prohibits issuance of a permit.
      (3)   The application seeks authorization for retailing by a person to
whom this chapter prohibits issuance of a permit.
      (4)   The application seeks authorization for a retailer whose permit has
previously been revoked or who has otherwise violated any provision of this
chapter within the last sixty months.
      (5)   The application seeks authorization for retailing that is
prohibited pursuant to this chapter (e.g., mobile vending, electronic cigarette
products) or that is unlawful pursuant to any other law.
      (6)   The application seeks authorization for retailing by a retailer who
has failed to pay any fees, penalties, or reinspection fees required by this
chapter.
   (b)   A permit shall be revoked if the department finds that one or more of
the bases for denial of a permit under this section existed at the time
application was made or at any time before the permit was issued. Such a
revocation shall be without prejudice to the filing of a new permit
application.
   (c)   A permit shall be permanently revoked if the retailer has committed
violations as specified in Section
4.64.130.
(Ord. 5633 § 2 (part), 2024: Ord. 5502 § 2 (part), 2020: Ord. 5418 § 2 (part),
2017)
4.64.070   Permit term, conditions, renewal, and expiration.
   (a)   Term of permit. The term of a permit is one year. A permit is invalid
upon expiration.
   (b)   Conditions of permit. As conditions of permit issuance and retention,
retailer shall:
      (1)   Allow compliance inspections as described in Section
4.64.110 and expressly consent to inspection of all areas and records of a
retailer’s business required to effectuate the purpose of this chapter,
including unlocking and allowing access to any area of retailer’s business
requested by any individual authorized to monitor and facilitate compliance
with this chapter.
      (2)   Comply with any order of the department to impound any product not
authorized to be sold by this chapter and cooperate with any departmental
seizure of any product, subject to appeal of those actions.
      (3)   Failure to comply with these permit conditions may result in permit
suspension or revocation as described in Section
4.64.130.
   (c)   Renewal of permit. The department shall renew a permit upon timely
payment of the annual permit fee provided that the retailer complies with this
chapter, as amended. The department may, in its discretion, agree to renew any
expired permit within the three-month period following expiration if the
retailer pays the annual permit fee and applicable late charges. For every
calendar month, or fraction thereof, that a retailer fails to renew an expired
permit, a late charge equal to twenty percent of the annual permit fee shall be
assessed. A permit renewed within three calendar months of expiration shall be
treated as if timely renewed.
   (d)   Issuance of permit after revocation or expiration of permit. To apply
for a new permit more than three calendar months after expiration of a permit
or following revocation of a permit that was wrongly issued, a retailer must
submit a complete application for a permit, along with the application fee and
annual permit fee. The department shall issue a permit pursuant to the
requirements of Section
4.64.060.
(Ord. 5633 § 2 (part), 2024: Ord. 5502 § 2 (part), 2020: Ord. 5418 § 2 (part),
2017)
4.64.080   Permits nontransferable.
   (a)   A permit may not be transferred from one person to another or from one
location to another. Whenever a new person obtains ownership in a business for
which a permit has been issued, a new permit shall be required, but any
exemption granted pursuant to Section
4.64.040 shall cease to apply.
   (b)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, prior violations
of this chapter at a location shall continue to be counted against a location
and permit ineligibility and suspension periods shall continue to apply to a
location unless:
      (1)   One hundred percent of the interest in the stock, assets, or income
of the business, other than a security interest for the repayment of debt, has
been transferred to one or more new owners; and
      (2)   The department is provided with clear and convincing evidence,
including an affidavit, that the business has been acquired in an arm's length
transaction.
(Ord. 5633 § 2 (part), 2024: Ord. 5502 § 2 (part), 2020: Ord. 5418 § 2 (part),
2017)
4.64.090   Permit conveys a limited, conditional privilege.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to grant any person obtaining and
maintaining a permit any status or right other than the limited, conditional
privilege to act as a retailer at the location in the city identified on the
face of the permit. All permits are issued subject to the city's right to amend
this chapter, and retailers shall comply with all provisions of this chapter,
as amended.
(Ord. 5633 § 2 (part), 2024: Ord. 5502 § 2 (part), 2020: Ord. 5418 § 2 (part),
2017)
4.64.100   Fees.
   The department shall not issue or renew a permit before full payment of any
applicable fees. The County Board of Supervisors shall, from time to time,
establish by resolution the fees to issue or to renew a permit. The fees shall
be calculated so as to recover the cost of administration of this chapter,
including, for example, issuing a permit, administering the permit program,
retailer education, and routine retailer inspection and compliance, but shall
not exceed the cost of the regulatory program authorized by this chapter. All
fees and interest earned from such fees shall be used exclusively to fund
administration and enforcement of this chapter.
(Ord. 5633 § 2 (part), 2024: Ord. 5502 § 2 (part), 2020: Ord. 5435 § 2, 2018:
Ord. 5418 § 2 (part), 2017)
4.64.110   Compliance monitoring.
   (a)   Compliance with this chapter shall be monitored by the department. In
addition, any peace officer may enforce the penal provisions of this chapter.
The department may designate any number of additional individuals to monitor
and facilitate compliance with this chapter.
   (b)   The department or other individuals designated to enforce the
provisions of this chapter shall monitor each retailer at least once per
twelve-month period to determine if the retailer is complying with all laws
applicable to retailing, other than those laws regulating underage access to
tobacco products. Nothing in this paragraph shall create a right of action in
any retailer or other person against the city, the County of Santa Clara, or
its agents.
   (c)   Any retailer found to be in violation of this chapter shall pay all
costs related to enforcement to ensure retailer’s compliance with this chapter,
including but not limited to, fees for reinspection to determine compliance
after a violation, enforcement costs, litigation costs, and attorneys’ fees in
any administrative or civil matter in which the department prevails pursuant to
Division A1 of the County Ordinance Code or any other provision of law.
(Ord. 5633 § 2 (part), 2024: Ord. 5502 § 2 (part), 2020: Ord. 5418 § 2 (part),
2017)
4.64.120   Prevention of underage sales.
   (a)   The department or other departments or individuals designated to
enforce the provisions of this chapter shall monitor each retailer at least
twice per twelve-month period to determine whether the retailer is conducting
business in a manner that complies with laws regulating youth access to tobacco
products. Nothing in this paragraph shall create a right of action in any
retailer or other person against the city, the County of Santa Clara, or its
agents.
   (b)   The department or other departments or individuals designated to
enforce the provisions of this chapter shall not enforce any law establishing a
minimum age for tobacco product purchases against an individual who otherwise
might be in violation of such law because of the individual's age ("youth
decoy") if the potential violation occurs when:
      (1)   The youth decoy is participating in a compliance check supervised
by a peace officer or a code enforcement official of the city;
      (2)   The youth decoy is acting as an agent of a department or individual
designated by the city or County of Santa Clara to monitor compliance with this
chapter; or
      (3)   The youth decoy is participating in a compliance check funded in
part, either directly or indirectly through subcontracting, by the city, the
County of Santa Clara, or the California Department of Public Health.
(Ord. 5633 § 2 (part), 2024: Ord. 5502 § 2 (part), 2020: Ord. 5418 § 2 (part),
2017)
4.64.130   Penalties for a violation by a retailer with a permit.
   (a)   Administrative fine. In addition to any other penalty authorized by
law, a retailer shall pay a fine if the retailer or any of the retailer's
agents or employees, violates any of the requirements, conditions, or
prohibitions of this chapter. The amount of the administrative fine for each
violation of this chapter shall be as follows:
      (1)   A fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each
violation identified during the first instance in which the retailer has
committed a violation or violations;
      (2)   A fine not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00)
for each violation identified during a subsequent instance if the retailer has
committed a previous violation or violations within a sixty-month period; and
      (3)   A fine not to exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for each
violation identified during a subsequent instance after the retailer twice
committed a previous violation or violations within a sixty-month period.
   (b)   Permit suspension. In addition to any other penalty authorized by law,
the department may suspend a permit if the department demonstrates that the
retailer or any of the retailer’s agents or employees has violated any of the
requirements, conditions, or prohibitions of this chapter. The period of the
suspension shall be as follows:
      (1)   A suspension not to exceed thirty calendar days for an initial
violation.
      (2)   A suspension not to exceed one hundred eighty calendar days if a
retailer commits a violation or violations during two instances within a sixty-
month period.
      (3)   When a permit is suspended based on a violation of this chapter,
the department shall post a placard at the physical location used for retailing
tobacco products to notify the general public of the suspension. The placard
shall be:
         (A)   Posted in the front window of the storefront used for retailing
tobacco products within five feet of the front door;
         (B)   Posted in a display case mounted on the outside front wall of
the physical location used for retailing tobacco products within five feet of
the front door; or
         (C)   Posted in a location approved by the department to ensure proper
notice to the general public and to patrons of the physical location used for
retailing tobacco products.
         (D)   Once attached to a building or structure, a placard is not to be
removed, altered, or covered until done so by an authorized representative of
the department or upon written notification from the department.
   (c)   Permanent permit revocation. In addition to any other penalty
authorized by law, the department shall permanently revoke a permit if a
retailer commits a violation or violations during three instances within a
sixty-month period.
   (d)   Waiver or reduction of fines and penalties for first violation. The
department may, in its sole discretion, waive or reduce any fines and penalties
for a retailer's first violation of this section if the retailer admits the
violation in writing and agrees to forego a hearing on the allegations.
Regardless of the department's waiver of penalties for a first violation, the
violation will be considered in determining the fines and suspension periods or
revocation for any future violation. This subsection shall not apply to any
violation involving a law regulating youth access to tobacco products.
   (e)   Corrections period. The department shall have discretion to allow a
retailer a period of time to correct any violation of any requirement,
condition, or prohibition of this chapter, other than a violation of a law
regulating youth access to tobacco products. If the department exercises its
discretion to provide a corrections period, and a retailer's violation is
corrected within the time allowed for correction, no penalty shall be imposed
under this section.
   (f)   Written notice of penalties. Whenever a fine is issued and/or a permit
is suspended or revoked based on a violation of this chapter, the department
shall provide the retailer written notice of the violation and the fine and
suspension or revocation, including when the suspension or revocation shall
take effect.
   (g)   Appeals. Any penalties imposed under this section may be appealed
pursuant to Section
4.64.150 of this chapter.
   (h)   A timely appeal shall stay enforcement of the appealed penalties until
the final administrative decision of the department is issued.
(Ord. 5633 § 2 (part), 2024: Ord. 5502 § 2 (part), 2020: Ord. 5418 § 2 (part),
2017)
4.64.140   Penalties for retailing without a permit.
   (a)   Administrative fine. In addition to any other penalty authorized by
law, a retailer shall pay a fine if the department demonstrates that the
retailer has engaged in retailing at a location without a valid permit, either
directly or through the retailer’s agents or employees. The amount of the
administrative fine for each violation of this chapter shall be as follows:
      (1)   A fine not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00)
for each violation identified during the first instance in which the retailer
has committed a violation or violations without a valid permit;
      (2)   A fine not to exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for each
violation identified during a subsequent instance if the retailer has committed
a previous violation or violations within a sixty-month period without a valid
permit; and
      (3)   A fine not to exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for each
violation identified during a subsequent instance after the retailer has twice
committed a previous violation or violations within a sixty-month period
without a valid permit.
   (b)   Time period for permit ineligibility. The ineligibility period shall
be as follows:
      (1)   For an initial violation of this chapter without a valid permit, no
new permit may be issued to the retailer or the location (unless ownership of
the business at the location has been transferred in an arm's length
transaction) until thirty calendar days have passed from the date of the
violation.
      (2)   If a retailer commits a violation or violations during two
instances within a sixty-month period without a valid permit, no new permit may
be issued to the retailer or the location (unless ownership of the business at
the location has been transferred in an arms length transaction) until one year
has passed from the date of the second violation.
      (3)   If a retailer commits a violation or violations during three
instances within any sixty-month period without a valid permit, the retailer
and the location (unless ownership of the business at the location has been
transferred in an arm's length transaction) shall be permanently ineligible for
a permit.
   (c)   Waiver or reduction of fines and penalties for first violation. The
department may, in its sole discretion, waive or reduce any fines and penalties
for a retailer's first violation of this section if the retailer admits the
violation in writing and agrees to forego a hearing on the allegations.
Regardless of the department's waiver of fines or penalties for a first
violation, the violation will be considered in determining the fines and
suspension periods or revocation for any future violation. This subsection
shall not apply to any violation involving a law regulating youth access to
tobacco products.
   (d)   Written notice of penalties. Whenever a fine is issued and/or a permit
is suspended pursuant to this section, the department shall provide the
retailer written notice of the fine and suspension, including when the
suspension shall take effect.
   (e)   Appeals. Any penalties imposed under this section may be appealed
pursuant to Section
4.64.150.
(Ord. 5633 § 2 (part), 2024: Ord. 5502 § 2 (part), 2020: Ord. 5418 § 2 (part),
2017)
4.64.150   Appeals.
   (a)   Any retailer served with a written notice of violation may request an
administrative hearing to appeal the existence of the violation, the amount of
the fine, the length of a suspension, a revocation of a permit, the sustained
impoundment of tobacco products, and/or seizure of tobacco products by
returning a completed hearing request form to the Office of the County Hearing
Officer within ten days from the date of the written notice of penalties.
   (b)   The retailer shall include the following in or with the hearing
request form:
      (1)   A statement indicating the reason the retailer contests the written
notice of penalties;
      (2)   Any evidence the retailer wants the hearing officer to consider;
      (3)   An advance deposit of the amount of any fine challenged; and
      (4)   The address of the retailer and, if available, an email address
that can be used for contact and correspondence by the Office of the County
Hearing Officer and the Department. The retailer may request service of notice
by mail.
   (c)   The hearing request form shall be deemed filed on the date received by
the Office of the County Hearing Officer. A timely appeal shall stay
enforcement of the appealed penalties while the appeal is ongoing.
   (d)   After receiving a timely hearing request form, the Office of the
County Hearing Officer shall notify the department as soon as practicable and
then shall schedule an administrative hearing. The Office of the County Hearing
Officer shall provide the retailer and the department at least ten calendar
days' written notice of the date, time, and place of the administrative hearing
and the name of the hearing officer who will conduct the hearing. The notice
shall be given to the retailer either by email, if requested, or by first class
mail, postage prepaid.
   (e)   Between the time the retailer requests the administrative hearing and
the time of the hearing officer's decision, the retailer, the department, and
each of their representatives shall not engage in ex parte communications with
the Office of the County Hearing Officer or the hearing officer regarding the
matters at issue in the hearing.
   (f)   The hearing shall be conducted by the hearing officer on the date,
time, and place specified in the notice to the retailer. A retailer's failure
to appear at the hearing shall constitute an abandonment of the hearing request
and a failure to exhaust administrative remedies as a precedent to judicially
challenge the existence of the violation and the imposition of the fine and
suspension.
   (g)   At the hearing, the retailer and the department shall have the
opportunity to present evidence, including witnesses, relevant to the hearing
officer's determination of the matter. Neither the provisions of the
Administrative Procedure Act (Government Code Section 11500 et seq.) nor the
formal rules of evidence in civil or criminal judicial proceedings shall apply
to such hearing. The hearing officer may admit any evidence, including
witnesses, relevant to the determination of the matter, except as otherwise
provided in Section
4.64.160(c).
   (h)   The written notice of penalties and any other reports prepared by or
for the department concerning the violation shall be admissible and accepted by
the hearing officer as prima facie evidence of the violation and the facts
stated in those documents.
   (i)   The hearing officer may continue the hearing from time to time, in the
hearing officer’s sole discretion, to allow for its orderly completion of the
hearing. After receiving the evidence submitted at the hearing, the hearing
officer may further continue the hearing and request additional information
from either the department or the retailer.
   (j)   After considering the evidence and testimony submitted the hearing
officer shall issue a written decision regarding the matters properly raised in
the request for administrative hearing. The hearing officer's decision shall:
      (1)   Be based on a preponderance of the evidence.
      (2)   Include a statement of the reasons for the decision.
      (3)   Be issued within twenty calendar days of the close of the hearing.
      (4)   Be served on both the retailer and the department. The decision
shall be given to the retailer either by email, if requested, or by first class
mail, postage prepaid.
   (k)   Based on the hearing officer's decision, the Office of the County
Hearing Officer shall promptly refund to the retailer any amount of the advance
fine deposit the department is not entitled to and shall provide the remainder
to the department.
   (l)   The hearing officer's written decision shall constitute the final
administrative decision.
(Ord. 5633 § 2 (part), 2024: Ord. 5502 § 2 (part), 2020: Ord. 5418 § 2 (part),
2017)
4.64.160   Enforcement.
   (a)   Any violation of this chapter is hereby declared to be a public
nuisance.
   (b)   Causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, or concealing a violation of
any provision of this chapter shall also constitute a violation of this
chapter.
   (c)   Whenever evidence of a violation of this chapter is obtained in any
part through the participation of an individual under the age of twenty-one
years old, such an individual shall not be required over their objection to
appear or give testimony in any civil or administrative process brought to
enforce this chapter and the alleged violation shall be adjudicated based upon
the sufficiency and persuasiveness of the evidence presented.
   (d)   Violations of this chapter may be remedied by a legal action brought
by the County of Santa Clara Office of the County Counsel pursuant to Division
A1 of the Ordinance Code of the County of Santa Clara. For the purposes of the
civil remedies provided in this chapter, each day on which a product is offered
for sale in violation of this chapter, and each individual retail product that
is sold or distributed in violation of this chapter, shall constitute a
separate violation of this chapter.
   (e)   Impoundment.
      (1)   Based upon inspection findings or other evidence, the department
may impound tobacco products that are suspected of being or found to be offered
for sale or distribution in violation of this chapter. The department may affix
a label to the product that shall be removed only by the department following
final written determination by the department as described below.
      (2)   No impounded tobacco products shall be used, removed, disposed, or
offered for sale unless the impoundment has been released. The decision by the
department may be appealed pursuant to the procedures set forth in Section
4.64.150.
      (3)   Within thirty days of final determination whether the impounded
products are authorized for sale under this chapter, the department shall
release the impounded materials or order that unauthorized, impounded product
shall be destroyed and properly disposed of at the cost of the retailer.
   (f)   Seizure. Tobacco products offered for sale in violation of this
chapter are subject to seizure by the department and shall be forfeited after
the retailer of the tobacco products seized is given reasonable notice and an
opportunity to demonstrate that the tobacco products were not offered for sale
in violation of this chapter. The decision by the department may be appealed
pursuant to the procedures set forth in Section 4.64.150. Forfeited tobacco
products shall be destroyed and properly disposed of at the cost of the
retailer after all internal appeals have been exhausted and after the time in
which to seek judicial review pursuant to Section
4.64.150 of this chapter has expired.
   (g)   All retailers are responsible for the actions of their employees
relating to compliance with this chapter. The sale, offer to sell, or
furnishing of any tobacco products by an employee shall be considered an act of
the retailer.
   (h)   The remedies provided by this chapter are cumulative and in addition
to any other remedies available at law or in equity.
(Ord. 5633 § 2 (part), 2024: Ord. 5502 § 2 (part), 2020: Ord. 5418 § 2 (part),
2017)
4.64.170.   No conflict with federal or state law.
   (a)   Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted or applied so as to
create any requirement, power, or duty that is preempted by, or in conflict
with, federal or state law, rules, or regulations.
   (b)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to penalize the purchase,
use, or possession of a tobacco product by any person not engaged in the
retailing of such products.
(Ord. 5633 § 2 (part), 2024: Ord. 5502 § 2 (part), 2020)
Title 5 HEALTH AND SANITATION*
Chapters:
   
5.04   Reserved
   
5.08   Reserved
   
5.10   Reserved
   
5.12   Refreshment Stands
   
5.20   Collection, Removal and Disposal of Refuse
   
5.24   Deconstruction and Construction Materials Management
   
5.25   Reserved
   
5.26   Reserved
   
5.30   Disposable Foodware Items and Other Disposable Products
   
5.35   Retail and Food Service Establishment Checkout Bag Requirements
   
5.40   Edible Food Recovery Requirements
   *   Powers and duties of health officers - See
Chapter 2.08. City health ordinances, boards and officers - See Health and
Safety Code §§ 500-504.
Chapter 5.04
RESERVED*
*   Editor's Note: Former Chapter 5.04, Milk and Milk Products, previously
codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance Nos. 1278 and 1405 was
repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 4089.
Chapter 5.08
RESERVED*
*   Editor's Note: Former Chapter 5.08, Restaurants and Food Establishments,
previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance Nos. 1278,
1405, 1543, 2714 and 2960 was repealed by Ordinance No. 4089.
Chapter 5.10
RESERVED*
*   Editor's Note: Former Chapter 5.10, Drive-In Restaurants, previously
codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance Nos. 1278, 1405, 2345 and
2960 was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 4089.
Chapter 5.12
REFRESHMENT STANDS
Sections:
   
5.12.010   Permit and conditions therefor.
   
5.12.020   Not a violation of Title 18.
   
5.12.030   Permits for public welfare events.
5.12.010   Permit and conditions therefor.
   For the benefit of the public at public events or gatherings within or
adjacent to the city, where large bodies of people may congregate or gather,
the health officer may grant permits for the erection, operation and
maintenance of refreshment stands. The health officer is authorized to make
conditions of such permits as may be necessary to secure the proper sanitation
of these stands. Any person who operates a refreshment stand without first
obtaining a permit shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. For any such permit a
daily fee as set forth in the municipal fee schedule shall be charged in lieu
of any other license or permit fee of this city, and shall be paid to the city
treasurer.
   Any stands erected under the provisions of this chapter shall be promptly
removed at the expiration of the day for which the permit is granted, and all
rubbish and debris shall be likewise removed.
(Ord. 4453 § 33, 1997: Ord. 2960 § 35, 1976: Ord. 2345 (part), 1967: prior code
§ 28.20)
5.12.020   Not a violation of Title 18.
   The limited permits authorized in this chapter shall not be considered to be
in violation of Title 18.
(Ord. 2345 (part), 1967: prior code § 28.21)
5.12.030   Permits for public welfare events.
   A permit shall be issued without a license fee to churches, schools,
charities and similar nonprofit organizations which desire to conduct booths at
public events and gatherings in the city, not for personal and private gain,
but for welfare work in civic matters within the city or within territory
contiguous to and within one mile of the exterior boundaries of the city.
(Ord. 2345 (part), 1967: prior code § 28.23)
Chapter 5.20
COLLECTION, REMOVAL AND DISPOSAL OF REFUSE *
Sections:
   5.20.010   Definitions.
   5.20.020   Declaration of policy.
   5.20.030   Discarding of refuse.
   5.20.040   Collection, removal and disposal only by authorized persons.
   5.20.050   No unauthorized containers.
   5.20.060   Contracting for special hauling services.
   5.20.070   Use of agents or subcontractors by the collector.
   5.20.080   Number of solid waste containers required.
   5.20.090   Collection and ownership of recyclable materials.
   5.20.100   Collection and ownership of compostable materials.
   5.20.105   Contamination of containers.
   5.20.108   Requirements for owners or managers of multifamily properties and
commercial premises.
   5.20.109   Requirements for special events.
   5.20.110   Exclusions.
   
5.20.111   Self-haul.
   5.20.120   Refuse containers.
   5.20.130   Maintenance and placement of containers.
   5.20.140   Frequency of refuse collection.
   5.20.150   Collection hours, quietness of collections, and collection
equipment.
   5.20.160   Litter, spillage or leakage of refuse.
   5.20.170   Special permits in hardship cases.
   5.20.180   No accumulation of refuse.
   5.20.190   Burning, burial, or dumping of restrictions.
   5.20.200   Hazardous waste.
   5.20.220   Scavenging prohibited.
   5.20.250   Liability for payment of rates.
   5.20.260   Penalty for failure to pay collection rate.
   5.20.270   Recycling center.
   5.20.280   Administration by City manager.
   5.20.290   Penalty for violation.
   *   Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history for this chapter includes Prior
Code §§ 31.01 - 31.20 and 31.22 - 31.24, as amended by Ordinances 1667, 2029
(part), 2196, 2511, 2566 (part), 2627 (part), 2862, 2960 (part), 3034, 3205 and
3424. For provisions relating to dead animals, see
Chapter 6.32.
5.20.010   Definitions.
   Within and limited to this chapter, the following words and phrases shall be
construed as defined in this section, unless the context indicates otherwise.
   (1)   "Back-haul" means transporting refuse to a destination owned and
operated by the generator using the generator's own employees or equipment.
   (2)   "Bin" means a detachable refuse container used in connection with
commercial premises with a 1 to 8 cubic yard capacity, equipped with a lid, and
designed for mechanical pick-up by collection vehicles.
   (3)   "Box" means a wheeled or sledded container or compactor, generally 7
to 50 cubic yards in size, suitable for the storage and collection of
commercial solid waste or recyclable materials.
   (4)   "Cart" means a wheeled receptacle equipped with a lid, and designed
for mechanical pick-up by collection vehicles.
   (5)   "CCR" refers to the California Code of Regulations.
   (6)   "City" means the government of the City of Palo Alto, defined in
Section 1.04.050(1) of the municipal code, with a principal place of business
at 250 Hamilton Avenue, Palo Alto, County of Santa Clara.
   (7)   "City manager" means the person referred to in Section 2.08.140 of the
municipal code, or designee.
   (8)   "Collection agreement" means a contract with the City for the
collection of refuse pursuant to Section
5.20.040.
   (9)   "Collector" means one or more persons authorized by Section 5.20.040
to provide the collection, processing and disposal of refuse pursuant to one or
more written contracts with the city.
   (10)   "Commercial business owner" means any person holding or occupying,
alone or with others, commercial premises, whether or not the person holds the
title or is the record owner of the commercial premise.
   (11)   "Commercial premises" means any occupied real property in Palo Alto,
except property occupied by federal, state or local government agencies which
do not consent to their inclusion, and except residential premises as defined
in subsection (37) hereof, and shall include, without limitation, any wholesale
or retail establishments, restaurant and food service establishment, bar,
store, shop, shopping center, office, industrial establishment, manufacturing
establishment, service station, repair, research and development establishment,
professional, services, sports or recreational facility, any place or premise
where an animal is maintained or sheltered, construction or demolition site,
any multifamily property as defined in subsection (26) hereof, and any other
commercial or industrial business facility, structure, site, or other
establishment in Palo Alto.
   (12)    "Compostable materials" means organic materials designated by the
City as approved for collection and processing, including, without limitation,
yard trimmings, food scraps, soiled paper and compostable plastics, but
excluding animal manure, sewage sludge, and human biological wastes.
"Compostable materials" has the same meaning as "organic waste" as defined in
Section 18982 (46) of Chapter 14 of the California Code of Regulations and used
in SB 1383.
   (13)   "Compostable plastic" means any packaging made of compostable plastic
meeting Biodegradable Products Institute (BPI) and ASTM D6400 standard for
compostability. The packaging must contain the words "compostable" to be
acceptable in the city's organic waste collection program.
   (14)   "Composting" means the controlled, biological decomposition of
organic materials into humus for use as a soil amendment, conditioner or
fertilizer or for any other similar use or purpose.
   (15)   "Construction and/or demolition site" means any real property in Palo
Alto, at which a building or structure, or any portion thereof, is being
constructed, assembled, erected or demolished, and during which construction or
demolition waste which must be removed from the property.
   (16)   "Construction and/or demolition waste" means any waste generated as
the result of construction or demolition work, including, without limitation,
discarded packaging or containers and waste construction materials, whether
brought on-site for fabrication or used in construction or resulting from
demolition, excluding liquid waste and hazardous waste.
   (17)   "Container" means any bin, box, cart, compactor, drop box, roll-off
box, or receptacle, used for the storage of solid waste, recyclable materials,
compostable materials or other materials designated by the City for collection
by the collector.
   (18)   "Director" means the person referred to in Section 2.08.190 of the
Municipal Code, or the director's designee.
   (19)   "Disposal or processing facility" means a landfill facility, a
recycling facility, a composting facility or a solid waste transfer or
processing station.
   (20)   "EPA" means the federal Environmental Protection Agency or successor
agency.
   (21)   "Food service establishment" means any establishment, located or
providing food within Palo Alto, which provides prepared and ready-to-consume
food or beverages, for public consumption, including, but not limited to, any
retail service establishment, eating and drinking service (as defined in
Chapter 18.23), takeout service (as defined in
Chapter 18.23), supermarket, delicatessen, restaurant, food vendor, sales
outlet, shop, cafeteria, catering truck or vehicle, cart or other sidewalk or
outdoor vendor or caterer which provides prepared and ready-to-consume food or
beverages, for public consumption.
   (22)   "Hazardous waste" means waste defined as hazardous by Public
Resources Code section 40141, as it now exists or may be amended, namely, a
waste or combination of wastes, which due to its quantity, concentration, or
physical, chemical or infectious characteristics, may do either of the
following: (i) cause or significantly contribute to, an increase in mortality
or an increase in serious irreversible, or incapacitating reversible, illness;
(ii) pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or
environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, or disposed of, or
otherwise managed. "Hazardous waste" includes extremely hazardous waste and
acutely hazardous waste, and any other waste as may hereafter from time to time
be designated as hazardous by the EPA or other agency of the United States
Government, or by the California Legislature or any agency of the State of
California empowered by law to classify or designate waste as hazardous,
extremely hazardous or acutely hazardous.
   (23)   "High diversion organic waste processing facility" means a facility
that is in compliance with the reporting requirements of 14 CCR Section 18815.5
(d) and meets or exceeds an annual average mixed waste organic content recovery
rate of 50 percent between January 1, 2022 and December 31, 2024, and 75
percent after January 1, 2025.
   (24)   "Home composting" means the controlled decomposition of organic
material, including, without limitation, yard trimmings and kitchen scraps,
into humus by any person owning or occupying any place or premises in Palo
Alto.
   (25)   "Manure" means the waste droppings of any animal.
   (26)   "Multifamily property" means any residential premise with three or
more attached units with shared service.
   (27)   "Organic wastes" means "compostable materials."
   (28)   "Person" means any individual, or entity referred to in Section
1.04.050(5) of the Municipal Code and includes any firm, limited liability
company, association, partnership, political subdivision, government agency,
municipality, industry, public or private corporation, or any other entity
whatsoever.
   (29)   "Place or premises" means every residential premises and commercial
premises, including any structure, apparatus, or portion thereof occupied or
operated by any person and situated on an integral parcel of land undivided by
a public street, highway, or railway.
   (30)   "Public solid waste or recycling receptacles" means any container for
the collection of solid waste, recyclable materials or compostable materials
that are both located on public property and intended for use by the general
public.
   (31)   "Recyclable materials" means materials designated by the City as
suitable for collection and transport to a material recovery facility for
processing into a recycled content product, including, without limitation,
newspaper, paper, cans, corrugated cardboard, glass and certain types of
plastic, and metals.
   (32)   "Recycling" means the process of collecting, sorting, cleansing,
treating, and reconstituting materials that would otherwise become solid waste,
and returning them to the economic mainstream in the form of raw material for
new, reused, or reconstituted products which meet the quality standards
necessary to be used in the marketplace. This term does not include
transformation as that term is defined in Public Resources Code section 40180.
   (33)   "Refuse" means and includes compostable materials, recyclable
materials and solid waste.
   (34)   "Refuse room" means a room(s) located inside a building in which
refuse containers are maintained and refuse is collected. Refuse rooms are
typically located at the end of a hallway or on the ground level, but may be in
other locations.
   (35)   "Refuse service" means the weekly or other periodic collection,
processing and disposal of materials properly deposited in the collector-
provided containers for solid waste, as well as weekly collection and
processing of recyclable materials and weekly collection and processing of
compostable materials.
   (36)   "Residential householder" means any person owning or occupying
residential premises in Palo Alto.
   (37)   "Residential premises" means any residential dwelling unit in Palo
Alto which does not meet the definition of multifamily property in subsection
(26) hereof, typically single-family homes or duplexes.
   (38)   "Salvage" means the controlled removal of construction or demolition
debris/material from a permitted building, construction, or demolition site for
the purpose of recycling, reuse, or storage for later recycling or reuse.
Examples include air conditioning and heating systems, columns, balustrades,
fountains, gazebos, molding, mantels, pavers, planters, quoins, stair treads,
trim, wall caps, bath tubs, bricks, cabinetry, carpet, doors, ceiling fans,
lighting fixtures, electrical panel boxes, fencing, fireplaces, flooring
materials of wood, marble, stone or tile, furnaces, plate glass, wall mirrors,
door knobs, door brackets, door hinges, marble, iron work, metal balconies,
structural steel, plumbing fixtures, refrigerators, rock, roofing materials,
siding materials, sinks, stairs, stone, stoves, toilets, windows, wood fencing,
lumber and plywood.
   (39)   "Self-hauler" means a person who occasionally collects, transports
and disposes of solid waste, compostable materials or recyclable materials
generated at the person's place or premise, in lieu of availing themselves of
the services of the collector. Self-hauler also includes a person who back-
hauls waste. Self-hauler includes, but is not limited to, landscapers,
gardeners and contractors as specified in Section
5.20.111.
   (40)   "Self-hauler of compostable materials" means a gardener, laborer,
contractor, construction worker, or landscaper who collects, transports and
disposes of compostable materials.
   (41)   "Solid waste" means solid and semisolid wastes, generated in or upon,
related to the occupancy of, remaining in or emanating from residential
premises or commercial premises, including garbage, trash, rubbish, ashes,
industrial wastes, manure, animal carcasses, solid or semisolid wastes, and
other solid and semisolid wastes. "Solid waste" shall not include liquid wastes
or sewage, abandoned vehicles, hazardous waste, recyclable materials or
compostable materials.
   (42)   "Solid waste enterprise" means any person regularly engaged in the
business of providing solid waste, recyclable materials or compostable
materials handling services.
   (43)   "Source separated single recyclable materials" means recyclable
materials that are separated from other recyclable materials or solid waste and
placed in separate containers according to type or category of materials and
directly marketed as a single commodity.
   (44)   "Waste station" means a collection of at least three refuse
containers, color coded, with proper signage located in common indoor and
outdoor areas (such as lobbies, hallways, front entrances, laundry rooms, etc.)
for use by the public, employees, tenants or customers allowing for proper
separation of refuse.
   (45)   "Yard trimmings" means plant trimmings generated from the maintenance
or alteration of public, commercial premises or residential premises
landscapes, including, without limitation, grass cuttings, yard clippings,
leaves, tree trimmings, pruning, brush and weeds, excepting those materials
which are prohibited under written rules and regulations promulgated by the
director.
(Ord. 5536 § 2 (part), 2021: Ord. 5475 § 1, 2019; Ord. 5377 § 1 (part), 2016;
Ord. 4451 § 1 (part), 1997)
5.20.020   Declaration of policy.
   (a)   The accumulation, collection, removal and disposal of refuse must be
controlled by the City for the protection of the public health, safety and
welfare. The Council finds that to give practical effect to this policy a
comprehensive system for the periodic collection, removal and disposal of
refuse from all places or premises is essential and benefits all occupants of
places or premises. All occupants of places or premises shall be liable for
refuse collection charges established by the Council for the collection,
removal and disposal of refuse.
   (b)   The City complies with the applicable provisions of the California
Integrated Waste Management Act, as amended, codified in the Public Resources
Code section 40000 et seq. The law requires that, by and after January 1, 2000,
fifty percent (50%) of the solid waste generated must be diverted through some
source reduction, recycling, and composting activities.
   (c)   The City also complies with the 75 percent recycling goal included as
part of AB 341 Mandatory Commercial Recycling Law, adopted on October 6, 2011,
which includes modifications to the Public Resources Code.
   (d)   In addition, the city complies with the organic waste recycling
requirements under AB 1826, which became effective on April 1, 2016.
   (e)   In 2016, SB 1383 established methane emissions reduction targets to
reduce statewide emissions of short-lived climate pollutants including,
establishing a fifty percent reduction of disposed organic waste from 2014
levels by 2020 and a seventy-five percent reduction by 2025; and the target to
reduce twenty percent of disposed edible food by 2025. Also in 2016, the city
established sustainability and climate action goals of an eighty percent
reduction in greenhouse gases and ninety- five percent diversion of materials
from landfills by 2030.
   (f)   In 2020, CalRecycle adopted regulations pursuant to SB 1383 (14 CCR
18981 et seq.) to implement the goals of SB 1383; the city complies with these
regulations.
   (g)   The City may adopt, implement, and enforce requirements, rules and
regulations for local compostable materials and local recyclable materials that
are more stringent or comprehensive than California law.
(Ord. 5536 § 2 (part), 2021: Ord. 5475 § 2, 2019; Ord. 5377 § 1 (part), 2016;
Ord. 4451 § 1 (part), 1997)
5.20.030   Discarding of refuse.
   (a)   No person shall throw, drop, leave, place, keep, accumulate, or
otherwise dispose of any refuse upon private property either with or without
the intent to later remove the same from that place or premises, or upon any
street, public right-of-way, sidewalk, gutter, stream, or creek, or the banks
thereof, or any public place or public property.
   (b)   All persons shall separate their refuse according to its
characterization as solid waste, compostable materials, or recyclable
materials, and place each type of refuse in a separate container designated for
disposal of that type of refuse. No person may mix any type of refuse, or
deposit refuse of one type in a collection container designated for refuse of
another type, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. This does not
prohibit the placement of refuse in public solid waste or recycling
receptacles, or in containers for collection in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter. This section does not prohibit any person from engaging in
home composting.
   (c)   Any person occupying a commercial premises, not including multifamily
property, who uses bags to collect and discard refuse, whether placed for
collection inside or outside a container, shall ensure that the refuse contents
of the bags are clearly visible. When bags are used, garbage shall be collected
in clear plastic bags and recyclable materials shall be collected in blue-
tinted plastic bags.
   (d)   All persons who use bags to collect compostable materials, whether
placed for collection inside or outside a container, shall use green-tinted
compostable bags such that the contents are clearly visible.
(Ord. 5536 § 2 (part), 2021: Ord. 5475 § 3, 2019; Ord. 5377 § 1 (part), 2016;
Ord. 4451 § 1 (part), 1997)
5.20.040   Collection, removal and disposal only by authorized persons.
   (a)   The City shall authorize, permit, regulate and control the collection,
removal and disposal of all refuse generated at all places or premises. For
this purpose, the City may enter into a collection agreement with one or more
solid waste enterprises with or without advertising for bids. The collection
agreement shall not be or be deemed or construed as a franchise.
   (b)   Notwithstanding any permit issued by any other governmental agency
authorizing the collection of any type of refuse, no person other than a person
with a collection agreement, or its duly authorized agents or subcontractors,
as provided in Section
5.20.070, shall negotiate or contract for, undertake to receive, collect,
remove, transport, or dispose of any type of refuse from within the Palo Alto
for a fee, service charge or other consideration therefor, except as
specifically provided herein.
   (c)   No person shall interfere in any manner with the lawful operations of
the collector or its duly authorized agents or subcontractors.
   (d)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, each residential
householder and commercial business owner shall utilize the services of the
collector for the collection of refuse from the residential or commercial
premises held or occupied by that owner or occupant and shall pay the fees for
services as approved by the Council. No residential householder or commercial
business owner shall enter into an agreement with a solid waste enterprise for
the collection of refuse except as otherwise provided in this chapter.
(Ord. 5377 § 1 (part), 2016; Ord. 4451 § 1 (part), 1997)
5.20.050   No unauthorized containers.
   (a)   Except as expressly authorized by this
Chapter 5.20, no person other than a collector may place a container within
Palo Alto.
   (b)   The City shall notify, in writing, any person who violates this
Section
5.20.050 that the prompt and permanent removal of the container from the place
or premises is required. The City shall deliver the written notice by posting a
copy of the notice prominently upon the container. If the container is
identified by the name and telephone number of the solid waste enterprise
servicing it, as required by Section
5.20.130(e), the City shall endeavor to contact the enterprise by telephone.
The failure of the City to notify telephonically the owner of the presence of
the container at the place or premises shall not invalidate the notice. The
City may impound or cause to be impounded any container if the same is not
permanently removed from the place or premises within the time set forth in the
notice, which time shall be not less than twenty-four hours after the posting
of the notice, or not less than six business hours after the telephonic
notification, if any notice is provided. For purposes of this Section
5.20.050, "business hours" means the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday
through Saturday. Any person who violates this Section
5.20.050 shall be liable to the City for all fines and charges levied in
connection with the collection, transportation, storage and handling of that
container by the City. The container impounded by the City shall be retrieved
by the owner or his or her representative immediately after all applicable
fines and charges have been paid. The City manager may delegate to the
collector the authority to impound any unauthorized containers and to collect
the fines and charges levied by the City.
   (c)   Upon posting of a written notice of violation upon the unauthorized
container, the person using the unauthorized container shall immediately cease
placing refuse therein.
(Ord. 5377 § 1 (part), 2016; Ord. 4451 § 1 (part), 1997)
5.20.060   Contracting for special hauling services.
   Any owner, occupant or tenant of a place or premise may contract with the
collector or its duly authorized agents or subcontractors, as provided in
Section
5.20.070, but not otherwise, for special hauling services for the collection,
removal and disposal of solid waste in excess of the regular services provided
by the collector.
(Ord. 5377 § 1 (part), 2016; Ord. 4451 § 1 (part), 1997)
5.20.070   Use of agents or subcontractors by the collector.
   The City may provide in any written contract entered into pursuant to
Section
5.20.040(a) that the collector may designate, in writing, one or more agents or
subcontractors who may collect, remove, and dispose of solid waste or
construction and demolition waste as may be in excess of the regular collection
made by the collector, subject to the limitations set forth in the collection
agreement.
(Ord. 5377 § 1 (part), 2016; Ord. 4451 § 1 (part), 1997)
5.20.080   Number of solid waste containers required.
   All persons owning or occupying any place or premises where solid waste is
created, produced or accumulated shall subscribe and pay for this type of
refuse service and shall subscribe and pay for a number of containers to hold
all solid waste created, produced or accumulated at or on the place or premise
during a one-week period, unless a different frequency for a collection
schedule has been approved or directed pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. 5377 § 1 (part), 2016; Ord. 4451 § 1 (part), 1997)
5.20.090   Collection and ownership of recyclable materials.
   (a)   All persons owning or occupying any place or premises where recyclable
materials are created, produced or accumulated shall subscribe and pay for this
type of refuse services and shall subscribe and pay for a number of containers
sufficient to hold all recyclable materials created, produced or accumulated at
the place or premises during a one-week period, unless a different frequency
collection schedule has been approved or directed pursuant to this chapter.
   (b)   Recyclable materials placed for curbside collection in or outside of a
container shall become the property of the collector at the time of placement
at the curb or other designated location for collection in or outside of the
container. The collector shall have the exclusive right to collect the
recyclable materials, unless the collection agreement specifies a different
arrangement.
   (c)   The disposal of solid waste and compostable materials in containers
designated for the collection of recyclable materials is prohibited. Recyclable
materials that are placed in a recyclable materials container for collection by
the collector shall be free of solid waste and compostable materials.
   (d)   Cardboard boxes shall be broken down flat before being placed into
recyclables containers to allow for adequate space to contain the recyclable
materials.
(Ord. 5536 § 2 (part), 2021: Ord. 5475 § 4, 2019; Ord. 5377 § 1 (part), 2016;
Ord. 4451 § 1 (part), 1997)
5.20.100   Collection and ownership of compostable materials.
   (a)   All persons owning or occupying any place or premises where
compostable materials are created, produced or accumulated shall subscribe and
pay for this type of refuse services and shall subscribe and pay for a number
of containers sufficient to hold all compostable materials created, produced or
accumulated at the place or premises during a one-week period, unless a
different frequency collection schedule has been approved or directed pursuant
to this chapter.
   (b)   Compostable materials placed for curbside collection in a container
shall become the property of the collector at the time of placement at the curb
or other designated location for collection of the container.
   (c)   The disposal of solid waste and recyclable materials in containers
designated for the collection of compostable materials is prohibited.
Compostable materials that are placed in a compostable materials container for
collection by the collector shall be free of solid waste and recyclable
materials.
   (d)   All commercial premises at which solid waste refuse service is
subscribed, shall subscribe and pay for a number of containers sufficient to
hold compostable materials created, produced or accumulated at or on the place
or premises during a one-week period, unless a different frequency collection
schedule has been approved or directed pursuant to this chapter.
   (e)   The City may direct the collector to audit individual solid waste
streams generated at commercial or residential premises to determine the owner,
occupant or tenant's compliance with this section.
(Ord. 5536 § 2 (part), 2022: Ord. 5475 § 5, 2019; Ord. 5377 § 1 (part), 2016;
Ord. 4451 § 1 (part), 1997)
5.20.105   Contamination of containers.
   (a)   No person subscribing to refuse service shall dispose or permit the
disposal of solid waste in a container designated for the collection of
recyclable materials or compostable materials. The person shall remove any
solid waste deposited in the recyclable materials and compostable materials
containers before the collection of the recyclable materials and compostable
containers occurring that week.
   (1)   The collector will notify any person who occupies commercial or
residential premises whenever the City or the collector determines the
recyclable materials or compostable materials container of that person is
contaminated with solid waste and the waste must be removed. After the person
removes the solid waste from the recyclable materials and compostable materials
container, the collector will return to the commercial or residential premises
to service the container or containers and the person occupying the commercial
or residential premises will be charged a "return trip" fee specified in the
refuse rate schedules.
   (2)   If the person occupying the commercial or residential premises does
not remove the waste from the recyclable materials and compostable materials
containers by the scheduled pick-up date, the containers will be serviced at
the next business day and the person occupying the commercial or residential
premises will be charged both an "extra solid waste pick-up" fee and a "return
trip" fee in addition to the refuse charges that apply to the level of service
subscribed by the person occupying the commercial or residential premises. The
extra solid waste pick-up fee shall be determined according to the size of the
contaminated recyclable materials or compostable materials container and the
established rates approved by the City.
   (3)   The fees outlined in Section
5.20.105 (a)(1) - (2) will also apply if a person occupying a commercial or
residential premises places recyclable materials in containers designated for
compostable materials or compostable materials in containers designated for
recyclable materials.
   (4)   If a person occupying a commercial or residential premises places
recyclable materials and/or compostable materials in containers designated for
solid waste, the person will be subject to a "contamination" fee.
   (b)   No person shall dispose of commercial grease or cooking oil in a
compostable materials container.
(Ord. 5536 § 2 (part), 2021: Ord. 5475 § 6, 2019; Ord. 5377 § 1 (part), 2016)
5.20.108   Requirements for owners or managers of multifamily properties and
commercial premises.
   (a)   The owner or manager of any multifamily property or commercial
premises shall provide a level of refuse service sufficient to contain the
refuse generated by the owners, occupants, tenants, employees, contractors, and
customers of the property or premises.
   (b)   The owner or manager of any multifamily property or commercial
premises shall provide the number and type of containers at the property or
premises sufficient to make the source separation of refuse convenient for the
owners, occupants, tenants, employees, contractors, and customers of the
property or commercial premises.
   (c)   The three types of containers shall: (1) Be appropriate in number and
size with respect to the quantity of solid waste, compostable materials, and
recyclable materials anticipated to be generated at the property or premises;
(2) Bear appropriate signage/label and be color-coded - blue containers for
recyclable materials, green containers for compostable materials, and black
containers for solid waste - to identify the primary materials accepted and the
primary materials prohibited in each container and meet any additional design
criteria established by the City; and (3) Be placed within six inches or less
of each other or as close together as practicable to provide equally convenient
access to users.
   (d)   The owner or manager of any multifamily property or commercial
premises shall provide information and training for new occupants or tenants,
employees and contractors, including janitors, on the manner of source
separation of solid waste, compostable materials, and recyclable materials
before or within 14 days of occupation of the premises or performing work on
the premises. The owner or manager shall provide information or train current
occupants, tenants, employees and contractors at least once per calendar year.
   (e)   The owner or manager of any commercial premises or their contractor
shall collaborate with on-site janitors to create effective source separation
programs.
   (f)   All commercial businesses including multifamily property shall
periodically inspect green compostable materials containers for contamination
and shall inform employees if containers are contaminated and of the
requirements to only use those containers for compostable materials.
   (g)   The use of public solid waste, recycling, or composting receptacles by
any commercial premises is prohibited.
(Ord. 5536 § 2 (part), 2021: Ord. 5377 § 1 (part), 2016)
5.20.109   Requirements for special events.
   (a)   The promoter or coordinator of a special event held in Palo Alto shall
provide a level of refuse service sufficient to contain the refuse generated at
the special event.
   (b)   The promoter or coordinator shall provide containers at appropriate
locations at the special event to facilitate the source separation of solid
waste, compostable materials, and recyclable materials by event employees,
vendors, and attendees.
   (c)   The three types of containers shall:
   (1)   Be appropriate in number and size with respect to the quantity of
solid waste, compostable materials, and recyclable materials anticipated to be
generated at the property or premises;
   (2)   Bear appropriate signage and be color-coded - blue containers for
recyclable materials, green containers for compostable materials, and black
containers for solid waste - to identify the type of refuse to be contained and
meet any additional design criteria established by the City; and
   (3)   Be placed together as a waste station to provide equally convenient
access to users.
   (d)   If the promoter or coordinator determines that vendor booths at the
special event will require refuse containers, the vendors shall receive from
the promoter or coordinator a set of refuse containers that bear appropriate
signage and are color-coded to identify the type of waste to be contained.
   (e)   The use of public solid waste recycling or composting receptacles at
special events is prohibited. The promoter or coordinator shall remove or cover
all public solid waste recycling or composting receptacles to prevent their use
during the special event. If covers for receptacles are utilized, the promoter
or coordinator shall return them to the city after the special event.
(Ord. 5536 § 2 (part), 2021: Ord. 5475 § 7, 2019; Ord. 5377 § 1 (part), 2016)
5.20.110   Exclusions.
   (a)   Residential Householder Exclusion. No provision of this chapter shall
prevent a residential householder from collecting and disposing of occasional
loads of solid waste generated at the residential premise, composting at home,
or selling, donating or disposing of recyclable or compostable materials
generated at the residential premise. The containers provided by the collector
may not be used for activities authorized by this paragraph. Notwithstanding
the foregoing, no residential householder shall employ or engage any solid
waste enterprise, other than the collector to haul or transport solid waste,
recyclable materials, or compostable materials to a disposal or processing
facility. No residential householder may collect or dispose of solid waste
generated at a location that is not the residential premise.
   (b)   Gardener's Exclusion. No provision of this chapter shall bar a
gardener, tree trimmer or other person engaged in a similar trade from
collecting and disposing of yard trimmings not containing other solid waste
whenever the collection and disposal are incidental to providing the gardening,
tree trimming or similar services. Trade persons shall adhere to the
requirements described in Section
5.20.111.
   (c)   Commercial Source Separated Recyclable Materials and Compostable
Materials.
   (1)   Commercial business owners shall retain the right to donate or sell
recyclable materials and compostable materials, or to pay fees for services to
solid waste enterprises other than the collector for the collection of
particular recyclable materials and compostable materials, so long as all
recyclable materials and compostable materials collected are source separated
single recyclable materials and compostable materials. Recyclable materials and
compostable materials collected pursuant to this paragraph (c) shall be
transported to a recyclable materials and compostable materials facility
achieving a diversion rate of 90 percent and where not more than 10 percent of
the materials are disposed of in a landfill. For source separated compostable
materials owner shall follow requirements in Section
5.20.111.
   (2)   Commercial business owners shall demonstrate compliance with the
provisions of this paragraph (c) at the request of the director.
   (3)   The City may require any recycler, junk dealer or other enterprise
engaged in the business of buying and marketing recyclable materials and
compostable materials to provide the City with information pertaining to the
collection and the amount of recyclable materials and compostable materials
collected from within Palo Alto's territorial limits.
   (d)   Collection of Source Separated Single Recyclable Materials. No
provision of this chapter shall prevent a recycler, junk dealer or other
enterprise engaged in the business of buying and marketing source separated
single recyclable materials in the stream of commerce and which buys such
materials for marketing and not for disposition in a landfill or transfer
station (as defined in Public Resources Code Section 40200), from buying
recyclable materials for monetary or other valuable consideration. A recycler,
junk dealer or enterprise which buys recyclable materials shall not be
prohibited from removing and transporting those materials to a destination for
marketing in the stream of commerce.
   (e)   Renovation, Rebuilding, Repairs. No provision of this chapter shall
prevent a commercial business owner from arranging for any worn, spent, or
defective equipment, or part thereof, used in the commercial business and
requiring renovation, rebuilding, recharging, regeneration or repair, to be
picked up, renovated, rebuilt, recharged, regenerated or otherwise restored and
repaired and returned to that commercial business owner. Any person engaged in
the business of renovating, rebuilding, recharging, regenerating, or otherwise
restoring or repairing the equipment or part thereof, is not prohibited from
transporting the same from or returning it to the commercial business, or from
removing, transporting or disposing of the equipment, or part thereof, replaced
in connection with an equipment repair or service contract.
   (f)   Contractors' Exclusions. In addition to the authority granted by
paragraph (c) of this Section
5.20.110, no provision of this chapter shall prevent a licensed contractor
under contract for the deconstruction, demolition or reconstruction of a
building, structure, pavement, or concrete installation from marketing any
saleable, including cardboard and metal, or donation items salvaged from the
deconstruction, demolition or reconstruction, or from causing the salvageable
items or construction or demolition waste to be removed and transported from
the place or premises at which such waste is generated, pursuant to the
provisions of the demolition or construction contract, subject to the
following:
   (1)   The collection, removal and disposal activity shall be performed only
by the licensed contractor under contract for the construction, deconstruction
or demolition work that generated the salvageable items or by regularly
employed personnel carried on the licensed contractor's payroll records as an
employee.
   (2)   All vehicles used to facilitate the collection, removal and disposal
activities shall be owned by or under the exclusive control of the licensed
contractor and shall meet all of the requirements of this chapter and all other
laws, statutes, rules, regulations and ordinances of the state of California
and the City. All vehicles shall be subject to inspection by and the approval
of the director from time to time.
   (3)   The placement and use of a container, other than a container provided
by the collector, shall be prohibited, whether placed on the ground, on a
vehicle, or any other place.
   (4)   A licensed contractor performing the work can collect, remove and
dispose of clean soil. The soil must be free of other materials including
compostable materials, wood, C & D debris, metal, etc.
   (g)   Concrete Exclusion. In addition to the authority granted by paragraph
(f) of this Section
5.20.110, nothing in this chapter shall prevent a commercial/industrial
business owner, residential householder, or licensed contractor from using a
solid waste enterprise other than the collector to dispose of concrete.
   (h)   Document Destruction Service. No provision of this chapter shall
prevent any person engaged in the business of destroying or disposing of
secret, confidential or sensitive documents from transporting or disposing of
those documents, provided the transport and disposal of the documents are
incidental to the document destruction or disposal service.
   (i)   General Requirement. In all cases where the right to an exclusion
pursuant to this Section
5.20.110 is exercised, disposal shall be made at a disposal or processing
facility that meets all applicable regulatory requirements. Any disposal by a
person exempted under this section shall not be relieved of any obligation or
liability imposed by this chapter or any other ordinance, resolution, rule or
regulation for the payment of the minimum solid waste and recyclable materials
disposal rates imposed pursuant to this chapter or any other applicable rates
or fees.
   (j)   Space Limitations for Existing Structures. The director may grant a
written exemption for any existing commercial business structure that lacks
sufficient storage space for compostable materials or recyclable materials from
all or portions of this section in accordance with the written rules and
regulations established by the director. The director, in cases where space
constraints are determined to exist, shall also evaluate the feasibility of
shared container usage by contiguous businesses or multifamily property
structures.
   (k)   De Minimus Exception. The director may waive any of the requirements
of this section if documentation satisfactory to the director, based upon rules
and regulations, is provided to establish that the materials in any type of
container, on an on-going basis is incidental to any other materials
originating from that collection location.
(Ord. 5536 § 2 (part), 2021: Ord. 5475 § 8, 2019; Ord. 5377 § 1 (part), 2016;
Ord. 4451 § 1 (part), 1997)
5.20.111   Self-haul.
   (a)   In addition to the authority granted by paragraph (a) of Section
5.20.110 nothing in this chapter shall prevent a person from, occasionally
collecting, transporting, and disposing of refuse generated at the place or
premise, in lieu of availing themselves of the services of the collector. The
person shall adhere to the container requirements as specified in Section
5.20.050. Any person who pursuant to paragraph (a) seeks to on a regular basis
collect, transport and dispose of solid waste generated at the place or
premise, shall first obtain approval of the director, and must comply with any
written rules and regulations established by the director.
   (b)   Self-haulers of compostable materials, including gardeners, laborers,
contractors, construction workers, and landscapers disposing of source
separated compostable materials, shall:
   (1)   Adhere to container requirements as specified in Section
5.20.050, provided, however, that self-haulers of compostable materials can use
a truck with an attached bed, a landscaper/gardeners truck, a dump truck, or a
trailer to collect, transport and dispose of compostable materials.
   (2)   Transport the compostable materials to a high diversion organic waste
processing facility approved by the city.
   (3)   Keep a record of the amount of source separated compostable materials
delivered to each high diversion waste processing facility, including:
   (A)   Delivery receipts and weight tickets from the entity accepting the
waste.
   (B)   The amount of material in cubic yards or tons transported by the
generator to each entity.
   (C)   If the material is transported to an entity that does not have scales
on-site, or employs scales incapable of weighing the self-hauler's vehicle in a
manner that allows it to determine the weight of materials received, the self-
hauler is not required to record the weight of material but shall keep a record
of the entities that received the compostable materials.
   (4)   Provide information collected in section (b)(3) above to city if
requested, which shall be subject to inspection by the city.
   (c)   A residential compostable materials generator that self-hauls
compostable materials is not required to record or report information.
   (d)   A gardener, landscaper, or other contractor is not considered a
residential compostable materials generator and is therefore required to follow
section (b) above.
   (e)   No residential householder or commercial business owner shall employ
or engage any solid waste enterprise, other than the collector, to haul or
transport the solid waste to a disposal or processing facility.
(Ord. 5536 § 2 (part), 2021)
5.20.120   Refuse containers.
   (a)   All types of refuse containers shall be kept in a sanitary condition
with the lids closed except whenever they are being loaded or unloaded.
   (b)   Refuse containers suitable for residential places or premises shall be
provided by the collector or the City. Any container shall be of a size based
upon the subscription service level requested by the person responsible for the
payment of charges therefor or as may be required by this chapter. Any
container shall not be loaded with more than the quantity of materials that
either can fit in the container with its lid closed or is in excess of the
weight limit marked on the container, when the lid is closed. All containers
for use at commercial premises shall be provided by or approved by the
collector, except for industry-approved grease or cooking oil tallow containers
that shall be provided by a designated tallow hauler.
   (c)   Refuse containers shall be collected by the collector whenever the
containers are placed in a refuse enclosure or at the authorized collection
area. Collection may be made at another location upon approval of the director,
based upon the subscription service level requested.
   (d)   All commercial property owners, commercial business owners and persons
shall provide access to the city or the collector for the inspection of
internal and external refuse containers and enclosures. The director shall be
authorized to conduct inspections of commercial premises, as permitted by law,
to ensure compliance with this chapter, including this section.
   (e)   Commercial property owners, commercial business owners and persons
shall ensure that all refuse containers and refuse enclosures are accessible
and easily serviceable by the collector. Service vehicles shall have a safe and
clear passage and access to refuse enclosures to provide for the efficient
service to customers.
(Ord. 5536 § 2 (part), 2021: Ord. 5475 § 9, 2019; Ord. 5377 § 1 (part), 2016;
Ord. 4451 § 1 (part), 1997)
5.20.130   Maintenance and placement of containers.
   (a)   The commercial business owners and residential householder shall
maintain their containers at their places and premises and the areas where the
containers are located in good, usable, clean and sanitary condition, and shall
ensure that the lids on the container are kept closed and shall ensure that
there is no litter underneath or surrounding the containers. No refuse shall be
placed outside of the container. Containers shall be maintained in a manner
that will prevent leakage, spillage and the emission of odors. Commercial
premises sharing receptacles placed outside of retail areas, shall also share
equally in the responsibility of emptying the receptacles so that they do not
overflow and maintaining the area around the receptacles so that it is free of
loose litter.
   (b)   The location or placement of containers at any place or premise shall
be subject to the approval of the director. Every commercial business owner
shall provide a location at the commercial premises for the containers they
use.
   (c)   Any collection agreement may provide for the rental of containers
approved by the collector to customers. The collector shall be responsible for
maintenance of the rental containers by keeping the containers in good and
sanitary condition (ordinary wear and tear excepted) and shall repaint the
containers at a frequency as determined by the director. The collector and the
renter shall determine and agree upon the placement of the containers to
minimize traffic, aesthetics and other potential effects that may be associated
with their placement.
   (d)   Where a container is not rented from the collector but is rented from
another solid waste enterprise and approved by the City, the renter shall
ensure that the container meets the standards of quality and maintenance
applicable to the containers supplied by the collector. The renter shall
procure the written standards or rules and regulations of the collector prior
to renting from another solid waste enterprise.
   (e)   Any containers of a one cubic yard or greater size shall be identified
with the name and telephone number of the collector or other solid waste
enterprise servicing the container. The container shall be identified by the
type of materials that can be deposited in the container.
   (f)   Containers shall remain on private property and not in the public
right-of-way except as necessary to accommodate scheduled collection.
Containers are permitted in the public right-of-way only during the day
preceding the day of scheduled collection and terminating the day following
such collection.
(Ord. 5536 § 2 (part), 2021: Ord. 5475 § 10, 2019; Ord. 5377 § 1 (part), 2016;
Ord. 4451 § 1 (part), 1997)
5.20.140   Frequency of refuse collection.
   The Collector or its duly authorized agents or subcontractors shall collect
refuse from all residential premises and commercial premises within Palo Alto
at least once a week, unless the director authorizes a different frequency of
collection as provided in Section 5.20.
(Ord. 5377 § 1 (part), 2016; Ord. 4451 § 1 (part), 1997)
5.20.150   Collection hours, quietness of collections, and collection
equipment.
   (a)   Refuse shall be collected only between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 6:00
p.m. in residential districts and at schools, churches, and commercial premises
located in commercial districts adjacent to residential districts.
   (b)   Refuse shall be collected only between the hours of 4:00 a.m. and 9:00
p.m. in commercial districts other than as indicated in (a) above, subject to
any reasonable modifications of collection periods as the director may impose.
   (c)   All collections shall be made as quietly as possible. All trucks and
equipment for refuse collection shall be operated in a manner that complies
with the noise ordinance codified in the Municipal Code. All unnecessarily
noisy trucks or equipment for such collections are prohibited.
(Ord. 5377 § 1 (part), 2016; Ord. 4451 § 1 (part), 1997)
5.20.160   Litter, spillage or leakage of refuse.
   All types of refuse hauled by any person over public streets in Palo Alto
shall be securely tied and covered during hauling in order to prevent litter
and the leakage, spillage, blowing or dropping of refuse of any type on to
public streets. No person shall allow any type of refuse to leak, spill,
scatter, blow or drop from any vehicle operated on public streets within Palo
Alto.
(Ord. 5377 § 1 (part), 2016; Ord. 4451 § 1 (part), 1997)
5.20.170   Special permits in hardship cases.
   Upon a showing of hardship by the owner, occupant or tenant of a place or
premise, the director may issue a special written permit authorizing a variance
with the provisions of this chapter yet the variance will be subject to the
imposition of terms and conditions as the director may deem necessary to
protect the public health, safety and welfare.
(Ord. 5377 § 1 (part), 2016; Ord. 4451 § 1 (part), 1997)
5.20.180   No accumulation of refuse.
   No person shall permit any type of refuse to accumulate at its place or
premises for a period in excess of one calendar week, except the director may
authorize by written rules and regulations a different frequency of collection,
removal and disposal of refuse for compactors at commercial premises. This
provision shall not be construed to prohibit any person from temporarily
storing building materials at any place or premises during the period of active
construction, reconstruction or repair of a building or structure thereon under
a current valid building permit, storing wood in an orderly pile at the place
or premise for household use, or retaining compostable materials for home
composting purposes.
(Ord. 5377 § 1 (part), 2016; Ord. 4451 § 1 (part), 1997)
5.20.190   Burning, burial, or dumping of restrictions.
   (a)   No person shall burn any refuse within Palo Alto at any time.
   (b)   No person shall bury or dump any type of refuse within Palo Alto.
Compostable materials may be buried on-site by the occupant of the residential
place or premises.
(Ord. 5377 § 1 (part), 2016; Ord. 4451 § 1 (part), 1997)
5.20.200   Hazardous waste.
   No person shall deposit any hazardous waste in a container.
(Ord. 5377 § 1 (part), 2016; Ord. 4451 § 1 (part), 1997)
5.20.220   Scavenging prohibited.
   (a)   No person shall tamper with, modify, scavenge from or deposit any type
of refuse placed in any refuse container which is not provided for the use of
that person, without the permission of the person responsible for the container
and payment of the fees therefor under this chapter.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in Sections
5.20.090 and
5.20.110, no person shall collect any type of refuse originating from any
residential place or premises or any posted recycling center within Palo Alto.
   (c)   The foregoing prohibitions are in addition to the prohibitions set
forth in Section 41950 et seq. of the Public Resources Code.
(Ord. 5377 § 1 (part), 2016; Ord. 4451 § 1 (part), 1997)
5.20.250   Liability for payment of rates.
   Except as set forth in Section
5.20.110, every person with residential premises or commercial premises within
Palo Alto shall be liable for the payment of the refuse service rates,
including any collection rates authorized by the City.
(Ord. 5377 § 1 (part), 2016; Ord. 4451 § 1 (part), 1997)
5.20.260   Penalty for failure to pay collection rate.
   (a)   All collection rates and charges imposed by the Council pursuant to
the provisions of this chapter for the collection, removal and disposal of all
types of refuse shall be a civil debt owing to the City from the owner,
occupant or person maintaining or controlling the place or premises receiving
the services.
   (b)   All such collection rates and charges shall be billed along with other
municipal utility bills, if so billed, and shall be subject to the provisions
of the City's utility rates and regulations governing the collection and
payment of other utility rates. The City may by agreement permit the collector
or other person to collect the applicable rates and charges for refuse service.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, fees for the use of boxes may be collected by
the collector.
   (c)   The collection of the rates imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be
in addition to any other remedies available to the City for the failure of any
person to pay the rates.
(Ord. 5377 § 1 (part), 2016; Ord. 4451 § 1 (part), 1997)
5.20.270   Recycling center.
   The city may maintain within the city's territorial limits a recycling
center which accepts from residents and nonresidents the delivery of recyclable
materials. The delivery of some or all of these recyclable materials may be
subject to the imposition of rates as a condition of acceptance at the
recycling center. Under rules and regulations promulgated by the city manager,
the city at any time may prohibit nonresidents from delivering some or all
recyclable materials to the recycling center, and may impose on nonresidents
rates on the delivery of recyclable materials that differ from those imposed on
residents.
(Ord. 5136 § 2, 2011: Ord. 4451 § 1 (part), 1997)
5.20.280   Administration by City manager.
   (a)   The City manager or designee shall adopt written rules and
regulations, not inconsistent with this chapter, as may be necessary for the
proper administration and enforcement of this chapter. The written rules and
regulations may include, but are not limited to, regulations relating to the
required frequency of refuse collection from various types of places or
premises, the types of special containers required for placement at places or
premises, and regulations governing the vehicles used in making collections.
   (b)   The City manager shall resolve all disputes concerning the
administration or enforcement of this chapter, and his or her decision shall be
final.
(Ord. 5377 § 1 (part), 2016; Ord. 4451 § 1 (part), 1997)
5.20.290   Penalty for violation.
   Violation of any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the
provisions and penalties set forth in Title 1 of the Municipal Code unless
otherwise specified.
(Ord. 5377 § 1 (part), 2016; Ord. 4618 § 1, 2000: Ord. 4451 § 1 (part), 1997)
Chapter 5.24
DECONSTRUCTION AND CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS MANAGEMENT
Sections:
   
5.24.010   Purpose.
   
5.24.020   Definitions.
   
5.24.030   Applicability.
   
5.24.040   Salvage survey and reuse required.
   
5.24.050   Deconstruction and source separation of materials.
   
5.24.060   Material collection.
   
5.24.070   No unauthorized containers.
   
5.24.080   Exclusions.
   
5.24.090   Administration by City Manager.
   
5.24.100   Enforcement and penalties.
5.24.010   Purpose.
   The accumulation, collection, removal and disposal of waste associated with
construction, deconstruction and demolition activities must be controlled for
the protection of the public health, safety and welfare, and the natural
environment. State law addresses this need through the California Integrated
Waste Management Act of 1989 and the California Green Building Code, which
requires local governments to require fifty percent of construction debris be
diverted from the landfill, and Senate Bill 1374, which requires annual
reporting to the state on progress made in the diversion of construction
related materials, including information on programs and ordinances implemented
and quantitative data, where available. Required minimum diversion rates by
project type are covered under the California Green Building Code and the
city's local amendments in Title
16, Building Regulations, of this code. In 2016, the city adopted
sustainability, waste diversion and climate action goals of eighty percent
reduction in greenhouse gases and ninety-five percent diversion of materials
from landfills by 2030. The city may adopt, implement, and enforce
requirements, rules and regulations for local reuse and recycling of materials
that are more stringent or comprehensive than California law, and this chapter
establishes local requirements to further both state law and the city’s adopted
policies.
   This chapter’s goals are to implement best practice methods for separation,
handling, and delivery of deconstruction and construction site materials to
maximize the salvage of building materials for reuse, to reduce the amount of
construction and deconstruction related materials disposed in landfills and to
establish deconstruction and source separation requirements. The requirements
of this chapter are in addition to, the requirement in Chapter
16.14 of this code to achieve a specified diversion of materials generated from
an applicable construction project.
(Ord. 5472 § 2 (part), 2019)
5.24.020   Definitions.
   For purposes of this chapter, terms defined in Chapter
5.20 shall have the same meanings in this chapter. The following terms shall
have the ascribed definition for the purposes of applying the criteria of this
chapter and other chapters as referenced.
   (1)   "Approved facility" means a reuse, recycling, composting, or materials
recovery facility which the director has determined can accept diverted
materials, has obtained all applicable federal, state and local permits, and is
in full compliance with all applicable regulations for reuse, recycling,
composting, and/or materials recovery.
   (2)   "Applicant" means (a) any individual, firm, limited liability company,
association, partnership, political subdivision, government agency,
municipality, industry, public or private corporation, or any other entity
whatsoever who applies to the city for, or who is issued, the applicable
permits to undertake a construction, remodeling, or demolition project within
Palo Alto, and (b) the owner of the real property that is subject to the
permit.
   (3)   "Construction and demolition debris" or "construction and
deconstruction materials" means (a) discarded materials generally considered to
be non-water soluble and non-hazardous in nature (as defined by California Code
of Regulations, Title 22, § 66261.3 et seq.), including but not limited to,
metal, glass, brick, concrete, porcelain, ceramics, asphalt, pipe, gypsum
wallboard, and lumber from the construction or destruction of a structure as
part of a construction or demolition project or from the renovation of a
structure and/or landscaping, including rocks, soil, trees, and other
vegetative matter that normally results from land clearing, landscaping and
development operations for a construction project; and (b) remnants of new
materials, including but not limited to, cardboard, paper, plastic, wood, glass
and metal from any construction, renovation and/or landscape project.
   (4)   "Contractor" means any person or entity holding, or required to hold,
a contractor's license under the laws of the State of California, and who
performs any construction, deconstruction, demolition, remodeling, renovation,
or landscaping service relating to buildings or accessory structures in the
city.
   (5)   "Covered project" means any project that is required to comply with
the provisions of this chapter, as described in Section
5.24.030.
   (6)   "Deconstruction" means the systematic and careful dismantling of a
structure, typically in the opposite order it was constructed, in order to
maximize the salvage of materials and parts for reuse and recycling.
   (7)   "Demolition" means the partial or complete destroying, tearing down,
dismantling or wrecking of any building or structure.
   (8)   "Diversion" means any activity, including recycling, source reduction,
reuse, deconstruction, or salvaging of materials, which causes materials to be
diverted from disposal in landfills and instead puts the material to use as the
same or different usable product.
   (9)   "Recycling" means the process of collecting, sorting, cleansing,
treating, and reconstituting materials that would otherwise become solid waste,
and returning them to the economic mainstream in the form of raw material for
new or reconstituted products which meet the quality standards necessary to be
used in the marketplace. This term does not include transformation as that term
is defined in Public Resources Code section 40180.
   (10)   "Reuse" means further or repeated use of materials or items,
including sale or donation of items, but not including recycling.
   (11)   "Reuse organization" means an organization approved by the city to
provide salvage surveys and accept materials or items for reuse.
   (12)   "Salvage" means the controlled removal of items and material from a
building, construction, or demolition site for the purpose of on- or off-site
reuse, or storage for later reuse. Examples of items that may be salvaged
include air conditioning and heating systems, columns, balustrades, fountains,
gazebos, molding, mantels, pavers, planters, quoins, stair treads, trim, wall
caps, bath tubs, bricks, cabinetry, carpet, doors, ceiling fans, lighting
fixtures, electrical panel boxes, fencing, fireplaces, flooring materials of
wood, marble, stone or tile, furnaces, plate glass, wall mirrors, door knobs,
door brackets, door hinges, marble, iron work, metal balconies, structural
steel, plumbing fixtures, refrigerators, rock, roofing materials, siding
materials, sinks, stairs, stone, stoves, toilets, windows, wood fencing, lumber
and plywood.
   (13)   "Source separated single recyclable materials" means recyclable
materials that are separated from other recyclable materials or solid waste and
placed in separate containers according to type or category of materials and
directly marketed as a single commodity.
(Ord. 5472 § 2 (part), 2019)
5.24.030   Applicability.
   This chapter shall be applicable to all residential and commercial projects
that include a whole structure demolition requiring a demolition permit.
However, this chapter shall not apply to those projects comprised solely of the
demolition of an accessory dwelling unit, or to any project for which the
completed demolition permit application was submitted to the city prior to July
1, 2020.
(Ord. 5472 § 2 (part), 2019)
5.24.040   Salvage survey and reuse required.
   (a)   All applicants and other persons who undertake a covered project shall
complete a salvage survey provided by a reuse organization or other third party
approved by the city, prior to the issuance of a demolition permit. The survey
shall itemize the materials and items eligible for salvage and reuse and the
estimated weights.
   (b)   Upon completion of the deconstruction and source separation of
materials, the applicant or person responsible for the covered project shall
ensure the items listed on the salvage survey are delivered to, collected by or
received by, and certified by a reuse organization or other third party
approved by the city, and shall submit to the city proof of delivery of salvage
items in accordance with city regulations.
(Ord. 5472 § 2 (part), 2019)
5.24.050   Deconstruction and source separation of materials.
   (a)   All applicants and other persons who undertake a covered project where
materials can be recycled or composted shall deconstruct buildings and
structures in a manner to divert the maximum feasible amount of materials and
debris from disposal in landfills. All construction and deconstruction
materials shall be source separated. Materials to be source separated for
recycling include, but are not limited to, steel, glass, brick, concrete,
asphalt, roofing material, pipe, gypsum, sheetrock, lumber, wood, pallets,
rocks, sand, soil, clean cardboard, paper, plastic, carpet, wood and metal
scraps. Materials to be composted include, but are not limited to, trees,
shrubs, plant cuttings, food scraps, and other material as designated by the
city.
   (b)   All persons undertaking a covered project shall submit proof of reuse,
recycling and composting in accordance with city regulations.
   (c)   The city, or its collector at city's direction, shall be authorized to
inspect, upon reasonable notice, and audit individual waste streams generated
at covered projects to determine compliance with this section.
(Ord. 5472 § 2 (part), 2019)
5.24.060   Material collection.
   Projects using a container provided by the city's collector pursuant to the
provisions of Chapter
5.20 shall be deemed to have complied with the requirement to take construction
and deconstruction related waste and source separated materials to an approved
facility. Persons using any other method of collection shall dispose of such
debris at an approved facility in accordance with city regulations.
(Ord. 5472 § 2 (part), 2019)
5.24.070   No unauthorized containers.
   No person other than the city's collector may place containers within Palo
Alto.
(Ord. 5472 § 2 (part), 2019)
5.24.080   Exclusions.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following:
   (a)   Dangerous Structures. Any building or structure that has been
determined to be dangerous, structurally unsafe or otherwise hazardous to human
life, and is required to be abated by demolition.
   (b)   No Suitable Materials. Any building or structure that does not have
materials that are suitable for reuse, recycling, or compost, as determined by
the Director of Public Works. Materials unsuitable for reuse, recycling, or
compost include insulation, painted or treated wood, rubber, and non-recyclable
plastics.
   (c)   De Minimus Exception. The Director of Public Works may waive any of
the requirements of this chapter if documentation satisfactory to the director
is provided to establish that the materials are not reusable, recyclable or
compostable, the materials are incidental in quantity, or providing appropriate
containers at the particular site would be unduly difficult.
(Ord. 5472 § 2 (part), 2019)
5.24.090   Administration by City Manager.
   (a)   The City Manager shall adopt written rules and regulations, not
inconsistent with this chapter, as may be necessary for the proper
administration and enforcement of this chapter.
   (b)   The City Manager shall resolve all disputes concerning the
administration or enforcement of this chapter, and his or her decision shall be
final.
(Ord. 5472 § 2 (part), 2019)
5.24.100   Enforcement and penalties.
   (a)   The Director of Public Works shall have primary responsibility for
enforcement of this chapter. The Director of Public Works is authorized to take
any and all other actions reasonable and necessary to enforce this chapter.
   (b)   Violation of any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the
provisions and penalties set forth in Title
1 of the Municipal Code unless otherwise specified.
   (c)   The remedies and penalties provided in this section are cumulative and
not exclusive.
(Ord. 5472 § 2 (part), 2019)
Chapter 5.25
RESERVED*
*   Editor's Note: Former Chapter 5.25, Aerial Spraying of Pesticides,
previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance No. 3270 was
repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 4342.
Chapter 5.26
RESERVED*
*   Editor's Note: Former Chapter 5.26, Aerial Spraying of Pesticides Hearing
Process, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance No.
3270 was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 4342.
Chapter 5.30
DISPOSABLE FOODWARE ITEMS AND OTHER DISPOSABLE PRODUCTS
Sections:
   
5.30.010   Definitions.
   
5.30.020   Prohibitions on the use of plastic foam products and non-recyclable
plastic.
   
5.30.025   Limitation on the use of disposable foodware items and other
disposable products.
   
5.30.030   Exemptions.
   
5.30.040   Reserved.
   
5.30.050   Severability.
   
5.30.060   Enforcement and penalties.
   
5.30.070   Construction.
5.30.010   Definitions.
   (a)   "City Facilities" refers to any real property, building, structure or
vehicle owned or operated by the City of Palo Alto, its agents, departments and
franchises.
   (b)   "Compostable" means items deemed acceptable within the city's compost
collection program as determined by the Director of Public Works and identified
on the city's website.
   (c)   "Disposable" means items designed to be used once or a limited number
of times and then discarded, whether the item is non-recyclable, Recyclable or
Compostable.
   (d)   "Food Service Container" means a product used by Food Service
Establishments for serving or transporting prepared and ready-to-consume food
or beverages. This includes but is not limited to plates, cups, bowls, lids,
trays and hinged or lidded containers.
   (e)   "Food Service Establishment" means any establishment, located or
providing food within the City of Palo Alto, which provides prepared and ready
to consume food or beverages, for public consumption including but not limited
to any Retail Service Establishment, eating and drinking service (as defined in
Title
18), takeout service (as defined in Title
18), supermarket, delicatessen, restaurant, food vendor, sales outlet, shop,
cafeteria, catering truck or vehicle, cart or other sidewalk or outdoor vendor
or caterer which provides prepared and ready-to-consume food or beverages, for
public consumption, whether open to the general public or limited to certain
members of the public (i.e., company cafeteria for employees).
   (f)   "Foodware Item" means any item used or provided by Food Service
Establishments to serve or consume food or beverages. Foodware Items include
Food Service Containers, condiment cups and packets, straws, utensils (forks,
spoons, sporks, knives, chopsticks), drink stirrers, beverage spill plugs,
napkins, and other drink or food accoutrements.
   (g)   "Plastic Foam" means blown expanded and extruded plastic foams made
from polystyrene or other resins which are processed by any number of
techniques including, but not limited to, fusion of monomer spheres (expanded
bead plastic), injection molding, foam molding and extrusion-blown molding
(extruded foam plastic). Expanded polystyrene and other plastic foam resins are
generally used to make disposable cups, bowls, plates, trays, egg cartons,
clamshell containers, ice chests, shipping boxes and packing materials.
   (h)   "Plastic Foam Products" means Disposable Plastic Foam ice chests,
cups, bowls, plates, clamshells, shipping boxes containers, egg cartons,
packaging peanuts, packing blocks or other packaging materials that are not
wholly encapsulated or encased by a more durable material. Additional Plastic
Foam Products may be added by administrative regulation promulgated by the
Director of Public Works.
   (i)   "Prepared Food" means any food or beverage prepared for consumption
using any cooking, packaging, or food preparation technique, including but not
limited to cooking, chopping, slicing, mixing, freezing, squeezing, or brewing,
and which requires no further preparation to be consumed. Prepared food
includes uncooked fruits or vegetables, "take-out" food, or food prepared to be
consumed off the Food Service Establishment premises. Prepared Food does not
include any uncooked meat, fish or poultry.
   (j)   "Recyclable" means items deemed acceptable within the city’s recycling
collection program as determined by the Director of Public Works and identified
on the city’s website.
   (k)   "Retail Service Establishment" shall have the same meaning as Retail
Service as defined in Title 18 of this Code.
   (l)   "Reusable Foodware" means a Foodware Item made of durable materials
and designed to be used repeatedly with a useful life greater than one year.
(Ord. 5473 § 2 (part), 2019: Ord. 5371 § 2 (part), 2016: Ord. 5039 § 2 (part),
2009)
5.30.020   Prohibition on the use of expanded plastic foam products and non-
recyclable plastic.
   (a)   Except as provided by section
5.30.030, Food Service Establishments are prohibited from providing prepared
food in Disposable Food Service Containers made from Plastic Foam or other non-
recyclable plastic.
   (b)   Except as provided by Section
5.30.030, Retail Service Establishments are prohibited from selling, leasing or
otherwise providing Plastic Foam Products.
   (c)   "Condiment" means relishes, spices, sauces, confections, or seasonings
that require no additional preparation and that are usually used on a food item
after preparation, including ketchup, mustard, mayonnaise, soy sauce, hot
sauce, salsa, salt, pepper, sugar, and sugar substitutes.
   (d)   "Disposable" means items designed to be used once or a limited number
of times and then discarded, whether the item is non-recyclable, Recyclable or
Compostable.
   (e)   "Food Service Container" means a product used by Food Service
Establishments for serving or transporting prepared and ready-to-consume food
or beverages. This includes but is not limited to plates, cups, bowls, lids,
trays and hinged or lidded containers.
   (f)   "Food Service Establishment" means any establishment, located or
providing food within the City of Palo Alto, which provides prepared and ready
to consume food or beverages, for public consumption including but not limited
to any Retail Service Establishment, eating and drinking service (as defined in
Title 18), takeout service (as defined in Title 18), supermarket, delicatessen,
restaurant, food vendor, sales outlet, shop, cafeteria, catering truck or
vehicle, cart or other sidewalk or outdoor vendor or caterer which provides
prepared and ready-to-consume food or beverages, for public consumption,
whether open to the general public or limited to certain members of the public
(i.e., company cafeteria for employees). For the purpose of this ordinance
"Food Service Establishment" shall include all entities found in "Food
Facility" as listed in CA HSC Ch. 2 Section 113789(a).
   (g)   "Foodware Item" means any item used or provided by Food Service
Establishments to serve or consume food or beverages. Foodware Items include
Food Service Containers, condiment cups and packets, straws, utensils (forks,
spoons, sporks, knives, chopsticks), drink stirrers, beverage spill plugs,
napkins, and other drink or food accouterments.
   (h)   "Plastic Foam" means blown expanded and extruded plastic foams made
from polystyrene or other resins which are processed by any number of
techniques including, but not limited to, fusion of monomer spheres (expanded
bead plastic), injection molding, foam molding and extrusion-blown molding
(extruded foam plastic). Expanded polystyrene and other plastic foam resins are
generally used to make disposable cups, bowls, plates, trays, egg cartons,
clamshell containers, ice chests, shipping boxes and packing materials.
   (i)   "Plastic Foam Products" means Disposable Plastic Foam ice chests,
cups, bowls, plates, clamshells, shipping boxes containers, egg cartons,
packaging peanuts, packing blocks or other packaging materials that are not
wholly encapsulated or encased by a more durable material. Additional Plastic
Foam Products may be added by administrative regulation promulgated by the
Director of Public Works.
   (j)   "Prepared Food" means any food or beverage prepared for consumption
using any cooking, packaging, or food preparation technique, including but not
limited to cooking, chopping, slicing, mixing, freezing, squeezing, or brewing,
and which requires no further preparation to be consumed. Prepared food
includes uncooked fruits or vegetables, "take-out" food, or food prepared to be
consumed off the Food Service Establishment premises. Prepared Food does not
include any uncooked meat, fish or poultry.
   (k)   "Recyclable" means items deemed acceptable within the city’s recycling
collection program as determined by the Director of Public Works and identified
on the city’s website.
   (l)   "Retail Service Establishment" shall have the same meaning as Retail
Service as defined in Title 18 of this Code.
   (m)   "Reusable Foodware" means a Foodware Item made of durable materials
and designed to be used repeatedly with a useful life greater than one year.
   (n)   "Third-party food delivery platform" means a business engaged in the
service of online food ordering and delivery from a food service establishment
to a consumer.
(Ord. 5547 § 2, 2022: Ord. 5473 § 2 (part), 2019: Ord. 5371 § 2 (part), 2016:
Ord. 5039 § 2 (part), 2009)
5.30.025   Limitation on the use of Disposable Foodware Items and other
Disposable products.
   Effective January 1, 2020:
   (a)   Food Service Establishments are prohibited from providing the
following Disposable Foodware Items:
      1.   Plastic straws
      2.   Plastic utensils (e.g., forks, knives, spoons, sporks, chopsticks)
      3.   Plastic drink stirrers, drink plugs, and other drink accoutrements
such as novelty cocktail accessories
      4.   Plastic food picks and toothpicks
   (b)   Food Service Establishments, City Facilities, and vendors at City-
sponsored events shall provide the following Foodware Items only if they are
Reusable or Compostable:
      1.   Straws
      2.   Utensils (e.g., forks, knives, spoons, sporks, chopsticks)
      3.   Drink stirrers, drink plugs, and other drink accoutrements such as
novelty cocktail accessories
      4.   Food picks and toothpicks
   (c)   Food Service Establishments shall provide permitted Disposable
Foodware Items, other than Food Service Containers, only upon consumer request
or at a self-serve station.
   (d)   Food Service Establishments are prohibited from providing consumers
with wrapped bundled foodware and condiments.
      1.   Food Service Establishments may provide unwrapped disposable
foodware accessories by a single serve dispenser to a consumer using refillable
self-service dispensers that dispense one item at a time to allow for
disposable foodware accessories to be obtained.
      2.   Food Service Establishments may provide condiments to a consumer
using refillable self-service dispensers to allow for condiments to be
obtained.
   (e)   Third-party food delivery platforms are prohibited from providing
foodware and condiments unless the consumer selects or requests the items.
      1.   Consumers must have the option to opt-in to request disposable
foodware and condiments including the number of each unit identified on the
third-party food delivery platform application, food service establishment web
site, or any vendor website or app when picking-up food from a food service
establishment and delivering food to a consumer.
      2.   If a consumer does not select any disposable foodware accessories or
condiments, no disposable foodware accessory or condiment shall be provided by
the food service establishment or third-party vendor for delivery with ready-
to-eat food.
(Ord. 5547 § 3, 2022: Ord. 5473 § 2 (part), 2019)
5.30.030   Exemptions.
   (a)   The following exemptions shall apply:
   (i)   Foods prepared or packaged outside the City of Palo Alto are exempt
from the provisions of this Chapter. Purveyors of food prepared or packaged
outside the City of Palo Alto are encouraged to follow the provisions of this
Chapter.
   (ii)    The Director of Public Works may exempt a Food Service
Establishment, Retail Service Establishment or City Facility/vendor from the
requirements of this Chapter for a period of up to one year, if the applicant
for such exemption can demonstrate that the conditions of this Chapter would
cause an undue hardship. An "undue hardship" includes, but is not limited to
situations unique to the applicant where there are no reasonable alternatives
to Plastic Foam Products or non-recyclable plastic Disposable Food Service
Containers and compliance with this Chapter would cause significant economic
hardship to that applicant, or cause them to be deprived of a legally protected
right.
   (iii)   A Food Service Establishment, Retail Service Establishment or City
facility/vendor seeking an exemption application shall include all information
necessary for the City to make its decision, including but not limited to
documentation showing the factual support for the claimed exemption. The
Director may require the applicant to provide additional information to permit
the Director to determine facts regarding the exemption application. This
exemption does not apply to the requirements found in California Public
Resource Code Chapter 5.2 Single-Use Foodware Accessories and Condiments.
   (iv)   Emergency Supplies and Service Procurement. City facilities, Food
Service Establishments, Retail Service Establishments, City contractors and
vendors doing business with the City shall be exempt from the provisions of
this chapter, in a situation deemed by the City Manager to be an emergency for
the immediate preservation of the public peace, health or safety.
   (v)   Nothing in this Chapter shall restrict, or be construed to restrict,
the availability of single-use plastic straws to individuals who may require
and request the use of single-use plastic straws due to disability or other
medical or physical conditions or circumstances. It shall not be a violation of
this Chapter for any Food Service Establishment, City Facility or City-
sponsored event vendor to provide single-use plastic straws to such individuals
who request plastic straws.
   (vi)   The following facilities are not required to comply with the
provisions in this chapter.
      (1)   Health Care Facilities (patient rooms only).
      (2)   Residential Care Facilities.
(Ord. 5547 § 4, 2022: Ord. 5473 § 2 (part), 2019: Ord. 5371 § 2 (part), 2016:
Ord. 5039 § 2 (part), 2009)
5.30.040   Reserved.
5.30.050   Severability.
   If any provision or clause of this chapter is held to be unconstitutional or
otherwise invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall
not affect other provisions of this chapter, and clauses of this chapter are
declared to be severable.
(Ord. 5371 § 2 (part), 2016; Ord. 5039 § 2 (part), 2009)
5.30.060   Enforcement and penalties.
   (a)   The Director of Public Works shall have primary responsibility for
enforcement of this chapter. The Director of Public Works is authorized to
promulgate regulations and to take any and all other actions reasonable and
necessary to enforce this Chapter, including, but not limited to, entering the
premises of any Food Service Establishment to verify compliance and the types
of Recyclable and Compostable Foodware Items acceptable in the City’s
collection program.
   (b)   Anyone violating or failing to comply with any of the requirements of
this Chapter shall be guilty of an infraction as set forth in Chapter
1.08 of the Palo Alto Municipal Code.
   (c)   Anyone violating or failing to comply with any of the requirements of
this Chapter shall be subject to an administrative penalty or administrative
compliance order as set forth in Chapters
1.12 and
1.16 of the Palo Alto Municipal Code.
   (d)   The remedies and penalties provided in this Section are cumulative and
not exclusive.
(Ord. 5473 § 2 (part), 2019: Ord. 5371 § 2 (part), 2016: Ord. 5039 § 2 (part),
2009)
5.30.070   Construction.
   This Chapter is intended to be a proper exercise of the City's police power,
to operate only upon its own officers, agents, employees and facilities and
other persons acting within its boundaries, and not to regulate inter-city or
interstate commerce. It shall be construed in accordance with that intent.
(Ord. 5371 § 2 (part), 2016; Ord. 5039 § 2 (part), 2009)
Chapter 5.35
RETAIL AND FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT CHECKOUT BAG REQUIREMENTS
Sections:
   
5.35.010   Definitions.
   
5.35.020   Types of checkout bags permitted at retail service and food service
establishments.
   
5.35.030   Checkout bag charge for paper or reusable bags at retail service
establishments.
   
5.35.035   Use of Compostable Produce Bags at Retail Service Establishments.
   
5.35.040   Reserved.
   
5.35.050   Exemptions.
   
5.35.060   Severability.
   
5.35.070   Penalties.
5.35.010   Definitions.
   The following words and phrases, whenever used in this chapter, shall be
construed as defined in this section:
   (a)   "Checkout bag" means a bag that is provided by a retail establishment
at the checkstand, cash register, point of sale or other point of departure for
the purpose of transporting food or merchandise out of the establishment.
Checkout bags do not include produce or product bags as defined in this
chapter.
   (b)   "Compostable Produce Bags" means paper bags and bags made of plastic-
like material if the material meets the ASTM Standard Specifications for
compostability D6400 or D6868, or the product is Biodegradable Products
Institute (BPI) certified, or is considered acceptable within the City’s
compost collection program.
   (c)   "Food service establishment" means any establishment, located or
providing food within the city of Palo Alto, which provides prepared and ready-
to-consume food or beverages, for public consumption including but not limited
to any retail service establishment, eating and drinking service (as defined in
Title
18), takeout service (as defined in Title
18), supermarket, delicatessen, restaurant, food vendor, sales outlet, shop,
cafeteria, catering truck or vehicle, cart or other sidewalk or outdoor vendor
or caterer which provides prepared and ready-to-consume food or beverages, for
public consumption, whether open to the general public or limited to certain
members of the public (i.e., company cafeteria for employees).
   (d)   "Produce bag" means any bag without handles provided to a customer to
carry produce, meats, bulk food, or other food items to the point of sale
inside a store and protects food or merchandise from being damaged or
contaminated by other food or merchandise when items are placed together in a
Reusable bag or Recyclable Paper Checkout Bag.
   (e)   "Product Bag” means a bag provided to a customer to protect
merchandise from being damaged or contaminated by other merchandise when items
are placed together in a Reusable Bag or Recyclable Paper Checkout Bag; a bag
to hold prescription medication dispensed from a pharmacy; or a bag without
handles that is designed to be placed over articles of clothing on a hanger.
   (f)   "Recyclable paper checkout bag" means a paper bag that meets one of
the following criteria:
      i.   Pre-approved standard. A paper bag that meets all of the following
requirements:
         1.   Contains no old growth fiber;
         2.   Is 100% recyclable overall and contains a minimum of 40% post-
consumer recycled content;
         3.   Displays the word "Recyclable" on the outside of the bag; and
         4.   The manufacturer, the location (country) where manufactured and
the percentage of post-consumer recycled content in an easy-to-read size font.
      ii.   Alternative materials. The director of public works is authorized
to approve alternate materials or testing methods meeting this section's
requirements provided that the director finds that the proposed materials or
testing standards satisfactorily comply with the intent, quality and
effectiveness in order to meet the purposes of this chapter. The particulars of
any approval made by the Director under this subsection shall be entered upon
the records of the public works department and a signed copy shall be furnished
to the applicant.
      iii.   Alternative standard. Any other published uniform recyclable paper
bag standard as approved by the director of public works.
   (g)   "Retail service establishment" means any establishment providing
retail sale, rental, service, processing, or repair of items primarily intended
for consumer or household use, including but not limited to the following:
groceries, meat, vegetables, dairy products, baked goods, candy, and other food
products; liquor and bottled goods, household cleaning and maintenance
products; drugs, cards, and stationery, notions, books, tobacco products,
cosmetics, and specialty items; flowers, plants, hobby materials, toys,
household pets and supplies, and handcrafted items; apparel, jewelry, fabrics,
and like items; cameras, photography services, household electronic equipment,
records, sporting equipment, kitchen utensils, home furnishing and appliances,
art supplies and framing, arts and antiques, paint and wallpaper, carpeting and
floor covering, interior decorating services, office supplies, musical
instruments, hardware and homeware, and garden supplies; bicycles; mopeds and
automotive parts and accessories (excluding service and installation); cookie
shops, ice cream stores and delicatessens.
   (h)   "Reusable checkout bag" shall mean a bag with handles that is
specifically designed and manufactured for multiple reuse which can be washed
or wiped clean and meets all of the following criteria:
      i.   Bags with a capacity of 15 liters or greater must meet all of the
following requirements:
         1.   To confirm durability, bags must meet EcoLogo ATP-001 standards
(including future amendments or any successor legislation):
            a.   Capacity test - minimum of 15 liters.
            b.   Dynamic test - minimum of 5 sets of 300 cycles (1,500 cycles
total).
         2.   To confirm bag thickness of 2.25 mils thick or greater, bags will
be measured according to ASTM D6988-08 or ISO 4593:1993 or ISO 4591:1992
standards (for embossed film) (including future amendments or any successor
legislation).
         3.   To confirm the absence of heavy metals causing environmental
hazards upon entering the solid waste stream, state methods are to be used for
preparing and for testing samples of each unique bag component following the
Model Toxics in Packaging Legislation; and
         4.   Is either:
            a.   Labeled in an easy-to-read sized font with the name of the
manufacturer, the country of origin where manufactured, the material from which
it is manufactured, the percentage of post-consumer recycled content, and a
statement that the bag does not contain heavy metals; or
            b.   As an alternative, information about the manufacturer, the
country of origin where manufactured, the material from which the bag is
manufactured, the percentage of post-consumer recycled content, and a statement
that the bag does not contain heavy metals can be provided through the
reporting requirements set forth under Section
5.35.030(d).
      ii.   Reusable bags with a capacity of less than 15 liters must meet all
of the following requirements:
         1.   Is 2.25 mils thick or greater as measured according to ASTM
D6988-08 or ISO 4593:1993 or ISO 4591:1992 standards (for embossed film)
(including future amendments or any successor legislation).
         2.   To confirm the absence of heavy metals causing environmental
hazards upon entering the solid waste stream, state methods are to be used for
preparing and for testing samples of each unique bag component following the
Model Toxics in Packaging Legislation; and
         3.   Is either:
            a.   Labeled in an easy-to-read sized font with the name of the
manufacturer, the country of origin where manufactured, the material from which
it is manufactured, the percentage of post-consumer recycled content, and a
statement that the bag does not contain heavy metals; or
            b.   As an alternative, information about the manufacturer, the
country of origin where manufactured, the material from which the bag is
manufactured, the percentage of post-consumer recycled content, and a statement
that the bag does not contain heavy metals can be provided through the
reporting requirements set forth under Section
5.35.030(d).
      iii.   Alternative materials. The director of public works is authorized
to approve alternate materials or testing methods meeting this section's
requirements provided that the director finds that the proposed materials or
testing standards satisfactorily complies with the intent, quality and
effectiveness in order to meet the purposes of this chapter. The particulars of
any approval made by the director under this subsection shall be entered upon
the records of the Public Works Department and a signed copy shall be furnished
to the applicant.
      iv.   Alternative standard. Any other published uniform bag standard as
approved by the director of public works.
   (i)   "Single-use plastic checkout bag" means any bag made predominately of
plastic derived from natural gas, petroleum or a biologically-based source,
such as corn or other plant sources, which is provided to a customer at the
point of sale which does not meet the definition of a reusable checkout bag.
(Ord. 5473 § 2 (part), 2019: Ord. 5194 § 3 (part), 2013)
5.35.020   Types of checkout bags permitted at retail service and food service
establishments.
   (a)   Retail service establishments within the city of Palo Alto shall
provide or make available to a customer only reusable bags or recyclable paper
checkout bags for the purpose of carrying away goods or other materials from
the point of sale, subject to the terms of this chapter.
      i.   Single-use plastic bags exempt from the chapter include those
integral to the packaging of the product, product bags, newspaper bags, door-
hanger bags, or bags sold in packages containing multiple bags intended for use
as garbage, pet waste or yard waste bags.
      ii.   Food service establishments within retail stores must comply with
those requirements listed under Section
5.35.020(b) below.
      iii.   Effective January 1, 2020, farmers markets shall only provide
Compostable Produce Bags to hold produce, meats, bulk food or other food items.
Single-use Plastic Checkout Bags, Produce Bags or Product Bags shall not be
provided by farmers markets for produce or meats.
   (b)   Effective November 1, 2013, food service establishments shall provide
or make available to a customer only recyclable paper checkout bags or reusable
bags, at their discretion, for the purpose of carrying away goods or other
materials from the point of sale, subject to the terms of this chapter.
      i.   Produce or product bags without handles may be used at food service
establishments to hold containers of food items that are free liquids such as
soups or stews that might be susceptible to spilling.
   (c)   The city of Palo Alto encourages, but does not require in-store public
education and encouragement to customers about the use of reusable bags. In-
store education for retail service establishments and food service
establishments is available at www.cityofpaloalto.org/plastics.
   (d)   Nothing in this chapter prohibits customers from using bags of any
type that they bring to the establishment themselves or from carrying away
goods that are not placed in a bag at point of sale, in lieu of using bags
provided by the establishment.
   (e)   A retail service or food service establishment may provide a reusable
bag at no charge if it is distributed as part of an infrequent and limited time
promotion. Infrequent and limited time promotions shall not exceed a total of
14 days in any consecutive 12 month period.
(Ord. 5473 § 2 (part), 2019: Ord. 5194 § 3 (part), 2013)
5.35.030   Checkout bag charge for paper or reusable bags at retail service
establishments.
   (a)   Effective July 1, 2013, no retail service establishment shall provide
a recyclable paper checkout bag or reusable bag to a customer at the point of
sale, unless the store charges the customer a checkout bag charge of at least
ten cents ($0.10) per bag to cover the costs of compliance with the chapter,
the actual costs of providing recyclable paper bags, educational materials or
other costs of promoting the use of reusable bags.
   (b)   Retail service establishments shall establish a system for informing
the customer of the charge required under this section prior to completing the
transaction. This system can include store clerks inquiring whether customers
who do not present their own reusable bag at point of checkout want to purchase
a checkout bag.
   (c)   The checkout bag charge shall be separately stated on the receipt
provided to the customer at the time of sale and shall be identified as the
checkout bag charge. Any other transaction fee charged by the retail service in
relation to providing a checkout bag shall be identified separately from the
checkout bag charge. The checkout bag charge may be completely retained by the
retail service and used for public education and administrative enforcement
costs.
   (d)   Retail services establishments shall keep complete and accurate
records of the number and dollar amount collected from recyclable paper and
reusable checkout bags sold each month and provide specifications demonstrating
that paper and reusable bags meet the standards set forth in Section
5.35.020 using either the electronic or paper reporting format required by the
city. This information is required to be made available to city staff upon
request up to three times annually and must be provided within seven days of
request. Reporting false information, including information derived from
incomplete or inaccurate records or documents, shall be a violation of the
chapter. Records submitted to the city must be signed by a responsible agent or
officer of the establishment attesting that the information provided on the
form is accurate and complete.
(Ord. 5194 § 3 (part), 2013)
5.35.035   Use of Compostable Produce Bags at Retail Service Establishments.
   Effective January 1, 2020, Retail Service Establishments shall only provide
Compostable Produce Bags to carry produce, meats, bulk food, or other food
items to point-of-sale within the store.
(Ord. 5473 § 2 (part), 2019)
5.35.040   Reserved.
5.35.050   Exemptions.
   (a)   Undue hardship. The city manager, or his or her designee, may exempt a
retail service or food service establishment from the requirements of this
chapter for a period of up to one year, upon sufficient evidence by the
applicant that the provisions of this chapter would cause undue hardship. An
undue hardship request must be submitted in writing to the city. The phrase
"undue hardship" may include, but is not limited to, the following:
      i.   Situations where there are no acceptable alternatives to single-use
plastic checkout bags for reasons which are unique to the retail service or
food service establishment.
      ii.   Situations where compliance with the requirements of this chapter
would deprive a person of a legally protected right.
   (b)   Retail service establishments shall not enforce the ten cent ($0.10)
store charge for customers participating in the California Special Supplemental
Food Program for Women, Infants, and Children, or in CalFresh, or in the
Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP-formerly food stamps). This
provision will expire on June 30, 2014.
(Ord. 5194 § 3 (part), 2013)
5.35.060   Severability.
   If any provision or clause of this chapter is held to be unconstitutional or
otherwise invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall
not affect other provisions of this chapter, and clauses of this chapter are
declared to be severable.
(Ord. 5194 § 3 (part), 2013)
5.35.070   Penalties.
   (a)   Anyone violating or failing to comply with any of the requirements of
this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction as set forth in
Chapter 1.08 of the Palo Alto Municipal Code.
   (b)   Each violation of this chapter shall be considered a separate offense.
   (c)   The remedies and penalties provided in this section are cumulative and
not exclusive.
(Ord. 5194 § 3 (part), 2013)
Chapter 5.40
EDIBLE FOOD RECOVERY REQUIREMENTS
Sections:
   
5.40.010   Declaration of policy.
   
5.40.020   Definitions.
   
5.40.030   Requirements for commercial edible food generators.
   
5.40.040   Requirements for food recovery organizations and services.
   
5.40.050   Edible food recovery inspections and investigations by department or
designee.
   
5.40.060   Enforcement.
5.40.010   Declaration of policy.
   (a)   Pursuant to Senate Bill 1383, the Short-Lived Climate Pollutant
Reduction Act of 2016, the California Department of Resources Recycling and
Recovery (CalRecycle) developed regulations to reduce organics in landfills as
a source of methane. The regulations place new requirements on cities,
counties, residential households, businesses, waste haulers, and food recovery
organizations to support achievement of statewide organic waste disposal
reduction targets. The regulations are set forth in Title 14 of the California
Code of Regulations ("14 CCR").
   (b)   CalRecycle's regulations direct cities and counties to develop edible
food recovery programs and require certain businesses to arrange for the
donation of edible food that would otherwise go to waste. In addition to
targeting methane emissions, these programs will help address food insecurity
in California.
   (c)   Pursuant to 14 CCR Section 18981.2, jurisdictions may delegate certain
responsibilities for implementing, monitoring, and enforcing their edible food
recovery programs to public or private entities.
(Ord 5536 § 3 (part), 2021)
5.40.020   Definitions.
   The definitions set forth in this section shall govern the application and
interpretation of this chapter.
   (1)   "City" means the City of Palo Alto.
   (2)   "Department" means any department of the city, the County of Santa
Clara, or any other public agency designated by the city to enforce or
administer this chapter, as authorized in 14 CCR Section 18981.2. The city
manager or designee is authorized to administer and enforce the provisions of
this chapter on behalf of the city.
   (3)   "Designee" means any private entity that the city contracts with or
otherwise arranges to carry out any responsibilities of this chapter, as
authorized in 14 CCR Section 18981.2.
   (4)   "Edible food" means food intended for human consumption, or as
otherwise defined in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(18). For the purposes of this
chapter, "edible food" is not solid waste if it is recovered and not discarded.
Nothing in this chapter requires or authorizes the recovery of edible food that
does not meet the food safety requirements of the California Retail Food Code.
   (5)   "Food distributor" means a company that distributes food to entities
including, but not limited to, supermarkets and grocery stores, or as otherwise
defined in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(22).
   (6)   "Food facility" has the same meaning as in Section 113789 of the
Health and Safety Code.
   (7)   "Food recovery" means actions to collect and distribute food for human
consumption which otherwise would be disposed, or as otherwise defined in 14
CCR Section 18982(a)(24).
   (8)   "Food recovery organization" means an entity that engages in the
collection or receipt of edible food from commercial edible food generators and
distributes that edible food to the public for food recovery either directly or
through other entities. "Food recovery organization" includes, but is not
limited to:
   (i)   A food bank as defined in Section 113783 of the Health and Safety
Code;
   (ii)   A nonprofit charitable organization as defined in Section 113841 of
the Health and Safety Code; and,
   (iii)   A nonprofit charitable temporary food facility as defined in Section
113842 of the Health and Safety Code.
   A food recovery organization is not a commercial edible food generator for
the purposes of this chapter pursuant to 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(7).
   If the definition in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(25) for food recovery
organization differs from this definition, the definition in 14 CCR Section
18982(a)(25) shall apply to this chapter.
   (9)   "Food recovery service" means a person or entity that collects and
transports edible food from a commercial edible food generator to a food
recovery organization or other entities for food recovery, or as otherwise
defined in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(26). A food recovery service is not a
commercial edible food generator.
   (10)   "Food service provider" means an entity primarily engaged in
providing food services to institutional, governmental, commercial, or
industrial locations of others based on contractual arrangements with these
types of organizations, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(27).
   (11)   "Grocery store" means a store primarily engaged in the retail sale of
canned food; dry goods; fresh fruits and vegetables; fresh meats, fish, and
poultry; and any area that is not separately owned within the store where the
food is prepared and served, including a bakery, deli, and meat and seafood
departments, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(30).
   (12)   "Health facility" has the same meaning as in Section 1250 of the
Health and Safety Code.
   (13)   "Hotel" has the same meaning as in Section 17210 of the Business and
Professions code.
   (14)   "Inspection" means a department or designee's electronic or on-site
review of records, containers, and an entity's collection, handling, recycling,
or landfill disposal of organic waste or edible food handling to determine if
the entity is complying with requirements set forth in this chapter, or as
otherwise defined in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(35).
   (15)   "Large event" means an event, including, but not limited to, a
sporting event or a flea market, that charges an admission price, or is
operated by a local agency, and serves an average of more than 2,000
individuals per day of operation of the event, at a location that includes, but
is not limited to, a public, nonprofit, or privately owned park, parking lot,
golf course, street system, or other open space when being used for an event.
If the definition in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(38) differs from this definition,
the definition in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(38) shall apply to this chapter.
   (16)   "Large venue" means a permanent venue facility that annually seats or
serves an average of more than 2,000 individuals within the grounds of the
facility per day of operation of the venue facility. A venue facility includes,
but is not limited to, a public, non-profit, or privately owned or operated
stadium, amphitheater, arena, hall, amusement park, conference or civic center,
zoo, aquarium, airport, racetrack, horse track, performing arts center,
fairground, museum, theater, or other public attraction facility. A site under
common ownership or control that includes more than one large venue that is
contiguous with other large venues in the site, is a single large venue. If the
definition in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(39) differs from this definition, the
definition in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(39) shall apply to this chapter.
   (17)   "Local education agency" means a school district, charter school, or
county office of education that is not subject to the control of city or county
regulations related to solid waste, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR Section
18982(a)(40).
   (18)   "Non-local entity" means an entity that is an organic waste generator
but is not subject to the control of a jurisdiction's regulations related to
solid waste. These entities may include, but are not limited to, special
districts, federal facilities, prisons, facilities operated by the state parks
system, public universities, including community colleges, county fairgrounds,
and state agencies.
   (19)   "Restaurant" means an establishment primarily engaged in the retail
sale of food and drinks for on-premises or immediate consumption, or as
otherwise defined in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(64).
   (20)   "Share table" has the same meaning as in Section 114079 of the Health
and Safety Code.
   (21)   "Supermarket" means a full-line, self-service retail store with gross
annual sales of two million dollars ($2,000,000), or more, and which sells a
line of dry grocery, canned goods, or nonfood items and some perishable items,
or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(71).
   (22)   "Tier One commercial edible food generator" means the following:
   (i)   Supermarkets, as defined above.
   (ii)   Grocery stores, as defined above, with a total facility size equal to
or greater than 10,000 square feet.
   (iii)   Food service providers, as defined above.
   (iv)   Food distributors, as defined above.
   (v)   Wholesale food vendors, as defined below.
   If the definition in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(73) of Tier One commercial
edible food generator differs from this definition, the definition in 14 CCR
Section 18982(a)(73) shall apply to this chapter.
   For the purposes of this chapter, food recovery organizations and food
recovery services are not commercial edible food generators.
   (23)   "Tier Two commercial edible food generator" means the following:
   (i)   Restaurants, as defined above, with 250 or more seats or a total
facility size equal to or greater than 5,000 square feet.
   (ii)   Hotels, as defined above, with an on-site food facility and 200 or
more rooms.
   (iii)   Health facilities, as defined above, with an on-site food facility
and 100 or more beds.
   (iv)   Large venues, as defined above.
   (v)   Large events, as defined above.
   (vi)   State agencies with a cafeteria with 250 or more seats or total
cafeteria facility size equal to or greater than 5,000 square feet.
   (vii)   Local education agency facilities, as defined above, with on-site
food facilities, as defined above.
   If the definition in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(74) of Tier Two commercial
edible food generator differs from this definition, the definition in 14 CCR
Section 18982(a)(74) shall apply to this chapter. Non-local entities that
operate a facility that meets this definition are Tier Two commercial edible
food generators.
   For the purposes of this chapter, food recovery organizations and food
recovery services are not commercial edible food generators.
   (24)   "Wholesale food vendor" means a business or establishment engaged in
the merchant wholesale distribution of food, where food (including fruits and
vegetables) is received, shipped, stored, prepared for distribution to a
retailer, warehouse, distributor, or other destination, or as otherwise defined
in 14 CCR Section 189852(a)(76).
(Ord 5536 § 3 (part), 2021)
5.40.030   Requirements for commercial edible food generators.
   (a)   Tier One commercial edible food generators must comply with the
requirements of this section commencing January 1, 2022, and Tier Two
commercial edible food generators must comply commencing January 1, 2024,
pursuant to 14 CCR Section 18991.3.
   (b)   Large venue or large event operators not providing food services, but
allowing for food to be provided by others, shall require food facilities
operating at the large venue or large event to comply with the requirements of
this section, commencing January 1, 2024.
   (c)   Tier One and Tier Two commercial edible food generators shall comply
with the following requirements:
   (1)   Arrange to recover the maximum amount of edible food that would
otherwise be disposed.
   (2)   Contract with, or enter into a written agreement with food recovery
organizations or food recovery services for: (i) the collection of edible food
for food recovery; or, (ii) acceptance of the edible food that the commercial
edible food generator self-hauls to the food recovery organization for food
recovery.
   (3)   Shall not intentionally spoil edible food that is capable of being
recovered by a food recovery organization or a food recovery service.
   (4)   Allow the department or designee to access the premises, conduct
inspections, and review electronic and hard copy records pursuant to 14 CCR
Section 18991.4.
   (5)   Keep records that include the following information, or as otherwise
specified in 14 CCR Section 18991.4:
   (A)   A list of each food recovery service or organization that collects or
receives its edible food pursuant to a contract or written agreement
established under 14 CCR Section 18991.3(b).
   (B)   A copy of all contracts or written agreements established under 14 CCR
Section 18991.3(b).
   (C)   A record of the following information for each of those food recovery
services or food recovery organizations:
   (i)   The name, address and contact information of the food recovery service
or food recovery organization.
   (ii)   The types of food that will be collected by or self-hauled to the
food recovery service or food recovery organization.
   (iii)   The established frequency that food will be collected or self-
hauled.
   (iv)   The quantity of food, measured in pounds recovered per month,
collected or self-hauled to a food recovery service or food recovery
organization for food recovery.
   (d)   Tier One commercial edible food generators shall submit food recovery
reports, as defined below, to the department or designee according to the
following schedule:
   (1)   On or before August 1, 2022, Tier One commercial edible food
generators shall submit a food recovery report for the period of January 1,
2022 through June 30, 2022.
   (2)   On or before May 1, 2023, and on or before May 1st each year
thereafter, Tier One commercial edible food generators shall submit a food
recovery report for the period covering the entire previous calendar year.
   (e)   Tier Two commercial edible food generators shall submit food recovery
reports, as defined below, to the department or designee according to the
following schedule:
   (1)   On or before May 1, 2025, and on or before May 1st each year
thereafter, Tier Two commercial edible food generators shall submit a food
recovery report for the period covering the entire previous calendar year.
   (f)   Food recovery reports submitted by Tier One and Tier Two commercial
edible food generators shall include the following information:
   (1)   The name and address of the commercial edible food generator;
   (2)   The name of the person responsible for the commercial edible food
generator's edible food recovery program;
   (3)   A list of all contracted food recovery services or food recovery
organizations that collect edible food from the commercial edible food
generator;
   (4)   The total number of pounds of edible food, per year, donated through a
contracted food recovery organization or food recovery service.
   (g)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to limit or conflict with
the protections provided by the California Good Samaritan Food Donation Act of
2017, the Federal Good Samaritan Act, or share table and school food donation
guidance issued by the California Department of Education pursuant to Senate
Bill 557 (2017).
(Ord 5536 § 3 (part), 2021)
5.40.040   Requirements for food recovery organizations and services.
   (a)   Food recovery services collecting, receiving, or coordinating the
collection of edible food directly from Tier One or Tier Two commercial edible
food generators, via a contract or written agreement established under 14 CCR
Section 18991.3(b), shall maintain the following records, or as otherwise
specified by 14 CCR Section 18991.5(a)(1):
   (1)   The name, address, and contact information for each commercial edible
food generator from which the service collects edible food.
   (2)   The quantity in pounds of edible food collected from each commercial
edible food generator per month.
   (3)   The quantity in pounds of edible food transported to each food
recovery organization per month.
   (4)   The name, address, and contact information for each food recovery
organization that the food recovery service transports edible food to for food
recovery.
   (b)   Food recovery organizations collecting, receiving, or coordinating the
collection of edible food directly from Tier One or Tier Two commercial edible
food generators, via a contract or written agreement established under 14 CCR
Section 18991.3(b), shall maintain the following records, or as otherwise
specified by 14 CCR Section 18991.5(a)(2):
   (1)   The name, address, and contact information for each commercial edible
food generator from which the organization receives edible food.
   (2)   The quantity in pounds of edible food received from each commercial
edible food generator per month.
   (3)   The name, address, and contact information for each food recovery
service that the organization receives edible food from for food recovery.
   (c)   Food recovery organizations and food recovery services that have their
primary address physically located in the city and contract with or have
written agreements with one or more Tier One or Tier Two commercial edible food
generators pursuant to 14 CCR Section 18991.3(b) shall submit food recovery
reports, as defined below, to the department or designee according to the
following schedule:
   (1)   On or before August 1, 2022, food recovery organizations and food
recovery services shall submit a food recovery report for the period of January
1, 2022 through June 30, 2022;
   (2)   On or before May 1, 2023, and on or before May 1st each year
thereafter, food recovery organizations and food recovery services shall submit
a food recovery report for the period covering the entire previous calendar
year.
   (d)   Food recovery reports submitted by food recovery services or
organizations shall include the following information:
   (1)   Total pounds of edible food recovered in the previous calendar year
from Tier One and Tier Two edible food generators with whom the reporting
entity has a contract or written agreement with pursuant to 14 CCR Section
18991.3(b).
   (2)   Total pounds of edible food recovered in the previous calendar year
from the Tier One and Tier Two commercial edible food generators within Santa
Clara County with whom the reporting entity has a contract or written agreement
pursuant to 14 CCR Section 18991.3(b).
   (e)   In order to support edible food recovery capacity planning assessments
or other studies conducted by the County of Santa Clara, the city, or their
designees, food recovery services and food recovery organizations operating in
the city shall provide information and consultation to the city, department, or
designee, upon request, regarding existing, or proposed new or expanded, food
recovery capacity that could be accessed by the city and its Tier One and Tier
Two commercial edible food generators. A food recovery service or food recovery
organization contacted by the city, the department, or designee shall respond
to such request for information within 60 days, unless a shorter timeframe is
specified.
(Ord 5536 § 3 (part), 2021)
5.40.050   Edible food recovery inspections and investigations by department or
designee.
   (a)   The department and/or designee are authorized to conduct inspections
and investigations, at random or otherwise, of any collection container,
collection vehicle loads, or transfer, processing, or disposal facility for
materials collected from generators to confirm compliance with this chapter by
Tier One and Tier Two commercial edible food generators, food recovery
services, and food recovery organizations, subject to applicable laws. This
section does not allow the department or designee to enter the interior of a
private residential property for inspection.
   (b)   Regulated entities shall provide or arrange for access during all
inspections (with the exception of residential property interiors) and shall
cooperate with the department's or designee's employees during such inspections
and investigations. Such inspections and investigations may include in-person
or electronic review of edible food recovery activities, records, or any other
requirement of this chapter described herein. Failure to provide or arrange for
access to an entity's premises or access to records for any inspection or
investigation is a violation of this chapter and may result in penalties
described.
   (c)   Any records obtained by the department or designee during its
inspections, and other reviews shall be subject to the requirements and
applicable disclosure exemptions of the Public Records Act as set forth in
Government Code Section 6250 et seq.
   (d)   Representatives of the department and/or designee are authorized to
conduct any inspections, or other investigations as reasonably necessary to
further the goals of this chapter, subject to applicable laws.
   (e)   Department shall receive written complaints, including anonymous
complaints, regarding entities that may be in violation of this chapter.
Complaints shall include the name and contact information of the complainant,
if the complainant is not anonymous; the identity of the alleged violator, if
known; a description of the alleged violation including location(s) and all
other relevant facts known to the complainant; any relevant photographic or
documentary evidence to support the allegations in the complaint; and the
identity of any witnesses, if known.
(Ord 5536 § 3 (part), 2021)
5.40.060   Enforcement.
   (a)   Administrative Fine. Violation of any provision of this chapter shall
constitute grounds for issuance of a notice of violation and assessment of an
administrative fine by the department. Absent compliance by the respondent
within the deadline set forth in the notice of violation, the department shall
commence an action to impose penalties, via an administrative citation and
fine.
   (b)   Notice of Violation. Before assessing an administrative fine, the
department shall issue a notice of violation requiring compliance within 60
days of issuance of the notice. The notice shall include: (1) the name(s) of
each person or entity to whom it is directed, (2) a factual description of the
violations, including the regulatory section(s) being violated, (3) a
compliance date by which the respondent is to take specified action(s), and (4)
the penalty for not complying before the specified deadline.
   (c)   Extensions to Compliance Deadlines. The department may extend the
compliance deadlines set forth in a notice of violation if it finds that there
are extenuating circumstances beyond the control of the respondent that make
compliance within the deadlines impracticable, including the following:
   (1)   Acts of God such as earthquakes, wildfires, flooding, and other
emergencies or natural disasters;
   (2)   Delays in obtaining discretionary permits or other government agency
approvals;
   (3)   Deficiencies in edible food recovery capacity and the existence of a
corrective action plan imposed by CalRecycle pursuant to 14 CCR Section 18996.2
due to those deficiencies; or,
   (4)   Any other circumstance in which the department director, in their sole
discretion, finds good cause to extend the compliance deadlines.
   (d)   Administrative Citations. If the respondent fails to correct the
violation by the compliance date, the department shall issue an administrative
citation and fine. The citation shall include a description of the
administrative citation appeal process, including the designated hearing
officer, the time within which the administrative citation may be contested,
and instructions for requesting a hearing.
   (e)   Amount of Fine. The amount of the administrative fine for each
violation of this chapter shall be as follows:
   (1)   For a first violation, the amount of the base penalty shall be fifty
dollars ($50.00) to one hundred dollars ($100.00) per violation.
   (2)   For a second violation, the amount of the base penalty shall be one
hundred dollars ($100.00) to two hundred dollars ($200.00) per violation.
   (3)   For a third or subsequent violation, the amount of the base penalty
shall be two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) to five hundred dollars ($500.00)
per violation.
   (f)   Factors Considered in Determining Penalty Amount. The following
factors shall be used to determine the amount of the penalty for each violation
within the appropriate penalty range:
   (1)   The nature, circumstances, and severity of the violation(s).
   (2)   The violator's ability to pay.
   (3)   The willfulness of the violator's misconduct.
   (4)   Whether the violator took measures to avoid or mitigate violations of
this chapter.
   (5)   Evidence of any economic benefit resulting from the violation(s).
   (6)   The deterrent effect of the penalty on the violator.
   (7)   Whether the violation(s) were due to conditions outside the control of
the violator.
   (g)   Appeals. Persons receiving an administrative citation for an
uncorrected violation may request a hearing to appeal the citation. The city
will designate a hearing officer who shall conduct the hearing and issue a
final written order. The hearing officer may be a city official or another
public agency designated by the city. The hearing officer shall be identified
in the administrative citation. A hearing will be held only if it is requested
within 15 days from the date of the notice of the administrative citation.
   (h)   Other Remedies. Other remedies allowed by law may be used to enforce
this chapter, including civil action or criminal prosecution as misdemeanor or
infraction. The department and/or city may pursue civil actions in the
California courts to seek recovery of unpaid administrative citations. The
department and/or city may choose to delay court action until such time as
court action is a reasonable use of staff and resources.
   (i)   Education Period for Non-compliance. Beginning January 1, 2022, and
through December 31, 2023, the department and/or designee will conduct
inspections and compliance reviews. If the department and/or designee
determines that a Tier One commercial edible food generator, food recovery
organization, food recovery service, or other entity is not in compliance, it
shall provide educational materials to the entity describing its obligations
under this chapter and a notice that compliance is required. It shall also
provide notice that violations may be subject to administrative civil penalties
starting on January 1, 2024.
(Ord 5536 § 3 (part), 2021)
Title 6 ANIMALS
Chapters:
   
6.04   Definitions
   
6.08   Administration and Enforcement
   
6.12   Impoundment
   
6.16   Dogs
   
6.20   Care and Keeping of Animals
   
6.22   Reserved
   
6.24   Stables
   
6.28   Dangerous and Wild Animals
   
6.32   Diseased and Crippled Animals
   
6.36   Sale of Animals
Chapter 6.04
DEFINITIONS*
Sections:
   
6.04.010   Definitions generally.
   
6.04.020   Animal.
   
6.04.030   Animal center.
   
6.04.040   Animal control officer.
   
6.04.050   Bird.
   
6.04.060   Cat.
   
6.04.070   Dog.
   
6.04.080   Impounded.
   
6.04.090   Pet shop.
   
6.04.100   Superintendent.
   
6.04.110   Unlicensed dog.
   *   Editor's Note: This chapter was derived from prior code § 18.01, as
originally adopted by Ordinance No. 1278.
6.04.010   Definitions generally.
   For the purpose of this title, the following words and phrases are defined
and shall be construed as set out in this chapter unless it is apparent from
the context that a different meaning is intended. The present tense includes
the past and future tense; each gender includes the other. The singular number
includes the plural, and the plural the singular.
(Ord. 3257 § 1 (part), 1981: Ord. 2669 § 5 (part), 1972)
6.04.020   Animal.
   "Animal" means any animal, mammal, bird, reptile, fish, or any other dumb
creature or any live vertebrate creature other than a human being.
(Ord. 3983 § 2, 1990: Ord. 3257 § 1 (part), 1981: Ord. 2669 § 5 (part), 1972)
6.04.030   Animal center.
   "Animal center" means the animal services and placement center.
(Ord. 2669 § 5 (part), 1972)
6.04.040   Animal control officer.
   "Animal control officer" means the superintendent of animal services and any
employee of the city having custody and control of animal services and
placement center and of animals therein and whose duties relate to the
enforcement of the ordinances concerning animals.
(Ord. 3257 § 1 (part), 1981: Ord. 2669 § 5 (part), 1972)
6.04.050   Bird.
   "Bird" means any bird of any age of either sex, including any exotic or
domestic bird.
(Ord. 3983 § 3, 1990: Ord. 3257 § 1 (part), 1981)
6.04.060   Cat.
   "Cat" means any cat of any age of either sex.
(Ord. 3983 § 4, 1990: Ord. 3257 § 1 (part), 1981: Ord. 2669 § 5 (part), 1972)
6.04.070   Dog.
   "Dog" means any dog of any age of either sex.
(Ord. 3983 § 5, 1990: Ord. 3257 § 1 (part), 1981: Ord. 2669 § 5 (part), 1972)
6.04.080   Impounded.
   "Impounded" means having been received into the custody of the animal
center, animal control officer or any authorized agent or representative
thereof, or any police officer of the city.
(Ord. 3983 § 6, 1990: Ord. 3257 § 1 (part), 1981: Ord. 2669 § 5 (part), 1972)
6.04.090   Pet shop.
   "Pet shop" means any person, firm, or corporation operating an establishment
where live animals are kept for sale, for hire, or sold.
(Ord. 3983 § 7, 1990: Ord. 3257 § 1 (part), 1981: Ord. 2669 § 5 (part), 1972)
6.04.100   Superintendent.
   "Superintendent" means the superintendent of the animal services division or
any person authorized to act in his behalf.
(Ord. 3983 § 8, 1990: Ord. 3257 § 1 (part), 1981: Ord. 2669 § 5 (part), 1972)
6.04.110   Unlicensed dog.
   "Unlicensed dog" means any dog over the age of four months upon which the
current plate or tag provided for in this title is not attached.
(Ord. 3983 § 9, 1990: Ord. 3257 § 1 (part), 1981: Ord. 2669 § 5 (part), 1972)
Chapter 6.08
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Sections:
   
6.08.010   Animal center established.
   
6.08.020   Badge of animal control officer - Interference with animal control
officer.
   
6.08.030   Enforcement.
   
6.08.040   Authority to enter premises.
   
6.08.050   Impoundment duties.
6.08.010   Animal center established.
   An animal center, which shall be located at a place to be designated from
time to time by the city manager, is hereby authorized and established.
(Ord. 2669 § 6 (part), 1972: prior code § 18.02)
6.08.020   Badge of animal control officer - Interference with animal control
officer.
   (a)   Animal control officers appointed by the city manager shall possess,
while engaged in the discharge of their duties, badges plainly designating
their office; except, that when any police officers act as an animal control
officer his badge as police officer shall be sufficient.
   (b)   It is unlawful for any person to hinder, molest, resist or interfere
with the animal control officer in the performance of his official duties or to
physically attempt to release the animals in his custody.
(Ord. 3257 § 2 (part), 1981: Ord. 2669 § 6 (part), 1972: prior code § 18.03)
6.08.030   Enforcement.
   Upon the issuance of an animal control officer badge, the recipient thereof
shall be duly sworn in as a public officer or employee of the city, as
authorized by the Penal Code, and is charged with the duty of enforcing this
code and all ordinances of the city and the penal laws of the state relating to
the care, treatment or impounding of dumb animals or for the prevention of
cruelty thereto. Such recipient shall not be deemed to be a member of the
police department of the city but shall function under the direction and
supervision of the superintendent of the animal center.
(Ord. 3257 § 2 (part), 1981: Ord. 2669 § 6 (part), 1972: prior code § 18.04)
6.08.040   Authority to enter premises.
   For the purpose of discharging the duties imposed by Section
6.08.030, animal control officers and the police of the city are authorized and
directed to enter upon and inspect. in accordance with the procedures provided
by law, any premises upon which any animal is kept or harbored, and to demand
the person owning or having charge or control of the animal to exhibit such
animal and its license tag, rabies certificate, or permit if a license,
certificate, or permit is required by this title.
(Ord. 3257 § 2 (part), 1981: Ord. 2669 § 6 (part), 1972: prior code § 18.05)
6.08.050   Impoundment duties.
   It shall be the duty of animal control officers and of the police officers
of the city when the animal control officers are not on duty, to take up and
immediately deliver to the animal center those animals which are directed to be
taken up and impounded by this title or which are found or kept contrary to the
provisions of this title.
(Ord. 2669 § 6 (part), 1972: prior code § 18.06)
Chapter 6.12
IMPOUNDMENT
Sections:
   
6.12.010   Disposition of impounded animals.
   
6.12.020   Animal center fees.
   
6.12.025   Special impounding fees.
   
6.12.030   Reclaiming animals.
   
6.12.040   Records of impounded animals.
   
6.12.050   Injured animals.
6.12.010   Disposition of impounded animals.
   (a)   The superintendent shall hold any stray animal impounded under the
provisions of this title for a period of three days, not counting the first day
of impound, and during such period of time the superintendent shall attempt to
contact the owner of such animal, if known, by phone or mail. After the passage
of three days, the animal may be sold by the superintendent as follows:
   (1)   Sales shall be for cash, at a price established by the city manager.
   (2)   If any animal is not redeemed or sold, the superintendent may continue
to hold the animal for subsequent sale in accordance with the provisions
contained in this section, or order the destruction of the animal.
   (3)   No animal will be knowingly sold to any person, medical college or
university for purposes of animal experimentation.
   (4)   The superintendent of the animal center, or his designated appointee,
may refuse to sell any animal to any person or organization if, in his opinion,
the animal should not be sold to that person or organization.
   Standards to be used when determining refusal to sell are:
   (A)   Adopting party is intoxicated;
   (B)   Adopting party has inadequate facilities for keeping the animal;
   (C)   Adopting party would be in violation of any ordinance of the city or
state as a result of the adoption;
   (D)   Adopting party desires animal for breeding purposes;
   (E)   Adopting party desires the dog as a guard for a business;
   (F)   Adopting party has a history of animal control violations;
   (G)   Adopting party has past history of animal cruelty;
   (H)   Adopting party is suspected or known to be involved in fighting dogs
or other animals;
   (I)   Adopting party does not have the capacity to provide for the essential
needs of the animal.
   A wild animal which has been taken up by the animal center shall be deemed
not to be impounded unless there is reason to believe it has an owner. Such an
animal need not be retained for any minimum period of time, but may be released
in a park or wildlife area, where lawful, unless the animal is dangerous or
suffering excessively, in which case it may be forthwith humanely destroyed or
other disposition made.
   Any animal which is voluntarily surrendered to the animal center by the
owner need not be kept by the animal center for any minimum period of time.
   An animal impounded or otherwise taken into custody by the animal center
which has been certified by a licensed veterinarian to be diseased or injured
to the extent that emergency veterinary care will not alleviate intense
suffering shall be destroyed forthwith.
(Ord. 3257 § 3 (part), 1981: Ord. 2669 § 7 (part), 1972: Ord. 2394 (part),
1967: prior code § 18.15)
6.12.020   Animal center fees.
   The city shall charge and receive from the owner fees for services in
impounding animals as set forth in the municipal fee schedule.
(Ord. 2960 § 37, 1976: Ord 2937 § 1, 1976: Ord. 2863 § 5, 1975: Ord. 2669 § 7
(part), 1972: Ord. 2566 § 6, 1970: Ord. 2394, 1967: Ord. 1619, 1955: prior code
§ 18.17)
6.12.025   Special impounding fees.
   For any dogs found running at large in Foothills Nature Preserve, Byxbee
Park, or city-owned Baylands, and impounded by the city, the city shall charge
and receive from the owner fees for services in impounding animals as set forth
in the municipal fee schedule.
(Ord. 5518 § 2, 2021: Ord. 2960 § 38,1976: Ord. 2949 § 1, 1976)
6.12.030   Reclaiming animals.
   Any animal may be reclaimed by the owner or person entitled to its control
before the sale or other disposition thereof by paying all fees and charges
that have been incurred or accrued up to the time of reclamation. Any and all
fees may be waived by the superintendent of animal services if the owner of the
animal agrees to and does spay and/or neuter the animal in question; all
surgery fees will be collected in lieu of redemption fees. Nothing in this
section shall prevent the issuance of a citation or complaint for any violation
of law.
(Ord. 3257 § 3 (part), 1981: Ord. 2669 § 7 (part), 1972: prior code § 18.18)
6.12.040   Records of impounded animals.
   The superintendent shall keep a record of each animal impounded, the date of
receipt of such animal, the date and manner of its disposal, and, if redeemed,
reclaimed or sold, the name of the person by whom redeemed, reclaimed or
purchased, the address of such person, and the amounts of all fees received or
collected for or because of the impounding, reclaiming, or purchasing thereof,
together with the number of any tag, and the date of any license exhibited or
issued upon the redemption or sale of any such animal.
(Ord. 2669 § 7 (part), 1972: Ord. 1278 § 18.19)
6.12.050   Injured animals.
   It shall be the duty of all officers of the animal center and for police
officers to deliver all sick and injured cats and dogs found in a public place
without their owners to a veterinarian known by such officer or agency to be a
veterinarian that ordinarily treats dogs and cats for a determination of
whether the animal shall be immediately and humanely destroyed or shall be
hospitalized under proper care and given emergency treatment. Upon return to
the animal center it shall be the duty of the superintendent to ensure that
prescribable treatment will be continued until the animal is either redeemed by
its owner or is euthanised. The duty created pursuant to this section shall not
be considered as a mandatory duty for purposes of the California Torts Claim
Act.
(Ord 3257 § 3 (part), 1981)
Chapter 6.16
DOGS*
Sections:
   
6.16.010   License and tag.
   
6.16.020   Application, term, form, transferability.
   
6.16.030   License fee, late fee.
   
6.16.040   Tag specifications - Records.
   
6.16.050   Failure to comply - Impoundment.
   
6.16.060   Duplicate tags.
   
6.16.070   Receipt upon redemption.
   
6.16.080   Number of dogs and female dogs allowed.
   
6.16.090   Transfer of ownership or possession - Notice required.
   
6.16.100   Leash required.
   
6.16.101   Veterinarian responsibilities.
   
6.16.102   Private property.
   
6.16.105   Juvenile citation.
   
6.16.110   Penalty.
   *   Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history: Prior code §§ 18.20 - 18.31, as
originally adopted by Ordinance No. 1278, and as amended by Ordinance No. 1693,
June 25, 1956 and Ordinance No. 2078, June 11, 1962. Amendment also effected by
Initiative Ordinance No. 1616, May 10, 1955 [See § 6.16.100].
6.16.010   License and tag.
   No person shall keep or cause to be kept any dog that is over the age of
four months within the city for more than ten days unless the dog is licensed
as provided in this title and has around its neck a collar to which is attached
a plate or tag as provided by this title.
(Ord. 2601 § 1, 1971: Ord. 2395 § 1 (part), 1967)
6.16.020   Application, term, form, transferability.
   (a)   Application for a dog license shall be made to the city treasurer or
his designated representative on the form provided by such officer and shall be
accompanied by a certificate of anti-rabies vaccination for the dog to be
licensed.
   (b)   The term of any dog license issued under this chapter commences on the
date of the issuance of the license and terminates on or before the expiration
date of the certificate of anti-rabies vaccination accompanying the application
for the dog license.
   (c)   All dog licenses issued under this chapter shall be numbered and shall
be in such form as provided by the city treasurer.
   (d)   Upon approval of the application, payment of the applicable license
fee, and payment of any applicable late fee, the city treasurer or his
designated representative shall issue the dog license in the name of the owner
or possessor of the dog to be licensed. Such license shall not be transferable
to another owner or possessor and shall not be valid for another dog.
(Ord. 2650 § 1, 1972: Ord. 2601 § 2, 1971: Ord. 2566 § 7, 1970: Ord. 2395 § 1
(part), 1967)
6.16.030   License fee, late fee.
   (a)   The fee for a dog license issued under this chapter, except as
provided in subsections (b), (c) and (d) below, shall be as set forth in the
municipal fee schedule.
   (b)   The license fee for spayed female dogs and neutered male dogs shall be
one-half of the fee listed in the municipal schedule for subsection (a).
   (c)   No person having impaired hearing or eyesight shall be required to pay
any license fee for any dog specially trained and principally used for the
purpose of leading or guiding such person.
   (d)   Licenses for police dogs as defined in Section
6.20.180 of the Palo Alto Municipal Code shall be issued without charge.
   (e)   If a person fails to obtain a dog license within ten days after
service of a written notice on him that such license is required, or thirty
days after the expiration of a dog license or ten days after acquiring a dog or
moving into the city limits with a dog, then a late fee as set forth in the
municipal fee schedule shall be charged in addition to the applicable license
fee.
(Ord. 3826 § 1, 1988: Ord. 3257 § 4 (part), 1981: Ord. 2960 § 39, 1976: Ord
2937 § 2, 1976: Ord. 2863 § 6, 1975: Ord. 2669 § 8, 1972: Ord. 2650 § 2, 1972:
Ord. 2601 § 3, 1971: Ord. 2395 § 1 (part), 1967)
6.16.040   Tag specifications - Records.
   A plate or tag with an identification number inscribed thereon shall be
furnished to the owner or possessor of the dog to be licensed with each initial
dog license. Such identification number shall not be transferable to another
dog. The superintendent shall keep a record of identification numbers, licenses
issued, a general description of each dog for which an identification number
and license are issued, and the name, address and telephone number of the owner
or possessor of each dog for which an identification number and license are
issued. It shall be the responsibility of every dog owner to ensure that the
superintendent of the animal center has on file the current address and
telephone number for any licensed dog.
(Ord. 3257 § 4 (part), 1981: Ord. 2669 § 9, 1972: Ord. 2601 § 4, 1971: Ord.
2395 § 1 (part), 1967)
6.16.050   Failure to comply - Impoundment.
   Every dog not wearing a collar to which is attached a valid plate or tag
provided under this title, found or being within the city, shall be taken by an
animal control officer or the police and impounded in the animal center where
it may be redeemed by the owner or person entitled to its possession within
three days after impounding on payment to the city of all accrued charges and
costs. If not redeemed, such dog shall be destroyed by the superintendent;
provided, however, that the superintendent is authorized to keep valuable dogs
and sell them, and his receipt for the sale thereof shall be a valid title to
the purchaser.
   Any dog which has been within the city for ten days or less and which is
held continuously under a leash not more than six feet in length by an able-
bodied person or confined within a vehicle shall not be taken by an animal
control officer or the police and impounded in the animal center.
(Ord. 3257 § 4 (part), 1981: Ord. 2669 § 10, 1972: Ord. 2601 § 6, 1971: Ord.
2395 § 1 (part), 1967)
6.16.060   Duplicate tags.
   Whenever any plate or tag as provided in this chapter is lost or stolen, the
city treasurer may issue a duplicate upon application therefor and upon the
payment of a fee as set forth in the municipal fee schedule and the filing of
an affidavit by the owner or possessor of said dog to the effect that such tag
or plate was lost or stolen.
(Ord. 2960 § 40, 1976: Ord. 2395 § 1 (part), 1967)
6.16.070   Receipt upon redemption.
   Whenever a dog is redeemed, the party redeeming must execute a receipt for
the dog. If a license fee has not been paid for the then-current year for any
impounded dog, the party redeeming must, before redemption, pay in advance all
charges for rabies vaccination and will receive a citation or notice to comply
with the licensing ordinance within ten days.
(Ord. 3257 § 4 (part), 1981: Ord. 2669 § 11, 1972: Ord. 2601 § 6, 1971: Ord.
2395 § 1 (part), 1967)
6.16.080   Number of dogs and female dogs allowed.
   (a)   No person shall keep or maintain more than three dogs at any street
address within the city unless the person, family, or group of persons keeping
or maintaining such dogs is operating a bona fide animal clinic or hospital or
a duly licensed pet shop, dog kennel, circus, carnival, traveling show,
menagerie, or dog exhibition at such street address.
   (b)   No person shall keep or maintain more than one unspayed female dog at
any street address within the city unless the person, family, or group of
persons keeping or maintaining such dogs is operating a bona fide animal
hospital or a duly licensed pet shop, dog kennel, circus, carnival, traveling
show, menagerie, or dog exhibition at such street address.
(Ord. 4453 § 35, 1997: Ord. 3257 § 4 (part), 1981: Ord. 2601 § 7, 1971: Ord.
2395 § 1 (part), 1967)
6.16.090   Transfer of ownership or possession - Notice required.
   Each owner or operator of any dog kennel, animal hospital or pet shop, and
any person engaged in the business of breeding dogs or as a veterinarian who
sells, gives away or in any manner causes the ownership or permanent possession
of any dog, whether over four months of age or not, to be transferred to any
person, shall notify the superintendent in writing of that fact within five
days after the date of such sale or transfer. Such notice shall state the kind
of dog, the name of the dog, if any, and the name and address of the person to
whom the dog has been sold or transferred.
(Ord. 2669 § 12, 1972: Ord. 2601 § 8, 1971: Ord. 2395 § 1 (part), 1967)
6.16.100   Leash required.*
   No person owning or harboring any dog shall allow or permit such dog,
whether licensed or not, to be upon a public street, sidewalk, park, school
ground, public place or upon any unenclosed lot or land except when held under
leash by an able-bodied person. Violation of this section shall be an
infraction.
(Ord. 4453 § 34, 1997: Ord. 2395 § 1 (part), 1967)
   *   Editor's Note: This section was originally adopted by Initiative
Ordinance No. 1616, May 10, 1955.
6.16.101   Veterinarian responsibilities.
   Every licensed veterinarian in the city who vaccinates or causes or directs
to be vaccinated any dog, residing in the city, with anti-rabies vaccine shall
certify that such animal has been vaccinated. Every veterinarian shall submit
to Palo Alto Animal Services as the licensing authority, a copy of the anti-
rabies vaccination certificate, within ten days of the beginning of each month,
for any dog which he/she vaccinates or directs to be vaccinated with the anti-
rabies vaccine during the previous month. An animal control officer or
superintendent of animal services or designee shall have the right to inspect
records of rabies vaccinations during the veterinarian's normal business hours.
(Ord. 5248 § 2, 2014)
6.16.102   Private property.
   An animal control officer shall not seize or impound a dog for violation of
an ordinance requiring a dog to be leashed or issue citations for violation of
such ordinance when the dog has not strayed from and is upon private property
owned by the dog owner or the person who has a right to control the dog, or
upon private property to which the dog owner or person who has a right to
control the dog has a right of possession. A dog that has strayed from but then
returned to the private property of his owner or the person who has a right to
control the dog shall not be seized or impounded, but in such a case, a
citation may be issued; provided, however, that if in such a situation the
owner or person who has a right to control the dog is not home, the dog may be
impounded. The animal control officer shall post a notice of such impounding on
the front door of the living unit of the owner or person who has a right to
control the dog. Such notice shall state the following: that the dog has been
impounded, where the dog is being held, the name, address, and telephone number
of the agency or person to be contacted regarding release of the dog, and an
indication of the ultimate disposition of the dog if no action to regain it is
taken within a specified period of time by its owner or by the person who has a
right to control the dog.
(Ord. 3257 § 4 (part), 1981)
6.16.105   Juvenile citation.
   A juvenile citation may be issued to any person under eighteen years of age
for violations of the ordinances codified in this chapter. A juvenile hearing
shall result from issuance of a juvenile citation, requiring an appearance with
one parent before the superintendent of the animal center. Failure to appear
may result in citation being referred to the Palo Alto police juvenile bureau
and/or the Santa Clara County juvenile probation department.
(Ord. 3257 § 4 (part), 1981)
6.16.110   Penalty.
   It is unlawful and constitutes an infraction for any person to violate, or
fail to comply with any provision of this chapter.
(Ord. 2770 § 2, 1974)
Chapter 6.20
CARE AND KEEPING OF ANIMALS
Sections:
   
6.20.010   Animals at large.
   
6.20.020   Animals on unenclosed premises.
   
6.20.030   Animals kept in enclosures.
   
6.20.035   Tying animals to bicycle racks or trees.
   
6.20.040   Nuisances by animals.
   
6.20.045   Dog defecation to be removed by owners.
   
6.20.050   Right to take possession of neglected animals.
   
6.20.055   Animals in Vehicles.
   
6.20.060   Bees.
   
6.20.070   Reserved.
   
6.20.080   Permit required to keep livestock.
   
6.20.090   Birds, goats, pigs and rabbits.
   
6.20.100   Penalty.
   
6.20.110   Number of cats.
   
6.20.120   Breeding permit required.
   
6.20.130   Animal at large while in heat - Prohibited.
   
6.20.140   Barking dogs.
   
6.20.150   Vaccination - Rabies.
   
6.20.160   Sanitary enclosures.
   
6.20.170   Slaughter of animals.
   
6.20.180   Reserved.
   
6.20.190   Reserved.
6.20.010   Animals at large.
   No person owning or having possession, charge, custody, or control of any
animal, except cats, shall cause, permit or allow the animal to stray, run, or
in any other manner to be at large in or upon any public street, sidewalk, park
or schoolground, or upon any unenclosed lot or land.
(Ord. 2396, 1967: prior code § 18.07)
6.20.020   Animals on unenclosed premises.
   No person shall stake out, herd or graze any animal upon any unenclosed lot
or land in any manner so that the animal may be or go beyond the boundary of
such lot or land. No person shall stake or tie, or leave staked or tied, within
one hundred feet of an inhabited or uninhabited residence, any horse, cow,
sheep, pig, mule, llama or goat in an open lot, without the written consent of
the owner or occupant of such residence.
(Ord. 3983 § 10, 1990: Ord. 3257 § 5 (part), 1981: prior code § 18.08)
6.20.030   Animals kept in enclosures.
   Every person who keeps horses, cows, sheep, pigs, mules, llamas and goats
within the city, when not in use, shall keep them in secure enclosures aat all
times.
(Ord. 4453 § 37, 1997: Ord. 3983 § 11, 1990: Ord. 3257 § 5 (part), 1981: prior
code § 18.11)
6.20.035   Tying animals to bicycle racks or trees.
   No person shall tie any animal to any city bicycle rack, or any shrub or
tree growing upon or along any of the sidewalks or streets of the city.
(Prior code § 18.12)
6.20.040   Nuisances by animals.
   It is unlawful for the owner or person having custody of any dog or other
animal to permit, either wilfully or through failure to exercise due care or
control, any such dog or animal to commit any act constituting a nuisance as
defined under Part Three of Division 4 of the California Civil Code and as such
part may hereafter be amended, upon the sidewalk of any public street; or upon
any walkway, path, grass or play area of any park or school; or upon the floor
of any common hall in any apartment house, condominium complex, or any other
community housing project, hotel or other multiple dwelling, or upon any
entranceway, stairway or wall immediately abutting on a public sidewalk, or
upon the floor of any theater, shop, store, office building or other building
used in common by the public; or upon the floor or stairway of any depot or
station or public waiting room; or upon any floor, stairway, entranceway,
office lobby, foyer, patio or any other area used in common by the public.
(Ord. 3983 § 13, 1990: Ord. 2770 § 3, 1974: prior code § 18.13)
6.20.045   Dog defecation to be removed by owners.
   (a)   It is unlawful for any person owning or having control or custody of
any dog to permit the animal to defecate upon the public property of this city
or upon the private property of another unless the person immediately removes
the feces and properly disposes of it.
   (b)   It is unlawful for any person to walk a dog on public property of this
city or upon the private property of another without carrying, at all times, a
suitable container or other suitable instrument for the removal and disposal of
dog feces.
   (c)   Visually disabled persons who use seeing-eye guide dogs are exempt
from this section.
   (d)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this code, every violation of
any of the provisions of this section shall be an infraction punishable as
follows:
   (1)   Upon a first conviction, by a fine not exceeding twenty-five dollars;
   (2)   For a second conviction within a period of one year by a fine not
exceeding fifty dollars;
   (3)   For a third or any subsequent conviction within a period of one year
by a fine not exceeding one hundred twenty-five dollars.
(Ord. 3719 § 2, 1986)
6.20.050   Right to take possession of neglected animals.
   Whenever animals are kept within any building or on any premises without
food, water, or proper care and attention, the animal control officers and the
police of the city may enter the building or premises to take possession of and
remove the animals so abandoned or neglected in accordance with the procedures
provided by law.
(Ord. 3257 § 5 (part), 1981: Ord. 2910 § 1, 1976: Ord. 2669 § 13, 1972: prior
code § 18.14)
6.20.055   Animals in Vehicles.
   (a)   It is unlawful for any person to leave any dog or other animal in an
unattended motor vehicle without adequate ventilation or in such a manner as to
subject the animal to extreme temperatures that may adversely affect the health
or well being of the animal.
   (b)   In the event that any animal is confined in a vehicle in violation of
subsection (a), or in a manner giving an animal control officer or police
officer reasonable cause to believe that the animal is confined in violation of
subsection (a), the officer shall have the power to enter the vehicle to
release the animal. The city shall not be liable for any damages resulting from
the use of such reasonable force.
   (c)   Violation of this section shall be a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 4866 § 2, 2005)
6.20.060   Bees.
   (a)   Except in the agricultural zone or open space declared area, no person
shall keep or maintain in the city any hive of bees without the written consent
of the adjacent neighbors who reside there, whether owners or tenants. Any
person who keeps or maintains any hive of bees shall also comply with the
following conditions:
   (1)   Except in the agricultural zone or the open space declared area, no
more than two hives can be maintained on any one lot or parcel of land.
   (2)   No hive shall be kept or maintained within twenty-five feet of any
property line of the lot or parcel of land upon which it is situated.
   (3)   "Front property line," for the purpose of subsection (a)(2) of this
section, is defined as the sidewalk boundary farthest from the street.
(Ord. 3983 § 14, 1990: Ord. 1857 (part), 1959: prior code § 18.43)
6.20.070   Reserved.
   (Repealed by Ord. 4453 § 42, 1997)
6.20.080   Permit required to keep livestock.
   No person shall keep any horse, cow, goat, sheep. chicken, duck, quail,
pheasant, turkey, llama, mule or pig within the city limits, except in the
agricultural zone or open space declared area, without first securing a permit
therefor from the superintendent of the animal center. The fee for this permit
shall be as set forth in the municipal fee schedule.
(Ord. 3983 § 16, 1990: Ord. 3257 § 5 (part), 1981: prior code § 18.46)
6.20.090   Birds, goats, pigs and rabbits.
   (a)   No person or persons, firm or corporation shall keep or maintain or
cause to be kept or maintained within the city any bird, goat, pig, or rabbit
except under the following conditions:
   (1)   Such animals shall under no circumstances be permitted to run at large
off of the owner's property and shall be confined within a suitable house or
coop after sundown.
   (2)   Such house or coop, any runway and any other area where such animals
roam shall at all times be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition, shall
be cleaned once a week or more often if necessary and shall at all times be
free from offensive odors and flies.
   (3)   Such house or coop shall be well lime-washed or painted once a year,
or more often if necessary.
   (4)   No part of any such house, coop or runway shall be less than twenty-
five feet from any dwelling or place of business occupied by human beings for
dwelling or business purposes without written consent of the occupant of such
dwelling or place of business.
   (5)   No person shall keep or maintain any house, coop or runway within
twenty-five feet of any property line of the lot or parcel of land upon which
it is situated without the unanimous written consent of the adjacent neighbors
who reside there, whether owners or tenants.
   (6)   No person shall keep or maintain in the city, except in the
agricultural zone or open space declared area, more than six mature birds or
rabbits without the unanimous written consent of the adjacent neighbors who
reside there, whether owners or tenants.
   (7)   No person shall raise, keep or have in his possession in the city,
except in the agricultural zone or open space declared area, any live rooster,
goose, peacock or guinea hen over the age of a baby chick or gosling, or any
other bird which because of its size, natural disposition, or any other
characteristic constitutes a hazard or menace to persons or disturbs the peace.
   (8)   No person shall keep or maintain in the city, except in the
agricultural zone or open space declared area, more than two adult goats or
pigs. However, no adult male goat shall be kept or maintained unless neutered.
(Ord. 3983 § 17, 1990: Ord. 3257 § 5 (part), 1981: prior code § 18.55)
6.20.100   Penalty.
   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it is unlawful and constitutes
an infraction for any person to violate, or fail to comply with any provision
of this chapter.
(Ord. 4453 § 38, 1997: Ord. 2770 § 4, 1974)
6.20.110   Number of cats.
   (a)   No person shall keep or maintain more than three cats at any street
address within the city unless the person, family or group of persons keeping
or maintaining such cats is operating a bona fide animal clinic or hospital or
a duly licensed pet shop, cat kennel, circus, carnival, traveling show,
menagerie, or cat exhibition at such street address.
   (b)   No person shall keep or maintain more than one unspayed female cat at
any street address within the city unless the person, family, or group of
persons keeping or maintaining such cats is operating a bona fide animal
hospital or a duly licensed pet shop, cat kennel, circus, carnival, traveling
show, menagerie, or cat exhibition at such street address.
(Ord. 4453 § 40, 1997: Ord. 3257 § 5 (part), 1981)
6.20.120   Breeding permit required.
   Any person owning or having control, custody, charge or possession of any
cat, dog or bird for breeding purposes shall secure a breeding permit from the
superintendent of the animal shelter. The fee for such permit shall be as set
forth in the municipal fee schedule. A cat, dog or bird shall be deemed to be
used for breeding purposes if more than one litter per year is raised per
permit holder.
(Ord. 3983 § 18, 1990: Ord. 3257 § 5 (part), 1981)
6.20.130   Animal at large while in heat - Prohibited.
   It is unlawful for the owner or person having possession, charge, custody or
control of any female dog or cat to cause or permit or allow the same to stray
or run or in any other manner to be at large upon any public street, lane,
alley, court or other public place in the city while such female cat or dog is
in heat.
(Ord. 3257 § 5 (part), 1981)
6.20.140   Barking dogs.
   It is unlawful for any person to keep, maintain, or permit in or upon any
premises within the city any barking dog that is under the control of that
person. "Barking dog" means a dog that barks, bays, cries, howls or makes any
other noise continuously and incessantly for a period of ten minutes within a
fifteen-minute period to the disturbance of any other person. The issuance of a
citation shall be within the discretion of the animal control officer or other
enforcement person.
   Nothing in this section shall require or prevent the utilization of nuisance
abatement procedures for abatement of the nuisance created by such barking dog.
(Ord. 3257 § 5 (part), 1981)
6.20.150   Vaccination - Rabies.
   Every owner of a dog over four months of age shall cause such dog to be
vaccinated with an anti-rabies vaccine approved by the state department of
public health. Revaccination shall be made at such intervals of time as may be
prescribed by the State Department of Public Health.
   Any animal may be exempted from the rabies vaccination requirement upon
approval of the superintendent of the animal center, and upon presentation of
an affidavit from a licensed veterinarian stating that, in the opinion of such
veterinarian, the vaccination would be injurious to the health and well-being
of such animal.
(Ord. 3257 § 5 (part), 1981)
6.20.160   Sanitary enclosures.
   All animals and all premises, enclosures or structures wherein animals are
kept shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary and secure condition, free
from all obnoxious odors and substances. All animals and all premises,
enclosures or structures wherein animals are kept shall be thoroughly cleaned,
and all debris, refuse, manure, urine, waste food, or other removable material
shall be removed therefrom every day or more often as necessary.
(Ord. 3983 § 19, 1990: Ord. 3257 § 5 (part), 1981)
6.20.170   Slaughter of animals.
   (a)   It is unlawful for any person, by any means, to slaughter any dog,
cat, sheep, goat, pig, cow, horse, deer, raccoon, coyote, mountain lion, llama,
mule, squirrel or opossum within the city.
   (b)   This section shall not apply to the act of putting to death any such
animal by the discharge of firearm by a sworn peace officer if the animal is
dangerous or is so badly injured that humanity requires its removal from
further suffering and no other disposition is practical.
   (c)   This section shall not apply to the act of putting to death any such
animal by a licensed veterinarian, an animal health technician or an
unregistered assistant at the direction and under the supervision of a licensed
veterinarian, or the administering of sodium pentobarbitol for euthanasia of
sick, injured, homeless, or unwanted domestic pets or animals by an employee of
a public pound or humane society who has received proper training in the
administration of sodium pentobarbitol for such purposes.
   (d)   Violation of this section shall be a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 4453 § 39, 1997: Ord. 3983 § 20, 1990: Ord. 3257 § 5 (part), 1981)
6.20.180   Reserved.
   (Repealed by Ord. 4453 § 41 (part), 1997)
6.20.190   Reserved.
   (Repealed by Ord. 4453 § 41 (part), 1997)
Chapter 6.22
RESERVED*
*   Editor's Note: Chapter 6.22, Pet Shops, previously codified herein, was
renumbered and relocated to Chapter 4.59 by Section 36 of Ordinance 4453, 1997.
Chapter 6.24
STABLES*
Sections:
   
6.24.010   Definitions.
   
6.24.020   Permit required to construct.
   
6.24.030   Application for permit.
   
6.24.040   Materials and construction requirements.
   
6.24.050   Maintenance of stables.
   
6.24.060   Suspension of permit.
   *   Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history: Prior code §§ 18.45 and 18.46 -
18.55, as originally adopted by Ordinance 1278.
6.24.010   Definitions.
   The word "stable" as used in this chapter shall be taken to mean any
building, structure or part of any building or structure used or intended to be
used for housing one or more horses, mules, donkeys, cows or cattle. The word
"premises" as used in this chapter shall be taken to mean the land and
appurtenances thereof used in connection with any stable.
(Ord. 3006 § 1 (part), 1977)
6.24.020   Permit required to construct.
   It shall be unlawful to construct. reconstruct, alter or repair any stable,
or to use as a stable any building, structure or part of any building or
structure, without having a valid permit therefor from the building official.
(Ord. 3006 § 1 (part), 1977)
6.24.030   Application for permit.
   (a)   No permit shall be granted to construct, reconstruct, alter or repair
any stable within the corporate limits of the city, except upon written
application therefor to the building official, signed by the owner or lessee of
the land upon which said stable is, or will be, located. The application shall
contain the following information:
   (1)   Exact location of premises on which the stable is to be constructed,
reconstructed, altered or repaired;
   (2)   The size, location on the premises, and character of construction of
said stable;
   (3)   The number of stalls, and the number of animals maintained or to be
maintained on said premises;
   (4)   The materials of which the floors are constructed or are to be
constructed;
   (5)   The location, size and character of construction of all gutters,
drains and sewer connections;
   (6)   The location, dimensions and character of construction of all manure
bins;
   (7)   Any other information in regard to said stable or premises which the
building official may require.
   (b)   The application shall be accompanied by plans or sketches setting
forth the above information.
(Ord. 3006 § 1 (part), 1977)
6.24.040   Materials and construction requirements.
   (a)   All stables hereafter constructed, reconstructed, altered or repaired
within the corporate limits of the city shall, in addition to any zoning
regulations and other regulations of the city governing construction, fully
comply with the regulations of this section and the regulations applicable to
accessory buildings.
   (b)   All floors shall have adequate drainage.
   (c)   Adequate ventilation shall be provided in all stables. There shall be
not less than five hundred cubic feet of space for each stall or animal housed
in any stable.
   (d)   There shall be provided upon all premises upon which any stable is
situated one or more manure bins, sufficient in number and dimensions to
contain all manure accumulating between removals. The bins shall be flyproof
when closed, and shall be kept closed at all times except when manure is being
introduced therein or being removed therefrom.
   (e)   All bins, storerooms or receptacles in which any grain or feed other
than hay is stored or kept shall be thoroughly ratproofed.
   (f)   All stables capable of accommodating more than six or less than
twenty-five animals shall have at least two exits five feet or more in width
and at least thirty feet apart, and shall be at opposite ends of the stable if
practicable. All stables capable of accommodating twenty-five or more animals
shall have exits as herein provided, except that the width thereof shall be not
less than five and one-half feet, and said width shall be increased six inches
for each additional ten animals accommodated above twenty-five animals.
(Ord. 3006 § 1 (part), 1977)
6.24.050   Maintenance of stables.
   All stables and stable premises shall be kept at all times in a clean
condition and good repair. All manure accumulating at any stable shall be
removed not less often than twice each week, or more often if necessary. Manure
shall not be permitted to accumulate in excess of the capacity of the manure
bin or bins required by this chapter, and all manure shall be promptly placed
in such bin or bins, and shall not be placed or piled at any place upon said
stable premises other than in such bin or bins. The generation and escape of
odors from stables shall be prevented as far as possible.
(Ord. 3006 § 1 (part), 1977)
6.24.060   Suspension of permit.
   Whenever any regulation or requirement of this chapter, or of any permit to
construct, reconstruct, alter or repair any stable within the corporate limits
of the city, shall have been violated, the permit of the stable upon which said
violation has occurred shall be suspended by the building official until such
time as all requirements or regulations of this chapter and of the permit shall
have been fully complied with, and during the suspension of the permit, no
animals shall be kept in the stable.
(Ord. 3006 § 1 (part), 1977)
Chapter 6.28
DANGEROUS AND WILD ANIMALS*
Sections:
   
6.28.010   Definitions.
   
6.28.020   Dangerous animals at large.
   
6.28.030   Dangerous dogs and animals.
   
6.28.040   Possessing dangerous or wild animals.
   *   Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history: Prior code §§ 18.37 - 18.41, as
originally adopted by Ordinance No. 1278, and Ordinance No. 2528.
6.28.010   Definitions.
   The following words and phrases whenever used in this chapter are defined as
follows:
   (a)   "Dangerous animal" means any dog or other animal which demonstrates a
propensity to assault, bite, scratch or harass people or other animals without
provocation. There shall be a rebuttable presumption that any animal that bites
a person is a dangerous animal.
   (b)   "Wild animal" means any exotic, venomous, nondomestic, or untrained
animal which because of its size, natural disposition, or other characteristic
constitutes a hazard or menace to persons or animals or is likely to damage
property.
(Ord. 3773 § 1 (part) 1987: Ord. 3257 § 7 (part), 1981: Ord. 2669 § 14 (part),
1972)
6.28.020   Dangerous animals at large.
   It is unlawful for any person owning or having possession, custody, charge,
or control of any dog or other animal known by such person to be dangerous to
cause or permit the animal to run loose about the person's premises in a manner
endangering any person lawfully entering such premises, or cause or permit the
animal to be unrestrained upon or about any public street, sidewalk, park,
schoolyard, or property of other persons.
   For purposes of this section, lawful entry to a premises includes but is not
limited to entry made by a person in the performance of any duty imposed upon
that person by the laws of this state or any city or county or by the laws or
postal regulations of the United States, or when that person is on such
property by reason of accident beyond control, or disaster, or by invitation
either expressed or implied.
(Ord. 3773 § 1 (part), 1987: Ord. 3257 § 7 (part), 1981: Ord. 2669 § 14 (part),
1972)
6.28.030   Dangerous dogs and animals.
   (a)   The superintendent of the animal center shall report in writing to the
chief of police concerning any animal the superintendent is informed is, or
believes to be, a dangerous animal.
   (b)   The chief of police or his designee shall set a date and time for a
public hearing to determine whether such animal is a dangerous animal as
defined in Section
6.28.010(a). Ten calendar days' written notice of the time and place for the
hearing shall be given to the person who owns or has possession, custody,
charge, or control of the animal.
   (c)   The chief of police or his designee shall preside at the hearing and
shall summon witnesses, administer oaths, hear testimony, and determine whether
the animal is a dangerous animal.
   (d)   In determining whether the animal is a dangerous animal, the chief of
police or his designee shall consider evidence concerning any bites committed
upon persons or other animals by the animal; provided, however that such
evidence shall not be exclusive. An animal may be shown to be dangerous even
though it is not proven to have bitten any person or other animal.
   The chief of police or his designee shall also consider any assaults upon
persons or other animals by the animal, any incidents of harassment by the
animal, the circumstances surrounding any incident indicating the temper or
viciousness of the animal and the general reputation of the animal in the
community with respect to its temper and viciousness. The deliberation shall
include any provocation that may have caused the animal to exhibit ferocious or
vicious characteristics.
   (e)   The chief of police or his designee shall issue written findings and a
decision, concerning whether the animal is a dangerous animal, within ten
working days after the hearing is concluded.
   (f)   Once the person who owns or has possession, custody, charge, or
control of the animal has been provided written notice of the time and place
for the hearing, he shall ensure the protection of the public health, safety
and welfare by securely confining the animal, prior to the hearing, at the
animal services center or at a facility approved by the superintendent of the
animal center. The animal's confinement shall continue, pending the issuance of
the written decision of the chief of police or his designee following the
hearing. All costs incurred as a result of the confinement shall be the sole
responsibility of the owner, possessor or custodian of the animal.
   (g)   If the animal is determined to be a dangerous animal, the chief of
police or his designee may revoke the animal's license and order its removal
from the city within twenty-four hours, order its destruction, or grant a
permit for possessing a dangerous animal as provided in Section
6.28.040.
   (h)   It is unlawful for any person to own or have possession, custody,
charge, or control of any dangerous animal ordered from the city by the chief
of police or his designee pursuant to this section. Any dangerous animal within
the city twenty-four hours after the removal order is issued shall be subject
to seizure by animal control officers or the police.
(Ord. 3773 § 1 (part), 1987: Ord. 3257 § 7 (part), 1981: Ord. 2669 § 14 (part),
1972)
6.28.040   Possessing dangerous or wild animals.
   (a)   It is unlawful for any person to own or have possession, custody,
charge, or control of any elephant, bear, hippopotamus, rhinoceros, ocelot,
lion, tiger, alligator, crocodile, leopard, wolf, monkey, squirrel, raccoon,
skunk, dangerous dog or other dangerous animal as determined by the public
hearing process provided for in Section
6.28.030, venomous or dangerous reptile of any kind, or any other wild animal
without first obtaining a permit from the superintendent of the animal center.
Any dangerous dog shall also be licensed.
   (b)   Applicants for such permit shall pay an annual permit fee per animal
as set forth in the municipal fee schedule.
   (c)   All permits provided for in this section shall be valid for one year
from the date of issuance, unless revoked as provided in this section.
   (d)   Upon receipt of an application for a permit to maintain any of the
animals set forth in this section, the superintendent of the animal center may
issue such permit if he is satisfied that such animal will be kept in a safe,
secure and humane fashion and without menacing the safety of any person or
animal or causing damage to property. As a condition of granting the permit,
the superintendent of the animal center may require that such animal be
properly caged or tethered and may make and issue regulations regarding the
possession or maintaining of such animal within the city.
   Any conditions for granting of a permit must be noted on the permit at the
time of issuance or at a later date that the chief of police or the
superintendent of the animal center deems necessary. Special conditions may
include but are not limited to:
   (1)   Keeping the animal confined on the premises in an enclosure approved
by the chief of police or the superintendent of the animal center;
   (2)   Keeping the animal securely muzzled, leashed, and under the control of
a person eighteen years of age or older, and who is physically capable of
restraining the animal when the animal is either on or off the property of the
person having control, custody, care, or ownership of the animal;
   (3)   Providing financial responsibility for the animal by posting a bond or
certificate of insurance to an amount deemed necessary by the city loss control
manager or the chief of police, which shall not be less than the amount of
fifty thousand dollars;
   (4)   Providing for the surgical spaying or neutering of the animal to
prevent reproduction.
   (e)   Any permit issued under this section may be revoked when any provision
of this chapter, or any condition or regulation issued by the chief of police
or his designee or the superintendent of the animal center under this chapter,
is violated, or when, in the opinion of the chief of police, the safety of any
person or animal is menaced or property is likely to be damaged by the
possession or maintenance of such animal.
   (f)   This section shall not apply to any dangerous or wild animal caged in
a safe and humane manner when being transported through the city or when such
animal is within the city under the control of a city-licensed circus,
carnival, traveling show, or collection of animals.
   However, in all cases, persons owning, caring for, or having control of any
animal known as a dangerous animal or wild animal as defined in this section or
Section
6.28.010 must post at entrances to the property where such animal is kept, a
sign not less than fifteen inches square, containing the warning, both in
written and pictorial form, that a dangerous or wild animal is present. If in
transit, any cages or containers used to hold such animals must have a clearly
visible notice attached to such cage or container warning of the presence of
dangerous or wild animals.
(Ord. 3773 § 1 (part), 1987: Ord. 3257 § 7 (part) 1981: Ord. 2960 § 41, 1976:
Ord. 2669 § 14 (part) 1972)
Chapter 6.32
DISEASED AND CRIPPLED ANIMALS
Sections:
   
6.32.010   Keeping diseased or crippled animals.
   
6.32.020   Animals suspected of having rabies.
   
6.32.030   Physicians to report animal bite cases.
   
6.32.040   Disposal of animals.
   
6.32.050   Dead animals in public places.
6.32.010   Keeping diseased or crippled animals.
   No person shall have, keep, or harbor any animal which is known or believed
by him to be infected with any dangerous or communicable disease, or which is
in an incurable, crippled condition or which is afflicted with any painful
disease which is believed by such person to be incurable, except as in this
title otherwise provided.
(Prior code § 18.32)
6.32.020   Animals suspected of having rabies.
   Whenever the owner or person in control of any animal is informed that such
animal has bitten a human being, or suspects that the animal is infected with
rabies, he shall immediately report the same to the local health department and
to the police department, and shall immediately confine such animal. At the
discretion of the local health officer or animal control officer, any animal
which bites or otherwise exposes a person shall be isolated in strict
confinement in a place and manner approved by the local health officer or
animal control officer and observed for at least fourteen days (dogs and cats,
ten days) after the day of infliction of the bite, with the exception that the
following alternative to the ten-day isolation of dogs and cats is permitted:
Dogs or cats which have been isolated in strict confinement under proper care
and under observation of a licensed veterinarian, in a pound, veterinary
hospital or other adequate facility in a manner approved by the local health
officer or animal control officer, may be released from isolation by the local
health officer or animal control officer after five days of veterinary
observation if, upon conducting a thorough physical examination on the fifth
day or more after infliction of the bite, the observing veterinarian certifies
that there are no clinical signs or symptoms of any systemic disease. If it
appears at any time during such period that the animal has rabies, the health
officer or animal control officer shall cause the animal to be destroyed. If at
the end of the fourteen-day period or such other period as may be prescribed by
the state Department of Public Health, it appears that the animal does not have
rabies, it shall be released upon payment to the superintendent of a sum for
its care during the period, together with an impounding fee as set forth in the
municipal fee schedule; provided, however, that no impounding fee shall be
charged to an owner or custodian of an animal who immediately transports such
animal to the animal center.
   The health officer or animal control officer or his duly authorized
representative is empowered to enter upon any public or private premises, in
accordance with the procedures provided by law, within the city for the purpose
of enforcing the provisions of this section and he is empowered to call upon
the police officers of the city for assistance in enforcing such provisions.
The owner of any animal which is reported to have bitten on two or more
occasions may be required to obtain a permit for keeping a dangerous animal, as
pursuant in
Chapter 6.28, following investigation of reported bites and recommendation by
the superintendent of the animal center.
(Ord. 3257 § 8 (part), 1981: Ord. 2960 § 42, 1976: Ord. 2669 § 15, 1972: Ord.
1297, 1950: prior code § 18.33)
6.32.030   Physicians to report animal bite cases.
   All cases of animal bites treated by any physician shall be reported by the
physician to the health department within seventy-two hours.
(Ord. 3257 § 8 (part), 1981: prior code § 18.34)
6.32.040   Disposal of animals.
   It shall be the duty of the superintendent, and he is authorized and
empowered to order the destruction by any employee of the animal center of any
animal lawfully taken into the custody of the city which in the opinion of the
superintendent is incapacitated by senility or which is infected with any
dangerous or communicable disease, or which is in an incurable, crippled
condition, or for which there is no immediate sale.
(Ord. 2669 § 16, 1972: prior code § 18.35)
6.32.050   Dead animals in public places.
   No person shall place the body of any dead animal in any street, park. or
public place or in any refuse receptacle. The bodies of any dead animals shall
be promptly removed as directed by the health officer of the city. In case the
owner of such dead animal is known and removal is accomplished by the city, the
owner shall pay the cost of removal of such animal. The city manager shall fix
the charges to be paid for the removal of dead animals. Said charges shall be
set forth in the municipal fee schedule.
(Ord. 2960 § 43, 1976: Ord. 2029 (part), 1961: prior code § 31.21)
Chapter 6.36
SALE OF ANIMALS
Sections:
   
6.36.010   Restrictions.
6.36.010   Restrictions.
   (a)   No person shall sell, offer for sale, barter, or display any rabbits,
baby chicks, ducklings or other fowl which have been dyed, colored or otherwise
treated so as to impart to them an artificial color.
   (b)   No person shall sell, offer for sale, barter or give away any rabbits,
baby chicks, ducklings or other fowl unless such person provides proper brooder
facilities for the care of such rabbits, chicks, ducklings or other fowl during
the time they are in the possession of such person.
   (c)   This section shall not be construed to prohibit the display or sale of
rabbits, natural chicks, ducklings or other fowl, in proper facilities by
dealers, hatcheries or stores engaged in the business of selling the same, to
be raised for food purposes.
   (d)   No person shall display, sell, offer for sale, barter, or give away,
upon any street or sidewalk of the city of Palo Alto, as pets or novelties: (1)
any fish, turtle, snake, lizard, chameleon or other reptile; (2) any rabbit,
bird, cat, dog, fowl, guinea pig, rodent or other animal.
   (e)   This section shall not be construed to prohibit the display or sale of
animals, birds, fish or reptiles legally held for sale in licensed pet shops,
kennels, aviaries or fish hatcheries.
(Ord. 3257 § 9, 1981: prior code § 18.42)
Title 7 RESERVED
Title 8 TREES AND VEGETATION
Chapters:
   
8.04   Public Trees, Shrubs, Hedges, and Plants
   
8.08   Weed Abatement
   
8.10   Tree and Landscape Preservation and Management
Chapter 8.04
PUBLIC TREES, SHRUBS, HEDGES, AND PLANTS
Sections:
   
8.04.005   Purpose.
   
8.04.010   Definitions.
   
8.04.015   Authority of city.
   
8.04.020   Permit required for certain work.
   
8.04.030   Application for permit.
   
8.04.040   Issuance of permit.
   
8.04.050   Public nuisances.
   
8.04.070   Enforcement.
   
8.04.080   Interference with enforcement.
   
8.04.090   Adoption of regulations.
8.04.005   Purpose.
   The purpose of this chapter is to protect and promote trees, shrubs, hedges,
and plants located on public property within the city. In establishing these
procedures and standards, the city recognizes that trees, shrubs, hedges, and
plants are an essential part of the city's infrastructure, with benefits that
include promoting the health, safety, welfare, and quality of life of the
residents of the city; addressing climate change by sequestering carbon and
providing a cooling effect; reducing air, water, and noise pollution;
preventing soil erosion and stormwater runoff; providing wildlife habitat; and
enhancing the aesthetic environment. It is the city's intent to encourage the
preservation of trees, shrubs, hedges, and plants.
(Ord. 5557 § 2 (part), 2022)
8.04.010   Definitions.
   For the purposes of this title, the following words shall have the meaning
ascribed to them in this section:
   (a)   "Person" means individuals, firms, associations and corporations, and
agents, employees or representatives thereof.
   (b)   "City" means the city of Palo Alto acting by and through its
authorized representatives.
   (c)   "Street" means and includes all land lying between the boundaries of
property abutting on all public streets, boulevards, alleys, and walks.
   (d)   "Parks" means and includes all parks to which names have been given by
action of the city council.
   (e)   "Public places" means and includes all grounds, other than streets or
parks, owned by, leased to, or under the control of the city of Palo Alto.
   (f)   "Tree" means and includes any woody perennial plant generally having a
single main stem and commonly achieving ten feet in height.
   (g)   "Shrub" means and includes any woody perennial plant generally having
multiple stems and commonly less than ten feet in height.
   (h)   "Hedge" means and includes any tree, shrub, or plant, when planted in
a dense, continuous line or area, as to form a thicket or barrier.
   (i)   "Plant" means and includes all vegetation other than trees and shrubs.
   (j)   "Public trees, shrubs, hedges, and plants" means and includes any
tree, shrub, hedge, or plant in any street, park, or public place in the city
of Palo Alto.
   (k)   "Urban forester" means public works department staff including the
urban forester or their designee.
   (l)   "Tree permit" means a permit issued by the urban forester for one or
more of the following purposes:
   (1)   To permit removal of a public tree.
   (2)   To permit public tree care, work, or treatment.
   (3)   To permit removal of a protected tree under
8.10.050.
   (4)   To establish a tree preservation bond.
   (5)   For payment of "in-lieu" fees for required mitigation measures.
(Ord. 5557 § 2 (part), 2022: Ord. 4642 § 6, 2000: Ord. 1353 (part), 1951: prior
code § 32.10(b)-(k))
8.04.015   Authority of city.
   The city of Palo Alto shall have control of all public trees, shrubs,
hedges, and plants now or hereafter in any street, park or public place within
the city limits, and shall have the authority to plant, care for, remove,
replace, and maintain such trees, shrubs, hedges, and plants.
(Ord. 5557 § 2 (part), 2022: Ord. 1353 (part), 1951: prior code § 32.10(a))
8.04.020   Permit required for certain work.
   Unless authorized by a tree permit or other city approval, no person shall
do any of the following:
   (a)   Plant, prune, trim, shape, remove, top, or in any way damage, destroy,
injure or mutilate a public tree, shrub, hedge, or plant. A tree permit is not
required for a property owner, resident, or their agent to maintain shrubs,
hedges, or plants located within the city right-of- way associated with their
property.
   (b)   Fasten a sign, wire, or injurious material to any public tree, shrub,
hedge, or plant.
   (c)   Excavate any ditch or tunnel; or place concrete or other pavement
within a distance of ten feet of the center of the trunk of any public tree.
(Ord. 5557 § 2 (part), 2022: Ord. 4745 § 7, 2002: Ord. 1353 (part), 1951: prior
code § 32.11)
8.04.030   Application for permit.
   Any person desiring to do any of the work described in Section
8.04.020 may apply for a tree permit so to do. The applicant shall state the
nature of the work and the location where it will be done.
(Ord. 5557 § 2 (part), 2022: Ord. 1353 (part), 1951: prior code § 32.12(a))
8.04.040   Issuance of permit.
   A tree permit shall be issued authorizing work that meets all the following
conditions:
   (a)   Will not create, continue, or aggravate any hazardous condition, or
public nuisance.
   (b)   Will not prevent or interfere with the growth, location or planting of
any approved public tree.
   (c)   Is consistent with the planting plan being followed by the city.
(Ord. 5557 § 2 (part), 2022: Ord. 1353 (part), 1951: prior code § 32.12(b))
8.04.050   Public nuisances.*
   Any of the following are, for the purposes hereof, defined to be public
nuisances:
   (a)   Any dead, diseased, infested, or dying tree, shrub, hedge, or plant in
any street or on any public or private property so near to any public tree,
shrub, hedge, or plant as to constitute a danger to a public tree, shrub,
hedge, or plant, or street, or portion thereof or public property.
   (b)   Any tree, shrub, hedge, or plant on any private property or in any
street, of a type or species that will destroy, impair, or otherwise interfere
with any street improvement, sidewalk, curb, approved public tree, gutter,
sewer, other public improvement, including utility mains and services, or a
public tree, shrub, hedge, or plant.
   (c)   Any tree limb, shrub, hedge, or plant reaching a height more than
three feet above the curb grade adjacent thereto, except a tree trunk having no
limbs lower than nine feet above curb grade, within the thirty-five foot
triangle of public or private property, measured from the projected curb lines,
at the intersections of any street improved for vehicular traffic where either
traffic signals, stop signs, or yield signs are not installed, or at any
intersections which are determined by the chief transportation official to
contain a tree limb, shrub, hedge, or plant that obscures or impairs the view
of a passing motorist, cyclist or pedestrian so as to create a safety hazard.
   (d)   Vines or climbing plants growing into or over any public tree, shrub,
hedge, or plant; or any public hydrant, pole or electrolier.
   (e)   Existence of any tree within the city limits that is infested or
infected with insects, scale, fungus, or growths that are included in the
California Department of Food and Agriculture’s detection and eradication
programs or that are injurious to trees.
   (f)   The existence of any branches or foliage which interfere with
visibility on, free use of, access to, or obstruct public vehicular or
pedestrian travel on any portion of any street improved for vehicular or
pedestrian travel.
   (g)   Hedges or dense, thorny shrubs and plants on any street or part
thereof.
   (h)   Shrubs and plants more than two feet in height in any tree well or
planting strip between the sidewalk and curb, measured above top of curb grade.
   (i)   Any tree, shrub, hedge, or plant declared a public nuisance pursuant
to state law and ordered removed by a court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. 5612 § 1 (part), 2024; Ord. 5557 § 2 (part), 2022: Ord. 4722 § 1, 2001:
Ord. 2032, 1961: Ord. 1353 (part), 1951: prior code § 32.13)
   *   Abatement procedure - See
Chapter 9.56 of this code.
8.04.070   Enforcement.
   (a)   Violation of any provision of this chapter is a misdemeanor,
punishable as provided in this code. Each day of violation constitutes a
separate offense and may be separately punished.
   (b)   Persons employed in the following designated employee positions are
authorized to exercise the authority provided in California Penal Code Section
836.5 and are authorized to issue citations for violations of this chapter,
including but not limited to leveling fines under the city's administrative
penalty authority: assistant director of public works public services division,
urban forester, project manager in the urban forestry section, landscape
architect, and code enforcement officer.
   (c)   Any person who damages a public tree, through any act or omission,
whenever such act or omission is prohibited by or not authorized pursuant to
this chapter, may be liable civilly in a sum not to exceed ten thousand dollars
per tree, or the reproduction cost of each such tree, whichever amount is
higher.
   (d)   Injunctive relief. A civil action may be commenced to abate, enjoin,
or otherwise compel the cessation of such violation.
   (e)   Costs. In any civil action brought pursuant to this chapter in which
the city prevails, the court shall award to the city all costs of investigation
and preparation for trial, the costs of trial, reasonable expenses including
overhead and administrative costs incurred in prosecuting the action, and
reasonable attorney fees.
   (f)   The remedies and penalties provided in this section are cumulative and
not exclusive.
(Ord. 5557 § 2 (part), 2022: Ord. 1353 (part), 1951: prior code § 32.15)
8.04.080   Interference with enforcement.
   No person shall interfere with or delay the authorized representatives of
the city from the execution and enforcement of this chapter, except as provided
by law.
(Ord. 1353 (part), 1951: prior code § 32.16)
8.04.090   Adoption of regulations.
   The city may adopt regulations prescribing standards of landscaping and
planting of streets, parks and public places, therein. A copy of such
regulations shall be available for public inspection upon request, and all work
performed in streets, parks or public places shall be performed in accordance
therewith.
(Ord. 1353 (part), 1951: prior code § 32.17)
Chapter 8.08
WEED ABATEMENT*
Sections:
   
8.08.005   Purpose.
   
8.08.010   Weeds as public nuisance.
   
8.08.020   Resolution declaring nuisance.
   
8.08.030   Form and publication of notice.
   
8.08.040   Hearing on notice.
   
8.08.050   Order to abate nuisance.
   
8.08.060   Account and report of cost.
   
8.08.070   Notice of report.
   
8.08.080   Hearing on cost assessment.
   
8.08.090   Collection on tax roll.
   *   For abatement provisions pertaining to nuisances other than weeds - See
Chapter 9.56. Legislative body may declare weeds a nuisance and order the
abatement thereof - See Gov. C.A. § 39561. City may compel removal of dirt,
rubbish, weeds, etc. - See Gov. C.A. §§ 39501-39502.
8.08.005   Purpose.
   The purpose of this chapter is to prohibit weeds on property within the
city. In establishing these procedures and standards, it is the city's intent
to ensure that all activities taken to abate weeds are sufficient to increase
public safety, to preserve aesthetically or environmentally desirable trees,
shrubs, hedges, and plants, and to prevent the displacement of wildlife
habitats.
(Ord. 5555 § 3 (part), 2022)
8.08.010   Weeds as public nuisance.
   (a)   No owner, agent, lessee or other person occupying or having charge or
control of any building, lot or premises within the city shall permit weeds to
remain upon the premises, or public sidewalks, or encroach into any parkland
(including any weeds encroaching over fences, or streets, or alleys between the
premises and the center line of any public street or alley.
   (b)   "Weeds" as used in this chapter means and includes any of the
following, growing upon streets, parks, public places, or private property in
the city:
   (1)   Plants which bear or may bear seeds of a downy or wingy nature.
   (2)   Plants, shrubs, hedges, and trees determined by the Fire Marshall to
constitute a fire menace due to their species, proximity to ignition sources,
and high potential to endanger nearby buildings.
   (3)   Plants and shrubs which are otherwise noxious or dangerous.
   (4)   Invasive plants, shrubs, hedges, and trees having high potential to
invade adjacent properties and high ecological impacts in the region as defined
by the California Invasive Plant Council.
   (5)   Poison oak and poison ivy when the conditions of growth are such as to
constitute a menace to the public health.
   (6)   Accumulations of garden refuse, cuttings, and other combustible trash.
   (c)   Every property owner shall remove or destroy such weeds from their
property, and in the abutting half of any street or alley between the lot lines
as extended.
(Ord. 5557 § 3 (part), 2022: Ord. 3982 § 1 (part), 1990: Ord. 1313 (part),
1950: prior code § 32.01)
8.08.020   Resolution declaring nuisance.
   Whenever any such weeds are growing upon any private property or properties
or in any street or alley within the city, the council shall pass a resolution
declaring the same to be a public nuisance and order the fire chief or urban
forester to give notice of the passage of such resolution as herein provided,
and stating therein that, unless such nuisance is abated without delay by the
destruction or removal of such weeds, the work of abating such nuisance will be
done by the city authorities, and the expense thereof assessed upon the lots
and lands from which, and/or in the front and rear of which, such weeds shall
have been destroyed or removed. Such resolution shall fix the time and place
for hearing any objections to the proposed destruction or removal of such
weeds.
(Ord. 5557 § 3 (part), 2022: Ord. 3982 § 1 (part), 1990: Ord. 3192 § 1 (part),
1980: Ord. 2662 § 23 (part), 1972: Ord. 1313 (part), 1950: prior code § 32.02)
8.08.030   Form and publication of notice.
   (a)   The fire chief or urban forester shall cause to be published a public
notice in substantially the following form:
   NOTICE TO DESTROY WEEDS
      NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that on ______, 20 __, pursuant to the provisions
of Section
8.08.020 of the Palo Alto Municipal Code, the City Council passed a resolution
declaring that all weeds growing upon any private property or in any public
street or alley, as defined in Section
8.08.010 of the Palo Alto Municipal Code, constitute a public nuisance, which
nuisance must be abated by the destruction or removal thereof.
      NOTICE IS FURTHER GIVEN that property owners shall without delay remove
all such weeds from their property, and the abutting half of the street in
front and alleys, if any, behind such property, and between the lot lines
thereof as extended, or such weeds will be destroyed or moved and such nuisance
abated by the city authorities, in which case the cost of such destruction or
removal will be assessed upon the lots and lands from which, or from the front
or rear of which, such weeds shall have been destroyed or removed; and such
cost will constitute a lien upon such lots or lands until paid, and will be
collected upon the next tax roll upon which general municipal taxes are
collected. All property owners having any objections to the proposed
destruction or removal of such weeds are hereby notified to attend a meeting of
the Council of said city, to be held in the Council Chamber of the City Hall in
said city on ______, 20___, at seven p.m., when and where their objections will
be heard and given due consideration.
   Date ______________________, 20____
   Fire Chief or Urban Forester
   City of Palo Alto   
   (b)   Such notice shall be published at least twice in a newspaper published
and circulated within the city, the first publication of which shall be at
least ten days prior to the time fixed by the council for hearing objections.
(Ord. 5557 § 3 (part), 2022: Ord. 4642 § 7, 2000: Ord. 3982 § 1 (part), 1990:
Ord. 2662 § 23 (part), 1972: Ord. 1313 (part), 1950: prior code § 32.03)
8.08.040   Hearing on notice.
   At the time stated in the notice, the council shall hear and consider any
and all objections to the proposed destruction or removal of such weeds and may
continue the hearing from time to time. The council, by motion or resolution,
shall allow or overrule any or all objections, if any, after which the council
shall thereupon be deemed to have acquired jurisdiction to proceed and perform
the work of destruction and removal of such weeds.
(Ord. 5557 § 3 (part), 2022: Ord. 3982 § 1 (part), 1990: Ord. 1313 (part),
1950: prior code § 32.04)
8.08.050   Order to abate nuisance.
   The council shall by resolution order the fire chief or urban forester to
abate such nuisance, or cause the same to be abated, by having the weeds
referred to destroyed or removed, and the fire chief or urban forester and his
deputies, assistants, employees, contracting agents or other representatives
are hereby expressly authorized to enter upon private property for that
purpose. Any property owner shall have the right to destroy or remove such
weeds themselves or have the same destroyed or removed at their own expense;
provided that such weeds shall have been removed prior to the arrival of the
fire chief or urban forester or their authorized representatives to remove
them.
(Ord. 5557 § 3 (part), 2022: Ord. 3982 § 1 (part), 1990: Ord. 3192 § 1 (part),
1980: Ord. 2662 § 23 (part), 1972: Ord. 1313 (part), 1950: prior code § 32.05)
8.08.060   Account and report of cost.
   The fire chief or urban forester shall keep an account of the cost of
abating such nuisance and embody such account in a report and assessment list
to the city council, which shall be filed with the clerk. Such report shall
refer to each separate lot or parcel of land by description sufficient to
identify such lot or parcel, together with the expense proposed to be assessed
against each separate lot or parcel of land.
(Ord. 5557 § 3 (part), 2022: Ord. 3982 § 1 (part), 1990: Ord. 3192 § 1 (part),
1980: Ord. 2662 § 23 (part), 1972: Ord. 1313 (part), 1950: prior code § 32.06)
8.08.070   Notice of report.
   The city clerk shall post a copy of such report and assessment list on the
bulletin board near the entrance door at the City Hall, together with a notice
of the filing thereof and of the time and place when and where it will be
submitted to the city council for hearing and confirmation, notifying property
owners that they may appear at such time and place, and object to any matter
contained therein. A like notice shall also be published twice in a newspaper
of general circulation, published and circulated within the city. The posting
and first publication of said notice shall be made and completed at least ten
days before the time such report shall have been submitted to the city council.
Such notice, as so posted and published, shall be substantially in the
following form:
NOTICE OF HEARING ON REPORT AND ASSESSMENT FOR WEED ABATEMENT
   NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that on ______, 20__, the Fire Chief or Urban
Forester of the City of Palo Alto filed with the City Clerk of said city a
report and assessment on abatement of weeds within said city, a copy of which
is posted on the bulletin board at the entrance to the City Hall.
   NOTICE IS FURTHER GIVEN that on _______, 20__, at the hour of seven p.m., in
the Council Chambers of said City Hall, said report and assessment list will be
presented to the City Council of said City for consideration and confirmation,
and that any and all persons interested, having any objections to said report
and assessment list, or to any matter or thing contained therein, may appear at
said time and place and be heard.
Date _____________, 20___
               
City Clerk of the City of Palo Alto
(Ord. 5557 § 3 (part), 2022: Ord. 4642 § 8, 2000: Ord. 3982 § 1 (part), 1990:
Ord. 3192 § 1 (part), 1980: Ord. 2662 § 23 (part), 1972: Ord. 1313 (part),
1950: prior code § 32.07)
8.08.080   Hearing on cost assessment.
   (a)   At the time and place fixed for receiving and considering such report
the city council shall hear the same together with any objections which may be
raised by any of the property owners liable to be assessed for the work of
abating such nuisance, and the fire chief or urban forester shall attend such
meeting with their record thereof, and upon such hearing, the council may make
such modifications in the proposed assessments therefore as it may deem
necessary, after which such report and assessment list shall be confirmed by
resolution.
   (b)   The amount of the cost of abating such nuisance upon, or in the front
or rear of, the various lots or parcels of land respectively referred to in
such report, shall constitute special assessments against such respective lots
or parcels of land, and after thus made and confirmed, shall constitute a lien
on such property for the amount of such assessments, until paid.
(Ord. 5557 § 3 (part), 2022: Ord. 3982 § 1 (part), 1990: Ord. 3192 § 1 (part),
1980: Ord. 2662 § 23 (part), 1972: Ord. 1313 (part), 1950: prior code § 32.08)
8.08.090   Collection on tax roll.
   On or before the first day of September of each year, the amounts of such
assessments against the respective parcels of land shall be entered on the next
tax roll which general city taxes are to be collected. Thereafter, such amounts
shall be collected at the same time, and in the same manner, as general city
taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same interest and penalties,
and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquencies. All laws applicable
to the levy, collection and enforcement of city taxes are hereby made
applicable to such assessments.
(Ord. 3982 § 1 (part) 1990: Ord. 2452 § 7, 1968: Ord. 1313 (part), 1950: prior
code § 32.09)
Chapter 8.10
TREE AND LANDSCAPE PRESERVATION AND MANAGEMENT*
Sections:
   
8.10.010   Purpose.
   
8.10.020   Definitions.
   
8.10.030   Tree and Landscape Technical Manual.
   
8.10.040   Disclosure of information regarding existing trees.
   
8.10.050   Removal of protected trees.
   
8.10.055   Tree replacement.
   
8.10.060   No limitation of authority under Titles 16 and 18.
   
8.10.070   Care of protected trees.
   
8.10.080   Development conditions.
   
8.10.090   Designation of heritage trees.
   
8.10.092   Tree removal in wildland- urban interface area.
   
8.10.095   Tree removal in Hospital District Zone.
   
8.10.100   Enforcement.
   
8.10.110   Remedies for violation.
   
8.10.120   Fees.
   
8.10.130   Severability.
   
8.10.140   Applications, notice, and appeals.
   *   Editor's Note: Prior Ordinance History: Section 2 of Ord. 4362 was
previously codified herein, and was not specifically repealed by adoption of
Ord. 4568.
8.10.010   Purpose.
   The purpose of this chapter is to protect specified trees located on private
property within the city, and establish standards for removal, maintenance, and
planting of trees and landscaping. In establishing these procedures and
standards, the city recognizes that trees and landscaping are an essential part
of the city's infrastructure. Their benefits include promoting the health,
safety, welfare, and quality of life of the residents of the city; addressing
climate change by sequestering carbon and providing a cooling effect; reducing
air, water, and noise pollution; preventing soil erosion and stormwater runoff;
providing wildlife habitat; and enhancing the aesthetic environment. It is the
city's intent to encourage both the preservation of trees and the proactive
incorporation of trees and their benefits within development.
(Ord. 5557 § 4 (part), 2022: Ord. 4568 § 1 (part), 1999)
8.10.020   Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, terms defined in
Chapter 8.04 shall have the same meanings in this chapter, and the following
terms shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section:
   (a)   "Basal flare" means that portion of a tree where there is a rapid
increase in diameter at the confluence of the rootcrown and trunk.
   (b)   "Buildable area" means that area of a parcel:
   (1)   Upon which, under applicable zoning regulations, a structure may be
built without a variance, design enhancement exception, or home improvement
exception; or
   (2)   Necessary for construction of primary access to structures located on
or to be constructed on the parcel, where there exists no feasible means of
access which would avoid protected trees. On single-family residential parcels,
the portion of the parcel deemed to be the buildable area for primary access
shall not exceed ten feet in width.
   (c)   "Building footprint" means the two-dimensional configuration of a
building's perimeter boundaries as measured on a horizontal plane at ground
level.
   (d)   "Designated arborist" means an arborist certified by the International
Society of Arboriculture or another nationally recognized tree research, care,
and preservation organization, selected by the urban forester for inclusion in
a list of approved arborists to be:
   (1)   Hired by an applicant at their own expense, or
   (2)   Chosen by the city at an applicant's expense, if a project includes a
public hearing.
   (e)   "Development" means any work upon any property in the city which
requires a subdivision, planned community zone, variance, use permit, building
permit, demolition permit, or other city approval or which involves excavation,
landscaping or construction within the tree protection zone of a protected tree
or is subject to requirements of the California Model Water Efficient Landscape
Ordinance (MWELO).
   (f)   "Director of planning and development services" means the director of
planning and development services or their designee.
   (g)   "Director of public works" means the director of public works or their
designee.
   (h)   "Discretionary development approval" means planned community zone,
subdivision, use permit, variance, home improvement exception, design
enhancement exception, architectural review board approval, or any proposal or
application that requires the discretion of the authorizing person or entity.
   (i)   "Excessive pruning" of a protected tree means any of the following:
   (1)   Removal of more than twenty-five percent of the functioning leaf,
stem, or root area of a tree in any twenty-four-month period.
   (2)   Removal of more than fifteen percent of the functioning root area of
any Quercus (oak) species in any thirty-six-month period.
   (3)   Any removal of the functioning leaf, stem, or root area of a tree so
as to cause a significant decline in health, increased risk of failure, or the
unbalancing of a tree.
   (j)   "Hazardous" means an imminent hazard which constitutes a high or
extreme threat to the safety of persons or property as defined by American
National Standards Institute A300, Part 9.
   (k)   "Protected" tree means any of the following:
   (1)   Any locally native tree of the species Acer macrophyllum (Bigleaf
Maple), Calocedrus decurrens (California Incense Cedar), Quercus agrifolia
(Coast Live Oak), Quercus douglasii (Blue Oak), Quercus kelloggii (California
Black Oak), or Quercus lobata (Valley Oak) which is eleven and one-half inches
in diameter (thirty-six inches in circumference) or more when measured four and
one-half feet (fifty-four inches) above natural grade.
   (2)   Any Coast Redwood tree (species Sequoia sempervirens) that is eighteen
inches in diameter (fifty-seven inches in circumference) or more when measured
four and one-half feet (fifty-four inches) above natural grade.
   (3)   Any tree, other than a Coast Redwood Tree, fifteen inches in diameter
(forty-seven inches in circumference) or more when measured four and one-half
feet (fifty-four inches) above natural grade of any species except those
invasive species described as weeds in Section
8.08.010 and those species classified as high water users by the Water Use
Classification of Landscape Species list (WUCOLS) approved by the California
Department of Water Resources.
   (4)   Any tree designated for protection during review and approval of a
current or previously completed development project. On parcels zoned other
than single-family (R-1) or low density (RE, R-2, or RMD) residential, species
exempted under subsection (3) of this Section may be designated as a protected
tree.
   (5)   Any tree designated for carbon sequestration and storage and/or
environmental mitigation purposes as identified in an agreement between the
property owner and a responsible government agency or recorded as a deed
restriction.
   (6)   Any heritage tree designated by the city council in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter.
   (7)   Any replacement mitigation tree or other tree designated to be planted
due to the conditions listed in Section
8.10.055.
   (l)   "Protected tree removal permit" means a permit issued to allow a
person to remove a protected tree.
   (m)   "Right tree in the right place principles" means the set of principles
that determine if a tree is located in an appropriate location for its specific
species requirements and characteristics, in accordance with the factors listed
in the Tree and Landscape Technical Manual.
   (n)   "Remove" or "removal" means:
   (1)   Complete removal, such as cutting to the ground or extraction, of a
tree; or
   (2)   Taking any action foreseeably leading to the death of a tree or
permanent damage to its health; including but not limited to excessive pruning,
cutting, topping, girdling, poisoning, overwatering, underwatering,
unauthorized relocation or transportation of a tree, or trenching, excavating,
altering the grade, or paving within the tree protection zone of a tree.
   (o)   "Retrenchment" means the process in which trees may reconfigure as
they age and deteriorate, often continuing to grow in trunk diameter while
branches die and fail.
   (p)   "Tree Protection Zone" means the area defined by a circle with a
radius ten times the diameter of the trunk when measured four and one-half feet
(fifty-four inches) above natural grade.
   (q)   "Tree Report" means a report prepared by a designated arborist.
   (r)   "Tree and Landscape Technical Manual" means the regulations issued by
the city manager to implement this chapter.
(Ord. 5612 § 2 (part), 2024: Ord. 5557 § 4 (part), 2022: Ord. 5494 § 3, 2020:
Ord. 4680 § 2, 2001: Ord. 4568 § 1 (part), 1999)
8.10.030   Tree and Landscape Technical Manual.
   The city manager, through the urban forestry section, and public works and
planning and development services departments, shall issue regulations
necessary for implementation and enforcement of this chapter, which shall be
known as the Tree and Landscape Technical Manual. In the event of a conflict
between the provisions of this Title 8 and the Tree and Landscape Technical
Manual, this Title 8 shall prevail. The Tree and Landscape Technical Manual
will be made readily available to the public and shall include, but need not be
limited to, standards and specifications regarding the following:
   (a)   Protection of trees during construction.
   (b)   Replacement of trees allowed to be removed pursuant to this chapter
where such replacements:
   (1)   Prioritize the use of locally native species, as listed in Section
8.10.020(l)(1), consistent with Urban Forest Master Plan Goal 2: "Re-generated
native woodland and riparian landscapes as the key ecological basis of the
urban forest with focus on native species and habitat;"
   (2)   Include climate adaptive, drought tolerant, non-native species as
needed to satisfy right tree in the right place principles; and
   (3)   Incorporate a secondary goal of net tree canopy increase on the
property within fifteen years.
   (c)   Maintenance of protected trees (including but not limited to pruning,
irrigation, and protection from disease).
   (d)   The format and content of tree reports required to be submitted to the
city pursuant to this chapter.
   (e)   The criteria for determining whether a tree is hazardous within the
meaning of this chapter.
   (f)   Landscape design, irrigation, and installation standards consistent
with the city's water efficient landscape regulations.
(Ord. 5557 § 4 (part), 2022: Ord. 4568 § 1 (part), 1999)
8.10.040   Disclosure of information regarding existing trees.
   (a)   Any application for development or demolition shall be accompanied by
a statement by a designated arborist which discloses whether any protected
trees exist on the property which is the subject of the application, and
describing each such tree, its species, size, tree protection zone, and
location. This requirement shall be met by including the information on plans
submitted in connection with the application.
   (1)   Notwithstanding subsection (a), applications involving only the
development of an Accessory Dwelling Unit that conforms to Section
18.09.030, Table 1, require only a statement disclosing whether any protected
trees are located on the property which is the subject of the application. This
statement may be completed by the applicant.
   (b)   In addition, the location and species of any other tree which is four
inches in diameter (e.g., thirteen inches in circumference) or more when
measured four and one-half feet (fifty-four inches) above natural grade shall
be shown on the plans if the tree is:
   (1)   On the property or in the adjacent public right-of-way, and is within
thirty feet of the building footprint proposed for development, or
   (2)   Located on adjacent property within thirty feet of the proposed
building footprint, or
   (3)   Close enough that its canopy overhangs the project site.
   (c)   The director of public works or urban forester may require submittal
of such other information as is necessary to further the purposes of this
chapter including but not limited to photographs.
   (d)   Disclosure of information regarding private protected trees pursuant
to this section shall not be required when the development for which the
approval or permit is sought does not involve any change in an existing
building footprint nor any grading, trenching, paving, or any change in
landscaping which could alter water availability to established plants, hedges,
shrubs, or trees.
   (e)   The urban forester or the designated arborist for a project shall add
identified protected trees into the city's tree inventory database, and in
coordination with the planning and development services departments, into city
parcel reports.
   (f)   Knowingly or negligently providing false or misleading information in
response to this disclosure requirement shall constitute a violation of this
chapter.
(Ord. 5612 § 2 (part), 2024: Ord. 5557 § 4 (part), 2022: Ord. 4568 § 1 (part),
1999)
8.10.050   Removal of protected trees.
   It shall be a violation of this chapter for anyone to remove or cause to be
removed a protected tree, except pursuant to a protected tree removal permit
issued under Section
8.10.140 consistent with the following:
   (a)   In the absence of proposed development:
   (1)   A protected tree shall not be removed unless the urban forester grants
a protected tree removal permit, or on parcels zoned other than single-family
(R-1) or low density residential (RE, R-2, or RMD), the director of planning
and development services authorizes the removal through staff level
architectural review pursuant to Section
18.76.020(b)(3), having determined, on the basis of a tree report prepared by a
designated arborist and other relevant information, that treatments or
corrective practices are not feasible, and that the tree should be removed
because any of the following apply:
   (i)   It is dead, is hazardous, or constitutes a public nuisance under
Section
8.04.050 of this code.
   (ii)   It is a detriment to or is crowding an adjacent protected tree.
   (iii)   It is at risk for retrenchment or other tree decline coping
processes or does not conform with right tree in the right place principles.
   (iv)   It is impacting the foundation or eaves of a residence, or any
covered parking required under
Title 18 of this code.
   (2)   In the event a protected tree is removed pursuant to a protected tree
removal permit granted under this subsection (a), a temporary moratorium on
development of the subject property may be issued by the urban forester for up
to twenty-four months or by, the director of planning and development services,
in consultation with the urban forester, for up to thirty-six months, from the
date the tree removal occurred. Completion of required mitigation measures
included in the tree removal permit does not remove or shorten any such
moratorium. A moratorium may be terminated early with approval of the urban
forester or director of planning, and development services, as applicable, and
may require additional mitigation measures. Mitigation measures included in the
protected tree removal permit and any additional mitigation measures required
to shorten a moratorium shall be imposed as a condition of any subsequent
permits for development on the subject property.
   (b)   In the case of any development on a single-family (R-1) or low density
(RE, R-2, or RMD) residential zoned parcel, other than in connection with a
subdivision, a protected tree shall not be removed unless the tree is proposed
for removal to accommodate an ADU constructed pursuant to Section
18.09.030, or because removal is necessary to allow an ADU constructed pursuant
to Section
18.09.040 to achieve the minimum standards set forth in state law, or it is
determined by the urban forester, on the basis of a tree report prepared by a
designated arborist and other relevant information, that any of the following
apply:
   (1)   The tree is so close to the proposed development that construction
would result in the death of the tree, and there is no financially feasible
design alternative that would permit preservation of the tree, where
financially feasible means an alternative that preserves the tree unless
retaining the tree would increase project cost by more than twice the
reproduction cost of the tree or ten percent of the given project valuation,
whichever is greater.
   (2)   Retention of one or more trees would result in reduction of the
otherwise-permissible buildable area of the lot by more than twenty-five
percent, and there is no financially feasible design alternative that would
allow for preservation of the tree(s). For the purposes of this subsection (a)
(2), a financially feasible design alternative means a design alternative that
preserves the tree(s) and would not increase the project cost by more than
twice the reproduction cost of the tree(s) or ten percent of the given project
valuation, whichever is greater. All tree protection zones impacting buildable
area are included in the reduction of buildable area calculation.
   (3)   The tree could be removed due to the conditions listed in Section
8.10.050(a)(1)(i), (ii), or (iii) and treatments or corrective practices are
not feasible.
   (c)   In the case of development involving a proposed subdivision of land
into two or more parcels, a protected tree shall not be removed unless
determined by the urban forester, on the basis of a tree report prepared by a
designated arborist and other relevant information, that either of the
following apply:
   (1)   Removal is unavoidable due to restricted access to the property or
deemed necessary to repair a geologic hazard (landslide, repairs, etc.), in
which case only the protected tree or trees necessary to allow access to the
property or repair the geologic hazard may be removed.
   (2)   The tree could be removed due to the conditions listed in subsection
(a)(1)(i), (ii), or (iii) and treatments or corrective practices are not
feasible.
   (d)   In the case of development requiring planning approval under
Title 18, and not included under subsections (b) or (c), a protected tree shall
not be removed unless determined by the urban forester, on the basis of a tree
report prepared by a designated arborist and other relevant information, that
any of the following apply:
   (1)   Retention of one or more trees would result in reduction of the
otherwise-permissible buildable area of the lot by more than twenty-five
percent, and there is no financially feasible design alternative that would
permit preservation of the tree(s), where financially feasible means an
alternative that preserves the tree(s) unless retaining the tree(s) would
increase project cost by more than twice the reproduction cost of the tree or
ten percent of the given project valuation, whichever is greater. All tree
protection zones impacting buildable area are included in the reduction of
buildable area calculation.
   (2)   The tree should be removed because it is dead, hazardous, or
constitutes a public nuisance under Section
8.04.050. In such cases, the tree protection zone of the removed tree, or an
equivalent area on the site, shall be preserved for mitigation purposes from
development of any structure.
   (3)   Discretionary development review determines that the final project
follows right tree in the right place principles and would result in a net tree
canopy increase on the property within fifteen years, and replacement of trees,
shrubs, and plants either:
   (i)   Is consistent with Urban Forest Master Plan Goal 2: "Re-generated
native woodland and riparian landscapes as the key ecological basis of the
urban forest with focus on native species and habitat," or
   (ii)   Uses climate adaptive, drought tolerant species.
   (e)   In any circumstance other than those described in subsections (a),
(b), (c), or (d), a protected tree shall not be removed unless determined by
the urban forester, on the basis of a tree report prepared by a designated
arborist and other relevant information, that the tree is dead, is hazardous,
or constitutes a public nuisance under Section
8.04.050.
(Ord. 5612 § 2 (part), 2024: Ord. 5557 § 4 (part), 2022: Ord. 5494 § 3, 2020:
Ord. 4826 § 4, 2004: Ord. 4680 § 3, 2001: Ord. 4568 § 1 (part), 1999)
8.10.055   Tree replacement.
   (a)   In the event a protected tree is removed pursuant to Section
8.10.050(a)(1)(i), mitigation for the removed tree, replacement tree ratio, in
lieu fees, or a combination thereof shall be determined by the urban forester,
based on factors including but not limited to the species, size, location, and
specific reason for removal of the protected tree, in accordance with the
standards and specifications in the Tree and Landscape Technical Manual.
   (b)   In the event a protected tree is removed pursuant to Section
8.10.050 (a)(1)(ii), (iii), or (iv), (b), (c), (d), or (e), the tree removed
shall be replaced in accordance with the standards and specifications in the
Tree and Landscape Technical Manual, including but not limited to
prioritization of locally native species, satisfaction of right tree in the
right place principles, and incorporation of a secondary goal of net tree
canopy increase on the property within fifteen years. The urban forester shall
approve the number, species, size, and location of replacement trees.
(Ord. 5612 § 2 (part), 2024: Ord. 5557 § 4 (part), 2022)
8.10.060   No limitation of authority under Titles 16 and 18.
   Nothing in this chapter limits or modifies the existing authority of the
city under Title 18 to require trees, shrubs, hedges, and other plants not
covered by this chapter to be identified, retained, protected, and/or planted
as conditions of the approval of development. In the event of conflict between
provisions of this chapter and conditions of any permit or other approval
granted pursuant to Title 16 or Title 18, the more protective requirements
shall prevail.
(Ord. 5557 § 4 (part), 2022: Ord. 4826 § 5, 2004: Ord. 4568 § 1 (part), 1999)
8.10.070   Care of protected trees.
   (a)   All owners of property containing protected trees shall follow the
maintenance standards in the Tree and Landscape Technical Manual, including
avoiding any action foreseeably leading to the death of a tree or permanent
damage to its health; including but not limited to excessive pruning, cutting,
topping, girdling, poisoning, overwatering, underwatering, unauthorized
relocation or transportation of a tree, or trenching, excavating, altering the
grade, or paving within the tree protection zone of a tree.
   (b)   At least seven days prior to pruning a protected tree, other than that
required to remove a dead, diseased, or broken branch or branches, the property
owner or their designee shall prominently post a notice on the property, in one
or more locations readily visible to the public, that includes standards for
pruning and a description of the tree including tree species, size, location,
the date of work, and a contact phone number. The form for such notice will be
available on the city's website as a printable document. Protected trees less
than five years old are exempt from this provision.
   (c)   Any requests to exceed the limits for pruning set forth in Section
8.10.020(i) shall be submitted to the urban forester by the property owner or
their designee at least fourteen days prior to pruning a protected tree. Each
request shall be accompanied by a statement explaining why exceedance of the
limits is warranted. No pruning that exceeds the limits set forth in Section
8.10.020(i) shall take place without the approval of the urban forester.
   (d)   The standards for protection of trees during construction contained in
the Tree and Landscape Technical Manual shall be followed during any
development on property containing trees.
   (e)   The urban forester shall add identified protected trees into the
city's tree inventory database and, in coordination with the planning and
development services departments, into city parcel reports.
(Ord. 5612 § 2 (part), 2024: Ord. 5557 § 4 (part), 2022: Ord. 4568 § 1 (part),
1999)
8.10.080   Development conditions.
   (a)   Development approvals for property containing protected public trees
shall include appropriate conditions as set forth in the Tree and Landscape
Technical Manual, providing for the protection of such trees during
construction and for maintenance of such trees thereafter. Trees may be
designated for protection that are significant visually or historically,
provide screening, or are healthy and important to the nearby ecosystem.
   (b)   It shall be a violation of this chapter for any property owner or
agent of the owner to fail to comply with any development approval or building
permit condition concerning preservation, protection, and maintenance of any
tree, including but not limited to protected trees.
(Ord. 5557 § 4 (part), 2022: Ord. 4568 § 1 (part), 1999)
8.10.090   Designation of heritage trees.
   (a)   Upon nomination by any person and with the written consent of the
property owner(s), the city council may designate a tree or trees as a heritage
tree.
   (b)   A tree may be designated as a heritage tree upon a finding that it is
of importance to the community due to any of the following factors:
   (1)   It is an outstanding specimen of a desirable species.
   (2)   It is one of the largest or oldest trees in Palo Alto.
   (3)   It possesses distinctive form, size, age, location, and/or historical
significance.
   (c)   After council approval of a heritage tree designation, the city clerk
shall notify the property owner(s) in writing. A listing of trees so
designated, including the specific locations thereof, shall be kept by the
departments of public works.
   (d)   Once designated, a heritage tree shall be considered protected and
subject to the provisions of this chapter unless removed from the list of
heritage trees by action of the city council. The city council may remove a
tree from the list upon its own motion or upon written request by the property
owner. Request for such action must originate in the same manner as nomination
for heritage tree designation.
(Ord. 5557 § 4 (part), 2022: Ord. 4568 § 1 (part), 1999)
8.10.092   Tree removal in wildland-urban interface area.
   Tree removal and relocation in the wildland-urban interface (WUI) area, as
defined in Section
15.04.190, shall be subject to the provisions in
Chapter 15.04. To the extent
Chapter 15.04 is inconsistent with this chapter,
Chapter 15.04 shall control.
(Ord. 5557 § 4 (part), 2022)
8.10.095   Tree removal in Hospital District Zone.
   Tree removal and relocation in the Hospital District (HD) shall be subject
to the provisions in Section
18.36.070. To the extent Section
18.36.070 is inconsistent with this chapter, Section
18.36.070 shall control.
(Ord. 5557 § 4 (part), 2022: Ord. 5123 § 2, 2011)
8.10.100   Enforcement.
   (a)   Violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor, punishable as provided in
this code. Each day of violation constitutes a separate offense and may be
separately punished.
   (b)   Persons employed in the following designated employee positions are
authorized to exercise the authority provided in California Penal Code Section
836.5 and are authorized to issue citations for violations of this chapter,
including but not limited to leveling fines under the city's administrative
penalty authority: assistant director of public works public services division,
urban forester, project manager in the urban forestry section, landscape
architect, and code enforcement officer.
(Ord. 5557 § 4 (part), 2022: Ord. 4568 § 1 (part), 1999)
8.10.110   Remedies for violation.
   In addition to all other remedies set forth in this code or otherwise
provided by law, the following remedies shall be available to the city for
violation of this chapter:
   (a)   Stop Work - Temporary Moratorium.
   (1)   If a violation occurs in the absence of proposed development pursuant
to Section
8.10.050(a)(1), or while an application for a building permit or discretionary
development approval for the lot upon which the tree is located is pending, the
director of planning and development services in consultation with the urban
forester shall issue a temporary moratorium on development of the subject
property, not to exceed five years from the date the violation occurred. The
purpose of the moratorium is to provide the city an opportunity to study and
determine appropriate mitigation measures for the tree removal, and to ensure
measures are incorporated into any future development approvals for the
property. Mitigation measures as determined by the urban forester shall be
imposed as a condition of any subsequent permits for development on the subject
property.
   (2)   If a violation occurs during development pursuant to Section
8.10.050(b), (c), (d), or (e), the city shall issue a stop work order
suspending and prohibiting further activity on the property pursuant to the
grading, demolition, and/or building permit(s) (including construction,
inspection, and issuance of certificates of occupancy) until a mitigation plan
has been filed with and approved by the director of planning and development
services in consultation with the urban forester, agreed to in writing by the
property owner(s), and either implemented or guaranteed by the posting of
adequate security. The mitigation plan shall include measures for protection or
repair of any remaining trees on the property, and shall provide for
replacement of each tree removed on the property or at locations approved by
the urban forester. The replacement ratio shall be in accordance with the
standards set forth in the Tree and Landscape Technical Manual, and shall be at
least twice the prescribed ratio required where tree removal is permitted
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
   (b)   Civil penalties.
   (1)   As part of a civil action brought by the city, a court may assess
against any person who commits, allows, or maintains a violation of any
provision of this chapter a civil penalty in the following amount:
   (i)   Ten thousand dollars per tree, or twice the reproduction cost of each
tree, whichever amount is higher, for the complete removal of a tree, as
defined in Section
8.10.020(n)(1).
   (ii)   Ten thousand dollars per tree, or the reproduction cost of each tree,
whichever amount is higher, for any of the actions set forth in Section
8.10.020(n)(2).
   (iii)   Ten thousand dollars per tree, or twice the repair cost of each
tree, whichever amount is higher, for damage to a tree protected or regulated
by this chapter which can be rehabilitated.
   (2)   Penalties shall be payable to the city.
   (3)   Reproduction or repair cost for the purposes of this chapter shall be
determined utilizing the most recent edition of the Guide for Plant Appraisal,
published by the Council of Tree and Landscape Appraisers.
   (c)   Administrative penalties. Persons listed in Section
8.10.100(b) may issue citations for violations of this chapter that level fines
under the city's administrative penalty authority.
   (d)   Injunctive relief. A civil action may be commenced to abate, enjoin,
or otherwise compel the cessation of such violation.
   (e)   Costs. In any civil action brought pursuant to this chapter in which
the city prevails, the court shall award to the city all costs of investigation
and preparation for trial, the costs of trial, reasonable expenses including
overhead and administrative costs incurred in prosecuting the action, and
reasonable attorney fees.
   (f)   The remedies and penalties provided in this section are cumulative and
not exclusive.
(Ord. 5557 § 4 (part), 2022: Ord. 4568 § 1 (part), 1999)
8.10.120   Fees.
   Tree reports required to be submitted to the city for review and evaluation
pursuant to this chapter shall be accompanied by the fee prescribed therefor in
the municipal fee schedule.
(Ord. 4568 § 1 (part), 1999)
8.10.130   Severability.
   If any provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or
circumstance is held to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such
invalidity shall not affect any other provision of this chapter which can be
given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the
provisions of this chapter are declared to be severable.
(Ord. 4568 § 1 (part), 1999)
8.10.140   Applications, notice, and appeals.
   (a)   Applications.
   (1)   All applications for removal of a protected tree pursuant to Section
8.10.050 shall be filed in accordance with this section and any applicable
provisions of
Chapter 18.77. Applications for removal of protected trees on non-residential
zoned properties will follow review guidelines set forth in Section
8.10.050(d) and Section
18.76.020 and will follow the process set forth in Section
18.77.070.
   (2)   The application form shall be prescribed by the urban forester and
shall contain a list of information that must be submitted in order for the
application to be deemed complete.
   (3)   Each application must be signed by all owners of the real property
containing the protected tree, or an agent of the owner of record of the real
property on which the protected tree occurs, when duly authorized by the owner
in writing.
   (4)   No application shall be deemed received until all fees for the
application as set forth in the municipal fees schedule have been paid, and all
documents specified as part of the application in this chapter or on the
application form have been filed.
   (5)   Protected tree removal permits shall automatically expire after twelve
months, unless otherwise provided in the permit, from the date of issuance of
the permit if within such twelve-month period, the proposed tree has not been
removed.
   (b)   Notice.
   (1)   All applications for removal of a protected tree pursuant to Section
8.10.050 shall give notice in accordance with this section, the Tree and
Landscape Technical Manual, and any applicable provisions of
Chapter 18.77.
   (2)   After submittal of an application to remove a protected tree, notice
shall be given consistent with subsection (b)(4) and shall include the date of
the proposed removal and the basis for the application.
   (3)   Upon determination of a protected tree removal application, notice
shall be given consistent with subsection (b)(4) and shall include a
description of the decision and how to appeal it.
   (4)   Notices required pursuant to this section shall include the address of
the property, a description of the protected tree, including species, size, and
location, and urban forestry contact information, and shall be given as
follows:
   (i)   In writing to all owners and residents of property within 300 feet of
the exterior boundary of the property containing the protected tree, and to all
principal urban forestry partner organizations.
   (ii)   By posting on the property, in one or more locations visible to the
public.
   (iii)   By posting on the city's website.
   (c)   Appeals.
   (1)   Any person applying to remove a protected tree in the absence of
proposed development pursuant to Section
8.10.050(a), and any owner or resident of property within 600 feet of the
exterior boundary of the property containing the protected tree, may request a
public hearing by the director of public works to review the urban forester's
decision, and may appeal the director of public works' determination to the
city council. Any such request or appeal shall be filed with the public works
department in a manner prescribed by the urban forester.
   (2)   Any person applying to remove a protected tree pursuant to Section
8.10.050(b), (c), (d), or (e), and any owner or resident of property within 600
feet of the exterior boundary of the property containing the protected tree may
request a hearing by the director of planning and development services to
review the decision. The request for a hearing shall be filed with the planning
division in a manner prescribed by the director of planning and development
services. An appeal of the director of planning and development services
determination shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures set forth in
Chapter 18.78.
   (3)   All appeals must be filed within fourteen days of posting of notice on
the property pursuant to subsection (b)(4)(ii).
(Ord. 5612 § 2 (part), 2024: Ord. 5557 § 4 (part), 2022: Ord. 4826 § 6, 2004:
Ord. 4568 § 1 (part), 1999)
Title 9 PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND SAFETY*
Chapters:
   
9.04   Alcoholic Beverages
   
9.06   Reserved
   
9.07   Safe Storage of Firearms
   
9.08   Guns and Explosives
   
9.09   Public Nuisance
   
9.10   Noise
   
9.12   Loudspeakers
   
9.14   Smoking and Tobacco Regulations
   
9.16   Reserved
   
9.17   Reserved
   
9.20   Reserved
   
9.22   Impersonating Public Officials
   
9.24   Reserved
   
9.26   Private Patrol Service
   
9.28   Hotels and Rooming Houses
   
9.32   Reserved
   
9.40   Aircraft
   
9.44   Solicitation of Employment, Business, or Contributions Within Public
Parking Lots
   
9.45   Solicitation in Streets, Commercial Parking Areas, and in and Adjacent
to Driveway Entrances
   
9.48   Obstructing Streets and Sidewalks
   
9.50   Graffiti
   
9.56   Abatement of Nuisances
   
9.57   Reserved
   
9.60   Civic Center Block Regulations
   
9.64   Regulation of Community Facilities
   
9.65   Residential Rental Registry Program
   
9.68   Rental Housing Stabilization
   
9.70   Resale Controls For Units Originally Financed With Mortgage Revenue
Bonds
   
9.72   Mandatory Response to Request for Discussion of Disputes Between
Landlords and Tenants
   
9.73   City Policy Against Arbitrary Discrimination
   
9.74   Discrimination Against Families with Minor Children in Housing
   
9.76   Mobilehome Park Conversion
   
9.78   Mosquito Abatement
   
9.79   Newsracks
   *   A city may enact local, police, sanitary and other regulations not in
conflict with general laws. See Constitution Article 11 § 11. For public dance
provisions - See
Chapter 4.46. For park regulations - See Title 22.
Chapter 9.04
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Sections:
   
9.04.010   Streets, sidewalks, highways, alleys - Consumption of alcoholic
beverages prohibited.
   
9.04.020   City parking lots - Consumption of alcoholic beverages prohibited.
   
9.04.030   Retail package off-site sale outlets - Possession of open containers
prohibited.
   9.04.040   Certain social gatherings unlawful.
9.04.010   Streets, sidewalks, highways, alleys - Consumption of alcoholic
beverages prohibited.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage
upon any street, sidewalk, highway or alley except as may be authorized by City
Council.
   (b)   Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section, alcoholic beverages
may be consumed in a city-owned right-of-way by patrons within legally
permitted eating establishment seating areas in accordance with, and subject to
a conditional use permit issued pursuant to §
18.76.010 of this code.
(Ord. 4991 § 1, 2008: Ord. 4051 § 1, 1991: Ord. 3364 § 1 (part), 1982)
9.04.020   City parking lots - Consumption of alcoholic beverages prohibited.
   (a)   Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, it shall be
unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage in or upon any of the
following listed city-owned, operated or controlled parking lots or garages:
      Lot   Location
   (1)   Lot J   University & Hamilton/Cowper & Webster
   (2)   Lot H   University & Hamilton/Waverly & Cowper
   (3)   Lot D   University & Hamilton/Waverly & Gilman
   (4)   Lot N   University & Hamilton/Ramona & Emerson
   (5)   Lot P   University & Hamilton/Emerson & High
   (6)   Lot R   University & Hamilton/High & Alma
   (7)   Lot T   University & Lytton/Kipling & Waverly
   (8)   Lot F   University & Lytton/Waverly & Florence
   (9)   Lot S   University & Lytton/Florence & Bryant
   (10)   Lot C   University & Lytton/Bryant & Ramona
   (11)   Lot A   University & Lytton/Ramona & Emerson
   (12)   Lot O   University & Lytton/Emerson & High
   (13)   Lot Q   University & Lytton/High & Alma
   (14)   Lot K (2)   Lytton & Everett/Waverly & Bryant
   (15)   Lot G   Hamilton & Forest/Waverly & Gilman
   (16)   Lot E   Hamilton & Forest/Gilman & Bryant
   (17)   Lot CC (Civic Center)   Hamilton & Forest/Bryant & Ramona
   (18)   Library Lot   Forest & Homer/Bryant & Ramona
   (19)   Lot C-1   Cambridge & College/Park & Birch
   (20)   Lot C-2   Cambridge & College/Birch & Ash
   (21)   Lot C-3   Cambridge & California/Park & Birch
   (22)   Lot C-9   Cambridge & California/Birch & Ash
   (23)   Lot C-4   Cambridge & California/Birch & Ash
   (24)   Lot C-5   Cambridge & California/Ash & El Camino
   (25)   Lot C-6   California & Sherman/Park & Birch
   (26)   Lot C-7   California & Sherman/Birch & Ash
   (27)   Lot C-8   California & Sherman/Ash & El Camino
   (28)   Lot   Middlefield & Midtown Court/Colorado & Moreno
   (29)   Lot L   Bryant & Lytton
   (b)   Permits. Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section, in
conjunction with a conditional use permit for a temporary use issued pursuant
to Section 18.88.200, the zoning administrator or his designee may grant to any
Palo Alto resident, business entity, or organization doing business in Palo
Alto an authorization for consumption of alcoholic beverages in and upon the
following parking lots or garages: Lot D, Lot P, Lot R, Lot S, Lot N, Lot O,
Lot Q, Lot C-4, Lot C-5, and Lot C-8. No authorization for consumption of
alcoholic beverages hereunder shall be granted for or shall be effective during
any days or hours other than Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Friday and Saturday
six p.m. to eleven p.m., and Sunday ten a.m. to eleven p.m. No such
authorization shall be granted if the zoning administrator determines it would
interfere with normal operations or usage of said parking lot. The zoning
administrator may require applicant to furnish any information necessary to
review and consider the application and shall require applicant to provide
insurance naming the city of Palo Alto as an additional insured party to the
policy with minimum coverage as required by city as a condition to issuance of
such permit. The applicable fee shall be that set forth in the municipal fee
schedule for conditional use permits for a temporary use.
(Ord. 4826 § 7, 2004: Ord. 4642 § 9, 2000: Ord. 4051 § 2, 1991: Ord. 3379 § 1,
1982: Ord. 3364 § 1 (part), 1982)
9.04.030   Retail package off-site sale outlets - Possession of open containers
prohibited.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person who has in his or her possession
any bottle, can, or other receptacle containing any alcoholic beverage which
has been opened, or a seal broken, or the contents of which have been partially
removed, to enter, remain, or be on the posted premises of any retail package
off-sale alcoholic beverage licensee licensed pursuant to Division 9
(commencing with Section 23000) of the California Business and Professions
Code.
   (b)   As used in subsection (a), "posted premises" means those premises
which are subject to licensure under any retail package off-sale alcoholic
beverage license as well as the parking lot immediately adjacent to the
licensed premises and any public sidewalk immediately adjacent to the licensed
premises on which clearly visible notices indicate to the patrons of the
licensee and parking lot and to persons on the public sidewalk that the
provisions of subdivision (a) are applicable.
   (c)   The owner and each operator of the posted premises shall post
prominent signs warning patrons of the prohibitions against possession of open
containers of alcoholic beverage prescribed in this ordinance; such signs shall
be posted prominently at each entry and at each exit to the posted premises, in
any immediately adjacent parking lot, and on the frontage of the posted
premises immediately adjacent to any public sidewalk adjacent to the posted
premises.
   (d)   Violations of any provision of this section shall be punishable as an
infraction.
(Ord. 4358 § 2, 1996)
9.04.040   Certain social gatherings unlawful.
   (a)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following words
have the following meanings:
   (1)   "Juvenile" means any minor child under the age of eighteen years of
age.
   (2)   "Minor" means any person under the age of twenty-one years of age.
   (3)   "Gathering or event" means a group of four or more persons who have
assembled or are assembling for a social occasion or a social activity.
   (4)   "Persons responsible for the event" means and includes, but is not
limited to:
   (A)   The person who owns, rents, leases or otherwise has control of the
premises where the gathering or event takes place; provided that the term
"person" shall not include the owner of the premises where the owner leases or
rents the premises to a third party and has no actual knowledge that the
gathering or event in question will take place on the premises.
   (B)   The person in charge of the premises.
   (C)   The person who organized the event and/or the host of the event.
   (b)   No person under the age of twenty-one years shall consume or have in
his/her possession or control any alcoholic beverage at any place not open to
the public, unless that person is being supervised by his/her parent or legal
guardian.
   (c)   Except as permitted by Article I, Section 4, of the California
Constitution, and the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act (California Business and
Professions Code Sections 23000 et seq.), no person shall suffer, permit, allow
or host a gathering or event at his/her place of residence or other private
property, place or premises under his/her control where persons under the age
of twenty-one are present and alcoholic beverages are in the possession of, or
are being consumed by, any person under the age of twenty-one years in
violation of subdivision (b) of this section.
(Ord. 4981 § 1, 2007)
Chapter 9.06
RESERVED*
*   Editor’s Note: Chapter 9.06, Wood Burning Fireplaces and Appliances,
previously codified herein, was repealed in its entirety by Section 6 of
Ordinance No. 5108.
   Editor’s Note: Chapter 9.06, Human Habitation of Vehicles, previously
codified herein, was repealed in its entirety by Section 1 of Ordinance No.
5286.
Chapter 9.07
SAFE STORAGE OF FIREARMS
Sections:
   
9.07.010   Definitions.
   
9.07.020   Safe storage of firearms.
   
9.07.030   Exception.
9.07.010   Definitions.
   (a)   For the purpose of this chapter, "firearm" means a firearm as defined
in Section 16520 of the Penal Code of the State of California.
   (b)   "Locked container" means a locked container, as defined in Section
16850 of the Penal Code of the State of California listed on the California
Department of Justice Bureau of Firearms roster of approved firearm safety
devices. For purposes of this chapter, a locked container does not include a
bag or other container made of fabric or other penetrable material, such as a
regular purse, backpack, or gym bag.
   (c)   "Residence" means any structure intended or used for human habitation,
including but not limited to houses, condominiums, rooms, accessory dwelling
units, motels, hotels, single room occupancies, time shares, recreational
vehicles, and other vehicles where human habitation occurs.
   (d)   "Trigger lock" means a trigger lock that is listed on the California
Department of Justice's roster of approved firearms safety devices and that is
identified as appropriate for that firearm by reference to either the
manufacturer and model of the firearm or to the physical characteristics of the
firearm that match those listed on the roster for use with the device under
Section 23635 of the Penal Code of the State of California.
(Ord. 5530 § 2 (part), 2021)
9.07.020   Safe Storage of Firearms.
   Except when carried on the person, no person shall keep a firearm in any
residence unless the firearm is stored in a locked container or is disabled
with a trigger lock.
(Ord. 5530 § 2 (part), 2021)
9.07.030   Exception.
   To encourage reporting of lost or stolen firearms, a person who complies
with Section 25250 of the Penal Code of the State of California by reporting
the loss or theft of a firearm they own or possess to a local law enforcement
agency within five days from the time they knew or reasonably should have known
the firearm had been lost or stolen from their residence where the firearm was
improperly stored shall not be penalized for that violation of Section
9.07.020.
(Ord. 5530 § 2 (part), 2021)
Chapter 9.08
GUNS AND EXPLOSIVES
Sections:
   
9.08.010   Firing and possession of guns and firearms.
   
9.08.020   Exceptions.
   
9.08.030   Carry of firearms in sensitive places.
9.08.010   Firing and possession of guns and firearms.
   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter no person shall have in his
possession within this city, and no person shall fire or discharge, or cause to
be fired or discharged within this city, nor shall any parent, guardian or
person having the care, custody or control of any minor permit such minor to
have in his possession within this city, or to fire or discharge or cause to be
fired or discharged within the city, any firearm, cannon, fireworks, gun,
pistol, revolver, anvil, firecracker or explosive of similar nature, rifle, air
rifle, air-gun, BB gun or pellet gun or any instrument of any kind, character
or description which throws or projects bullets or missiles of any kind to any
distance by means of elastic force, air or any explosive substance, all
referred to in this section as "firearms."
(Ord. 1720 (part), 1956: prior code § 8.01)
9.08.020   Exceptions.
   (a)   The provisions of Section
9.08.010 as to the use of any of the firearms mentioned therein shall not apply
to any of the following cases:
   (1)   To police, peace officers or persons in military service in the
discharge of their duties and using reasonable care;
   (2)   To persons using firearms in necessary self-defense;
   (3)   To the possession of such firearms for keeping at the place of
residence or business of the person otherwise in lawful possession thereof, or
while traveling to or from a legal firing, shooting or target range or hunting
ground;
   (4)   To the discharging or firing of such firearms or causing them to be
discharged or fired at a legal firing, shooting or target range or hunting
ground;
   (5)   To the discharging or firing of fireworks after permit therefor has
been issued by the fire chief;
   (6)   To the use of a gun firing .22 caliber shot-cartridge only, upon a
written permit applied for and granted by the chief of police to protect life
or property against animals, birds or rodents;
   (7)   To the discharging or firing of a pistol incapable of projecting any
bullet or missile (a) for the sole purpose of starting an organized athletic
event, by an official who has charge of the competitors at the start of the
athletic event; or (b) for use as a theater prop in a bona fide theatrical
production.
(Ord. 2936 § 1, 1976: Ord. 2142 (part), 1963: Ord. 1720 (part), 1956: prior
code § 8.02)
9.08.030   Carry of firearms in sensitive places.
   (a)   Purpose and intent. The purpose of this section is to protect
sensitive places that have traditionally been subject to restrictions on
carrying or possessing firearms, consistent with the Supreme Court’s guidance
in N.Y. State Rifle & Pistol Ass’n v. Bruen (2022), 142 S. Ct. 2111; to protect
health, life, and property within the city; and to preserve the order and
security of the city, its inhabitants, and its visitors.
   (b)   Prohibition. Except as otherwise provided by federal or state law, no
person shall carry a firearm in any sensitive place unless they are subject to
an exemption under subsection (d) of this section. This prohibition applies to
persons licensed to carry a concealed firearm.
   (c)   For the purposes of this section, “sensitive place” means any of the
following:
      (1)   Any building owned by or under the control of city government for
the purpose of government administration;
      (2)   Any building within the geographic boundaries of the city that is
owned or leased by a public entity other than the city for the purposes of
government administration, where the public entity that owns or leases the
property has authorized the city to enforce this prohibition on said property;
      (3)   Any polling place while voting is occurring;
      (4)   Any school. For the purposes of this section, “school” includes all
institutions that provide preschool, elementary, secondary, post-secondary,
technical, or trade or vocational education, and includes all athletic
facilities, offices, cafeterias and eating establishments, health care
facilities, research facilities, parking lots, and shared rooms and common
areas of dormitories thereof. “School” does not include a private residence at
which education is provided for children who are all related to one another by
blood, marriage, or adoption.
   (d)   Exemptions. This section shall not apply to:
      (1)   A federal, state, or local law enforcement officer when such person
is authorized to carry a concealed weapon or a loaded firearm under state law
or under 18 U.S.C. Section 926B or any successor legislation;
      (2)   An honorably retired officer or agent of a law enforcement agency,
when authorized to carry a concealed or loaded weapon under state law or 18
U.S.C. Section 926C;
      (3)   A security guard or messenger of a financial institution, a guard
of a contract carrier operating an armored vehicle, a licensed private
investigator, a patrol operator, an alarm company operator, or security guard,
when such persons are authorized by applicable state or federal law to carry a
firearm and when such persons are engaged in the exercise of their official
duties;
      (4)   A person bringing or transporting an unloaded firearm onto city
property to exchange, transfer, or relinquish it to law enforcement, in
compliance with any city operated, approved, or sponsored program to purchase,
exchange, or otherwise obtain voluntary relinquishment of firearms;
      (5)   A person lawfully possessing an unloaded firearm in the locked
trunk of, or inside a locked container in, a motor vehicle;
      (6)   A hunter with a valid hunting license when going to or returning
from a legal hunting expedition; provided, however, that when transiting
through any area where firearms are prohibited, any firearm is safely stored in
a locked container or otherwise secured using a firearm safety device as
defined by California Penal Code Section 16540 or any successor legislation.
   (e)   Penalties. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable as set forth in
Chapter 1.08 of the Palo Alto Municipal Code.
(Ord. 5578 § 3, 2023)
Chapter 9.09
PUBLIC NUISANCE
Sections:
   
9.09.010   Regulating public nuisance.
9.09.010   Regulating public nuisance.
   It shall be unlawful for any person on any street or in any public place
within the city to do any of the following:
   (a)   To urinate or defecate, except at a lavatory facility.
   (b)   To willfully and maliciously disturb any lawful assemblage or
procession of persons.
   (c)   To ignite, cause to be ignited, permit to be ignited, or suffer, allow
or maintain any outdoor fire except as permitted by Section
22.04.300 of this code.
   This subsection (c) applies to activities on private property as well as on
public property.
(Ord. 4911 § 2, 2006)
Chapter 9.10
NOISE*
Sections:
   
9.10.010   Declaration of policy.
   
9.10.020   Definitions.
   
9.10.030   Residential property noise limits.
   
9.10.040   Commercial and industrial property noise limits.
   
9.10.050   Public property noise limits.
   
9.10.060   Special provisions.
   
9.10.070   Exception permits.
   
9.10.080   Violations.
   *   Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history: Ordinances 2664, 3609, 3640,
3751, 3763, 3790, 3881, 4453.
9.10.010   Declaration of policy.
   It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city that the peace, health,
safety and welfare of the citizens of Palo Alto require protection from
excessive, unnecessary and unreasonable noises from any and all sources in the
community. It is the intention of the city council to control the adverse
effect of such noise sources on the citizen under any condition of use,
especially those conditions of use which have the most severe impact upon any
person.
(Ord. 4634 § 2 (part), 2000)
9.10.020   Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms are defined as follows:
   (a)   "Sound level," expressed in decibels (dB), means a logarithmic
indication of the ratio between the acoustic energy present at a given location
and the lowest amount of acoustic energy audible to sensitive human ears and
weighted by frequency to account for characteristics of human hearing, as given
in the American National Standards Institute Standard S1.1, "Acoustic
Terminology," paragraph 2.9, or successor reference. All references to dB in
this chapter utilize the A-level weighting scale, abbreviated dBA, measured as
set forth in this section.
   (b)   "Precision sound level meter" means a device for measuring sound level
in decibel units within the performance specifications in the American National
Standards Institute Standard S1.4, "Specification for Sound Level Meters."
   (c)   "Noise level" means the maximum continuous sound level or repetitive
peak sound level, produced by a source or group of sources as measured with a
precision sound level meter. In order to measure a noise level, the controls of
the precision sound level meter should be arranged to the setting appropriate
to the type of noise being measured.
   (d)   "Local ambient" means the lowest sound level repeating itself during a
six-minute period as measured with a precision sound level meter, using slow
response and "A" weighting. The minimum sound level shall be determined with
the noise source at issue silent, and in the same location as the measurement
of the noise level of the source or sources at issue. However, for purposes of
this chapter, in no case shall the local ambient be considered or determined to
be less than: (1) Thirty dBA for interior noise in Section
9.10.030(b); (2) Forty dBA in all other sections. If a significant portion of
the local ambient is produced by one or more individual identifiable sources
which would otherwise be operating continuously during the six-minute
measurement period and contributing significantly to the ambient sound level,
determination of the local ambient shall be accomplished with these separate
identifiable noise sources silent.
   (e)   "Vehicle" means any device by which any person or property may be
propelled, moved, or drawn upon a highway or street.
   (f)   "Property plane" means a vertical plane including the property line
which determines the property boundaries in space.
   (g)   "Emergencies" mean essential activities necessary to restore,
preserve, protect or save lives or property from imminent danger of loss or
harm.
   (h)   "Leaf blower" means any portable machine used to blow leaves, dirt and
other debris off sidewalks, driveways, lawns or other surfaces.
   (i)   "Residential power equipment" means any mechanically powered saw,
sander, drill, grinder, generator, lawnmower, hedge trimmer, edger, or any
other similar tool or device (other than leaf blowers).
   (j)   "Residential zone" means all lands located within the following zoning
districts: RE, R1, R2, RMD, RM-20, RM-30, and RM-40; "residential zone" also
means any lands located within Planned Community (PC) zoning districts actually
used for authorized residential purposes. Any zoning district other than those
defined as residential zones are classified as non-residential zones for
purposes of this chapter.
   (k)   "Holiday" means and includes New Year's Day (January 1), Martin Luther
King Day (the third Monday in January), Washington's Birthday (the third Monday
in February), Memorial Day (the last Monday in May), Independence Day (July 4),
Labor Day (the first Monday in September), Columbus Day (the second Monday in
October), Veteran's Day (November 11), Thanksgiving Day (the fourth Thursday in
November), and Christmas Day (December 25).
(Ord. 5460 § 15, 2019: Ord. 4634 § 2 (part), 2000)
9.10.030   Residential property noise limits.
   (a)   No person shall produce, suffer or allow to be produced by any
machine, animal or device, or any combination of same, on residential property,
a noise level more than six dB above the local ambient at any point outside of
the property plane, except as modified in (c) below.
   (b)   No person shall produce, suffer or allow to be produced by any
machine, animal, or device, or any combination of same, on multi-family
residential property, a noise level more than six dB above the local ambient
three feet from any wall, floor, or ceiling inside any dwelling unit on the
same property, when the windows and doors of the dwelling unit are closed,
except within the dwelling unit in which the noise source or sources may be
located.
   (c)   Electrification Equipment shall be deemed to comply with this Section
9.10.030 if the equipment complies with the maximum equipment sound levels and
is placed at the setbacks established in Table 1 - Setback Requirements. As an
alternative to compliance with Table 1, a property owner may utilize the limits
set forth in subsections (a) and (b) of this Section
9.10.030 if those provisions would be more permissive.
Table 1 - Setback Requirements
Equipment Sound Equipment Sound Equipment Sound Equipment Sound
Level (dBA)     Level (dBA)     Level (dBA)     Level (dBA)     Minimum Setback
West of         East of         West of         East of         from Receiving
Foothill        Foothill        Foothill        Foothill        Property Line
Expressway      Expressway      Expressway for  Expressway for  (ft.)
                                Inverter Pumps  Inverter Pumps
Table 1 - Setback Requirements
Equipment Sound Equipment Sound Equipment Sound Equipment Sound
Level (dBA)     Level (dBA)     Level (dBA)     Level (dBA)     Minimum Setback
West of         East of         West of         East of         from Receiving
Foothill        Foothill        Foothill        Foothill        Property Line
Expressway      Expressway      Expressway for  Expressway for  (ft.)
                                Inverter Pumps  Inverter Pumps
43              53              45              55              3
44              54              46              56              4
45              55              47              57              4
46              56              48              58              5
47              57              49              59              5
48              58              50              60              6
49              59              51              61              7
50              60              52              62              7
51              61              53              63              8
52              62              54              64              9
53              63              55              65              10
54              64              56              66              12
55              65              57              67              13
56              66              58              68              15
57              67              59              69              17
58              68              60              70              19
59              69              61              71              21
60              70              62              72              24
61              71              63              73              27
62              72              64              74              30
63              73              65              75              34
 
(Ord. 5601 § 8, 2023: Ord. 4634 § 2 (part), 2000)
9.10.040   Commercial and industrial property noise limits.
   No person shall produce, suffer or allow to be produced by any machine or
device, or any combination of same, on commercial or industrial property, a
noise level more than eight dB above the local ambient at any point outside of
the property plane.
(Ord. 4634 § 2 (part), 2000)
9.10.050   Public property noise limits.
   (a)   No person shall produce, suffer or allow to be produced by any machine
or device, or any combination of same, on public property, a noise level more
than fifteen dB above the local ambient at a distance of twenty-five feet or
more, unless otherwise provided in this chapter.
   (b)   Sound performances and special events not exceeding eighty dBA
measured at a distance of fifty feet are exempt from this chapter when approval
therefor has been obtained from the appropriate governmental entity, except as
provided in Section
22.04.180 of this code.
   (c)   Vehicle horns or other devices primarily intended to create a loud
noise for warning purposes, shall not be used when the vehicle is at rest, or
when a situation endangering life, health or property is not imminent.
(Ord. 4634 § 2 (part), 2000)
9.10.060   Special provisions.
   The special exceptions listed in this section shall apply, notwithstanding
the provisions of Sections
9.10.030 through
9.10.050.
   Said exceptions shall apply only to the extent and during the hours
specified in each of the following enumerated exceptions.
   (a)   General Daytime Exception. Any noise source which does not produce a
noise level exceeding seventy dBA at a distance of twenty-five feet under its
most noisy condition of use shall be exempt from the provisions of Sections
9.10.030(a),
9.10.040 and
9.10.050(a) between the hours of eight a.m. and eight p.m. Monday through
Friday, nine a.m. and eight p.m. on Saturday, except Sundays and holidays, when
the exemption herein shall apply between ten a.m. and six p.m.
   (b)   Construction. Except for construction on residential property as
described in subsection (c) of this section, construction, alteration and
repair activities which are authorized by valid city building permit shall be
prohibited on Sundays and holidays and shall be prohibited except between the
hours of eight a.m. and six p.m. Monday through Friday, nine a.m. and six p.m.
on Saturday provided that the construction, demolition or repair activities
during those hours meet the following standards:
       (1)   No individual piece of equipment shall produce a noise level
exceeding one hundred ten dBA at a distance of twenty-five feet. If the device
is housed within a structure on the property, the measurement shall be made
out-side the structure at a distance as close to twenty-five feet from the
equipment as possible.
      (2)   The noise level at any point outside of the property plane of the
project shall not exceed one hundred ten dBA.
      (3)   The holder of a valid construction permit for a construction
project in a non-residential zone shall post a sign at all entrances to the
construction site upon commencement of construction, for the purpose of
informing all contractors and subcontractors, their employees, agents,
materialmen and all other persons at the construction site, of the basic
requirements of this chapter.
         (A)   Said sign(s) shall be posted at least five feet above ground
level, and shall be of a white background, with black lettering, which
lettering shall be a minimum of one and one-half inches in height.
         (B)   Said sign shall read as follows:
   CONSTRUCTION HOURS FOR NON-RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY (Includes Any and All
Deliveries)
      MONDAY–FRIDAY 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
      SATURDAY 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
      SUNDAY/HOLIDAYS Construction prohibited.
Violation of this Ordinance is a misdemeanor punishable by a maximum of six
months in jail, $1,000 fine, or both. Violators will be prosecuted. P.A.M.C. §
9.10.060(b).
   (c)   Construction on Residential Property. Construction, alteration,
demolition or repair activities conducted in a residential zone, authorized by
valid city building permit, shall be prohibited on Sundays and holidays and is
prohibited on all other days except during the hours of eight a.m. and six p.m.
Monday through Friday, nine a.m. and six p.m. on Saturday, provided that the
construction, demolition or repair activities during those hours meet the
following standards:
       (1)   No individual piece of equipment shall produce a noise level
exceeding one hundred ten dBA at a distance of twenty-five feet. If the device
is housed within a structure on the property, the measurement shall be made
outside the structure at a distance as close to twenty-five feet from the
equipment as possible.
      (2)   The noise level at any point outside of the property plane of the
project shall not exceed one hundred ten dBA.
      (3)   The holder of a valid building permit for a construction project
located within any residential zone shall post a sign at all entrances to the
construction site upon commencement of construction, for the purpose of
informing all contractors and subcontractors, their employees, agents,
materialmen and all other persons at the construction site, of the basic
requirements of this chapter.
          (A)   Said sign(s) shall be posted no less than three feet and no
more than five feet above ground level, shall be visible from the adjacent
street, and shall be of a white background, with black lettering, which
lettering shall be a minimum of one and one-half inches in height.
         (B)   Said sign shall read as follows:
CONSTRUCTION HOURS FOR RESIDENTIAL PROPERTIES (includes any and all deliveries)
MONDAY–FRIDAY 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
SATURDAY 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
SUNDAY/HOLIDAYS Construction Prohibited.
Violation of this Ordinance is a misdemeanor punishable by a maximum of six
months in jail, $1,000 fine, or both. Violators will be prosecuted. P.A.M.C. §
9.10.060(b).
   (d)   Other Equipment. Equipment used by city employees, city contractors,
or public utility companies or their contractors, not covered by subsections
(b) and (c) of this section, shall be allowed during the same hours as the
exception set forth in subsection (b) of this section, providing no piece of
equipment shall produce a noise level which exceeds one hundred ten dBA,
measured at a distance of twenty-five feet from the equipment.
    (e)   Residential Power Equipment. Residential power equipment shall be
allowed during the hours of eight a.m. and eight p.m. Monday through Friday,
nine a.m. and six p.m. Saturday, and ten a.m. and six p.m. on Sundays and
holidays, providing it does not produce a noise level that exceeds ninety-five
dBA measured at twenty-five feet from the equipment and is not being operated
for construction regulated in subsections (b) or (c) of this section.
   (f)   Leaf Blowers.
      (1)   No person shall operate any leaf blower which does not bear an
affixed manufacturer’s label indicating the model number of the leaf blower and
designating a noise level not in excess of sixty-five dBA when measured from a
distance of fifty feet utilizing American National Standard Institute method-
ology. Any leaf blower which bears such a manufacturer’s label shall be
presumed to comply with any noise level limit of this chapter provided that it
is operated with all mufflers and full extension tubes supplied by the
manufacturer for that leaf blower. No person shall operate any leaf blower
without attachment of all mufflers and full extension tubes supplied by the
manufacturer for that leaf blower.
      (2)   No person shall operate; cause operation of; or allow operation of
a leaf blower on property a person owns, has control of, or is a tenant of;
(including but not limited to a leaf blower operator, leaf blower operator’s
employer, property owner, property manager, tenant, or other person authorizing
or employing the use of a leaf blower on their property) as follows:
         (A)   Within a residential zone (as defined by Title 18) except during
the following hours: nine a.m. and five p.m. Monday through Friday and ten a.m.
and four p.m. Saturday;
         (B)   Within non-residential zone except during the following hours:
eight a.m. and six p.m. Monday through Friday and ten a.m. to four p.m.
Saturday;
         (C)   On Sundays and holidays; or
         (D)   Within any residential zone, at any time, any leaf blower
powered by an internal combustion engine or any leaf blower powered by a
generator powered by an internal combustion engine.
      (3)   In addition to all authorizations and restrictions otherwise
provided in this chapter, public streets, sidewalks, and parking lots in
business districts and at the Municipal Golf Course and all city parks may be
cleaned between four a.m. and eight a.m. using leaf blowers which bear an
affixed manufacturer’s label indicating the model number of the leaf blower and
designating a noise level not in excess of sixty-five dBA when measured from a
distance of fifty feet utilizing American National Standard Institute
methodology.
      (4)   Enforcement of this subsection (f) is exempt from PAMC section
1.12.030(c).
   (g)   Street Sweeping. Street sweeping activities are allowed between the
hours of ten p.m. and eight a.m. daily, provided they do not produce a noise
level in excess of ninety dBA, when measured at a distance of twenty-five feet
from the street sweeper.
   (h)   Refuse Collection. Refuse collection activities shall be permitted
between the hours of four a.m. and nine p.m. daily, provided they do not
produce a noise level in excess of ninety-five dBA measured at a distance of
twenty-five feet from the activity.
   (i)   Safety Devices. Aural warning devices which are required by law to
protect the health, safety and welfare of the community shall not produce a
noise level more than three dBA above the standard or minimum level stipulated
by law.
   (j)   Emergencies. Emergencies are exempt from this chapter.
   (k)   Public Parking Lot Cleaning. Cleaning equipment (other than leaf
blowers), when used in public parking lots, shall be allowed during the hours
of ten p.m. and eight a.m. daily, providing no such piece of equipment shall
produce a noise level that exceeds ninety dBA measured at a distance of twenty-
five feet.
   (l)   Business District Street Cleaning. Cleaning equipment (other than leaf
blowers), when used in public streets and public sidewalks within the public
right-of-way in business districts shall be allowed during the hours of ten
p.m. and eight a.m. daily, providing no such piece of equipment shall produce a
noise level that exceeds ninety dBA measured at a distance of twenty-five feet.
(Ord. 5591 § 2, 2023: Ord. 4778 §§ 2, 3, 2003: Ord. 4754 § 2, 2002: Ord. 4727 §
2, 2002: Ord. 4634 § 2 (part), 2000)
9.10.070   Exception permits.
   If the applicant can show to the city manager or his designee that a
diligent investigation of available noise abatement techniques indicates that
immediate compliance with the requirements of this chapter would be impractical
or unreasonable, a permit to allow exception from the provisions contained in
all or a portion of this chapter may be issued, with appropriate conditions to
minimize the public detriment caused by such exceptions. Any such permit shall
be of as short duration as possible up to six months, but renewable upon a
showing of good cause, and shall be conditioned by a schedule for compliance
and details of methods therefor in appropriate cases. Any person aggrieved with
the decision of the city manager or his designee may appeal to the city council
pursuant to Section
16.40.080 of this code.
(Ord. 4634 § 2 (part), 2000)
9.10.080   Violations.
   Any person who violates Section
9.10.060(e) or 9.10.060(f) shall be guilty of an infraction. Any person who
violates any of the other provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
(Ord. 4634 § 2 (part), 2000)
Chapter 9.12
LOUDSPEAKERS
Sections:
   
9.12.010   Open air loudspeakers.
9.12.010   Open air loudspeakers.
   The use of electronic equipment, including but not limited to amplifiers,
radio loudspeakers, phonographs, tape amplifiers, electronically operated
musical instruments or other device of like design used for producing sound in
or upon any public street, park or grounds, or any other open area to which the
public has access, whether publicly or privately owned, between the hours of
eleven p.m. and one hour after sunrise is unlawful.
(Ord. 2556 § 1, 1970: prior code § 7.04)
Chapter 9.14
SMOKING AND TOBACCO REGULATIONS*
Sections:
   
9.14.005   Purpose.
   
9.14.010   Definitions.
   
9.14.020   Smoking prohibited - Enclosed places.
   
9.14.025   Smoking prohibited - Unenclosed areas.
   
9.14.030   Smoking prohibited - City pool cars.
   
9.14.035   Smoking prohibited - Public parks and public events.
   
9.14.040   Smoking prohibited - Child day care facilities.
   
9.14.045   Smoking prohibited - Commercial areas and public events.
   
9.14.050   Smoking prohibited - Outdoor common areas of all multi unit
residences.
   
9.14.055   Smoking prohibited - Nonsmoking buffer zones.
   
9.14.060   Required and implied lease terms for all new and exiting units in
multi- unit residences.
   
9.14.065   Other requirements and prohibitions.
   
9.14.070   Exemptions.
   
9.14.080   Reserved.
   
9.14.090   Display of tobacco products for sale.
   
9.14.100   Posting of signs required.
   
9.14.110   Enforcement.
   
9.14.120   Public nuisance.
   
9.14.130   Violations.
   *   Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history: Ordinance Nos. 2657, 2842, 3185,
3476, 3503, 3618 and 3768.
9.14.005   Purpose.
   The purpose of this Chapter is to:
   (a)   Protect the public health, safety and general welfare by prohibiting
smoking and use of electronic smoking devices in multi-unit housing, public
parks, public places, service locations, city pool cars, child day care
facilities, and unenclosed eating establishments.
   (b)   Ensure a cleaner and more hygienic environment within the city, reduce
litter, and protect the City’s natural resources, including creeks and streams.
   (c)   Enhance the welfare of residents, workers, and visitors by reducing
exposure to second hand smoke, which studies confirm can cause negative health
effects in non-smokers.
   (d)   Balance the needs of persons who smoke with the needs of nonsmokers,
including children and youth, to be free from the discomforts and health
threats created by exposure to second-hand smoke and vapor.
(Ord. 5405 § 2 (part), 2017; Ord. 5376 § 2 (part), 2016; Ord. 5300 § 2 (part),
2015: Ord. 5207 § 2, 2013)
9.14.010   Definitions.
   The following words and phrases, whenever used in this chapter shall be
construed as defined in this section:
   (a)   “Adjacent unenclosed property” means any unenclosed area of property,
publicly or privately owned, that abuts a multi-unit residence.
   (b)   “Bar” means an area which is devoted to serving alcoholic beverages
and in which serving food is only incidental to the consumption of such
beverages. “Bar” shall include bar areas within eating establishments which are
devoted to serving alcoholic beverages and in which serving food is only
incidental to the consumption of such beverages.
   (c)   “City car” means any truck, van or automobile owned by the city and
operated by a city employee.
   (d)   “Commercial area” means an area, including all publicly owned
sidewalks, alleys, parking areas, public places, outdoor dining areas, service
areas, etc. within areas zoned in the city’s comprehensive plan as regional/
community commercial (including downtown, California Avenue business district,
town and country, and Stanford shopping center) and neighborhood commercial.
   (e)   “Common area” means every enclosed area and every unenclosed area of a
multi-unit residence that residents of more than one unit are entitled to enter
or use, including, without limitation, halls, pathways, lobbies, courtyards,
elevators, stairs, community rooms, playgrounds, gym facilities, swimming
pools, parking garages, parking lots, grassy or landscaped areas, restrooms,
laundry rooms, cooking areas, and eating areas.
   (f)   “Eating establishment” means a coffee shop, cafeteria, short-order
café, luncheonette, sandwich shop, soda fountain, restaurant, or other
establishment serving food to members of the public.
   (g)   “Electronic smoking device” means an electronic and/or battery-
operated device that can deliver an inhalable dose of nicotine to the user.
“Electronic smoking device” includes any product meeting this definition,
regardless of whether it is manufactured, distributed, marketed or sold as an
electronic cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe,
electronic hookah, electronic vape, vaporizer or any other product name or
descriptor.
   (h)   “Employee” means any person who is employed by any employer in
consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages or profit.
   (i)   “Employee eating place” means any place serving as an employee
cafeteria, lunchrooms, lounge, or like place.
   (j)   “Employer” means any person who employs the services of an individual
person or persons.
   (k)   “Enclosed” means either closed in by a roof and four walls with
appropriate openings for ingress and egress or not open to the sky due to a
cover or shelter consisting of a tarpaulin, tent structure or other impermeable
or semi-permeable materials or fabric.
   (l)   “Enclosed area” means an area in which outside air cannot circulate
freely to all parts of the area, and includes an area that has:
   (1)   Any type of overhead cover, whether or not that cover includes vents
or other openings and at least three walls or other physical boundaries of any
height, whether or not those boundaries include vents or other openings; or
   (2)   Four walls or other vertical boundaries that exceed six feet in
height, whether or not those boundaries include vents or other openings.
   (m)   “Landlord” means any person or agent of a person who owns, manages, or
is otherwise legally responsible for a unit in a multi-unit residence that is
leased to a residential tenant, except that “landlord” does not include a
tenant who sublets a unit (e.g., a sublessor).
   (n)   “Motion picture theater” means any theater engaged in the business of
exhibiting motion pictures.
   (o)   “Multi-unit residence” means property containing two or more units,
including, but not limited to, apartment buildings, condominium complexes,
senior and assisted living facilities, and long-term health care facilities.
Multi-unit residences do not include the following:
   (1)   A hotel or motel that meets the requirements of California Civil Code
section 1940, subdivision (b)(2);
   (2)   A mobile home park;
   (3)   A single-family home; and
   (4)   A single-family home with a detached or attached in-law or second
unit.
   (p)   “Nonsmoking area” means any enclosed area or unenclosed area in which
smoking is prohibited by (1) this chapter or other law; (2) binding agreement
relating to the ownership, occupancy, or use of real property; or (3)
designation of a person with legal control over the area.
   (q)   “Public event” means events open to the general public, including but
not limited to a farmers’ market, parade, craft fair, festival, or any other
such event.
   (r)   “Public places” means enclosed areas within publicly and privately
owned buildings, structures, facilities, or complexes that are open to, used
by, or accessible to the general public. Public places include, but are not
limited to, stores, banks, eating establishments, bars, hotels, motels, depots
and transit terminals, theaters and auditoriums, enclosed sports arenas,
convention centers, museums, galleries, polling places, hospitals and other
health care facilities of any kind (including clinics, dental, chiropractic, or
physical therapy facilities), automotive service centers, general business
offices, nonprofit entity offices and libraries. Public places further include,
but are not limited to, hallways, restrooms, stairways, escalators, elevators,
lobbies, reception areas, waiting rooms, indoor service lines, checkout
stations, counters and other pay stations, classrooms, meeting or conference
rooms, lecture rooms, buses, or other enclosed places that are open to, used
by, or accessible to the general public.
   (s)   “Service locations” means those enclosed or unenclosed areas open to,
used by, or accessible to the general public that are listed below:
   (1)   Bus, train and taxi shelters;
   (2)   Service waiting areas including, but not limited to, ticket or service
lines, public transportation waiting areas, and public telephones;
   (3)   Areas within twenty-five feet of the entrance or exit to an enclosed
public place, where smoking is prohibited;
   (4)   Areas in dedicated parks or other publicly accessible areas that are
within twenty-five feet of bleachers, backstops, or play structures.
   (t)   “Smoking” means inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying any lighted,
heated, or ignited cigar, cigarette, cigarillo, pipe, hookah, electronic
smoking device, or any plant product intended for human inhalation.
   (u)   “Tobacco product” means any substance containing tobacco leaf,
including but not limited to cigarettes, cigars, smoking tobacco, and smokeless
tobacco.
   (v)   “Tobacco store” means a retail store utilized primarily for the sale
of tobacco products and accessories and in which the sale of other products is
incidental.
   (w)   “Tobacco vending machine” means any electronic or mechanical device or
appliance the operation of which depends upon the insertion of money, whether
coin or paper bill, or other thing representative of value, which dispenses or
releases a tobacco product and/or tobacco accessories.
   (x)   “Unenclosed area” means any area that is not an enclosed area.
   (y)   “Unit” means a personal dwelling space, even where lacking cooking
facilities or private plumbing facilities, and includes any associated
exclusive-use enclosed area or unenclosed area, such as, for example, a private
balcony, porch, deck, or patio. “Unit” includes, without limitation, an
apartment; a condominium; a townhouse; a room in a senior facility; a room in a
long-term health care facility, assisted living facility, or hospital; a room
in a hotel or motel; a dormitory room; a room in a single room occupancy
facility; a room in a homeless shelter; a mobile home; a camper vehicle or
tent; a single-family home; and an in-law or second unit.
   (z)   “Vapor” means aerosol produce from use of an electronic smoking
device.
   (aa)   “Workplace” means any enclosed area of a structure or portion thereof
used as a place of employment as well as unenclosed workplaces, such as outdoor
construction sites.
(Ord. 5405 § 2 (part), 2017; Ord. 5376 § 2 (part), 2016; Ord. 5300 § 2 (part),
2015: Ord. 5207 § 3, 2013: Ord. 4294 § 2, 1995: Ord. 4164 § 2 (part), 1993:
Ord. 4056 § 4 (part), 1991)
9.14.020   Smoking prohibited - Enclosed places.
   (a)   Smoking and the use of electronic smoking devices is prohibited in the
enclosed areas of the following places within the city of Palo Alto, except in
places subject to prohibition on smoking contained in Labor Code Section
6404.5, in which case that law applies:
   (1)   Workplaces;
   (2)   Public places;
   (3)   Units within multi-unit residences; and
   (4)   Common areas of multi-unit residences.
   The effective date of the smoking prohibition provided in subdivision (3)
and (4) of this section is January 1, 2018.
   (b)   Any places exempted by the California smoke free workplace law (Labor
Code Section 6404.5(d)) are not exempt under this chapter. Smoking is
prohibited by this chapter in all places exempted by that state law, except as
provided in Section
9.14.070.
(Ord. 5405 § 2 (part), 2017; Ord. 5376 § 2 (part), 2016; Ord. 5300 § 2 (part),
2015: Ord. 4056 § 4 (part), 1991)
9.14.025   Smoking prohibited - Unenclosed areas.
   (a)   Smoking and the use of electronic smoking devices in all unenclosed
areas defined as service locations shall be prohibited, including a buffer zone
within 25 feet from any doorway, window, opening, crack, or vent into an
enclosed area in which smoking is prohibited, except while the person smoking
is actively passing on the way to another destination and provided smoke does
not enter any enclosed area in which smoking is prohibited.
   (b)   Smoking and the use of electronic smoking devices is prohibited in
unenclosed eating establishments and bars.
(Ord. 5376 § 2 (part), 2016; Ord. 5300 § 2 (part), 2015: Ord. 4164 § 3, 1993)
9.14.030   Smoking prohibited - City pool cars.
   Smoking and the use of electronic smoking devices is prohibited in all city
cars.
(Ord. 5405 § 2 (part), 2017; Ord. 5376 § 2 (part), 2016; Ord. 5300 § 2 (part),
2015: Ord. 4056 § 4 (part), 1991)
9.14.035   Smoking prohibited - Public parks and public events.
   Smoking and the use of electronic smoking devices is prohibited in all
parks, including at public events.
(Ord. 5376 § 2 (part), 2016; Ord. 5300 § 2 (part), 2015: Ord. 5207 § 4, 2013)
9.14.040   Smoking prohibited - Child day care facilities.
   Smoking is prohibited in a private residence which is licensed as a child
day care facility within the meaning of Health and Safety Code Section 1596.750
and Section 1596.795 and amendments.
(Ord. 5376 § 2 (part), 2016; Ord. 5300 § 2 (part), 2015: Ord. 4056 § 4 (part),
1991)
9.14.045   Smoking prohibited - Commercial areas and public events.
   Smoking and the use of electronic smoking devices is prohibited in
commercial areas, except places where smoking is already prohibited by state or
federal law, in which case those laws apply. This prohibition includes public
events held on public streets. A shopping center or commercial areas may
establish a designated smoking area that is at least 25 feet away from any
openings and includes receptacles to control litter.
(Ord. 5376 § 2 (part), 2016; Ord. 5300 § 2 (part), 2015: Ord. 4056 § 4 (part),
1991)
9.14.050   Smoking prohibited - Outdoor common areas of all multi unit
residences.
   Smoking and the use of electronic smoking devices is prohibited in outdoor
common areas of all multi-unit residences, provided, however, that a person
with legal control over a common area may designate a portion of the unenclosed
area of the common area as a designated smoking area if the area meets the
following criteria:
   (1)   Must be an unenclosed area;
   (2)   Must be at least twenty-five feet from unenclosed areas primarily used
by children and unenclosed areas with improvements that facilitate physical
activity including, for example, playgrounds, tennis courts, swimming pools,
and school campuses;
   (3)   Must be at least twenty-five feet in any direction from any operable
doorway, window, opening or other vent into an enclosed area that is located at
the multi-unit residence and is a nonsmoking area;
   (4)   Shall have a clearly marked perimeter;
   (5)   Shall have a receptacle for cigarette butts that is emptied and
maintained; and
   (6)   Shall be identified by conspicuous signs.
(Ord. 5405 § 2 (part), 2017)
9.14.055   Smoking prohibited - Nonsmoking buffer zones.
   Smoking and the use of electronic smoking devices is prohibited in adjacent
unenclosed property within twenty-five feet in any direction of any doorway,
window, opening, or other vent into an enclosed area of a multi-unit residence.
(Ord. 5405 § 2 (part), 2017)
9.14.060   Required and implied lease terms for all new and existing units in
multi-unit residences.
   (a)   Every lease or other rental agreement for the occupancy of a unit in a
multi-unit residence, entered into, renewed, or continued month-to- month,
effective January 1, 2018 shall include the following:
   (1)   A clause stating that smoking is prohibited in the unit, including
exclusive-use areas such as balconies, porches, or patios.
   a.   A clause providing that it is a material breach of the lease or
agreement for the tenant, or any other person subject to the control of the
tenant or present by invitation or permission of the tenant, to (i) smoke in
any common area of the property other than a designated smoking area; (ii)
smoke in the unit, or (iii) violate any law regulating smoking anywhere on the
property.
   b.   A clause providing that it is a material breach of the agreement for
tenant or any other person subject to the control of the tenant to violate any
law regulating smoking while anywhere on the property. Such a clause might
state, "It is a material breach of this agreement for tenant or any other
person subject to the control of the tenant or present by invitation or
permission of the tenant to violate any law regulating smoking while anywhere
on the property."
   (2)   A clear description of all areas on the property and in the buffer
zone where smoking is allowed or prohibited.
   (3)   A clause expressly conveying third-party beneficiary status to all
occupants of the multi-unit residence as to the smoking provisions of the lease
or other rental agreement. Such a clause shall provide that any tenant of the
multi-unit residence may sue another tenant/owner to enforce the smoking
provisions of the agreement but that no tenant shall have the right to evict
another tenant for a breach of the smoking provisions of the agreement.
   (b)   Whether or not a landlord complies with subsection (a) above, the
clauses required by that subsection shall be implied and incorporated by law
into every agreement to which subsection (a) applies and shall become effective
as of the earliest possible date on which the landlord could have made the
insertions pursuant to subsection (a).
   (c)   This chapter shall not create additional liability for a landlord to
any person for a tenant's breach of any smoking provision in a lease or other
rental agreement for the occupancy of a unit in a multi-unit residence if the
landlord has fully complied with this section.
   (d)   Failure to enforce any smoking provision required by this chapter
shall not affect the right to enforce such provision in the future, nor shall a
waiver of any breach constitute a waiver of any subsequent breach or a waiver
of the provision itself.
(Ord. 5405 § 2 (part), 2017)
9.14.065   Other requirements and prohibitions.
   (a)   Every landlord shall deliver the following, on or before July 1, 2017,
to each unit of a multi-unit residence:
   (1)   A written notice of the new requirements prohibiting smoking in units
and common areas as stated in Section
9.14.020.
   (b)   As of July 1, 2017, every seller of a unit in a multi-unit residence
shall provide prospective buyers with written notice clearly stating that:
   (1)   Smoking is prohibited in units, including any associated exclusive-use
enclosed area or unenclosed area, such as, for example, a private balcony,
porch, deck, or patio, as of January 1, 2018; and
   (2)   Smoking is prohibited in all common areas, except for specifically
designated smoking areas, as of January 1, 2018.
   (c)   Clear and unambiguous “No Smoking” signs shall be posted in sufficient
numbers and locations in common areas where smoking is prohibited by this
chapter or other law. Such signs shall be maintained by the person or persons
with legal control over the common areas. The absence of signs shall not be a
defense to a violation of any provision of this chapter.
(Ord. 5405 § 2 (part), 2017)
9.14.070   Exemptions.
   The following places and workplaces are exempt from Section
9.14.020:
   (a)   Smoking at theatrical production sites is not prohibited by this
subsection if the theater general manager certifies that smoking is an
essential part of the story and the use of a fake, prop, or special effect
cannot reasonably convey the idea of smoking in an effective way to a
reasonable member of the anticipated audience. This exception will not apply if
minors are performers within the production;
   (b)   A fully enclosed room in a hotel, motel, other transient lodging
establishment similar to a hotel, motel, or public convention center which is
being used entirely for a private function and which is not open to the general
public, except while food or beverage functions are taking place, including
setup, service, and cleanup activities, or when the room is being used for
exhibit purposes, and except for sixty-five percent of the guest rooms in a
hotel, motel, or similar transient lodging establishment;
   (c)   Tobacco stores with private smokers’ lounges meeting the requirements
of the applicable portions of subdivision (d)(4) of Labor Code Section 6404.5.
(Ord. 5405 § 2 (part), 2017; Ord. 5376 § 2 (part), 2016; Ord. 5300 § 2 (part),
2015: Ord. 4294 § 3, 1995: Ord. 4164 § 2 (part), 1993: Ord. 4056 § 4 (part),
1991)
9.14.080   Reserved*.
   *   Editor’s Note: Former Section 9.14.080, pertaining to location of
tobacco vending machines, was repealed by Section 4 of Ord. No. 5418.
9.14.090   Display of tobacco products for sale.
   No person shall display or offer tobacco products for sale except in an
area, or from within an enclosure, which physically precludes the removal of
the tobacco products without the assistance of the person authorizing such
display or offer, or an employee of such person.
(Ord. 5376 § 2 (part), 2016; Ord. 5300 § 2 (part), 2015: Ord. 4056 § 4 (part),
1991)
9.14.100   Posting of signs required.
   With the exception of service locations, wherever this ordinance prohibits
smoking and the use of electronic smoking devices, conspicuous signs shall be
posted. Signs of similar size containing the international “no smoking” symbol
consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette and electronic
smoking device enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it may be used in
addition to or in lieu of any signs required hereunder. Such signs shall be
placed by the owner, operator, manager, or other persons having control of such
room, building, or other place where smoking and the use of electronic smoking
devices is prohibited. Signs placed at each entrance of buildings in which
smoking is totally prohibited shall be sufficient. The absence of signs shall
not be a defense to a violation of any provision of this chapter.
(Ord. 5376 § 2 (part), 2016; Ord. 5300 § 2 (part), 2015: Ord. 4294 § 4, 1995:
Ord. 4164 § 2 (part), 1993: Ord. 4056 § 4 (part), 1991)
9.14.110   Enforcement.
   Pursuant to Section 6 of Article IV of the Palo Alto City Charter, the city
manager is hereby granted authority to enforce the provisions of this chapter
and Labor Code Section 6404.5.
(Ord. 5376 § 2 (part), 2016; Ord. 5300 § 2 (part), 2015: Ord. 4294 § 5, 1995)
9.14.120   Public nuisance.
   Any violation of this chapter is a public nuisance and may be abated in
accordance with
Chapter 9.56 of the Palo Alto Municipal Code and/or Code of Civil Procedure
Section 731.
(Ord. 5376 § 2 (part), 2016; Ord. 5300 § 2 (part), 2015: Ord. 4056 § 4 (part),
1991)
9.14.130   Violations.
   Violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punishable as provided
in this code. Violations shall be punishable by and of the following: warning,
administrative citation, infraction, or misdemeanor. Violations shall also be
punishable by the following fines:
   (a)   A fine not exceeding $250 for the first violation;
   (b)   A fine not exceeding $300 for the second violation;
   (c)   A fine not exceeding $500 for each additional violation within one
year.
(Ord. 5376 § 2 (part), 2016; Ord. 5300 § 2 (part), 2015: Ord. 4056 § 4 (part),
1991)
Chapter 9.16
RESERVED*
*   Editor's Note: Chapter 9.16, False Report of Crime, previously codified
herein, was repealed in its entirety by Section 49 of Ordinance No. 4453.
Chapter 9.17
RESERVED*
*   Editor's Note: Chapter 9.17, Personal Cultivation of Marijuana, previously
codified herein, was repealed in its entirety by Section 2 of Ordinance No.
5419.
Chapter 9.20
RESERVED*
*   Editor's Note: Chapter 9.20, Police Radio Messages, previously codified
herein, was repealed in its entirety by Section 52 of Ordinance No. 4453.
Chapter 9.22
IMPERSONATING PUBLIC OFFICIALS
Sections:
   
9.22.010   Prohibited.
9.22.010   Prohibited.
   (a)   No person shall falsely represent himself to be a public officer,
inspector, deputy, clerk or other employee or agent or agency of the city of
Palo Alto, any other city, or any other governmental agency not covered by the
terms of Penal Code Section 146a, and in such assumed character:
   (1)   Threaten or intimidate any person, or purport or threaten to arrest
any person; or
   (2)   Obtain entry to or search any premises, or search any person or the
property of any person, or attempt to make any such entry or search; or
   (3)   Obtain or attempt to obtain money, property or other thing of value;
or
   (4)   Obtain or attempt to obtain information from any person; or
   (5)   Contact one or more persons for any other purpose.
   For the purpose of this section, "contact" means personal contact, use of
the telephone, the mails, telegraph, circular, advertisement, or any other
means of communication, written or oral.
(Ord. 2355, 1967: prior code § 7.14)
Chapter 9.24
RESERVED*
*   Editor's Note: Former Chapter 9.24, Juvenile Curfew Regulations, was
originally adopted in 1994 by Ordinance No. 4234. Pursuant to Section 4 of
Ordinance No. 4234, the chapter was to be in effect until October 31, 1995,
unless extended. At the time this codification was prepared, no such extension
or readoption had occurred, and at the instruction of the city attorney the
chapter was therefore designated as "Reserved."
   Prior ordinance history: Ordinance No. 3881. Ordinance No. 1478 was also
originally codified herein, but was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No.
4234.
Chapter 9.26
PRIVATE PATROL SERVICE*
Sections:
   
9.26.010   Regulation of uniforms and equipment.
   
9.26.020   False representations prohibited.
   *   Editor's Note: Chapter 9.26, formerly codified as Chapter 4.38 of this
code, was renumbered and relocated by Section 16 of Ordinance 4453.
9.26.010   Regulation of uniforms and equipment.
   (a)   The chief of police shall prescribe or approve the style and type of
uniform, if any, to be used by the private patrol system or patrol service for
the purpose of maintaining readily apparent distinction from the uniforms worn
by the regularly employed police officers of the city.
   (b)    No equipment or motor vehicle shall be used in any business or
activity permitted under this chapter, except with the prior approval of the
chief of police who shall inspect such equipment or motor vehicle to insure the
maintenance of a readily apparent distinction from the equipment and motor
vehicles used by authorized law enforcement agencies.
   (c)   The chief of police shall prescribe or approve the type or character
of identification markings or insignia placed on any motor vehicle used in the
operation of any private patrol service or patrol system.
   (d)   For the purposes of this section, "private patrol" means any person
carrying on the business or occupation of night watchman, night watch service,
private policeman, or any other occupation, the purpose of which is to afford
additional police or fire protection for hire or reward; provided, that a
watchman or caretaker working for a single employer in a line of business other
than defined herein shall not be subject to the provisions of this section; and
further provided that a person operating an armored car service for
transporting money or other valuable personal property under guard, shall not
be subject to the provisions of this section.
(Ord. 4453 § 16 (part), § 25, 1997: Ord. 1997 (part), 1961: prior code § 4.59)
9.26.020   False representations prohibited.
   (a)   Police Operations. No person, other than a regular police officer or a
duly authorized reserve officer of the city shall, for any purpose whatsoever,
represent himself or falsely represent another to be a member of the police
department of this city, or use any sign, word, language or device calculated
to induce a false or mistaken belief that he is acting or purporting to act on
behalf of the police department of this city within the scope of any real or
purported duty thereof.
   (b)   Collection, etc. No person other than a regular police officer or a
duly authorized reserve officer of this city, acting within the scope and
course of his official duties, shall use any sign, badge, title or designation,
or make any express or implied representation calculated to induce the belief
that he is a member of the police force of this city, or connected therewith in
any way, in connection with any activity directed toward the collection of any
money or debt, or the repossessing, recovering, or taking of anything of value,
or for any purpose of private gain whatsoever.
(Ord. 4453 § 16 (part), § 26, 1997: Ord. 1997 (part), 1961: prior code § 4.60)
Chapter 9.28
HOTELS AND ROOMING HOUSES
Sections:
   
9.28.010   Guest register required - Open to inspection.
   
9.28.020   Use of false names by guests.
9.28.010   Guest register required - Open to inspection.
   All hotels, tenements and rooming houses for transient guests shall keep a
register in which shall be entered the true names and addresses of all guests
seeking rooms for lodging. Such registrations shall be made in the true name of
each guest, who shall enter after the name, his proper residence address. Such
registration shall be open at all times for the inspection of the chief of
police or his authorized agent. It shall be unlawful for any owner, proprietor
or lessee of a hotel, tenement or rooming house for transient guests to refuse
or neglect to comply with the requirements hereinbefore set forth.
(Prior code § 21.01)
9.28.020   Use of false names by guests.
   It shall be unlawful for any guest, roomer or lodger in any hotel, tenement,
or rooming house to use any name other than his true name in so registering.
(Prior code § 21.02)
Chapter 9.32
RESERVED*
*   Editor's Note: Chapter 9.32, Hypnotism and Fortune Telling, previously
codified herein, was repealed in its entirety by Secton 8 of Ordinance No.
4745.
Chapter 9.40
AIRCRAFT
Sections:
   
9.40.010   Aircraft defined.
   
9.40.020   Landing at other than established airports restricted.
   
9.40.030   Special permit for infrequent helicopter landings.
9.40.010   Aircraft defined.
   The term "aircraft" as used in this chapter means any airplane, helicopter,
or any other contrivance now known or hereafter invented, used or designed for
navigation or flight in the air, except a parachute or other contrivance used
primarily as safety equipment.
(Ord. 2180 (part), 1963: prior code § 7.13(a))
9.40.020   Landing at other than established airports restricted.
   Except in case of emergency or for rescue missions, no person shall land any
aircraft within the city except upon an airport, aircraft landing field,
heliport or helistop, approved by the city council, except as set forth in
Section
9.40.030.
(Ord. 2180 (part), 1963: prior code § 7.13(b))
9.40.030   Special permit for infrequent helicopter landings.
   Applications for a permit for infrequent helicopter landings shall be made
in writing to the city manager and shall be accompanied by a map indicating the
area concerned. The city manager may grant such application subject to such
conditions as he deems necessary to protect the public and surrounding
property. He may deny such an application when in his opinion the granting
thereof will adversely affect the use or enjoyment of adjacent property in any
way.
(Ord. 2180 (part), 1963: prior code § 7.13(c))
Chapter 9.44
SOLICITATION OF EMPLOYMENT, BUSINESS, OR CONTRIBUTIONS WITHIN PUBLIC PARKING
LOTS*
Sections:
   
9.44.010   Solicitation prohibited.
   
9.44.020   Solicitation defined.
   *   Editor's Note: Former Chapter 9.44, Handbills, Advertising and Samples,
and containing prior code §§ 20.02 and 20.03, and §§ 5 and 6 of Ordinance No.
2681, was repealed by Ordinance No. 4359.
9.44.010   Solicitation prohibited.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit or attempt to solicit
employment, business or contributions of money or other property from any
pedestrian or occupant of a vehicle located within any public parking lot.
(Ord. 4359 § 2 (part), 1996)
9.44.020   Solicitation defined.
   The term "solicitation" as used in this chapter shall mean and include the
activity of requesting, offering, advertising, or otherwise announcing the
availability of a person for employment or availability to provide services for
compensation, the sale of goods, or a request for money or other property; or
requesting, offering, advertising, or otherwise announcing the intent to
purchase or secure employment, to sell services or goods, or to solicit a
contribution of money or other property. A solicitation shall be deemed
complete when made or attempted, whether or not an actual employment
relationship is created, a business transaction is completed, or a contribution
of money or other property takes place.
(Ord. 4359 § 2 (part), 1996)
Chapter 9.45
SOLICITATION IN STREETS, COMMERCIAL PARKING AREAS, AND IN AND ADJACENT TO
DRIVEWAY ENTRANCES
Sections:
   
9.45.010   Definitions.
   
9.45.020   Solicitation in designated streets prohibited.
   
9.45.030   Solicitation in designated driveway approaches prohibited.
   
9.45.040   Solicitation in commercial parking areas.
   
9.45.050   Violations punishable as infractions.
9.45.010   Definitions.
   (a)   "Solicit" shall mean and include any request, offer, enticement, or
action which announces the availability of a person to engage in an employment
transaction, to engage in a business transaction, or to engage in the
contribution of money or other property. Solicitation shall be deemed complete
when made whether or not an actual employment relationship is created, a
business transaction is completed, or a contribution of money or other property
takes place as a result of a solicitation.
   (b)   "Business" shall mean and include any type of product, performance, or
activity which is provided or performed, or offered to be provided or
performed, in exchange for money, labor, goods, or any other form of
consideration.
   (c)   "Employment" shall mean and include the provision of services,
industry, or labor performed by a person for wages or other compensation or
under any contract of hire, written or oral, expressed or implied.
   (d)   "Contribution" shall mean and include any donation of money, goods, or
other things of value.
   (e)   "Street" means and includes the paved portion of any public street,
highway, expressway, or alley within the city (including the vehicular travel
lanes, parking areas, bicycle lanes), as well as the medians thereof (whether
paved or planted or marked with striping) and any sidewalks (including planter
strips between the curb and the sidewalk) within the public right of way.
   (g)   "Driveway approach" means any portion of the public sidewalk which is
utilized for vehicular access from private property to any public street,
highway, expressway or alley.
(Ord. 4614 § 2 (part), 2000)
9.45.020   Solicitation in designated streets prohibited.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person, while that person is located on a
street location designated by resolution of the city council, to solicit
employment, business, or contributions from occupants of vehicles on that
street location.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person, while occupying any vehicle on a
street location designated by resolution of the city council, to solicit
employment, business, or contributions from pedestrians or from occupants of
other vehicles on that street location.
   (c)   Violations of this section shall not be punishable unless signs are
posted which provide notice of the prohibitions contained in this section.
(Ord. 4614 § 2 (part), 2000)
9.45.030   Solicitation in designated driveway approaches prohibited.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person, while located on or occupying any
vehicle on a public street, sidewalk, or planter area within or adjacent to any
driveway approach (i.e. within fifty feet of a driveway approach) in a location
designated by resolution of the city council to solicit employment, business,
or contributions from occupants of vehicles crossing or occupying that driveway
approach.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person, while located on or occupying any
vehicle on a public street, sidewalk, or planter area within any driveway
approach in a location designated by resolution of the city council to solicit
employment, business, or contributions from pedestrians crossing or occupying
that driveway approach.
   (c)   Violations of this section shall not be punishable unless signs are
posted which provide notice of the prohibitions contained in this section.
(Ord. 4614 § 2 (part), 2000)
9.45.040   Solicitation in commercial parking areas.
   (a)   No person shall solicit employment, business or contributions from a
location within a commercial parking area other than an area within or served
by such parking area which is authorized by the property owner or the property
owner's authorized representative for such solicitations.
   (b)   For purposes of this section, a "commercial parking area" shall mean
privately owned property which is designed or used primarily for the parking of
vehicles and which adjoins one or more commercial establishments.
   (c)   This section shall only apply to commercial parking areas where the
following occurs:
   (i)   The owner or person in lawful possession of the commercial parking
area establishes a written policy which provides area(s) for the lawful
solicitation of employment, business, or contributions of money or other
property in locations which are accessible to the public and do not interfere
with normal business operations of the commercial premises;
   (ii)   A copy of said policy is submitted to the city manager to be
maintained in city files; and,
   (iii)   The owner or person in lawful possession of the commercial parking
area has caused a notice to be posted in a conspicuous place at each entrance
to such commercial parking area not less than fourteen by twenty inches in size
with lettering not less than one inch in height and not to exceed in total area
six feet. The notice shall be in substantially the following form: "Palo Alto
Municipal Code Section
9.45.040 prohibits solicitation of employment, business or contributions of
money or other property in areas of this commercial parking lot which are not
approved for such activity by the property owner."
(Ord. 4614 § 2 (part), 2000)
9.45.050   Violations punishable as infractions.
   Violations of this chapter shall be punishable as infractions. No person
shall be cited under the ordinance codified in this chapter unless the person
engages in conduct prohibited by this chapter after having been notified by a
law enforcement officer that he or she is in violation of the prohibition in
the ordinance codified in this chapter.
(Ord. 4614 § 2 (part), 2000)
Chapter 9.48
OBSTRUCTING STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Sections:
   
9.48.010   Displaying goods on sidewalk.
   
9.48.020   Unlawful acts - Exceptions.
   
9.48.025   Sitting or lying on public sidewalks in University Avenue area/
commmercial downtown Palo Alto - Prohibited.
   
9.48.030   Sidewalk elevators.
   
9.48.040   Discarding rubbish, dirt, leaves, debris or discarded material on
streets or other public or private properties.
   
9.48.050   Obligation to clean sidewalk.
9.48.010   Displaying goods on sidewalk.
   No person owning or occupying any premises fronting on a public street shall
place any goods, wares or merchandise, for the purpose of exhibition, display
or advertisement, on any portion of the sidewalk in front of the premises
without having obtained an encroachment permit as provided in Section
9.48.020(b)(8). No flag, canvas, banner, nor any advertising device of any
description whatever shall be stretched across any street or sidewalk without
the written permission of the chief building official.
(Ord. 4405 § 1, 1997: Ord. 3334 § 1, 1982: prior code § 20.01)
9.48.020   Unlawful acts - Exceptions.
   (a)   No person shall place or cause to be placed anywhere upon any street
or sidewalk, and no person owning, occupying or having control of any premises,
shall suffer to remain in front thereof upon the sidewalk of the street next to
such premises, anything which shall restrict the public use thereof.
   (b)   This section shall not apply to:
   (1)   Goods or merchandise in actual course of receipt, delivery or removal.
   (2)   Lamp posts or hydrants erected by permission of the city engineer.
   (3)   Ornamental trees planted along outer line of the sidewalk and within
the curb, and barriers for the protection of the same.
   (4)   Materials used in the construction or repair of any building during
the existence of a written permit issued by the city engineer.
   (5)   Parking and directional signs erected by authority of the council.
   (6)   Newsracks for which a required permit has been obtained in accordance
with
Chapter 9.79.
   (7)   Chairs, benches, or tables placed pursuant to, and in compliance with
the terms and conditions of, a valid encroachment permit.
   (8)   A special sales event involving the display, exhibition,
advertisement, or sale of merchandise, goods, or wares upon a portion of the
public sidewalk in such a fashion as to not prevent or render hazardous the
passage of pedestrians, and not exceeding fifty percent of the width of each
sidewalk and held in an area of the city in which not less than one-half of the
frontage thereof is in a commercial or industrial zone and to which a majority
of proprietors of the businesses thereof within each particular area affected
nearby have consented, and which is sponsored solely by such proprietors or an
organization to which they belong. Such special sales events must be authorized
pursuant to a valid encroachment permit, and shall not exceed three consecutive
days nor occur in the same block more than twice in any one calendar year.
Exhibition, display, advertising, or sale of merchandise, wares and goods is
prohibited except by those persons occupying business premises immediately
adjacent to the area in which such exhibition, display, advertisement, or sale
is to occur.
(Ord. 4531 § 3, 1998: Ord. 4405 § 2, 1997: prior code § 20.05)
9.48.025   Sitting or lying on public sidewalks in University Avenue area/
commmercial downtown Palo Alto - Prohibited.
   (a)   No person shall sit or lie down upon the public sidewalk, or upon a
blanket, chair, stool, or any other object placed upon the public sidewalk
within fifty feet of any commercial property between Lytton Avenue and Channing
Avenue from Alma Street to Emerson Street and the area between Lytton Avenue
and Forest Avenue from Emerson Street to Webster Street during the hours
between 11:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m.
   (b)   The prohibition set forth above in this section shall not apply to:
   (1)   Any person sitting or lying down on the sidewalk due to a medical
emergency;
   (2)   Any person who, as the result of a disability, utilizes a wheelchair
or similar device to move about the public sidewalk;
   (3)   Any child accompanied by an adult who is seated in and using a
stroller, or similar device, to move about the public sidewalk;
   (4)   Any person sitting or lying down upon a chair, bench or planter box
wall located on the public sidewalk which is placed there by a public agency;
   (5)   Any person sitting or lying down upon a chair or bench located upon
the public sidewalk which is placed there by an abutting private property owner
or tenant pursuant to a commercial sidewalk encroachment permit, temporary
lease, or temporary street closure permit;
   (6)   Any person sitting or lying down while conducting, attending, or
participating in an activity or event which is authorized by a lawfully issued
temporary street closure permit or other permit issued by the city which
permits use of the public sidewalk;
   (7)   Sitting on a public sidewalk within a bus zone while waiting for
public or private transportation.
   (c)   No person shall be cited under this section unless the person engages
in conduct prohibited by this section after having been notified by a law
enforcement officer that he or she is in violation of the prohibition in this
section.
(Ord. 4955 § 2, 2007: Ord. 4588 § 1, 1999: Ord. 4404 § 2, 1997)
9.48.030   Sidewalk elevators.
   (a)   No person shall operate or use any sidewalk elevator:
   (1)   Unless the shafts or sidewalk openings of such sidewalk elevators are
covered with substantial iron doors or iron gratings, as nearly flush with the
upper surface of the sidewalk as will permit proper drainage, and unless such
doors or gratings are provided with some mechanical device for locking and
unlocking them which will not require any person to ride on such elevator for
the purpose of locking or unlocking said doors or gratings;
   (2)   Unless the same are equipped with some mechanical device which will
prevent the platform of said elevator from approaching within less than five
feet of sidewalk doors or gratings thereof when the doors or gratings are
closed;
   (3)   Unless he is directed or permitted to use such elevator by occupant of
the premises;
   (4)   Unless the same are protected on the opposite side by substantial
lattice, heavy mesh screened gate, or barricade, at least thirty inches in
height, securely held in place when doors are up, or openings made. Such grate
or barricade may be removed upon the curbside during a period of loading and
unloading.
   (b)   No person operating a sidewalk elevator, trap-door, grating, or other
opening shall allow the sidewalk doors thereof to be opened without first
posting a responsible person on the sidewalk to give warning to such opening.
   (c)   No person operating or using sidewalk elevators, gratings, trapdoors
or other opening in sidewalks, shall keep the same open or permit the same to
remain open except during the time necessary for the shipping or receiving of
merchandise or supplies and unless provided with suitable guards as stated, so
as to prevent accidents to the public, and unless a lighted lamp is maintained
at openings when doors or gratings thereof are open after dark.
   (d)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to overrule or supersede
the authority of the city to revoke such right to use and occupy the space
below the sidewalk as provided in Section 4503 or other applicable sections of
the Building Code.
(Ord. 2304, 1966: prior code § 20.06)
9.48.040   Discarding rubbish, dirt, leaves, debris or discarded material on
streets or other public or private properties.
   No person shall put, place, sweep, throw, brush, blow or in any other manner
deposit any rubbish, dirt, leaves, debris or discarded material of any kind or
character upon any sidewalk, street, alley, gutter or other place in the city,
nor shall any person throw, sweep, blow or brush any rubbish, paper sweepings,
leaves or dirt from any residence or other building or grounds onto any
sidewalk, street or alley or onto any other public or private property without
authorization.
(Ord. 4625 § 2, 2000: Ord. 1504 (part), 1953: prior code § 20.09)
9.48.050   Obligation to clean sidewalk.
   The occupant or tenant, or in the absence of an occupant or tenant, the
owner of any real estate in Palo Alto in front of which there is a paved
sidewalk shall keep the sidewalk free of dirt, debris and litter. Sweepings
from the sidewalk shall not be swept or otherwise made or allowed to go into
the street but shall be disposed of by the person responsible for the cleaning
of the sidewalk.
(Ord. 1504 (part), 1953: prior code § 20.10)
Chapter 9.50
GRAFFITI
Sections:
   
9.50.010   Graffiti prohibited on public property.
   
9.50.015   Graffiti defined.
   
9.50.020   Removal of graffiti.
   
9.50.030   Restitution for the cost of graffiti removal.
9.50.010   Graffiti prohibited on public property.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or maliciously apply
graffiti to any property or facilities owned or controlled by the city of Palo
Alto or any other public agency within the city of Palo Alto.
(Ord. 4642 § 10 (part), 2000: Ord. 4233 § 1 (part), 1994)
9.50.015   Graffiti defined.
   "Graffiti" shall be defined, for purposes of this chapter, to mean a symbol,
word, figure, or design that is marked, etched, scratched, drawn, sprayed,
painted, or otherwise applied on any surface of real or personal property
without the authorization of the owner and subject to view from any street or
other public property.
(Ord. 4642 § 10 (part), 2000: Ord. 4233 § 1 (part), 1994)
9.50.020   Removal of graffiti.
   The city manager is authorized to use public funds employing city staff or
contractors to remove graffiti on city property or on property of other public
agencies within the city with the written consent of that public agency.
(Ord. 4642 § 10 (part), 2000: Ord. 4233 § 1 (part), 1994)
9.50.030   Restitution for the cost of graffiti removal.
   The city attorney is authorized to request that the courts impose as
restitution in any criminal or juvenile proceeding arising out of the
application of graffiti to city property or the property of other public
agencies within the city the obligation to reimburse the city for all costs
incurred by the city in the removal of that graffiti. The city attorney is also
authorized to institute and prosecute civil proceedings against any person
(and, if the person is a minor, the parents of that minor under California
Civil Code section 1714.1(b)) who applies graffiti in violation of this chapter
to recover the city's cost of removing that graffiti.
(Ord. 4642 § 10 (part), 2000: Ord. 4233 § 1 (part), 1994)
Chapter 9.56
ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES*
Sections:
   
9.56.010   Definitions.
   
9.56.020   Enforcement agency.
   
9.56.030   Nuisances described - Authority to abate.
   
9.56.040   Notice to abate.
   
9.56.050   Manner of giving notice.
   
9.56.060   Hearing.
   
9.56.070   Abatement by city - Debt of owner.
   
9.56.080   Imposition of lien.
   
9.56.090   Abatement by owner.
   
9.56.100   Procedure not exclusive.
   
9.56.110   Summary abatement of immediate dangers.
   
9.56.120   Violations - Penalties.
   
9.56.130   Enforcement - Citation authority.
   *   For weeds as nuisances - See
Chapter 8.08.
9.56.010   Definitions.
   (a)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following words shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section:
   (1)   "Abate" means to repair, replace, remove, destroy or otherwise remedy
the condition in question by such means and in such manner and to such an
extent as the enforcement officer in his judgment determines is necessary in
the interest of the general health, safety and welfare of the community.
   (2)   "Enforcement officer" means either the fire chief or the building
official and includes any official or officials in their respective departments
duly appointed to administer the provisions of this chapter.
   (3)   "Premises" means any building, lot, parcel, real estate, or land or
portion of land whether improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks
and parking strips.
   (4)   "Responsible person" means any agent, lessee, or other person
occupying or having charge or control of any premises, except the owner.
(Ord. 3184 § 1, 1980: Ord. 1998 (part), 1961: prior code § 35.01)
9.56.020   Enforcement agency.
   The fire department and the department of planning and development services
shall have concurrent jurisdiction to administer the provisions of this
chapter.
(Ord. 5494 § 3, 2020: Ord. 4745 § 9, 2002: Ord. 3184 § 2, 1980: Ord. 1998
(part), 1961: prior code § 35.02)
9.56.030   Nuisances described - Authority to abate.
   (a)   Each of the following conditions constitutes a nuisance, and whenever
an enforcement officer determines that any of such conditions exist upon any
premises, he may require or provide for the abatement thereof pursuant to this
chapter and make the costs of abatement a lien upon the property:
   (1)   The existence of any accumulation of solid waste upon the premises so
as to be a nuisance under Section
5.20.180.
   (2)   The existence of weeds upon the premises, or public sidewalks, or
streets, or alleys between said premises and the centerline of any public
street or alley, so as to be a nuisance under Section
8.08.010.
   (3)   The existence of any dead, diseased, infested, or dying tree in any
street; or on any private property so near to any street tree as to constitute
a danger to street trees, or streets, or portions thereof, so as to be a
nuisance under Section
8.04.050(a).
   (4)   The existence of any tree or shrub on any private property or in any
street, of a type or species apt to destroy, impair or otherwise interfere with
any street improvements, sidewalks, curbs, approved street trees, gutters,
sewers, other public improvements, including utility mains or services so as to
be a nuisance under Section
8.04.050(b).
   (5)   The existence within the thirty-five foot triangle of property at the
intersection of streets improved for vehicular traffic, of any tree limb,
shrub, hedge, or plant exceeding three feet in height where either traffic
signals, stop signs, or yield signs are not installed, or at any intersections
which are determined by the chief transportation official to contain tree
limbs, shrubs, hedges, or plants that obscure and impair the view of passing
motorists or pedestrians so as to create a safety hazard, so as to be a
nuisance under Section
8.04.050(c).
   (6)   The existence of any vines or climbing plants growing into or over any
street tree or any public hydrant, pole or electrolier contrary to the
provisions of Section
8.04.050(d) or the existence of any shrub, vine or plant growing on, around or
in front of any hydrant, alarm box, standpipe, sprinkler system connection or
any other appliance or facility provided for fire protection purposes, in such
a way as to obscure the view thereof or impair the access thereto by the fire
department.
   (7)   The existence of any tree within the city limits that is infested,
infected or in danger of becoming infested or infected with objectionable
insects, scale, fungus or growth injurious to trees so as to be a nuisance
under Section
8.04.050(e).
   (8)   The existence of any branches or foliage which interfere with
visibility on, or free use of, or access to, or obstruct public vehicular or
pedestrian travel on any portion of any street improved for vehicular or
pedestrian travel so as to be a nuisance under Section
8.04.050(f).
   (9)   The existence of hedges or dense thorny shrubs and plants on any
street or part thereof so as to be a nuisance under Section
8.04.050(g).
   (10)   The existence of shrubs and plants more than two feet in height in
any street, measured above top of curb grade so as to be a nuisance under
Section
8.04.050(h).
   (11)   The existence of any open pit in any closed or abandoned trampoline
center.
   (12)   The existence of any act or condition that presents a fire, panic, or
life safety hazard, or would contribute to the rapid spread of fire or inhibit
mitigation or increase the chance of release of hazardous material, or would
interfere with, hinder or delay the egress of occupants or response of
emergency personnel, so as to be a nuisance under Section
15.04.055.
   (13)   The existence upon the sidewalk in front of any premises of anything
which shall restrict the public use thereof so as to be a nuisance under
Section
9.48.020.
   (14)   The existence upon the sidewalk in front of any premises of any dirt,
debris or litter so as to be a nuisance under Section
9.48.050.
   (15)   The existence of any sign erected, constructed or maintained in
violation of or which fails to comply in any way with the provisions of
Chapter 16.20 of this code.
   (16)   The existence of a sidewalk or a portion of a sidewalk adjacent to
any premises which is out of repair or pending reconstruction and in condition
to endanger persons or property or in condition to interfere with the public
convenience in the use of such sidewalk.
   (17)   The storage or keeping of any used or unused building material in a
location out of doors for more than thirty days within a year; provided, that
nothing in this subsection shall:
   (A)   Make lawful any such storage when it is prohibited by other ordinances
or laws;
   (B)   Prohibit such storage upon the premises of a bona fide lumberyard or
other dealer in building materials when the same is permitted under the Zoning
Code and other applicable laws;
   (C)   Prohibit such storage for ninety days when done in conjunction with
the construction project for which a valid building permit is in effect if
required and which is being prosecuted diligently to completion; extensions for
additional periods of time may be granted by the building official when
additional storage time is necessary and upon proof that such construction
project will be diligently pursued.
   "Building materials," as used in this subsection, means and includes lumber,
plumbing materials, wallboard, sheet metal, plaster, brick, cement, concrete
block, roofing materials, cans of paint and similar materials.
   (18)   The storage or keeping in a location out of doors of any unused and
abandoned open pit or excavation, building foundation, automobile, trailer,
housetrailer, boat or other vehicle or major parts thereof. Without limiting
the foregoing, any such thing stored or kept for a period in excess of thirty
days in a year shall be presumed to be unused and abandoned for purposes of
this provision.
   (19)   The existence of any fence or other structure or thing on private
property abutting or fronting upon any public street, sidewalk or place, which
is in a sagging, leaning, fallen, decayed or other dilapidated or unsafe
condition.
   (20)   The existence of any driveway which is determined to have been
abandoned, pursuant to the provisions of Section
12.08.090; provided, that no notice need be given to the owner of the property
with respect to the abatement of such condition other than that provided in
this chapter.
   (21)   Any other condition on or use of property which is in fact a menace
to the public peace, health, or safety.
(Ord. 5557 § 5, 2022: Ord. 4745 § 10, 2002: Ord. 4722 § 2, 2001: Ord. 3209 § 1,
1980: Ord. 2068, 1962: Ord. 1998 (part), 1961: prior code § 35.04)
9.56.040   Notice to abate.
   (a)   The enforcement officer shall cause any owner or other responsible
person to be notified of the existence of such condition on the premises and
shall direct that such person or persons shall abate said condition or appear
before the enforcement officer at a stated time and place and show cause why
such condition should not be abated by the city at such person's expense.
   (b)   The notice shall be substantially in the following form:
NOTICE TO ABATE UNSAFE OR UNLAWFUL CONDITION
(Name and address of person notified)
As owner, agent, lessee or other person occupying or having charge or control
of the building, lot or premises at __________ you are hereby notified that the
undersigned pursuant to Section
9.56.030 of the Palo Alto Municipal Code has determined that there exists upon
or adjoining said premises the following condition contrary to the provisions
of subsection _____ of Section
9.56.030:
You are hereby notified to abate said condition to the satisfaction of the
undersigned within ____ days of the date of this notice or to appear at the
office of the ____________, _________, at _________________, Palo Alto,
California, on _____________,19___, at _____ o'clock ___.M., and show cause, if
any you have, why said condition should not be abated by the city, and the
expenses thereof charged to you as a personal obligation and/or made a lien
upon said buildings or grounds. Abatement is to be accomplished in the
following manner:
                  
(NAME OF DEPARTMENT AND HEAD)
Dated: __________________
By _____________________
(Ord. 1998 (part), 1961: prior code § 35.05)
9.56.050   Manner of giving notice.
   (a)   A copy of the notice provided for in Section
9.56.040 shall be sent to the owner and may be sent to any other of said
persons sought to be charged with the responsibility of abatement. The notice
shall be sent by mail, postage prepaid and addressed as follows:
   (1)   To the owner: As such person's name and address appear on the last
equalized assessment roll or as known to the enforcement officer or the person
authorized by the enforcement officer to give such notice;
   (2)   To any other such person: As such person's name and address are known
to the enforcement officer or the person authorized by him to give notice.
   (b)   The person giving such notice shall file a copy thereof in the office
of the enforcement officer together with an affidavit or certificate stating
the time and manner in which such notice was given. The failure of any owner or
other person to receive such notice shall not affect in any manner the validity
of any proceedings taken hereunder.
(Ord. 2452, 1968: Ord. 1998 (part), 1961: prior code § 35.06)
9.56.060   Hearing.
   At the time fixed in said notice, the enforcement officer shall hear
testimony offered on behalf of the person or persons sought to be charged which
tends to show why said condition should not be abated and the expense thereof
charged to such person as a civil debt and/or made a lien upon the buildings or
grounds. The enforcement officer may hear rebuttal testimony on behalf of the
city. If at the conclusion of such hearing the enforcement officer is satisfied
that said condition exists and concludes that it should be abated at the
expense of such person or persons as aforesaid, he shall so advise such persons
attending the hearing, either orally or in writing. In the event any person
given notice of hearing as shown by the evidence of mailing fails to appear at
said hearing, then as to him such evidence of mailing shall, without the taking
of further testimony, be sufficient evidence of the existence of facts in
support of said conclusion, and no notice of said conclusion of the enforcement
officer need be given to any such person failing to appear.
(Ord. 1998 (part), 1961: prior code § 35.07)
9.56.070   Abatement by city - Debt of owner.
   In all cases where the enforcement officer has determined to proceed with
abatement, then on the day following the date fixed for said hearing or, if the
matter has been continued by the enforcement officer, the day following the
conclusion thereof, the city shall acquire jurisdiction to abate said condition
at said person's expense as herein provided. Upon the abatement of such
condition or any portion thereof by the city, all the expenses thereof shall
constitute a civil debt owing to the city jointly and severally by such of the
persons who have been given notice as in this chapter provided, excepting only
such of said persons which the enforcement officer has concluded pursuant to
proof at the hearing are not persons properly charged with the responsibility
of abatement within the meaning of this chapter. The debt shall be collectible
in the same manner as any other civil debt owing to the city.
(Ord. 1998 (part), 1961: prior code § 35.08)
9.56.080   Imposition of lien.
   If the debt is not paid upon demand, and in the event the city officer
charged with the collection of the debt shall determine not to file civil suit
to collect the same, then the debt may be embodied in a report and an
assessment list which shall be filed with the city clerk as provided in Section
8.08.060. Thereafter proceedings shall be had as provided in Sections
8.08.060 to
8.08.090 inclusive for the placement and collection of liens on property.
(Ord. 1998 (part), 1961: prior code § 35.09)
9.56.090   Abatement by owner.
   If and when an owner or other responsible person undertakes to abate any
condition described in this chapter, whether by order of an enforcement officer
or otherwise, all needful and legal conditions pertinent to said abatement may
be imposed by an enforcement officer, and it is unlawful for the owner to fail
to comply with such conditions. Nothing in this chapter shall relieve any owner
or other responsible person of the obligation of obtaining any required permit
to do any work incidental to such abatement.
(Ord. 1998 (part), 1961: prior code § 35.10)
9.56.100   Procedure not exclusive.
   The procedure provided in this chapter shall be cumulative and in addition
to any other procedure or procedures provided in ordinances of this city or by
state law for the abatement of any of the conditions described in this chapter,
and abatement under this chapter shall not prejudice or affect any other
action, civil or criminal, for the maintenance of any such condition.
(Ord. 1998 (part), 1961: prior code § 35.11)
9.56.110   Summary abatement of immediate dangers.
   Whenever any condition on or use of property causes or constitutes or
reasonably appears to cause or constitute an imminent or immediate danger to
the health or safety of the public or a significant portion thereof, any
enforcement officer or his authorized representative shall have the authority
to summarily and without notice abate the same. The expenses of such abatement
shall become a lien on the property and be collectible as provided in Section
9.56.080.
(Ord. 2068 (part), 1962: prior code § 35.12)
9.56.120   Violations - Penalties.
   It is unlawful for any person to maintain, or allow to be maintained, any
condition described as a nuisance in Section
9.56.030. Violations shall be a misdemeanor, punishable as provided in this
code. Each day of violation constitutes a separate offense and may be
separately punished.
(Ord. 4453 § 43, 1997: Ord. 3184 § 2 (part), 1980)
9.56.130   Enforcement - Citation authority.
   The following designated employee positions may enforce the provisions of
this chapter by the issuance of citations. Persons employed in such positions
are authorized to exercise the authority provided in Penal Code Section 836.5
and are authorized to issue citations for violations of this chapter. The
designated employee positions are: chief building official, plan check
engineer, assistant fire chief, fire inspector, building inspection supervisor,
and code enforcement officer.
(Ord. 4453 § 44, 1997: Ord. 3184 § 2 (part), 1980)
Chapter 9.57
RESERVED*
*   Editor's Note: Chapter 9.57, Narcotics Paraphernalia Sale and Display,
previously codified herein, was relocated and renumbered as
Chapter 4.58 by Section 45 of Ordinance No. 4453.
Chapter 9.60
CIVIC CENTER BLOCK REGULATIONS
Sections:
   
9.60.010   Application of chapter.
   
9.60.020   Definitions.
   
9.60.030   Obstructing entrances, exits and free passage.
   
9.60.040   Permitted uses of Civic Center Plaza.
   
9.60.050   Damage to city property.
   
9.60.060   Bicycles, skateboards, etc.
   
9.60.070   Alcoholic beverages prohibited.
9.60.010   Application of chapter.
   The regulations set forth in this chapter shall apply to all of the property
defined as the Civic Center Block.
(Ord. 4575 § 2 (part), 1999)
9.60.020   Definitions.
   The following words and phrases, whenever used in this chapter, shall be
construed as defined in this section:
   (a)   "Civic Center Block" means and includes all of the publicly owned
property in the block bounded by Hamilton and Forest Avenues and Bryant and
Ramona Streets, including all sidewalks.
   (b)   "Civic Center Plaza" means that portion of the Civic Center Block
comprising the elevated surface surrounding City Hall and all stairs, steps, or
ramps providing access to the Civic Center Plaza from surrounding sidewalks.
(Ord. 4575 § 2 (part), 1999)
9.60.030   Obstructing entrances, exits and free passage.
   (a)   No person shall block any entrance or exit.
   (b)   No person shall impede the progress of any person lawfully entering or
exiting any structure nor shall any person obstruct the free passage of any
other person.
(Ord. 4575 § 2 (part), 1999)
9.60.040   Permitted uses of Civic Center Plaza.
   (a)   Civic Center Plaza is primarily designated for civic and governmental
uses and for access to City Hall and its parking garage. General public use of
the Civic Center Plaza is permitted for political, demonstrative, educational,
and recreational purposes except to the extent that it conflicts with these
civic and governmental uses. For the purpose of providing security, access, and
noninterference with the civic and governmental uses within City Hall, no
person may use those portions of Civic Center Plaza within fifteen feet of City
Hall for political, demonstrative, educational or recreational purposes. The
city manager may take any measures that are reasonably necessary to prevent
such general use by the public for political, demonstrative, educational, and
recreational purposes from disrupting or interfering with either civic and
governmental uses or other conflicting uses by the general public.
   (b)   Commercial activities and commercial solicitation not associated with
and supportive of city programs or city-sponsored activities are prohibited
within the Civic Center Plaza.
   (c)   No person shall discard any litter or other material which presents a
slipping hazard or environmental hazard or which damages or defaces any surface
in Civic Center Plaza.
   (d)   No person shall drive, park, place or erect on the Civic Center Plaza
or surrounding sidewalks of the Civic Center Block any vehicle or object
(including without limitation maintenance and construction vehicles, supplies,
and equipment, scaffolds, stages, platforms or other structures) which is
determined by the director of public works to exceed safe weight limits for the
structural slab and supports of the Civic Center Plaza and surrounding
sidewalks; no person shall drive or place on the Civic Center Plaza or
surrounding sidewalks of the Civic Center Block any vehicle or object exceeding
two hundred fifty pounds without first obtaining the review and approval of the
director of public works.
   (e)   Camping is prohibited, and it shall be unlawful for any person to camp
on Civic Center Plaza. "Camping" is defined as the use of Civic Center Plaza
for living accommodation purposes such as sleeping or making preparations to
sleep (including the laying down of bedding for the purpose of sleeping),
storing personal belongings, employing any fire or heating device, erecting or
using any tents or shelter or other structure or vehicle for sleeping, doing
any digging or earth breaking, or carrying on cooking activities. "Camping"
also means residing in or using the Civic Center Plaza for living accommodation
purposes, as exemplified by remaining for prolonged or repetitious periods of
time not associated with ordinary political, congregational, recreational, or
social uses with one's personal possessions (including but not limited to
clothing, sleeping bags, bedrolls, blankets, sheets, luggage, backpacks,
kitchen utensils, cookware, and similar material), sleeping or making
preparations to sleep, storing personal belongings as above defined, or cooking
or consuming meals. These activities constitute camping when it reasonably
appears, in light of all the circumstances, that a person is using Civic Center
Plaza as a living accommodation regardless of that person's intent or the
nature of any other activities in which they might also be engaging.
(Ord. 4575 § 2 (part), 1999)
9.60.050   Damage to city property.
   No person other than a city employee or city contractor in the performance
of public duty shall:
   (a)   Attach to or place upon any structure or surface any sign, card,
display or other similar device;
   (b)   Climb or mount any pole, structural support, canopy, retaining wall,
tree, or structure (including elevator housings, raised planters, and air
vents);
   (c)   Remove, destroy, injure, mutilate or cut any tree, plant, shrub, bloom
or flower.
(Ord. 4575 § 2 (part), 1999)
9.60.060   Bicycles, skateboards, etc.
   No person shall operate any bicycle, roller skates or blades, skateboard or
other locomotive device, whether propelled by engine or human effort, provided
that motor vehicles may be operated on vehicle ramps and bicycles may be walked
on vehicle ramps. This section shall not apply to any person using a locomotive
device necessitated by his physical handicap. Violations of this section shall
constitute an infraction.
(Ord. 4575 § 2 (part), 1999)
9.60.070   Alcoholic beverages prohibited.
   (a)   No person shall consume any alcoholic beverages and/or possess any
bottle, can, or other receptacle containing any type of alcoholic beverage
which has been opened, or a seal broken or the contents of which have been
partially removed in the Civic Center Block.
   (b)   This section shall not apply to the consumption of wine and/or beer in
the Civic Center Plaza which wine and/or beer have been provided by authorized
persons at any event at which such wine and beer are served and for which the
city manager has specifically authorized in advance the serving of wine and
beer. The city manager or designee may impose reasonable terms and conditions
on any authorization given pursuant to this section, including, but not limited
to, requiring insurance coverage indemnifying the city, its officers, agents
and employees from all liability associated with or arising from the event. The
city manager or designee may deny authorization for the serving of wine and
beer at an event which poses in the exercise of the city manager's reasonable
discretion, a disruption in the general area due to increased noise, traffic or
any other threat to the public health, safety, convenience or welfare.
(Ord. 4575 § 2 (part), 1999)
Chapter 9.64
REGULATION OF COMMUNITY FACILITIES*
Sections:
   
9.64.010   Use of community facilities prohibited from 10:30 p.m. to sunrise.
*   Editor's Note: Chapter 9.64, Abandoned, Wrecked, Dismantled or Inoperative
Vehicles, previously codified herein, was relocated and renumbered as
Chapter 10.34 by Section 53 of Ordinance No. 4453.
9.64.010   Use of community facilities prohibited from 10:30 p.m. to sunrise.
   (a)   No person shall use, remain in or enter any Community Facilities
between 10:30 pm and sunrise, other than a duly authorized city employee or
persons participating in city-sponsored activities or other activities for
which the city has provided written permission to utilize the grounds beyond
the closing time, provided however that the additional closure of specific
facilities during portions of the day or the year may be specified by the City
Manager or his or her designee.
   (b)   For the purposes of this chapter, “Community Facilities” means all
buildings and premises of City of Palo Alto Libraries, the Cubberley Community
Center, Lucie Stern Community Center, Children’s Theatre, Community Theatre,
Junior Museum & Zoo, Mitchell Park Community Center and Field House, Art
Center, Peers Park Field House, and Civic Center Plaza, (as defined in
Municipal Code Section
9.60.020(b)), but not any land dedicated for park use.”
(Ord. 5511 § 2, 2020: Ord. 5215 § 2, 2013)
Chapter 9.65
RESIDENTIAL RENTAL REGISTRY PROGRAM
Sections:
   
9.65.010   Purpose.
   
9.65.020   Definitions.
   
9.65.030   Registration of residential rental units.
   
9.65.040   Rental registry information privacy.
   
9.65.050   Penalties.
9.65.010   Purpose.
   The purpose of this chapter is to adopt a residential rental registry
program for the city of Palo Alto, which will allow the city to:
   (a)   Learn about the Palo Alto residential rental landscape as it is
experienced by renters and landlords;
   (b)   Make data-informed policy decisions that protect public health,
safety, and welfare for the residents of Palo Alto and that support certainty,
stability, and fairness in the residential rental market for renters and
landlords;
   (c)   Support community awareness of existing renter protections;
   (d)   Support the implementation of the city's Housing Element goals,
policies, and programs, including providing information available to inform the
city's significant investments in rental unit protection, preservation, and
production.
(Ord. 5605 § 2 (part), 2024)
9.65.020   Definitions.
   For purposes of this chapter, the following terms are defined as follows:
   (a)   "Landlord" means the owner or property manager exercising effective
control over the terms and conditions of the tenancy of a residential rental
unit, including a person with such control delegated through a durable power of
attorney.
   (b)   "Rent" means the consideration, including any bonus, benefit, or
gratuity demanded or received by a landlord, for or in connection with the use
or occupancy of a residential rental unit.
   (c)   "Rental registry information" means the information required to be
submitted to the city of Palo Alto by a landlord pursuant to this chapter.
   (d)   "Residential rental unit" means any housing structure occupied as a
dwelling or offered for rent or lease as a dwelling, whether attached,
detached, single or multiple-family. The term "residential rental unit" shall
not include an attached bedroom of a landlord-occupied dwelling where the
landlord and renter(s) share living facilities.
   (e)   "Renter" means a person or entity entitled by written or oral
agreement to occupy a residential rental unit to the exclusion of others.
(Ord. 5605 § 2 (part), 2024)
9.65.030   Registration of residential rental units.
   (a)   Initial Registration of Residential Rental Units. The landlord of each
residential rental unit within the city of Palo Alto shall register the unit
within the annual open registration period established by the City Manager or
their designee. Registration must be completed using forms provided by the
city, which may take the form of a secure website, and which may be amended
from time to time. Registration is complete only when all rental registry
information has been provided to the city and all outstanding fees and
penalties, if applicable, have been paid.
   (b)   Renewal Registration. The landlord of each residential rental unit
within the city of Palo Alto shall renew the registration of each unit annually
within the annual open registration period established by the City Manager or
their designee.
   (c)   Rental Registry Information Submission.
      (1)   At minimum, the following information shall be provided as part of
the initial and renewal registration of a residential rental unit:
         i.   The address of each residential rental unit,
         ii.   The name and contact information of the property owner and
property manager or landlord, as applicable.
      (2)   In addition to requiring the minimum information described in
paragraph (c)(1) of this section, the City Manager or their designee shall have
the authority to require or request additional information at initial or
renewal registration which may help to achieve the intended purpose of this
chapter.
      (3)   The City Manager or their designee shall have the authority to
require rental registry information to be submitted in a particular manner or
on a particular platform, such as on a secure website or through paper-based
forms, which may be amended from time to time.
   (d)   Event-based Registration Amendments.
      (1)   At minimum, landlords shall amend the registration of their
residential rental unit within ten (10) calendar days whenever one of the
following events occurs in relation to that residential rental unit:
         i.   Any increase in rent,
         ii.   A notice to quit is sent to a renter,
         iii.   An unlawful detainer complaint is filed, or
         iv.   An eviction.
      (2)   The City Manager or their designee shall have authority to
designate additional events which will require landlords to amend the
registration of their residential rental units and which may help to achieve
the intended purpose of this chapter.
   (e)   Affidavit. Each initial and renewal registration and event-based
registration amendment shall be accompanied by an affidavit signed by the
landlord declaring under penalty of perjury that the information provided is
true and correct.
   (f)   Fees.
      (1)   For the sole purpose of reimbursing the city of Palo Alto for the
reasonable costs of maintaining residential rental unit registration records
and related administrative systems, and program administration, the landlord of
each residential rental unit to which this chapter applies shall pay a fee upon
initial and renewal registration in an amount to be set by the Palo Alto city
council.
      (2)   Notwithstanding paragraph (1) of this subsection, the city council
may, in its discretion, waive or reduce the fees for initial or renewal
registration to help achieve the intended purpose of this chapter.
      (3)   A landlord may not seek recovery of this fee from the renter(s) in
occupancy of their residential rental unit(s).
(Ord. 5605 § 2 (part), 2024)
9.65.040   Rental registry information privacy.
   The city will only affirmatively publish or disseminate rental registry
information in the aggregate, except that rental registry information
describing individualized residential rental units may be shared or distributed
in the following circumstances:
   (a)   Individualized rental registry information regarding a renter's
tenancy at a specific residential rental unit may be shared with that renter;
   (b)   The status of whether the city has or has not received rental registry
information regarding a residential rental unit may be shared with the public;
and
   (c)   As required by the California Public Records Act, individualized
rental registry information may be disclosed pursuant to a request.
(Ord. 5605 § 2 (part), 2024)
9.65.050   Penalties.
   (a)   Penalties for Delinquency. Any landlord operating in the city that
fails to register or amend their residential rental units in accordance with
this chapter shall pay, in addition to the amount of the registration fee, a
penalty in an amount to be determined by ordinance or resolution.
   (b)   Penalty Waiver. The City Manager or their designee shall have
discretion to waive this penalty fee for good cause and if the City Manager or
their designee determines that waiving the penalty fee would promote the
purpose of this chapter.
   (c)   Action to Collect. If a landlord fails to comply with the fee
requirements of this chapter, the city may refer the matter to a collection
agency and/or the city attorney may file a civil action against any landlord.
Penalties may be added to the residential rental unit registration fee.
Penalties will become due and payable along with the registration fee.
   (d)   Remedies Cumulative. All remedies prescribed under this chapter shall
be cumulative and the use of one or more remedies by the city shall not bar the
use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this
chapter.
(Ord. 5605 § 2 (part), 2024)
Chapter 9.68
RENTAL HOUSING STABILIZATION
Sections:
   
9.68.010   Purpose.
   
9.68.020   Definitions.
   
9.68.030   Requirement of offering one-year written leases.
   
9.68.040   Just-cause evictions required.
   
9.68.050   General relocation assistance or rent waiver for no-fault eviction.
   
9.68.060   Relocation assistance for evictions without at-fault just cause in
structures or lots containing 10 or more residential rental units.
   
9.68.070   Security deposit limit.
   
9.68.080   Renter’s remedies.
   
9.68.090   Nonwaiver.
9.68.010   Purpose.
   (a)   It is found and declared that there is a growing shortage of, but
increasing demand for, housing in the city of Palo Alto. Such shortage and
increased demand, coupled with increasing inflation, have placed substantial
pressure on those residents of Palo Alto seeking rental housing. This council
finds that renters are entitled to a contractual relationship with a landlord
that offers some assurance of stability and fair treatment under the terms of a
written lease to minimize displacement of renters into a rental housing market
which affords them few and expensive options.
   (b)   Council further finds that the provisions of California Assembly Bill
1482 (2019), as codified and later expanded in the Civil Code of the state of
California, offers important protections from instability and displacement to
renters. The provisions of that bill as they relate to eviction reduction are
restated and expanded below, to make the protections permanent in the city of
Palo Alto, to extend them to renters living in qualified residential rental
units that received a certificate of occupancy within the last fifteen years,
and to reduce the minimum occupancy time period for renters to qualify for
eviction protections.
(Ord. 5592 § 2, 2023: Ord. 5589 § 2 (part), 2023: Ord. 3252 § 1 (part), 1980)
9.68.020   Definitions.
   (a)   “Just cause” to terminate a tenancy means either of the following:
   (1)   “At-fault just cause”, which means any of the following:
   (A)   Default in the payment of rent.
   (B)   A breach of a material term of the lease, as described in paragraph
(3) of Section 1161 of the California Code of Civil Procedure, including, but
not limited to, violation of a provision of the lease after being issued a
written notice to correct the violation.
   (C)   Maintaining, committing, or permitting the maintenance or commission
of a nuisance as described in paragraph (4) of Section 1161 of the California
Code of Civil Procedure.
   (D)   Committing waste as described in paragraph (4) of Section 1161 of the
California Code of Civil Procedure.
   (E)   The renter had a written lease that terminated on or after July 20,
2023, and after a written request or demand from the landlord, the renter has
refused to execute a written extension or renewal of the lease for an
additional term of similar duration with similar provisions, provided that
those terms do not violate this chapter or any other provision of law.
   (F)   Criminal activity by the renter on the residential rental unit,
including any common areas, or any criminal activity or criminal threat, as
defined in subdivision (a) of Section 422 of the California Penal Code, on or
off the residential rental unit, that is directed at any landlord or agent of
the landlord.
   (G)   Assigning or subletting the premises in violation of the renter’s
lease, as described in paragraph (4) of Section 1161 of the California Code of
Civil Procedure.
   (H)   The renter’s refusal to allow the landlord to enter the residential
rental unit as authorized by Sections 1101.5 and 1954 of the California Civil
Code, and Sections 13113.7 and 17926.1 of the California Health and Safety
Code.
   (I)   Using the premises for an unlawful purpose as described in paragraph
(4) of Section 1161 of the California Code of Civil Procedure.
   (J)   The employee, agent, or licensee’s failure to vacate after their
termination as an employee, agent, or a licensee as described in paragraph (1)
of Section 1161 of the California Code of Civil Procedure.
   (K)   When the renter fails to deliver possession of the residential rental
unit after providing the landlord written notice as provided in Section 1946 of
the California Civil Code of the renter’s intention to terminate the hiring of
the real property, or makes a written offer to surrender that is accepted in
writing by the landlord, but fails to deliver possession at the time specified
in that written notice as described in paragraph (5) of Section 1161 of the
California Code of Civil Procedure.
   (2)   “No-fault just cause,” which means any of the following:
   (A)   Intent to occupy the residential rental unit by the landlord or their
sibling, spouse, domestic partner, children, grandchildren, parents,
grandparents, father-in-law, mother-in-law, son-in-law, or daughter-in-law,
provided the landlord is a natural person.
   (B)   Permanent withdrawal of the residential rental unit from offer for
rent or lease pursuant to California Government Code sections 7060-7060.7.
   (C)   The landlord complying with any of the following:
   (i)   An order issued by a government agency or court relating to
habitability that necessitates vacating the residential rental unit.
   (ii)   An order issued by a government agency or court to vacate the
residential rental unit.
   (iii)   A local ordinance that necessitates vacating the residential rental
unit.
   (D)   Intent to demolish or to substantially remodel the residential rental
unit. “Substantially remodel” means the replacement or substantial modification
of any structural, electrical, plumbing, or mechanical system that requires a
permit from a governmental agency, or the abatement of hazardous materials,
including lead-based paint, mold, or asbestos, in accordance with applicable
federal, state, and local laws, that cannot be reasonably accomplished in a
safe manner with the renter in place and that requires the renter to vacate the
residential rental unit for at least 30 days. Cosmetic improvements alone,
including painting, decorating, and minor repairs, or other work that can be
performed safely without having the residential rental unit vacated, do not
qualify as substantial rehabilitation.
   (b)   “Landlord” means the owner or property manager exercising effective
control over the terms and conditions of the tenancy of a residential rental
unit, including a person with such control delegated through a durable power of
attorney.
   (c)   “Rent” means the consideration. including any bonus, benefit, or
gratuity demanded or received by a landlord for or in connection with the use
or occupancy of a rental unit.
   (d)   “Rent increase” means any additional rent demanded of or paid by a
tenant for a rental unit.
   (e)   "Renter" means a person or entity entitled by written or oral
agreement to occupy a residential rental unit to the exclusion of others.
   (f)   “Residential rental unit” means any housing structure occupied as a
dwelling or offered for rent or lease as a dwelling, whether attached,
detached, single or multiple-family.
   (g)   “Security” means any payment, fee, deposit, or charge, including, but
not limited to, any payment, fee, deposit, or charge, except as provided in
Section 1950.6 of the California Civil Code, that is imposed at the beginning
of the tenancy to be used to reimburse the landlord for costs associated with
processing a new renter or that is imposed as an advance payment of rent, used
or to be used for any purpose, including, but not limited to, any of the
following:
   (1)   The compensation of a landlord for a renter’s default in the payment
of rent.
   (2)   The repair of damages to the premises, exclusive of ordinary wear and
tear, caused by the renter or by a guest or licensee of the renter.
   (3)   The cleaning of the premises upon termination of the tenancy necessary
to return the unit to the same level of cleanliness it was in at the inception
of the tenancy.
   (4)   To remedy future defaults by the renter in any obligation under the
rental agreement to restore, replace, or return personal property or
appurtenances, exclusive of ordinary wear and tear, if the security deposit is
authorized to be applied thereto by the rental agreement.
(Ord. 5589 § 2 (part), 2023: Ord. 3420 §§ 1 and 2, 1983: Ord. 3327 § 1, 1982:
Ord. 3252 § 1 (part), 1980)
9.68.030   Requirement of offering one-year written leases.
   (a)   Offer. If a renter or prospective renter wishes to rent a residential
unit from a landlord and if said landlord wishes to rent said residential
rental unit to said renter or prospective renter, the landlord must offer to
the renter or prospective renter a written lease which has a minimum term of
one year. Such offer must be made in writing. Signing of a lease which has a
minimum term of one year shall be considered an offer in writing.
   (b)   Acceptance. If the renter or prospective renter accepts the offer of a
written lease which has a minimum term of one year, this acceptance must be in
writing. Signing a lease which has a minimum term of one year will be
considered an acceptance.
   (c)   Rejection. If the renter or prospective renter rejects the offer for a
written lease which has a minimum term of one year, this rejection must be in
writing, and the landlord and renter or prospective renter may then enter into
an agreement, oral or written, that provides for a rental term of less than one
year.
   (d)   Rent. If the landlord and renter enter into a written lease which has
a minimum term of one year, such lease must set the rent for the residential
rental unit at a rate or rates certain and these rates shall not be otherwise
modified during the term of such lease.
   (e)   Renewal of Leases. If both the landlord and the renter wish to
continue the rental relationship, upon the expiration of the initial written
lease which has a minimum term of one year, a lease shall be offered again in
accordance with the procedures of Section
9.68.030(a) through (d):
   (1)   Leases with a term of one year shall be offered annually.
   (2)   Leases with a term longer than one year shall be renewable at the
expiration of each lease period for a minimum term of one year.
   (3)   A landlord shall offer annually a written lease with a minimum term of
one year to a renter who rejected an initial offer of a written lease with a
minimum term of one year but who has rented a unit from the landlord for a
period of at least twelve months.
   (f)   Applicability. This section shall not apply to:
   (1)   A residential rental unit which is rented on the effective date of the
ordinance codified in this chapter, provided, that (A) if the unit is rented
subject to a written lease, when the lease in effect for such a unit expires,
the ordinance codified in this chapter shall then apply; and (B) if the unit is
rented without a written lease, within thirty days after the effective date of
this section, the landlord shall offer a written lease to the renter in
accordance with this section;
   (2)   An owner-occupied unit that is rented to a renter for less than one
year;
   (3)   A residential rental unit occupied by a renter who subleases that unit
to another renter for less than one year;
   (4)   A single-family dwelling;
   (5)   Rooms or accommodations in hotels, boardinghouses, or lodginghouses
which are rented to transient guests for a period of less than thirty days;
   (6)   Dwelling units in a condominium, community apartment, planned
development or stock cooperative as defined in
Chapter 21.40, or in a limited equity stock cooperative as defined in the
California Business and Professions Code;
   (7)   Dwelling units in which housing accommodations are shared by landlord
and tenant;
   (8)   Housing accommodations in any hospital, extended care facility,
asylum, nonprofit home for the aged, or in dormitories owned and operated by an
institution of higher education, a high school or an elementary school;
   (9)   Housing accommodations rented by a medical institution which are then
subleased to a patient or patient's family;
   (10)   Dwelling units whose rents are controlled or regulated by any
government unit, agency, or authority, or whose rent is subsidized by any
government unit, agency, or authority;
   (11)   Dwelling units acquired by the city of Palo Alto or any other
governmental unit, agency or authority and intended to be used for a public
purpose; or
   (12)   A residential rental unit where tenancy is an express condition of,
or consideration for employment under a written rental agreement or contract.
(Ord. 5589 § 2 (part), 2023: Ord. 3929 § 1, 1989: Ord. 3327 § 2, 1982: Ord.
3252 § 2 (part), 1980)
9.68.040   Just-cause evictions required.
   (a)   Applicability to residential rental units. This section shall apply to
all residential rental units, except not any of the following:
   (1)   Transient and tourist hotel occupancy as defined in subdivision (b) of
Section 1940 of the California Civil Code.
   (2)   Housing accommodations in a nonprofit hospital, religious facility,
extended care facility, licensed residential care facility for the elderly, as
defined in Section 1569.2 of the California Health and Safety Code, or an adult
residential facility, as defined in Chapter 6 of Division 6 of Title 22 of the
Manual of Policies and Procedures published by California’s State Department of
Social Services.
   (3)   Dormitories owned and operated by an institution of higher education
or a kindergarten and grades 1 to 12, inclusive, school.
   (4)   Housing accommodations in which the renter shares bathroom or kitchen
facilities with the owner who maintains their principal residence at the
residential rental unit.
   (5)   Single-family owner-occupied residences.
   (6)   A property containing two separate dwelling units within a single
structure in which the owner occupied one of the units as the owner’s principal
place of residence at the beginning of the tenancy, so long as the owner
continues in occupancy, and neither unit is an accessory dwelling unit or a
junior accessory dwelling unit.
   (7)   A residential rental unit that is alienable separate from the title to
any other dwelling unit, provided that both subparagraphs (A) and (B) below
apply:
   (A)   The owner is not any of the following:
   (i)   A real estate investment trust, as defined in Section 856 of the
California Internal Revenue Code.
   (ii)   A corporation.
   (iii)   A limited liability company in which at least one member is a
corporation.
   (iv)   Management of a mobilehome park, as defined in Section 798.2 of the
California Civil Code.
   (B)   The renters have been provided written notice that the residential
property is exempt from this section.
   (i)   Notice must be given using the following statement:
   “This property is not subject to the just cause eviction requirements of
Chapter 9.68 of the Palo Alto Municipal Code. This property meets the
requirements of Section
9.68.040(a)(7) of the Palo Alto Municipal Code and the owner is not any of the
following: (1) a real estate investment trust, as defined by Section 856 of the
California Internal Revenue Code; (2) a corporation; (3) a limited liability
company in which at least one member is a corporation; or (4) management of a
mobilehome park, as defined in Section 798.2 of the California Civil Code.”
   (ii)   The notice required under clause (i) may, but is not required to, be
provided in the rental agreement.
   (8)   Housing restricted by deed, regulatory restriction contained in an
agreement with a government agency, or other recorded document as affordable
housing for persons and families of very low, low, or moderate income, as
defined in Section 50093 of the California Health and Safety Code, or subject
to an agreement that provides housing subsidies for affordable housing for
persons and families of very low, low, or moderate income, as defined in
Section 50093 of the California Health and Safety Code or comparable federal
statutes.
   (b)   Protection for renters. Notwithstanding any other law, after a renter
has continuously and lawfully occupied a residential rental unit for 6 months,
the landlord of the residential rental unit shall not terminate the tenancy
without just cause, which shall be stated with specificity in the written
notice to terminate tenancy. If any additional adult renters are added to the
lease before an existing renter has continuously and lawfully occupied the
residential rental unit for 12 months, then this subdivision shall only apply
if either of the following are satisfied:
   (1)   All of the renters have continuously and lawfully occupied the
residential rental unit for 6 months or more.
   (2)   One or more renters have continuously and lawfully occupied the
residential rental unit for 12 months or more.
   (c)   Opportunity to cure. Before a landlord issues a notice to terminate a
tenancy for just cause that is a curable lease violation, the landlord shall
first give notice of the violation to the renter with an opportunity to cure
the violation pursuant to paragraph (3) of Section 1161 of the California Code
of Civil Procedure. If the violation is not cured within the time period set
forth in the notice, a three-day notice to quit without an opportunity to cure
may thereafter be served to terminate the tenancy.
   (d)   Notice. A landlord subject to this section shall provide notice to the
renter, which may take the form of a lease provision or an addendum to a lease,
and which shall include the following, in no less than 12-point type:
“California law limits the amount your rent can be increased. See Section
1947.12 of the Civil Code for more information. Local law also provides that
after all of the renters have continuously and lawfully occupied the property
for 6 months or more or at least one of the renters has continuously and
lawfully occupied the property for 12 months or more, a landlord must provide a
statement of cause in any notice to terminate a tenancy. See
Chapter 9.68 of the Palo Alto Municipal Code for more information.”
   (e)   Dispute resolution. Nothing in this chapter abrogates the
responsibility of landlords to comply with the requirements of
Chapter 9.72 (Mandatory Response to Request for Discussion of Disputes between
Landlords and Tenants) of the Palo Alto Municipal Code. As applicable, a renter
may request mandatory discussion of rental housing disputes by filing a written
request for dispute resolution according to section
9.72.040 (Dispute Resolution Process).
(Ord. 5592 § 3, 2023: Ord. 5589 § 2 (part), 2023)
9.68.050   General relocation assistance or rent waiver for no-fault eviction.
   (a)   Applicability. This section shall be applicable only to tenancies for
which just- cause is required to terminate the tenancy under section
9.68.040 (Just-cause evictions required), except it shall not apply to a
tenancy when relocation assistance payment is available to the renter through
section
9.68.060 (Relocation assistance for evictions without at-fault just cause in
structures or lots containing 10 or more residential rental units) and the
assistance available through section
9.68.060 is greater in value than the assistance available through this
section.
   (b)   Relocation assistance for renters.
   (1)   Form of assistance. If a landlord issues a termination notice based on
a no-fault just cause described in section
9.68.020(f)(2), the landlord shall, regardless of the renter’s income, at the
landlord’s option, do one of the following:
   (A)   Assist the renter to relocate by providing a direct payment to the
tenant as described in section
9.68.050(b)(3).
   (B)   Waive in writing the payment of rent for the final month of the
tenancy, prior to the rent becoming due.
   (2)   Notice required. If a landlord issues a notice to terminate a tenancy
for no-fault just cause, the landlord shall notify the renter of the renter’s
right to relocation assistance or rent waiver pursuant to this chapter. If the
landlord elects to waive the rent for the final month of the tenancy as
provided in section
9.68.050(b)(1), the notice shall state the amount of rent waived and that no
rent is due for the final month of the tenancy.
   (3)   Amount.
   (A)   The amount of relocation assistance or rent waiver shall be equal to
one month of the renter’s rent that was in effect when the landlord issued the
notice to terminate the tenancy. Any relocation assistance shall be provided
within 15 calendar days of service of the notice.
   (B)   If a renter fails to vacate after the expiration of the notice to
terminate the tenancy, the actual amount of any relocation assistance or rent
waiver provided pursuant to this section shall be recoverable as damages in an
action to recover possession.
   (C)   The relocation assistance or rent waiver required by this section
shall be credited against any other relocation assistance required by any other
law.
   (4)   Effect of noncompliance. A landlord’s failure to strictly comply with
this subdivision shall render the notice of termination void.
(Ord. 5589 § 2 (part), 2023)
9.68.060   Relocation assistance forevictions without at-fault just cause in
structures or lots containing 10 or more residential rental units.
   (a)   Applicability. This section shall be applicable only to structures or
lots containing 10 or more residential rental units. This section shall not
apply to any of the following:
   (1)   A single-family dwelling;
   (2)   Rooms or accommodations in hotels, boardinghouses, or lodginghouses
which are rented to transient guests for a period of less than thirty days;
   (3)   Dwelling units in a condominium, community apartment, planned
development or stock cooperative as defined in
Chapter 21.40, or in a limited equity stock cooperative as defined in the
California Business and Professions Code;
   (4)   Dwelling units in which housing accommodations are shared by landlord
and tenant;
   (5)   Housing accommodations in any hospital, extended care facility,
asylum, nonprofit home for the aged, or in dormitories owned and operated by an
institution of higher education, a high school or an elementary school;
   (6)   Housing accommodations rented by a medical institution which are then
subleased to a patient or patient's family;
   (7)   Dwelling units whose rents are controlled or regulated by any
government unit, agency, or authority, or whose rent is subsidized by any
government unit, agency, or authority; or
   (8)   Dwelling units acquired by the city of Palo Alto or any other
governmental unit, agency or authority and intended to be used for a public
purpose.
   (b)   Amount required. Whenever a landlord seeks an eviction for any reason
other than to comply with regulations relating to the qualifications of tenancy
established by a governmental entity or at-fault just cause other than
temporary displacement of 31 days or fewer, the landlord shall provide a
relocation assistance payment as follows:
   (1)   Unit Type      Amount
 
0 bedrooms         $7,000
1 bedroom          $9,000
2 bedrooms         $13,000
3 or more bedrooms $17,000
 
   If the residential rental unit is occupied by two or more renters, the
landlord shall provide each renter with a proportional share of the required
payment. One half of the payment shall be paid at the time that the landlord
provides notice of its intent to seek a qualifying eviction; the remainder of
the payment shall be paid to each renter when that renter vacates the unit.
   (2)   Notwithstanding subsection (b)(1), each residential rental unit that,
at the time the landlord provides notice of its intent to seek an eviction
subject to this section, is occupied by a low-income household as defined in
Chapter 16.65, a renter who is 60 years of age or older, a renter who is
disabled within the meaning of Government Code section 12955.3, or a renter who
is a minor, shall be entitled to a single additional relocation payment of
$3,000. This amount shall be divided equally among the qualifying (i.e. low-
income, elderly, disabled, orminor) renters. In order to receive this
additional payment a qualifying renter must provide written notice to the
landlord of his or her eligibility along with supporting evidence within 15
days of receiving the landlord's notice. The entirety of this additional
payment shall be paid within 15 days of the renter’s written notice to the
landlord.
   (c)   Notice. Prior to or at the same time that the landlord provides notice
of its intent to seek an eviction subject to this section, the landlord shall
serve on the renter a written notice describing the rights described in this
section. The failure to provide this notice shall not operate as a substantive
defense to an eviction pursuant to California Government Code sections 7060-
7060.7.
   (d)   Annual adjustment. Commencing July 1, 2019, the relocation payments
specified in this section shall increase annually at the rate of increase in
the "rent of primary residence" expenditure category of the Consumer Price
Index (CPI) for all urban consumers in the San Francisco-Oakland-Hayward
Region, not seasonally adjusted, for the preceding calendar year. Current rates
shall be published on the city's website.
   (e)   Request for waiver. A landlord may request a waiver or adjustment of
the relocation assistance payment required by this section only upon a showing
that strict application of its requirements would effectuate an
unconstitutional taking of property or otherwise have an unconstitutional
application to the property. Requests for waiver or adjustment must be
submitted in writing to the director of planning and development services
together with supporting documentation at least 90 days before the proposed
termination of tenancy. Requests shall be acted on by the city council.
   (f)   Authority to regulate. The director of planning and development
services may issue regulations implementing this section.
(Ord. 5589 § 2 (part), 2023: Ord. 5544 § 2, 2022: Ord. 5543 § 2, 2022: Ord.
5494 § 3, 2020: Ord. 5451 § 2, 2018: Ord. 5447 § 2, 2018)
9.68.070   Security deposit limit.
   (a)   Applicability. This section applies to security for leases of all
residential rental units.
   (b)   Limits. A landlord may not demand or receive security, however
denominated, in an amount or value in excess of an amount equal to one and a
half months’ rent, in the case of unfurnished rental units, in addition to any
rent for the first month paid on or before initial occupancy.
   (c)   Security deposit purposes. The landlord may claim of the security only
those amounts as are reasonably necessary for the purposes specified in
subdivision
9.68.020(g). The landlord may not assert a claim against the renter or the
security for damages to the premises or any defective conditions that
preexisted the tenancy, for ordinary wear and tear or the effects thereof,
whether the wear and tear preexisted the tenancy or occurred during the
tenancy, or for the cumulative effects of ordinary wear and tear occurring
during any one or more tenancies.
(Ord. 5589 § 2 (part), 2023)
9.68.080   Renter’s remedies.
   (a)   Defense to Action to Recover Possession. Failure of a landlord to
comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall provide the renter with
a defense in any legal action brought by the landlord to recover possession of
the residential rental unit.
   (b)   Defense to Action to Collect Rent. Failure of a landlord to comply
with any of the provisions of this chapter shall provide the renter with a
defense in any legal action brought by the landlord to collect rent.
   (c)   Injunctive Relief. A renter may seek injunctive relief on his or her
own behalf and on behalf of other affected renters to enjoin the landlord’s
violation of this chapter.
   (d)   Remedies are Nonexclusive. Remedies provided in this section are in
addition to any other existing legal remedies and are not intended to be
exclusive.
(Ord. 5589 § 2 (part), 2023: Ord. 3252 § 1 (part), 1980)
9.68.090   Nonwaiver.
   Any waiver or purported waiver by a renter of rights under this chapter
prior to the time when such rights may be exercised, except a rejection of a
one-year lease offered in accordance with Section
9.68.030, shall be void as contrary to public policy.
(Ord. 5589 § 2 (part), 2023: Ord. 3252 § 1 (part), 1980)
Chapter 9.70
RESALE CONTROLS FOR UNITS ORIGINALLY FINANCED WITH MORTGAGE REVENUE BONDS
Sections:
   
9.70.010   Purpose.
   
9.70.020   Definitions.
   
9.70.030   Resale controls of units originally financed with mortgage revenue
bonds.
   
9.70.040   Exceptions to resale control requirements.
9.70.010   Purpose.
   The purpose of this chapter is to enhance the public welfare by ensuring
that housing financed with mortgage revenue bond proceeds contributes to
attaining the housing goals set forth in the Comprehensive Plan of the City of
Palo Alto by increasing the supply of residential housing affordable to low and
moderate income households.
(Ord. 3336 § 1 (part), 1982)
9.70.020   Definitions.
   (a)   The following words and phrases, whenever used in this chapter, shall
be construed as defined in this section:
   (1)   “Consumer Price Index” means the consumer price index for the San
Francisco-Oakland area published by U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor
Statistics or a successor index approved by the director of planning and
development services.
   (b)   "Qualified buyer" means a person or persons whose income does not
exceed the maximum income established for mortgage revenue bond financing by
the California Health and Safety Code and as specifically approved for a
project in the developer agreement among the county of Santa Clara, the city
and the developer for a project.
   (3)   “Deed restrictions” means the most recent deed restrictions developed
by the city for the city’s below-market-rate program which are on file with the
department of planning and development services.
(Ord. 5494 § 3, 2020: Ord. 3505 §1, 1984: Ord. 3336 § 1 (part), 1982)
9.70.030   Resale controls of units originally financed with mortgage revenue
bonds.
   In order to accomplish the purposes of this chapter, housing units in the
city which are financed with mortgage revenue bonds shall be sold only to
qualified buyers. The qualified buyers of each such unit shall grant to the
city a right of first refusal to purchase the unit pursuant to deed
restrictions to be recorded as part of any grant deed with the county recorder
of Santa Clara County; provided, that the base price, as set forth in the deed
restrictions, shall be increased by two-thirds of the percentage increase in
the Consumer Price Index from the date of the purchase of a unit by the seller
to the date of receipt by city of the notice of intent to sell.
(Ord. 3505 § 2, 1984: Ord. 3336 § 1 (part), 1982)
9.70.040   Exceptions to resale control requirements.
   Unless they are more restrictive, the resale controls established by Section
9.70.030 shall not apply to units designated as BMR units under the city's
below-market-rate program or to any other units for which resale controls have
been established by the city.
(Ord. 3505 § 3, 1984: Ord. 3336 § 1 (part), 1982)
Chapter 9.72
MANDATORY RESPONSE TO REQUEST FOR DISCUSSION OF DISPUTES BETWEEN LANDLORDS AND
TENANTS
Sections:
   
9.72.010   Purposes and findings.
   
9.72.020   Mandatory discussion of rental housing disputes.
   
9.72.030   Applicability.
   
9.72.040   Dispute resolution process.
   
9.72.050   Property registration.
   
9.72.060   Retaliation prohibited.
   
9.72.070   Notice of tenant's rights.
   
9.72.080   Definitions.
   
9.72.090   Penalties.
9.72.010   Purposes and findings.
   The city council finds and declares as follows:
   (a)   There is an imbalance between the supply of and demand for rental
housing in the city of Palo Alto. The imbalance is the result of both a
shortage of rental housing and overwhelming market demand.
   (b)   The imbalance between supply and demand creates an imbalance of
bargaining power between landlords and tenants.
   (c)   As a result of these market and bargaining power imbalances, Palo Alto
tenants may be unwilling or unable to assert their legal rights and other
concerns to their landlords.
   (d)   Communication between landlords and tenants is impaired as a result.
Moreover, the Palo Alto rental housing market is less responsive to the needs
of tenants because "customer service"is not needed to attract and retain
tenants.
   (e)   These impacts are detrimental to the health, safety and general
welfare of Palo Alto and the surrounding region because the stability, security
and quality of housing opportunities are reduced.
   (f)   These impacts can be reduced by improving communications between
landlords and tenants through a fair and reliable process for the conciliation
and mediation of disputes.
   (g)   Because effective communication must be "two-way,"it is essential that
all affected parties be required to participate in mediated dispute resolution.
   (h)   In order to further assure improved communications it is necessary to
protect the parties to mediation from retaliation for exercising the rights
afforded by this chapter.
   (i)   The city council recognizes that it is important to monitor and
improve the processes established in this chapter on a periodic basis.
(Ord. 4728 § 1 (part), 2002)
9.72.020   Mandatory discussion of rental housing disputes.
   All persons (landlords and tenants) residing in, owning, or managing
residential rental property to which this chapter applies shall participate in
the conciliation and mediation of rental housing disputes as provided in this
chapter. The definitions applicable to this chapter appear in Section
9.72.080.
(Ord. 4728 § 1 (part), 2002)
9.72.030   Applicability.
   This chapter shall apply to residential rental property as follows:
   (a)   Any residential rental property containing two or more dwelling units,
except two-unit residential rental property in which one of the units is owner-
occupied; or
   (b)   Any residential rental property that is owned by a person or legal
entity that owns two or more residential rental properties within the city.
(Ord. 4728 § 1 (part), 2002)
9.72.040   Dispute resolution process.
   (a)   Any tenant or landlord may request mandatory discussion of rental
housing disputes by filing a written request for dispute resolution within
twenty-one days of learning the facts that give rise to the dispute. The
request must be filed with the city's facilitation administrator, and must
provide enough factual information to outline the basic issue or issues being
raised.
   (b)   Within seven days of receiving a written request for dispute
resolution, the facilitation administrator will notify both tenant and landlord
that a case has been opened and will provide a copy of the request to the
responding party. The facilitation administrator will also initiate a
conciliation process, to be undertaken by the facilitation administrator, other
city staff, or a mediator, before mediation is scheduled.
   (c)   The facilitation administrator will not open dispute resolution, or
will order dispute resolution closed, when it is clear from the written request
that there is no substantial factual basis for the dispute, or when the dispute
involves the actions or behavior of persons, or conditions, that are not within
the control or responsibility of the parties; or when the dispute is frivolous,
malicious or vexatious; or when further proceedings are not, in the sole
judgment of the facilitation administrator, likely to be productive. Both
parties will be notified of the facilitation administrator's action and shall
have access to the case summary forms used by the facilitation administrator,
which will not contain any confidential communications from the parties. The
facilitation administrator will also order dispute resolution closed if the
parties agree to engage a mediator of their own choice, so long as the party
who requests the mediator agrees in writing to bear all costs related to that
service.
   (d)   The facilitation administrator will promptly assign the request to a
mediator who will contact all relevant parties to conciliate and mediate the
dispute. The facilitation administrator shall have the authority to combine
different disputes or different parties in the interest of efficiently
addressing the disputes, provided that any party may, for reasons of
confidentiality or otherwise, opt out of a combined mediation involving more
than one tenant or landlord by notifying the facilitation administrator. All
communications between the facilitation administrator and the parties as well
as between the mediator or conciliator and the parties shall be confidential
and subject to the confidentiality guarantees set forth in California Evidence
Code Sections 703.5 and 1115 – 1128, as they may be amended or superseded. The
mediator assigned to the case will promptly investigate and if necessary
disclose any conflict of interest or potential conflict of interest to the
parties as soon as the conflict or potential conflict becomes known to the
mediator. At the time of disclosure, the parties will have the option of
waiving any such conflict as long as the waiver is in writing. The city shall
not be obligated to incur any financial obligation in order to assign a
mediator. A mediator will not be assigned if there are not qualified volunteers
available without cost to the city or parties.
   (e)   No mediation will be scheduled until at least fourteen days after the
parties are notified in order to allow time for conciliation efforts before
mediation. Unless all parties agree in writing to waive the time limit, the
initial mediation session will be conducted within twenty-eight days of the
date the written request for dispute resolution is filed. The landlord's
business location shall be considered so that the mediation will be scheduled
at a reasonably convenient time taking into account the distance that the
landlord must travel to attend the mediation.
   (f)   If a mediation session is held, the mediator shall provide the parties
with an opening statement explaining the nature of the process and the ground
rules. Thereafter the mediator will determine the manner and course of the
session, including whether to meet with the parties in caucus, provided that
the general guiding principle will always be to provide the parties with a full
opportunity to air the concerns giving rise to the dispute.
   (g)   The landlords and/or tenants involved in the dispute shall be
obligated to personally appear at a mediation session scheduled by a mediator.
All parties must participate in the mediation session until completion of the
mediator's opening statement. All parties appearing must have the legal
authority to resolve disputes arising under this chapter. Participation in
mediation shall be voluntary in all respects after the opening statement. The
mediator may, with the consent of all parties, schedule additional sessions as
needed.
   (h)   No party shall be obligated to reach any specific agreement, or to
reach any agreement at all, as a result of participating in conciliation or
mediation communications. If an agreement is reached, it will be stated in
writing by the mediator or by the parties. Any such agreement shall be
confidential and will not be enforceable or usable for any purpose outside the
dispute resolution process, unless all signatories agree that the document can
be disclosed or used in other proceedings.
(Ord. 4728 § 1 (part), 2002)
9.72.050   Property registration.
   The landlord of each residential rental property within the city shall
register the unit or units with the city according to the requirements of
Chapter 9.65 (Residential Rental Registry Program), regardless of whether the
residential rental property is listed in Section
9.72.030.
(Ord. 4728 § 1 (part), 2002: Ord. 5605 § 3, 2024)
9.72.060   Retaliation prohibited.
   No landlord or tenant who has been a party to conciliation and mediation of
rental housing disputes pursuant to this chapter may undertake or cause any
type of retaliatory act or omission against another party as a result of the
other party having invoked or participated in the dispute resolution process.
The facilitation administrator upon request shall review an act or omission,
including a notice of eviction or an unlawful detainer action, which occurs
within six months of the party's participation in conciliation and mediation of
rental housing disputes, unless the eviction or action is the result of the
unjustified failure or refusal to pay rent. In the event that the facilitation
administrator concludes that there is sufficient evidence to investigate an act
or omission of retaliation under this provision, the relevant facts will be
referred to the city attorney for appropriate remedial action.
(Ord. 4728 § 1 (part), 2002)
9.72.070   Notice of tenant's rights.
   (a)   Every rental agreement, lease, or other written document evidencing or
changing the terms of tenancy for a residential rental property to which this
chapter applies shall include or be accompanied by the following: A notice
summarizing the rights afforded by this chapter, including but not limited to
the protection against retaliation; and the name, address and telephone number
of the facilitation administrator. The facilitation administrator shall prepare
and publish acceptable notification language, including the name, address and
phone number of the city's facilitation administrator. The notification shall
be capitalized text at least fourteen points in size and shall state:
THE PALO ALTO MUNICIPAL CODE GIVES YOU THE RIGHT TO MEDIATION OF DISPUTES
BETWEEN LANDLORD AND TENANT. YOU MUST REQUEST MEDIATION WITHIN 21 DAYS OF
LEARNING ABOUT THE FACTS THAT CREATED THE DISPUTE. CONTACT THE CITY OF PALO
ALTO'S FACILITATION ADMINISTRATOR [name, address and phone] FOR FURTHER
INFORMATION. THE PALO ALTO MUNICIPAL CODE PROTECTS YOU FROM RETALIATION FOR
EXERCISING YOUR RIGHT TO MEDIATION.
   (b)   The notification shall be provided in English, Spanish, Chinese and
Russian in the translated form prepared and published by the facilitation
administrator.
   (c)   Failure to provide this notification shall result in an automatic
extension of the twenty-one-day time limit for filing a written request for
dispute resolution pursuant to Section 9.72.040(a). The automatic extension
shall remain in effect until twenty-one days after written notification is
provided by the landlord.
   (d)   Failure of a landlord to comply with the notice provisions described
above or in a form which provides substantially the same information shall
render any rental increase notice invalid and unenforceable, and shall provide
the tenant with a defense in any legal action brought by the landlord to
collect rent in whole or in part based upon the amount of the rental increase,
including any unlawful detainer action based on failure to pay rent which
includes an unenforceable rental increase amount as a basis for all or part of
the unpaid rent alleged in that action. The failure to comply with the notice
provisions will be cured only after the proper written notice of tenant's
rights, along with a new rental increase notice, has been properly served on
the tenant.
(Ord. 5033 § 2, 2009: Ord. 4728 § 1 (part), 2002)
9.72.080   Definitions.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms are defined as follows:
   (a)   "Conciliation"means a confidential telephone call or other contacts by
a mediator or the facilitation administrator with a landlord and tenant for the
purpose of resolving a rental housing dispute.
   (b)   "Facilitation administrator"means the person or entity responsible for
the routine case intake, mediator assignment and other administrative duties of
the dispute resolution process established by this chapter.
   (c)   "Landlord"means the owner or property manager exercising effective
control over the terms and conditions of the tenancy of a residential rental
property, including a person with such control delegated through a durable
power of attorney.
   (d)   "Mediation"means a meeting in which landlord and tenant have the
opportunity to communicate with a mediator and each other in a face-to-face
setting at a neutral location in order to resolve a rental housing dispute
under ground rules designed to protect the confidentiality and neutrality of
the communications.
   (e)   "Mediator"means a person who is certified to have completed at least
forty hours of basic mediation training with subsequent advanced training, and
who has also participated as a mediator or co-mediator in at least ten
mediations conducted under the auspices of a recognized community or commercial
mediation program, and who has agreed (in a form acceptable to the facilitation
administrator) to a statement of mediation ethics and principles, including an
acknowledgement of the duty to disclose any conflicts of interest in any
specific case.
   (f)   "Rental housing dispute"means a fact-based grievance raised by any
tenant, owner, or property manager regarding the occupancy or use of rental
property limited to rental rate increases, deposits, repairs and maintenance,
utilities, occupants, parking and storage facilities, privacy, quiet enjoyment,
or use of common areas.
   (g)   "Residential rental property"means any housing structure occupied as a
dwelling or offered for rent or lease as a dwelling, whether attached,
detached, single or multiple-family.
   (h)   "Tenant"means the person or entity entitled to occupy a residential
rental property at the time that the rental housing dispute arises.
(Ord. 4728 § 1 (part), 2002)
9.72.090   Penalties.
   (a)   Violations of this chapter shall be punishable as infractions pursuant
to Palo Alto Municipal Code Section
1.08.010.
(Ord. 4728 § 1 (part), 2002)
Chapter 9.73
CITY POLICY AGAINST ARBITRARY DISCRIMINATION
Sections:
   
9.73.010   Statements of policy.
   
9.73.020   Leasing of city property.
   
9.73.030   Other city activities.
   
9.73.040   Definitions.
9.73.010   Statements of policy.
   (a)   Human Rights. It is the policy of the city of Palo Alto to affirm,
support and protect the human rights of every person within its jurisdiction.
These rights include, but are not limited to, equal economic, political, and
educational opportunity; equal accommodations in all business establishments in
the city; and, equal service and protection by all public agencies of the city.
   (b)   Freedom from Arbitrary Discrimination. It is the policy of the city of
Palo Alto to protect and safeguard the right and opportunity of every person to
be free from arbitrary discrimination on the basis of their race, skin color,
gender, age, religion, disability, national origin, ancestry, sexual
orientation, housing status, marital status, familial status, weight or height.
(Ord. 4795 § 2 (part), 2003)
9.73.020   Leasing of city property.
   (a)   All persons who, for a period of more than twenty-nine consecutive
days, lease city property shall, as a covenant and condition of such lease,
agree in writing to accept and enforce the statements of policy set forth in
Section
9.73.010 with respect to all of the activities that are conducted upon the
leased city property.
   (b)   No city agency, board, commission, or official shall permit any person
to lease city property, for a period of more than twenty-nine consecutive days,
unless such person has agreed in writing to accept and enforce the statements
of policy set forth in Section
9.73.010 with respect to all of the activities conducted upon the leased city
property.
   (c)   It shall be unlawful for any person, who for a period of more than
twenty-nine consecutive days, leases city property, to discriminate in their
own activities upon the leased city property against other persons on the basis
of race, skin color, gender, age, religion, disability, national origin,
ancestry, sexual orientation, housing status, marital status, familial status,
weight or height.
(Ord. 4795 § 2 (part), 2003)
9.73.030   Other city activities.
   (a)   The city manager shall take all appropriate actions to assure that the
statements of policy set forth in Section
9.73.010 are implemented to the fullest extent permitted by law with respect to
those city activities listed in subsection (b) below.
   (b)   The following city activities shall be subject to the statements of
policy set forth in Section
9.73.010:
   (1)   Employment by the city of Palo Alto;
   (2)   Persons performing services, providing goods, or constructing public
works on behalf of the city of Palo Alto;
   (3)   Persons receiving funding, grants or subsidies from the city of Palo
Alto; and
   (4)   City recreational, educational or other programs and activities of any
kind.
(Ord. 4795 § 2 (part), 2003)
9.73.040   Definitions.
   The following words and phrases whenever used in this chapter shall be
construed as defined in this section, unless the context indicates otherwise.
   (a)   "City property" means any real property or facilities owned or
controlled by the city of Palo Alto.
   (b)   "Lease" means any non-residential lease, license or other permitted
use of city property.
   (c)   "Person" means natural person, joint venture, joint stock company,
partnership, association, club, company, corporation, business trust,
organization, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of
any of them.
(Ord. 4795 § 2 (part), 2003)
Chapter 9.74
DISCRIMINATION AGAINST FAMILIES WITH MINOR CHILDREN IN HOUSING*
Sections:
   
9.74.010   Findings and purpose.
   
9.74.020   Definitions.
   
9.74.030   Prohibited activities.
   
9.74.040   Exemptions.
   
9.74.050   Requirements of financial obligations not prohibited.
   
9.74.060   Penalties - Remedies.
   *   As adopted by Ord. 3411, this chapter was designated Ch. 9.70. That
chapter number had already been assigned to the previous chapter, "Resale
Controls for Units Originally Financed with Mortgage Revenue Bonds." Therefore,
the number assigned to this chapter was amended by the codifier to its present
designation as
Ch. 9.74
9.74.010   Findings and purpose.
   (a)   The city council finds and declares that:
   (1)   Arbitrary discrimination against persons with minor children exists in
the city.
   (2)   The existence of such discrimination poses a substantial threat to the
public health and welfare of a large segment of the community, namely, families
with children.
   (3)   The overall effect of such discrimination is to encourage the flight
of families from the city, resulting in the decline of stable,
intergenerational neighborhoods, the closure of schools, and the reduction of
social and recreational services for children and their families.
   (4)   Such discrimination cuts across all racial, ethnic, and economic
lines, but falls most heavily on minority and single-parent families with
children.
   (5)   It is consistent with the housing element of the General Plan to
promote and ensure open and free choice of housing without discrimination on
the basis of age or family composition.
   (6)   Because housing is a fundamental necessity of life, it is against the
public policy of the city to discriminate in rental housing against persons
based upon their age, parenthood, pregnancy, or the potential or actual tenancy
of a minor child.
(Ord. 3411 § 1 (part) 1983)
9.74.020   Definitions.
   (a)   For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms are defined as
follows:
   (1)   "Senior adults" means persons sixty-two years of age or older.
   (2)   "Housing accommodations" means any residential rental unit consisting
of one or more rooms in which cooking facilities are available.
   (3)   "Minor child" means any natural person under the age of eighteen
years.
   (4)   "Person" means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture,
association, corporation, estate, or trust.
(Ord. 3411 § 1 (part), 1983)
9.74.030   Prohibited activities.
   (a)   It is unlawful for any person having a housing accommodation for rent
or lease, or any authorized agent or employee of such person, to do or attempt
to do any of the following:
   (1)   Refuse to rent or lease a housing accommodation, refuse to negotiate
for the rental or lease of a housing accommodation, or otherwise deny to or
withhold from any person or persons, a housing accommodation on the basis of
age, parenthood, pregnancy, or the potential or actual tenancy of a minor
child;
   (2)   Discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or
privileges of the rental or lease of a housing accommodation, or in the
provision of services, facilities or benefits, in connection therewith, on the
basis of age, parenthood, pregnancy, or the potential or actual tenancy of a
minor child. However, nothing in this chapter shall preclude any person from
imposing reasonable restrictions on the use of common areas, facilities, and
services which are necessary to protect the health and safety of a tenant;
   (3)   Represent to any person on the basis of age, parenthood, pregnancy, or
the potential or actual tenancy of a minor child that a housing accommodation
is not available for inspection, rental, or lease when such housing
accommodation is, in fact, available;
   (4)   Make, print, or publish, or cause to be made, printed, or published
any notice, statement, sign, advertisement, application, or contract with
regard to a housing accommodation offered by that person that indicates any
preference, limitation, or discrimination with respect to age, parenthood,
pregnancy, or the potential or actual tenancy of a minor child;
   (5)   Include in any rental agreement or lease for a housing accommodation,
a clause or condition providing that as a condition of continued tenancy, the
tenants shall remain childless or shall not bear children or otherwise not
maintain a household with a person of a certain age;
   (6)   Refuse to rent after making a bona fide offer, or to refuse to
negotiate for the rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or deny, housing
accommodations to any person because of the potential tenancy of a minor child
or children;
   (7)   Limit occupancies to fewer than two natural persons per bedroom,
unless that number exceeds the maximum allowed under the superficial floor-
space requirements of Section 503(b) of the Uniform Housing Code. For those
housing accommodations without any bedroom, no person shall be required to rent
or lease to more than one person. In no case shall such occupancy limits apply
to a newborn infant during the term of any lease in effect on the date of birth
of such infant unless that limit implements the superficial floor-space
requirements of Section 503(b) of the Uniform Housing Code. All occupancies
limitations shall be uniformly imposed and either conspicuously posted on the
premises or contained in a written policy, rules or notice;
   (8)   Evict or otherwise demand surrender of a housing accommodation from
any person because of age, parenthood, pregnancy or presence of a minor child;
   (9)   Charge additional rent for persons living in a housing accommodation
on the basis of age, parenthood, pregnancy, or presence of a minor child.
(Ord. 3411 § 1 (part), 1983)
9.74.040   Exemptions.
   (a)   Nothing contained in this chapter shall apply to or be construed:
   (1)   To affect a housing project or development where the owner has
publicly established and implemented a policy of renting exclusively to senior
adults and their spouses. Deviance from or abandonment of that policy shall
automatically terminate this exemption and subject the owner to all the
provisions of this chapter;
   (2)   To affect any state licensed nursing home, convalescent home, or
community care facility;
   (3)   To apply to any housing accommodation occupied by the owner;
   (4)   To apply to any housing accommodation occupied by a tenant who
subleases any portion of that accommodation to another tenant;
   (5)   To affect any area or tract of land where two or more mobile home lots
are rented or leased or held out for rent or lease to accommodate mobile homes
used for human habitation.
(Ord. 3411 § 1 (part), 1983)
9.74.050   Requirements of financial obligations not prohibited.
   This chapter shall not prohibit the person having the right to rent or lease
the premises from requiring the same rent, deposits, fees or charges of
prospective adult tenants with minor children as he or she may require of
prospective adult tenants without children. However, no discrimination in the
amount or manner of payment of the rent, deposits, fees or charges shall be
permitted.
(Ord. 3411 § 1 (part), 1983)
9.74.060   Penalties - Remedies.
   (a)   Criminal. Violations of this chapter shall constitute an misdemeanor.
   (b)   Civil. Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall be
liable to each party injured by such violation for actual damages sustained by
such person, costs and reasonable attorneys' fees. In addition, the court may
award punitive damages.
   (c)   Injunctive Relief.
   (1)   Any person who commits, or proposes to commit, an action in violation
of this chapter may be enjoined therefrom by any court of competent
jurisdiction.
   (2)   Any action for injunctive relief under this chapter may be brought by
the city attorney, by any aggrieved person, by other law enforcement agencies,
by the district attorney or by any person or entity which will fairly and
adequately represent the interests of the protected class.
(Ord. 4453 § 46, 1997: Ord. 3411 § 1 (part), 1983)
Chapter 9.76
MOBILEHOME PARK CONVERSION
Sections:
   
9.76.010   Purpose and findings.
   
9.76.020   Definitions.
   
9.76.030   Application and relocation impact report.
   
9.76.040   Hearing procedures.
   
9.76.050   Acceptance of conditions required.
   
9.76.060   Appeals.
   
9.76.070   Relocation notice.
   
9.76.080   Exceptions to requirement to provide relocation assistance.
   
9.76.090   Expiration and extension of approval of conversion.
   
9.76.100   Enforcement.
   
9.76.110   Provisions to prevent eviction prior to determination of relocation
assistance.
   
9.76.120   Rent increase review petitions.
   
9.76.130   Interpretation.
   
9.76.140   Challenges to decisions.
9.76.010   Purpose and findings.
   The mobilehome owners who rent spaces for their homes in mobilehome parks
make a considerable investment in purchasing, maintaining and improving their
homes and in maintaining the rented space for their homes. If a park closes or
is converted to a new use, the mobilehome owners may lose their homes and the
investment in them due to the high cost and risk of injury involved in moving a
mobilehome, the fact that improvements to a home may not be movable and the
lack of vacant mobilehome spaces in parks within a reasonable distance from the
closing park that will accept relocating homes. In recognition of the unique
situation and vulnerability of mobilehome owners, the State Legislature adopted
the Mobilehome Residency Law, Civil Code Section 798, et seq., which protects
them from eviction except for specified and limited causes, and Government Code
Sections 65863.7 and 66427.4, which authorize the city to require park owners
who want to close a park or convert it to another use to provide reasonable
relocation assistance as a condition of closing and converting a park.
   This chapter is adopted pursuant to Government Code Sections 65863.7 and
66427.4 and the city's police power to provide a procedure and standards for
assessing the adverse impacts of a mobilehome park closure or conversion on the
displaced mobilehome owners residing in the park that is being closed and to
determine appropriate relocation assistance for those residents.
(Ord. 4696 § 1(part), 2001)
9.76.020   Definitions.
   (a)   "Comparable mobilehome"means a mobilehome that is similar in size,
age, condition, number of bedrooms and amenities to a mobilehome that is being
displaced by conversion of a mobilehome park.
   (b)   "Comparable mobilehome park"means a mobilehome park that is similar in
condition, age, size and amenities to the park that is being closed and is
located within a community similar to that in which the park that is being
closed is located and has similar access to community amenities such as
shopping, medical services, recreational facilities and transportation.
   (c)   "Comparable housing"means housing in an apartment complex or
condominium that is similar in size, number of bedrooms and amenities to the
mobilehome that is being displaced and is located in a community that has
similar access to shopping, medical services, recreational facilities and
transportation or a comparable mobilehome in a comparable mobilehome park.
   (d)   "Conversion"means the closure of a mobilehome park and the cessation
of holding out spaces in the park for rental even if no new use is planned and
conversion of a mobilehome park to another use.
   (e)   "Legal owner"means any person or entity having a legal interest in a
mobilehome, such as a lender or mortgagor.
   (f)   "Mobilehome"shall have the meaning set forth in the Mobilehome
Residency Law, Civil Code Section 798, et seq. as now in effect or subsequently
amended and shall also mean vehicles designed or used for human habitation,
including camping trailers, motorhomes, slide-in campers and travel trailers if
they have been in the park being closed or converted and used as the occupant's
primary residence, as established by nine months' continuous residency prior to
the filing of a conversion application.
   (g)   "Mobilehome park"or "park"means an area of land where two or more
mobilehome spaces are rented or held out for rent to accommodate mobilehomes
used for human habitation.
   (h)   "Mobilehome resident"or "resident"means a registered owner of a
mobilehome who resides in the mobilehome.
   (i)   "Park owner"means a person or entity that owns a mobilehome park or a
person or entity authorized to act on behalf of the owner of a mobilehome park.
(Ord. 4696 § 1(part), 2001)
9.76.030   Application and relocation impact report.
   (a)   Prior to conversion of a park, the park owner shall file with the city
an application to convert the park, a resident questionnaire and relocation
impact report ("RIR"). The application shall be made on a form provided by the
city. No application shall be deemed complete until a resident questionnaire
for each affected resident and tenant and a completed RIR have been filed.
   (b)   No notice that the park is being converted or of any proposed new use
of the park shall be given and no signs indicating that the park is being
converted or closed or indicating the future use of the park shall be posted
prior to the date on which the city has approved the conversion and the park
owner has signed and filed a certificate accepting the conditions of approval
adopted by the city.
   (c)   Resident Questionnaire. A confidential resident questionnaire shall be
sent to each resident and tenant of the park on a form provided by the city as
soon as the conversion application has been filed. The form shall require the
following information for each mobilehome space in the park:
   (1)   The registered owner and legal owner of the mobilehome;
   (2)   The identity, ages, number and any mental or physical handicap or
special needs of the residents occupying the mobilehome;
   (3)   The date of manufacture of the mobilehome, the name of the
manufacturer, the size of the mobilehome, the number of bedrooms in the
mobilehome, any special amenities in the home, including but not limited to
equipment needed because of the medical condition, age, or handicap or
disability of any resident or tenant in the home;
   (4)   Any improvements or renovations to the mobilehome or improvements to
the mobilehome space made by the current resident, including, but not limited
to, a new roof, porches, patios, awnings, pop-out rooms, recreational
equipment, barbecue equipment, landscaping, etc., whether such improvements are
movable and the cost of such improvements;
   (5)   The purchase price paid by the current resident of the mobilehome and
the amount and terms of any remaining mortgage or loan on the home;
   (6)   Any special circumstance that would limit the area to which the
resident or tenant is able to relocate;
   (7)   Whether the residents receive Supplemental Social Security Income or
qualify as low or very low income persons or families under the standards
issued by the Department of Housing and Urban Development ("HUD");
   The questionnaires shall be kept separately from the rest of the application
materials and shall not be included in the RIR sent to each resident and
tenant. The identity of each resident and his or her responses shall be kept
confidential and used only to determine the relocation assistance to be
provided to a particular resident or tenant. If the park owner does not submit
questionnaires containing sufficient information, the city may seek the
information directly from the residents.
   (d)   Contents of the RIR. The RIR shall include the following information:
   (1)   A description of any proposed new use for the site;
   (2)   A proposed timetable for the conversion of the park;
   (3)   A legal description of the park;
   (4)   The number of spaces in the park;
   (5)   For each space in the park:
   (i)   The size, number of bedrooms, manufacturer and date of manufacture of
the mobilehome on the space,
   (ii)   The names and ages of the occupants of the mobilehome and their
length of residency in the park,
   (iii)   Any special needs, handicaps or disability of the occupants and
related special equipment, modifications or improvements to the home known to
the park owner,
   (iv)   The value the mobilehome would have if the park were not being
closed, the depreciated replacement value of the mobilehome and its value if it
is to be removed from the park and cannot be relocated to a space in a
comparable mobilehome park, these values shall be determined by appraisals by a
qualified appraiser to be chosen by the park owner from a list supplied by the
city. The cost of the appraisals shall be paid by the park owner.
   (v)   Any improvements to the home, including but not limited to, patios,
porches, pop-out rooms and any recent major improvements to the home, including
but not limited to, a new roof or new siding.
   (vi)   Any information available to the park owner concerning any handicap,
disability or special need of the residents.
   (vii)   Two sets of mailing labels for both the residents and legal owners
of each mobilehome.
   (e)   The purchase price paid for the park by the park owner and any amount
incurred to make capital improvements to the park.
   (f)   An appraisal of the park if continued in use as a mobilehome park and
an appraisal of the park site if used for the highest and best use permitted by
the zoning for the site or any new zoning being requested by the park owner.
The appraiser shall be selected by the park owner, subject to the approval of
the city, and shall be paid by the park owner.
   (g)   Whether the park owner has offered to sell the mobilehome park to the
residents and terms of that offer.
   (h)   The purchase price of comparable mobilehomes in comparable mobilehome
parks.
   (i)   The cost of comparable housing, including the purchase price of
comparable condominiums and comparable mobilehomes in a comparable mobilehome
park and the cost of moving into a comparable apartment, including such items
as first and last months rent, security deposits and higher rent or mortgage
payments at the comparable housing.
   (j)   A list of comparable parks within a thirty-five-mile radius and for
each such park, the space rents and the qualifications for residency in each
park (e.g., age restrictions, no pets), whether the park has any vacant space
and will accept homes being relocated and if so, any restrictions, such as size
and age, on the relocated homes that would be accepted.
   (k)   Estimates from two moving companies approved by the city, and
qualified to move mobilehomes on public streets and highways, of the cost of
moving each mobilehome in the park, including the cost of permits and tearing
down and setting up the home at the new location, including the cost of any
upgrades to comply with applicable building, plumbing, electrical and health
and safety codes and the cost of moving any improvements, including, but not
limited to, patios, porches and pop-out rooms.
   (l)   Proposed measures to mitigate the adverse impacts of the park
conversion on the residents in the park.
   (m)   Identification of a relocation specialist to assist the residents in
finding and moving to relocation spaces and comparable housing. The relocation
specialist shall be selected by the park owner subject to the approval of the
city and shall be paid by the park owner.
(Ord. 4696 § 1(part), 2001)
9.76.040   Hearing procedures.
   (a)   An application shall be deemed complete within thirty days unless
written notice is given specifying the information that must be supplied to
make the application complete.
   (b)   A hearing on application shall be set within sixty days of the date
the application is completed.
   (c)   Thirty days prior to hearing, the park owner must verify to the city
that the residents and legal owners of the mobilehomes in the park have been
given the required notice of the application.
   (d)   A copy of the RIR must be provided to residents at least thirty days
before the hearing.
   (e)   At least thirty days mailed notice of the hearing on the application
shall be given to each affected resident, tenant, and legal owner.
   (f)   The application shall be heard by a qualified hearing officer selected
by the city. The park owner shall pay all hearing officer fees.
   (g)   The hearing officer shall approve the application on the condition
that the mitigation measures proposed by the park owner are adequate to
mitigate the adverse impacts on the displaced residents and may condition the
approval on additional conditions, including, but not limited to the following,
provided that such conditions do not exceed the reasonable costs of relocation:
   (1)   For residents whose mobilehomes can be relocated to a space in a
comparable mobilehome park:
   (a)   The cost of physically relocating the mobilehome, as defined above,
within thirty-five miles of the park that is closing.
   (b)   The cost of moving the personal property in the mobilehome.
   (c)   The cost of staying overnight in a motel for the number of nights
required to move and set up the mobilehome in the new park.
   (d)   Costs incurred to move into the new park, such as first and last
months rent and security deposits.
   (e)   For those residents who qualify as low or very low income persons or
families, as defined by HUD or are receiving supplemental social security, a
lump sum based on consideration of the difference between higher rent at the
new park for one year and the park that is closing.
   (f)   For those residents who are handicapped or disabled, a lump sum based
on consideration of the cost of obtaining any assistance necessary to move,
such as help with packing or other physical tasks that the resident cannot do
without assistance and to offset the cost of replacing any special equipment
that cannot be moved and is used because of the resident's disability.
   (2)   For residents whose mobilehomes cannot be relocated to a space in a
comparable park:
   (a)   A lump sum based on consideration of the cost of moving to and
purchasing or renting comparable housing, including, but not limited to, the
cost of purchasing a comparable mobilehome in a comparable mobilehome park, the
cost of moving personal property from the mobilehome in the closing park to
comparable housing, payment of first and last month's rent and any security
deposit at the comparable housing, the loss of investment in the mobilehome
that cannot be relocated and any remaining loan payments that must be made even
though the resident cannot continue to live in the mobilehome.
   (b)   If the resident is disabled or handicapped, an additional sum toward
the cost of obtaining any assistance needed to enable the resident to move.
   (c)   If the residents are low income persons or a low income family, as
defined by HUD, or are receiving supplemental social security, an additional
sum to partially offset any higher rent at the comparable housing during the
first year at the new location.
(Ord. 4696 § 1(part), 2001)
9.76.050   Acceptance of conditions required.
   The city's approval of a conversion application shall not be valid and
effective until the park owner has filed a certificate of acceptance of the
conditions of approval with the city.
(Ord. 4696 § 1(part), 2001)
9.76.060   Appeals.
   Any aggrieved person may appeal the hearing officer's decision to the city
council by filing a written notice of appeal with the city clerk within ten
days of the date the hearing officer's decision becomes final. The appeal shall
be in the form specified by the city and shall be accompanied by a filing fee
specified in the municipal fee schedule.
(Ord. 4696 § 1(part), 2001)
9.76.070   Relocation notice.
   No resident shall be required to remove his or her mobilehome and no tenant
shall be required to vacate a mobilehome until (i) the park owner has given the
six months' notice of closure required by the Civil Code Section 798.56, (ii)
that six-month period has elapsed, (iii) the city's decision approving the
closure is final, and (iv) the park owner has provided the relocation
assistance required by the city as a condition of conversion.
(Ord. 4696 § 1(part), 2001)
9.76.080   Exceptions to requirement to provide relocation assistance.
   (a)   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to a park that is
closing due to bankruptcy.
   (b)   An applicant may seek a total exemption on the ground that imposition
of any relocation assistance would eliminate substantially all reasonable use
or economic value of the property for alternate uses. The application must
provide evidence demonstrating that this result would occur.
   (c)   An applicant may seek a partial exemption on the ground that the
imposition of a particular relocation obligation would eliminate substantially
all reasonable use or economic value of the park for alternate uses. The
application must specify the particular obligation that would cause this result
and provide evidence to demonstrate that this result would occur.
(Ord. 4696 § 1(part), 2001)
9.76.090   Expiration and extension of approval of conversion.
   Conversion approvals shall expire one year after the date they are issued.
The city manager may upon request grant extensions of time based upon a showing
that good faith progress has been made toward fulfilling the conditions of
approval or some intervening event not the fault of the park owner has
prevented timely compliance with the conditions of approval.
(Ord. 4696 § 1(part), 2001)
9.76.100   Enforcement.
   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter is
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as
provided by law.
(Ord. 4696 § 1(part), 2001)
9.76.110   Provisions to prevent eviction prior to determination of relocation
assistance.
   (a)   Any resident already renting a space in the park on the date the
application for conversion is filed shall be eligible for relocation
assistance.
   (b)   No park owner shall require any resident to waive his/her rights to
relocation assistance as a condition of renting a space in the park, except
when the resident moves into the park after the date the conversion application
is filed and notice has been given that the conversion application has been
filed. Any such waiver will only be valid if the park owner completes the
conversion hearing process within year
   (c)   Residents who are eligible for relocation assistance shall be entitled
to the assistance required by the city as a condition of conversion even if
they move out of the park before the city's final determination concerning
required relocation assistance.
(Ord. 4696 § 1(part), 2001)
9.76.120   Rent increase review petitions.
   (a)   A resident may, with the written support of no less than 25% of the
total number of residents, petition for review of any notice of rent increase
that alone or in combination with any other rent increases imposed in the last
twelve months exceeds the sum of the then-current Bureau of Labor Statistics
Consumer Price Index – All Urban Consumers – San Francisco – Oakland – San
Jose, plus 6%.
   (b)   The petition must be filed with the city clerk within thirty days
after notice of the rent increase is given by the park owner and must contain
sufficient information to allow the city to determine whether the rent increase
which is the subject of the petition meets the criteria of this subsection. The
petition shall include the following information:
   (1)   The number of eligible resident households in the park;
   (2)   The space number and members of each eligible resident household
signing the petition;
   (3)   The signature of one adult member of each eligible resident household
signing the petition;
   (4)   The date of notice and amount of the rent increase that is the subject
of the petition;
   (5)   The amount of the existing rent, the date(s) of any increase imposed
during the immediately preceding twelve months and the amount of the rent
before those increases were imposed;
   (6)   A statement describing the efforts of the residents and park owner to
resolve the dispute through formal or informal dispute resolution, including
but not limited to mediation;
   (c)   The city shall give notice of the petition by certified mail or
personal delivery to the park owner and the petitioning resident within fifteen
days of the date it is received. The notice shall state a preliminary
determination whether the petition meets the criteria of this subsection. If
the preliminary determination is that it does meet the criteria, the notice
shall include a list of qualified hearing officers who are available, at the
park owner's expense, to conduct a hearing on the matter. The park owner and
petitioning resident shall attempt to agree on the selection of a hearing
officer, but if they do not or cannot agree within ten days, the hearing
officer shall be chosen by the city.
   (d)   If the city's preliminary determination is that the petition does not
meet the criteria of this section or that it is otherwise incomplete, the
notice shall state that the petition is being rejected and the reasons for the
rejection. In such case, the petitioners may submit a revised petition, which
cures the reason for rejection, within ten days of receipt of the rejection
notice. The revised petition shall be processed in the same manner as the
original.
   (e)   Upon selection of the hearing officer, the city shall give notice of
the hearing date by certified mail or personal delivery to the park owner and
the petitioning resident. The hearing date shall be not sooner than thirty and
no later than eighty days after the date the petition was received. The notice
shall also state that the park owner has thirty days in which to provide
justification for the rent increase pursuant to this chapter and notice that
the noticed increase cannot be charged, demanded, collected or retained unless
and until approved by the city.
   (f)   In determining whether a rent increase should be granted and if so,
the amount of that increase, the hearing officer shall approve such increases
as are required to provide a just, reasonable and fair return on investment to
the park owner and shall consider all relevant evidence and facts, including
but not limited to, the following:
   (1)   Changes in the CPI since the last rent increase;
   (2)   Rents in comparable mobilehome parks;
   (3)   Increases or decreases in the level of services, amenities and
maintenance;
   (4)   Changes in operating and maintenance costs, including utilities not
paid by the residents and taxes, since the last rent increase. These costs
shall not include interest on mortgage debt or principal payments on mortgage
debt;
   (5)   Costs incurred for capital improvements or unusual repairs not
reimbursable by insurance since the last rent increase;
   (6)   Changes in the park's profits since the last rent increase;
   (7)   Length of time since the last increase;
   (8)   Evidence demonstrating that a rent increase is necessary to allow the
park to earn a just and reasonable return;
   (g)   The hearing officer shall render his or her findings and decision in
writing within ninety days of the date the petition was received by the city.
The decision of the hearing officer shall be final.
   (h)   This section shall not apply to spaces subject to a lease exempt from
local rent regulations pursuant to the Mobile Home Residency Law, California
Civil Code Section 798, et seq., shall not apply to spaces first held out for
rent after January 1, 1990, or the rent first charged to a purchaser of a
mobile home in the park or for a vacant space, provided that a space shall not
be deemed vacant when an existing mobile home resident removes his or her
mobile home to replace it with a new mobile home.
   (i)   An eligible resident may refuse to pay any rent in excess of the
maximum rent permitted by this section. The fact that such unpaid rent is in
excess of the maximum rent permitted by this section shall be a defense in any
action brought to recover possession of a mobile home space and for nonpayment
of rent or to collect the illegal rent.
   (j)   Notice of the hearing officer's decision to the park owner and
affected resident shall state that the ninety day statute of limitations in
Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6 is applicable.
(Ord. 4696 § 1(part), 2001)
9.76.130   Interpretation.
   This chapter shall be interpreted so as to be consistent with the Mobilehome
Residency Law, Evidence Code Section 798, et seq. and Government Code Sections
65863.7, 65863.8 and 66427.4, as now in effect or as subsequently amended.
(Ord. 4696 § 1(part), 2001)
9.76.140   Challenges to decisions.
   Any action challenging a decision made pursuant to this chapter shall be
brought within the ninety-day statute of limitation period set forth in Code of
Civil Procedure Section 1094.6.
(Ord. 4696 § 1(part), 2001)
Chapter 9.78
MOSQUITO ABATEMENT
Sections:
   
9.78.010   Declaration of findings, intent and policy.
   
9.78.020   Mosquito breeding places.
   
9.78.030   Enforcement.
   
9.78.040   Notice to abate.
   
9.78.050   Contents of notice.
   
9.78.060   Hearing - Appearance - Order - Penalties for failure to comply.
   
9.78.070   Recurrence of nuisance.
   
9.78.080   Abatement by health officer.
   
9.78.090   Abatement by health officer - Debt of owner.
   
9.78.100   Imposition of lien.
   
9.78.110   Abatement by owner.
   
9.78.120   Procedure not exclusive.
   
9.78.130   Exemption from lien provisions.
9.78.010   Declaration of findings, intent and policy.
   The city council expressly finds and declares that mosquito breeding places
constitute a hazard to public health. It is the intent of this chapter to
establish procedures for abating mosquito breeding places and to provide legal
means for recovering the cost of abatement.
(Ord. 3470 § 1 (part), 1983)
9.78.020   Mosquito breeding places.
   No person shall permit any accumulation of water upon any premises in which
mosquitoes breed. Any breeding place for mosquitoes is a public nuisance and a
hazard to public health. The presence of mosquito larvae or pupae in any
accumulation of water, whether upon the ground surface, pond, pool or container
of any description shall constitute prima facie evidence that such a place is a
breeding place for mosquitoes.
(Ord. 3470 § 1 (part), 1983)
9.78.030   Enforcement.
   It shall be the duty of the health officer to enforce the provisions of this
chapter; and in the performance of this duty, the health officer is authorized
to enter at any reasonable hour any premises as may be necessary in the
enforcement of this chapter.
(Ord. 3470 § 1 (part), 1983)
9.78.040   Notice to abate.
   Whenever a public nuisance specified in this chapter exists upon any
property, the health officer may notify in writing the owner and party in
possession, or the agent of either, of the existence of the nuisance. The
written notice may be served by any person authorized by the health officer in
the same manner as a summons in a civil action. The contents of the written
notice shall conform to the requirements of Section
9.78.050.
(Ord. 3470 § 1 (part), 1983)
9.78.050   Contents of notice.
   The notice shall:
   (a)   State the finding of a health officer that a public nuisance exists on
the property and the location of such nuisance on the property;
   (b)   Direct the owner and party in possession to abate the nuisance within
a specified time by destroying the larvae or pupae that are present;
   (c)   Direct the owner and party in possession to perform, within a
specified time, any work necessary to prevent recurrence of breeding in the
places specified in the notice;
   (d)   Inform the owner and party in possession that failure to comply with
the requirements of subsection (b) of this section shall subject the owner and
party in possession to civil penalties of not more than five hundred dollars
per day for each day the nuisance continues after the time specified for the
abatement of the nuisance in the notice;
   (e)   Inform the owner and party in possession that before complying with
the requirements of the notice, the owner and party in possession may appear at
a hearing before the health officers at a time and place stated in the notice;
   (f)   Inform the owner and party in possession that failure to comply with
the requirements of subsection (b) of this section will result in the city
abating the condition, and expense thereof charged to the owner and party in
possession as a personal obligation and/or made a lien upon the property upon
which said condition exists.
(Ord. 3470 § 1 (part), 1983)
9.78.060   Hearing - Appearance - Order - Penalties for failure to comply.
   Before the expiration of the time set for compliance with the requirements
of the notice, the owner and party in possession may appear at the hearing
before the health officer at the time and place fixed by the health officer and
stated in the notice. At the hearing, the health officer shall determine
whether the initial finding as set forth in the notice is correct, after
permitting the owner and party in possession to present testimony on his
behalf. If, after hearing all the facts, the health officer makes a
determination that a nuisance exists on the property, the health officer shall
order compliance with the requirements of the notice or with alternate
instructions issued by the health officer. Any failure to comply with any order
of the health officer issued pursuant to this section shall subject the owner
and party in possession to civil penalties as determined by the discretion of
the health officers which penalties shall not exceed five hundred dollars per
day for each and every day during which the owner and the party in possession
has failed to comply with such order.
(Ord. 3470 § 1 (part), 1983)
9.78.070   Recurrence of nuisance.
   Any recurrence of the nuisance within thirty days of the time specified for
abatement of the nuisance may be deemed to be a continuation of the original
nuisance.
(Ord. 3470 § 1 (part), 1983)
9.78.080   Abatement by health officer.
   In the event that the nuisance is not abated within the time specified in
the notice or at the hearing, the health officer may abate the nuisance at the
expense of the person or persons receiving the notice provided in Section
9.78.040 by destroying the larvae or pupae and by taking appropriate measures
to prevent the recurrence of further breeding.
(Ord. 3470 § 1 (part), 1983)
9.78.090   Abatement by health officer - Debt of owner.
   Upon the abatement of such condition or any portion thereof by the health
officer, all expenses thereof shall constitute a civil debt owing to the city
jointly and severally by such of the persons who have been given notice in this
chapter provided, excepting only such of said persons which the enforcement
officer has concluded pursuant to proof at the hearing are not persons properly
charged with the responsibility of abatement within the meaning of this
chapter. The debt shall be collectible in the same manner as any other civil
debt owing to the city.
(Ord. 3470 § 1 (part), 1983)
9.78.100   Imposition of lien.
   If the debt is not paid upon demand, and in the event the city officer
charged with the collection of the debt shall determine not to file civil suit
to collect the same, then the debt may be embodied in a report and an
assessment list which shall be filed with the city clerk as provided in Section
8.08.060. Thereafter, proceedings shall be had as provided in Sections
8.08.060 to
8.08.090, inclusive, for the placement and collection of liens on property.
(Ord. 3470 § 1 (part), 1983)
9.78.110   Abatement by owner.
   If and when an owner or other responsible person undertakes to abate any
condition described in this chapter whether by order of the health officer or
otherwise, all needful and legal conditions pertinent to said abatement may be
imposed by the health officer, and it is unlawful for the owner to fail to
comply with such conditions. Nothing in this chapter shall relieve any owner or
other responsible person of the obligation of obtaining any required permit to
do any work incidental to such abatement.
(Ord. 3470 § 1 (part), 1983)
9.78.120   Procedure not exclusive.
   The procedure provided in this chapter shall be cumulative and, in addition,
to any other procedure or procedures provided in ordinances of the city or by
state law for the abatement of any of the conditions described in this chapter,
and abatement under this chapter shall not prejudice or affect any other
action, civil or criminal, for the maintenance of any such condition.
(Ord. 3470 § 1 (part) 1983)
9.78.130   Exemption from lien provisions.
   The lien provisions of the ordinance codified in this chapter do not apply
to the property of any county, city, district, or other public corporation.
However, the governing body of any county, city, district or other public
corporation shall repay to the health officer the amount expended by the health
officer upon any of the property of such public entity upon presentation by the
health officer of a verified claim or bill.
(Ord. 3470 § 1 (part), 1983)
Chapter 9.79
NEWSRACKS*
Sections:
   
9.79.010   Purpose - Scope.
   
9.79.020   Definitions.
   
9.79.030   Permit required.
   
9.79.040   Obtaining a permit.
   
9.79.050   Standards for maintenance and display of newsracks.
   
9.79.060   Size and design standards.
   
9.79.070   Standards for placement and location of newsracks.
   
9.79.080   Special newsrack areas.
   
9.79.090   Blinder racks required.
   
9.79.100   Violation - Enforcement.
   
9.79.110   Nuisance.
   
9.79.120   Removal and hearing.
   
9.79.130   Abandoned newsracks.
   *   Editor's Note: The effective date of Ordinance 4531 was December 1,
1998. However, pursuant to Section 7 of Ordinance 4531, the regulations enacted
by Sections
9.79.030,
9.79.040,
9.79.060,
9.79.070, and subsection (a) of Section
9.79.050, shall be effective on April 5, 1999. Also pursuant to said Section 7
of Ordinance 4531, the provisions of subsection (b)(1) of Section
9.79.080 shall not be enforced in the downtown commercial area until the
special newsrack containers to be furnished by the city have been installed,
which in no event will be earlier than April 5, 1999.
9.79.010   Purpose - Scope.
   The purpose and scope of the regulations in this chapter are as follows:
   (a)   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all newsracks located in
public places within the city of Palo Alto; provided, that certain provisions,
as specified, shall apply only to newsracks located on public property.
   (b)   It is in the public interest to establish regulations that balance the
right to distribute information through newsracks with the right of persons to
reasonably access and use public property.
   (c)   The public health, safety, welfare and convenience require that:
interference with vehicular, bicycle, wheelchair or pedestrian traffic be
avoided; obstruction of sight distance and views of traffic signs and street-
crossing pedestrians be eliminated; damage done to sidewalks or streets be
minimized and repaired; the good appearance of public property be maintained;
trees and other landscaping be allowed to grow without disturbance; access to
emergency and other public facilities be maintained; and ingress and egress
from, and the enjoyment of store window displays on, properties adjoining
public property be protected.
   (d)   Newsracks placed and maintained on public property, absent some
reasonable regulation, may unreasonably interfere with the use of such
property, and may present hazards to persons or property.
   (e)   The regulations on the time, place and manner of the placement,
location and maintenance of newsracks set forth in this chapter are carefully
tailored to ensure that the purposes stated in this section are implemented
while still providing ample opportunities for the distribution of news to the
public.
(Ord. 4531 § 2 (part), 1998)
9.79.020   Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases are
defined and shall be given the meaning set out in this section unless it is
apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended.
   (a)   "Abandoned newsrack" means any newsrack which remains empty for ten
business days; provided, that a newsrack remaining empty due to labor strike or
any temporary and extraordinary interruption of distribution or publication by
the newspaper or other publication sold or distributed from that newsrack shall
not be deemed abandoned.
   (b)   "City engineer" means the director of public works or his or her
designee.
   (c)   "Harmful matter" means and is defined as in California Penal Code
Section 313, as may from time to time be amended.
   (d)   "Minor" means any natural person under eighteen years of age.
   (e)   "Newsrack" means any self-service or coin-operated box, container,
storage unit, or other dispenser installed, used or maintained for the display
and sale or distribution of newspapers, periodicals or other publications.
   (f)   "Person" means any individual, partnership, firm, association,
corporation, limited liability company, or other legal entity.
   (g)   "Public place(s)" means and includes any public property owned or
controlled by the city of Palo Alto or any other public agency, or any outdoor
private property which is open to the public.
   (h)   "Public property" means any public right-of-way or any property owned
or controlled by the city of Palo Alto, including, without limitation, streets,
sidewalks, alleys, and rights-of-way.
   (i)   "Special newsrack area" means any area of the city of Palo Alto so
designated by the city council upon findings that the special circumstances of
the area require special design, placement and other standards for newsracks.
   (j)   "Special newsrack container" means a specially designed permanently
affixed container provided by or on behalf of the city, within which shall be
the exclusive location for the placement of newsracks in a special newsrack
area.
(Ord. 4531 § 2 (part), 1998)
9.79.030   Permit required.
   It is unlawful to install, place, maintain or cause to be placed, installed
or maintained a newsrack on, or projecting on, any public property without
first receiving a permit therefor from the city engineer and unless such
newsrack is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter; provided that,
except for newsracks proposed to be located within a special newsrack area, a
newsrack located on public property as of April 5, 1999 may continue to remain
in such location, under the following conditions:
   (i)   The newsrack is in compliance with the requirements for the
installation and maintenance of newsracks contained in this chapter; and
   (ii)   A permit application for such newsrack has been filed as of that date
with the city engineer by the duly authorized representative of both the
publisher and, if applicable, any independent distributor authorized to service
the publisher's newsrack; and
   (iii)   A permit pursuant to such application has not been denied with
respect to any such newsrack.
   If no permit application has been filed by that date by the duly authorized
representative of both the publisher and, if applicable, any independent
distributor authorized to service the publisher's newsrack, or such permit is
denied, such newsrack shall be deemed to be in violation of the provisions of
this chapter.
(Ord. 4531 § 2 (part), 1998)
9.79.040   Obtaining a permit.
   (a)   Exclusive Requirements. The provisions of this chapter shall be the
exclusive requirements for newsrack encroachments onto public property in the
city.
   (b)   Application. Applications for a newsrack permit for one or more
newsracks shall be made to the city engineer on a form prescribed by the city
engineer, which shall include, without limitation:
   (1)   The name, street and mailing address, and telephone number of the
applicant, which shall be the duly authorized representative of both the
publisher and, if applicable, any independent distributor authorized to service
the publisher's newsrack for which the permit is sought;
   (2)   The name, street and mailing address and telephone number of the
distributor or other responsible person whom the city may notify or contact at
any time concerning the applicant's newsrack(s);
   (3)   The number of proposed newsracks and a description of the exact
proposed location (including a map or site plan, drawn to scale, with adequate
locational information to verify conformance with this chapter) and the
proposed means of affixing each proposed newsrack;
   (4)   A description of each proposed newsrack, including its dimensions, the
number of publication spaces it will contain, and whether it contains a coin-
operated mechanism;
   (5)   The name and frequency of publication of each publication proposed to
be contained in each newsrack;
   (6)   A statement signed by the applicant that the applicant agrees to
indemnify, defend and hold harmless, the city and its representatives from all
claims, demands, loss, fines or liability to the extent arising out of or in
connection with the installation, use or maintenance of any newsrack on public
property by or on behalf of any such person, except such injury or harm as may
be caused solely and exclusively by the negligence of the city or its
authorized representatives; and
   (7)   A statement signed by the applicant that the applicant agrees, upon
removal of a newsrack, to repair any damage to the public property caused by
the newsrack or its removal.
   (c)   Issuance of Permit. A permit shall be issued within ten working days
from the date of filing the application with the city engineer if the
application is properly completed and the type of newsrack and location
proposed for each newsrack meet the standards set forth in this chapter. A
single permit shall be issued for all newsracks applied for by an applicant
which meet the standards of this chapter. A permit shall not be transferable.
   (d)   Period of Permit Validity. All permits issued within three years from
the effective date of this section shall expire on the date three years from
the effective date of this section, regardless of the date of issuance. All
permits issued within the second and succeeding three year periods shall,
likewise, expire at the end of such three-year period.
   (e)   Issuance of Permit Sticker. Each permittee shall be issued a pre-
printed sticker for each permitted newsrack, which shall be affixed to the
lower right corner of the front of each newsrack.
   (f)   Denial of Permit. If a newsrack permit is disapproved, in whole or in
part, the city engineer shall notify the applicant within ten working days from
the date of filing a complete application with the city engineer, explaining
the reasons for the denial of the permit. The applicant shall have ten calendar
days within which to appeal the decision to the city manager in accordance with
the appeal provisions set forth in subsection (g) of this section.
   (g)   Appeal of Permit Denial. After receiving a notice of appeal, the city
manager or the designee of the city manager shall conduct a hearing within
thirty days of the receipt of the applicant's appeal, unless otherwise agreed
to by the applicant. Written notice of the time and place of the hearing shall
be given to the applicant, and shall be posted in the official posting
locations of the city. The hearing shall be informal, but oral and written
evidence may be given by both sides. The city manager or designee shall render
a written decision within fifteen days after the date of the hearing. The
decision of the city manager shall be final.
   (h)   Amendment to Permit. In the event of a change in any of the
information contained in the application, the permittee shall submit such
change in writing to the city engineer. A permittee may install and maintain
additional newsracks by an amendment to the permit. The rules and procedures of
this section shall also apply to the review and approval of any such amendment.
(Ord. 4656 § 2, 2000: Ord. 4531 § 2 (part), 1998)
9.79.050   Standards for maintenance and display of newsracks.
   (a)   Every person placing or maintaining a newsrack on public property
shall comply with the following requirements:
   (1)   Every newsrack shall be maintained in a neat and clean condition, and
in good repair at all times. For example, without limitation, every newsrack
shall be reasonably free of dirt and grease, be reasonably free of chipped,
faded, peeling or cracked paint, be reasonably free of rust and corrosion, have
no broken or cracked plastic or glass parts, and have no broken structural
parts.
   (2)   Every newsrack shall be constructed, installed and maintained in a
safe and secure condition.
   (3)   Every newsrack shall be made of solid material on all sides, so as to
contain the material inside the newsrack in a manner as to prevent it from
blowing away or otherwise becoming litter. No wire or other open form of
newsrack shall be permitted.
   (4)   Every newsrack shall be kept free of graffiti.
   (5)   Every newsrack that sits on legs shall be kept free of dirt and litter
under the newsrack.
   (6)   Every newsrack shall be painted or covered with a protective coating,
so as to keep it free from rust, and shall be cleaned and repainted on a
regular basis.
   (7)   Every coin-operated newsrack shall be equipped with a coin-return
device that is maintained in good repair and working order.
   (8)   Every coin-operated newsrack shall display information on how to
secure a refund in the event of coin return malfunction. Such information shall
be placed in a visible location on the front or top of the newsrack, and shall
be legible.
   (9)   Other than the display of the publication contained therein, no
newsrack shall display or be affixed with any words or pictures except for the
identifying information, and the coin return information, if applicable,
required by subsection (e) of Section
9.79.040 and subsections(a)(8)and(b), respectfully, of this section; provided
that, except as provided in Section
9.79.080 (Special Newsrack Areas), each side of a newsrack may display, in
characters no more than four inches high, the name and/or logo of the
publication contained in the newsrack, and the front of each newsrack may be
affixed with a single sign or decal, no larger than eight inches by ten inches,
containing only information relating to the display, sale or distribution of
the publication contained in the newsrack. If the newsrack is a Sho-Rack K-100
or K-Jack KJ55 style, or equivalent (i.e., double-high), which contains a
built-in sign holder, the newsrack may be affixed with a sign that fits within
that holder, not to exceed eleven inches by seventeen inches. If a newsrack has
no sign or decal, the name and/or logo display may be up to eleven inches high.
   (10)   Old or out-of-date material removed from any newsrack by any person
who owns, maintains, or stocks the newsrack shall be recycled or disposed of in
a lawful manner. Such material shall not be disposed of in any trash receptacle
owned or rented by others, without the express written consent of the owner or
renter of such receptacle. Such material shall be disposed of in a manner that
does not cause the material to become litter.
   (b)   Every newsrack located in a public place shall be affixed with
identifying information, which shall contain the name, address and telephone
number of the newsrack owner and of the distributor of the publication(s)
contained therein. Such information shall be placed in a visible location on
the front or top of the newsrack, and shall be legible. The size of the
identifying information shall be no larger than three inches by five inches.
(Ord. 4531 § 2 (part), 1998)
9.79.060   Size and design standards.
   Except as provided in Section
9.79.080 (Special Newsrack Areas), no newsrack shall be placed, installed or
maintained on any public property except in compliance with the following
standards:
   (a)   No newsrack shall be more than fifty inches high (including the
pedestal in the case of modular newsracks) measured from the ground to the top
surface of the newsrack, nor more than two feet deep, nor more than twenty-four
inches wide.
   (b)   The highest operable part of the coin slot, if provided, and all
controls, dispensers and other operable components of a newsrack shall be no
higher than forty-eight inches above the ground, and no lower than fifteen
inches above the ground.
   (c)   The design of a newsrack shall not create a danger to the persons
using the newsrack in a reasonably foreseeable manner. All newsracks shall
comply with all applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations
including, without limitation, the Americans with Disabilities Act and other
laws and regulations relating to barrier-free design.
(Ord. 4531 § 2 (part), 1998)
9.79.070   Standards for placement and location of newsracks.
   (a)   Except as otherwise set forth in Section
9.79.080 (Special Newsrack Areas), no newsrack shall be placed, installed or
maintained on any public property when such installation, use or maintenance
endangers the safety of persons or property. No newsrack shall be placed,
installed or maintained on any public property except in compliance with the
following standards:
   (1)   Newsracks shall be placed only on a sidewalk, in one of the following
locations:
   (i)   Near a curb, in which case, the back of the newsrack shall be placed
no less than eighteen inches (twelve inches along El Camino Real) nor more than
twenty-four inches from the face of the curb; or
   (ii)   Adjacent to the wall of a building, in which case, the back of the
newsrack shall be placed parallel to such wall and not more than six inches
from the wall.
   (2)   Every newsrack shall be placed so as to open toward the sidewalk.
   (3)   Every newsrack shall be affixed to the sidewalk or to another
newsrack, in a manner approved by the permit therefor; provided, no newsrack
shall be chained to another newsrack. Newsracks shall not be chained or
otherwise attached to any bus shelter, bench, street light, utility pole or
device or sign pole, or to any tree, shrub or other plant, nor situated upon
any landscaped area.
   (4)   No newsrack shall be placed, installed or maintained:
   (i)   Within ten feet of any marked or unmarked crosswalk as measured from
the curb return;
   (ii)   Within five feet of any fire hydrant, call box, or other emergency
facility; bus bench; or utility pole or box;
   (iii)   At any location where the clear space for the passage of pedestrians
is reduced to less than six feet (five feet along El Camino Real);
   (iv)   Within five feet of any driveway;
   (v)   Within five feet of any red curb of a bus stop zone;
   (vi)   Within five feet of the curb return of any wheelchair curb ramp not
in a marked crosswalk;
   (vii)   In such a manner as to impede or interfere with the reasonable use
of any commercial window display or access to or from any building;
   (viii)   In such a manner as to impede or interfere with the reasonable use
of any bicycle rack;
   (ix)   In such a manner as to block or cover any portion of an underground
utility vault, manhole, or other sidewalk underground access location.
   (b)   Newsracks may be placed or joined together; however, no group of
newsracks placed along a curb shall extend for a distance of more than ten feet
(i.e., the combined width of five newsracks); and no group of newsracks shall
be closer than four feet to another group of newsracks along a curb.
   (c)   The city engineer may allow a permittee to place a newsrack in a
location in variance of the standards otherwise required by this section if the
city engineer finds that such variance will not be detrimental to the public
safety and that, due to the existing physical constraints at that location,
imposition of the standards would make placement impossible and would cause a
hardship to the permittee and its patrons. The written findings and the
variance shall be made part of the permit. Prior to considering whether or not
to grant a variance, the city engineer shall provide written notice of the
requested variance to the owner(s) of the real property adjacent to or abutting
the proposed newsrack location.
   (d)   If sufficient space does not exist to accommodate all newsracks sought
to be placed at one location without violating the standards set forth in this
chapter, the city engineer shall give priority as to that location to
publications on a historical "first come first served" basis to permit
applicants as follows:
   (1)   First priority shall be publications that are published two or more
times a week;
   (2)   Second priority shall be given to publications that are published once
per week;
   (3)   Third priority shall be given to publications that are published less
than once per week but more than once per month;
   (4)   Fourth priority shall be given to publications that are published
monthly or less frequently than monthly.
   In the event the city engineer is required to utilize the priority system
described in subparagraphs (1) through (4), above, he or she shall permit only
one rack per publication in a single location, provided that the Sunday edition
of a daily publication shall be considered as a separate publication and shall
be in the second category.
(Ord. 4531 § 2 (part), 1998)
9.79.080   Special newsrack areas.
   (a)   The city council hereby finds that special circumstances require
special design, placement and other standards for newsracks located in the
following areas of the city; and such areas are hereby designated as "special
newsrack areas":
   (1)   The Downtown Commercial Area.
   (i)   The city council hereby designates the "downtown commercial area,"
bounded by and including both sides of the following streets: Middlefield,
Hamilton, Alma, and Lytton, as a special newsrack area.
   (ii)   The council finds that the downtown commercial area has become very
congested, with street furniture and other sidewalk encroachments, automobiles
and other means of travel competing with pedestrians for the public space; and
that special standards for the design and location of newsracks, in conjunction
with a program for the furnishing and installation of street furniture, and the
enforcement of existing regulations for other encroachments in the downtown
commercial area, will help to create a sense of order out of chaos and provide
a friendly environment for those who come to the area.
   (b)   Notwithstanding any contrary provisions in this chapter, the following
special standards shall apply to newsracks and the placement of publications in
newsracks within any special newsrack area so designated pursuant to
subdivision (a) of this section:
   (1)   No newsrack shall be located in a special newsrack area except within
a special newsrack container. All newsracks in a special newsrack container
shall meet the following specifications:
   (i)   Every newsrack shall be a modular design, 49-16 or K-100 style (as
manufactured by "Sho-Rack") or KJ50/KJ55F (as manufactured by "K-Jack") or M-
30/M-33 (as manufactured by National Newsvend) or the equivalent, as determined
by the city engineer.
   (ii)   Each publication shall use the same color for all of its newsracks
located within a special newsrack area.
   (iii)   The name and/or logo otherwise permitted pursuant to subparagraph
(a)(9) of Section
9.79.050 may be placed only on the front face of the box.
   (iv)   Permittees of double high racks may be required to provide devices
commonly known as "spacers" for the newsracks adjacent to each double high
rack, to ensure that all newsracks in a single location group of racks are the
same height. Permittees who use newsracks of a brand other than Sho-Rack may be
required to furnish spacers to achieve height uniformity.
   (2)   Original Placement of Newsracks Within a Special Newsrack Area.
   (i)   No newsrack shall be located in a special newsrack area unless a
permit has been obtained in accordance with this subsection (2) or subsection
(3).
   (ii)   Within thirty days after the effective date of the ordinance
designating a special newsrack area, or as soon as practicable thereafter, the
city engineer shall establish a date (the "cut-off date") by which application
shall be made to the city engineer for every newsrack proposed to be located
within a special newsrack area. No application shall be considered that is
filed later than the cut-off date established for that area. The city engineer
shall give notice of the cut-off date by publication once in a newspaper of
general circulation in the city. The city engineer shall also endeavor to mail
notice of the cut-off date to the owners and/or distributors of newsracks
existing as of the effective date of the ordinance designating a special
newsrack area; provided, however, that failure to provide mailed notice to any
person shall not invalidate any action taken pursuant to this section or this
chapter.
   The process for obtaining a permit shall be in accordance with Section
9.79.040, provided, that where the number of newsracks for which application
has been made exceed the number of special newsrack containers available in a
special newsrack area, or in a particular location within a special newsrack
area, the city engineer shall issue newsrack permits in the manner described in
regulations established by the city engineer and approved by the city council.
   (3)   After the original placement of newsracks within a special newsrack
area, as described in subparagraph (2) of this subsection (b), application may
be made for placement of a newsrack in a location within a special newsrack
area for which no empty special newsrack container is available. Such
applications shall be placed on a waiting list. In the event a special newsrack
container becomes available, the city engineer shall issue a permit for that
location to the applicant for the location, if there is only one applicant. In
the case of multiple applicants for a single location, the city engineer shall
determine which applicant shall receive the permit in the manner described in
regulations established by the city engineer and approved by the city council.
(Ord. 4531 § 2 (part), 1998)
9.79.090   Blinder racks required.
   (a)   Newsracks located in public places, other than public places from
which minors are excluded, and which display to the public view harmful matter,
shall be equipped with devices commonly known as blinder racks in front of the
material so that the lower two-thirds of the material is not exposed to public
view.
   (b)   Newsracks located in public places, other than public places from
which minors are excluded, and which display to the public view material
depicting or describing specified sexual activities, as defined in subdivision
(1) of this subsection, or which contain material depicting or describing
specified anatomical areas, as defined in subdivision (2) of this subsection,
where such picture, or illustration, or statement has as its purpose or effect
sexual arousal, gratification or affront, shall be equipped with blinder racks
in front of the material so that the lower two-thirds of the material is not
exposed to public view.
   (1)   "Specified sexual activities" means:
   (i)   Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal;
   (ii)   Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; or
   (iii)   Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttock or female breast.
   (2)   "Specified anatomical areas" means:
   (i)   Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic hair,
buttocks, perineum, anal region, or female breast at or below the areola
thereof; or
   (ii)   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely
and opaquely covered.
(Ord. 4531 § 2 (part), 1998)
9.79.100   Violation - Enforcement.
   (a)   It shall be illegal to place, install, or maintain any newsrack or any
material in a newsrack in a manner contrary to any provision of this chapter.
   (b)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty
of an infraction and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in
subsection (b) of Section
1.08.010 of this code.
   (c)   Employees in the positions designated in this section are authorized
to exercise the authority provided in Penal Code Section 836.5 and are
authorized to issue citations for violations of this chapter. The designated
employee positions are: (1) code enforcement officer; (2) supervisor, building
inspection. Employees exercising the authority provided for in this subsection
(c) are generically referred to in this chapter as "code enforcement officer,"
notwithstanding their official employee position.
(Ord. 4531 § 2 (part), 1998)
9.79.110   Nuisance.
   Any newsrack or any material in a newsrack placed, installed or maintained
in violation of this chapter shall constitute a public nuisance and may be
abated in accordance with applicable provisions of law.
(Ord. 4531 § 2 (part), 1998)
9.79.120   Removal and hearing.
   In addition to the enforcement remedies available to the city, which are set
forth in
Chapter 1.12 and in Sections
9.79.100 and
9.79.110 of this chapter, any newsrack placed, installed or maintained in
violation of this chapter may be removed by the city, subject to the notice and
hearing procedures set forth in this section.
   (a)   Notice of Violation. Before removal of any newsrack, the code
enforcement officer shall notify the owner or distributor of the violation.
Written notification by first class mail to the address or addresses shown on
the offending newsrack shall constitute adequate notice. The code enforcement
officer may, but need not, affix an additional notice tag onto the offending
newsrack. If no identification is shown on the newsrack, posting of the notice
on the newsrack alone shall be sufficient. The notice shall state the nature of
the violation, shall specify actions necessary to correct the violation, and
shall give the owner or distributor ten business days from the date appearing
on the notice to either remedy the violation or to request a meeting before the
chief building official or designee of the chief building official, who shall
not be the code enforcement officer. The date on the notice shall be no earlier
than the date on which the notice is mailed or affixed to the newsrack, as the
case may be.
   (b)   Meeting and Decision. Any owner or distributor notified under
subsection (a) may request a meeting with the chief building official or
designee by making a written request therefor within ten business days from the
date appearing on the notice. The meeting shall be informal, but oral and
written evidence may be given by both sides. The chief building official or
designee shall give his or her decision within ten business days after the date
of the meeting. Any action by the city to remove the newsrack shall be stayed
pending the written decision of the chief building official or designee
following the meeting.
   (c)   Removal and Impoundment. The city may remove and impound a newsrack or
newsracks in accordance with this section following the written decision of the
chief building official or designee upholding the determination of a violation,
or if the owner or distributor has neither requested a meeting nor remedied the
violation within ten business days from the date on the notice. An impounded
newsrack shall be retained by the city for a period of at least thirty calendar
days following the removal, and may be recovered by the permittee upon payment
of a fee as set forth in the Municipal Fee Schedule. An impounded newsrack and
its contents may be disposed of by the city after thirty calendar days.
   (d)   Summary Abatement. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (a)
and (b), prior notice and an opportunity to be heard shall not be required
prior to removal of any newsrack that is installed or maintained in such a
place or manner as to pose an immediate or clear and present danger to persons,
vehicles or property or any newsrack that is placed in any location without a
permit. In such case, the city shall proceed in the following manner:
   (1)   Within the next working day following removal, the chief building
official or designee shall notify by telephone the permittee or, in the case of
an unpermitted newsrack, the owner of the newsrack or a person whose name is
shown on the required identification. Within three business days, the chief
building official or designee shall send written confirmation of the telephoned
notice. The written confirmation shall contain the reasons for the removal and
information supporting the removal, and shall inform the recipient of the right
to request, in writing or in person, a post-removal meeting within four
business days of the date of such written notice.
   (2)   Upon timely request, the chief building official or designee shall
provide a meeting within forty-eight hours of the request, unless the
requesting party agrees to a later date. The proceeding shall be informal, but
oral and written evidence may be given by both sides. The chief building
official or designee shall give his or her decision in writing to the
requesting party within forty-eight hours after such meeting. If the chief
building official or designee finds that the removal was proper, he or she
shall notify the requesting party to pay any applicable penalties and costs and
recover the newsrack. If the chief building official or designee finds that the
removal was improper and that placement of the newsrack was lawful, the chief
building official or designee shall order that the newsrack be released and
reinstalled without charge.
   (3)   If the owner of an unpermitted rack cannot be determined and the rack
does not contain the required identification, no notice of the removal shall be
required.
(Ord. 4531 § 2 (part), 1998)
9.79.130   Abandoned newsracks.
   An abandoned newsrack may be removed by the city and impounded, pursuant to
the notice and hearing procedures set forth in Section
9.79.120. The city may dispose of the newsrack if the permittee does not claim
the newsrack and pay any required fees within thirty days of its removal.
(Ord. 4531 § 2 (part), 1998)
Title 10 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC*
Chapters:
   
10.04   Definitions
   
10.08   Enforcement and Obedience to Traffic Regulations
   
10.10   Temporary Street Closures
   
10.12   Traffic-Control Devices
   
10.16   Turning Movements
   
10.20   One-Way Streets and Alleys
   
10.24   Special Stops Required
   
10.28   Miscellaneous Driving Rules
   
10.32   Pedestrians
   
10.34   Abandoned, Wrecked, Dismantled or Inoperative Vehicles
   
10.36   Stopping, Standing and Parking - Generally
   
10.40   Stopping, Standing and Parking - Loading and Unloading
   
10.44   Stopping, Standing and Parking - Prohibited or Restricted
   
10.45   Valet Parking
   
10.46   College Terrace Residential Parking Permit Program (RPPP)
   
10.47   Large Vehicle Parking
   
10.48   Trucks and Truck Routes
   
10.50   Residential Preferential Parking Districts
   
10.51   Crescent Park No Overnight Parking Program
   
10.52   Trains
   
10.56   Special Speed Zones
   
10.60   Parking Violations
   10.62   Idling of Vehicles
   
10.64   Bicycles, Roller Skates and Coasters
   
10.70   (Reserved)
   *   State law authorizing local authorities to adopt rules and regulations
relating to vehicles and traffic - See Veh. C.A. §§ 21100-21113.
Chapter 10.04
DEFINITIONS
Sections:
   
10.04.010   Definitions generally.
   
10.04.020   Alley.
   
10.04.030   Bicycle parking zone.
   
10.04.040   Business district.
   
10.04.045   Community service officer.
   
10.04.050   Holidays.
   
10.04.060   Loading zone.
   
10.04.070   Official time standard.
   
10.04.080   Park.
   
10.04.085   Parking enforcement officer.
   
10.04.086   Parking enforcement contractor.
   
10.04.090   Parkway.
   
10.04.100   Passenger loading zone.
   
10.04.110   Pedestrian.
   
10.04.120   Police officer.
   
10.04.125   Public parking facility.
   
10.04.128   Shared-use path.
   
10.04.130   Stop.
   
10.04.140   Stop or stand.
   
10.04.150   Taxi stand.
   
10.04.160   Traffic.
   
10.04.170   Traffic control devices.
   
10.04.180   Traffic lane.
   
10.04.185   Transportation network company.
   
10.04.190   Vehicle Code definitions.
10.04.010   Definitions generally.
   For the purpose of this title, unless it is plainly evident from the context
that a different meaning is intended, certain terms used herein shall have the
definitions ascribed to them in this chapter.
(Ord. 4558 § 2 (part), 1999)
10.04.020   Alley.
   "Alley" means a public or private vehicular way less than twenty-five feet
in width affording a secondary means of vehicular access to abutting property.
(Ord. 4558 § 2 (part), 1999)
10.04.030   Bicycle parking zone.
   "Bicycle parking zone" means that space reserved exclusively for the parking
of bicycles.
(Ord. 4558 § 2 (part), 1999)
10.04.040   Business district.
   "Business district" means all portions of the city of Palo Alto which are
commercially zoned as provided in Title 18 of this code.
(Ord. 4558 § 2 (part), 1999)
10.04.045   Community service officer.
   "Community service officer" means a special police officer of the city
authorized to direct traffic and to enforce all laws of the city and of the
state applicable to the parking or towing of vehicles and all laws of the city
and of the state applicable to bicycles and bicyclists and to enforce all
traffic laws of the city and of the state applicable to traffic within bicycle
lanes and bicycle paths.
(Ord. 4558 § 2 (part), 1999)
10.04.050   Holidays.
   For the purpose of this title holidays and other special days shall be in
accordance with
Chapter 2.08 of this code.
(Ord. 4558 § 2 (part), 1999)
10.04.060   Loading zone.
   "Loading zone" means that space adjacent to a curb reserved for the
exclusive use of vehicles during the active loading or unloading of passengers
or materials.
(Ord. 5531 § 2 (part), 2021: Ord. 4558 § 2 (part), 1999)
10.04.070   Official time standard.
   Whenever certain hours are named herein, they shall mean standard time or
daylight saving time, as may be in current use in this city.
(Ord. 4558 § 2 (part), 1999)
10.04.080   Park.
   "Park" means the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise
than temporarily for a period of less than thirty seconds for the purpose of
and while actually engaged in active loading or unloading passengers or
materials.
(Ord. 5531 § 2 (part), 2021: Ord. 4558 § 2 (part), 1999)
10.04.085   Parking enforcement officer.
   "Parking enforcement officer" means a special officer of the city authorized
to direct traffic and to enforce all laws of the city and of the state
applicable to the parking or towing of vehicles.
(Ord. 4558 § 2 (part), 1999)
10.04.086   Parking enforcement contractor.
   “Parking enforcement contractor” means any duly qualified company that the
city has entered into a contract with and that has been approved by the chief
of police to provide enforcement of
Chapter 10.50 relating to Palo Alto Municipal Code infractions only in parking
zones. Enforcement includes both the issuance and processing of citations for
RPP District parking violations.
(Ord. 5294 § 2, 2015)
10.04.090   Parkway.
   "Parkway" means that portion of a street other than a roadway or a sidewalk.
(Ord. 4558 § 2 (part), 1999)
10.04.100   Passenger loading zone.
   "Passenger loading zone" means the space adjacent to a curb reserved for the
exclusive use of vehicles during the active loading or unloading of passengers.
(Ord. 5531 § 2 (part), 2021: Ord. 4558 § 2 (part), 1999)
10.04.110   Pedestrian.
   "Pedestrian" means any person afoot.
(Ord. 4558 § 2 (part), 1999)
10.04.120   Police officer.
   "Police officer" means every sworn member of the police department, police
reserves or any employee of the city of Palo Alto authorized by the chief of
police to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of
traffic regulations.
(Ord. 4558 § 2 (part), 1999)
10.04.125   Public parking facility.
   The term "public parking facility" shall mean any public parking lot or
parking structure owned or leased by the city in which parking by the general
public is permitted.
(Ord. 4558 § 2 (part), 1999)
10.04.128   Shared-use path.
   "Shared-use path" means a graded linear area or pathway, paved or unpaved,
that is designated for the use of both pedestrians and bicyclists and is not
part of a roadway.
(Ord. 5433 § 1, 2018)
10.04.130   Stop.
   "Stop" means complete cessation of movement.
(Ord. 4558 § 2 (part), 1999)
10.04.140   Stop or stand.
   "Stop or stand" means any stopping or standing of a vehicle, whether
occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or
in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic
control device.
(Ord. 4558 § 2 (part), 1999)
10.04.150   Taxi stand.
   "Taxi stand" means a public place alongside the curb of a street or
elsewhere in the city of Palo Alto which has been designated by the city
manager as reserved exclusively for the use of taxicabs.
(Ord. 4558 § 2 (part), 1999)
10.04.160   Traffic.
    "Traffic" means pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles and other
conveyances either singly or together while using any street for purposes of
travel.
(Ord. 4558 § 2 (part), 1999)
10.04.170   Traffic control devices.
   "Traffic control devices" means all signs, signals, markings and devices not
inconsistent with this title, heretofore or hereafter placed or erected under
this title, as authorized by the Vehicle Code of the State of California or by
the authority of this title.
(Ord. 4558 § 2 (part), 1999)
10.04.180   Traffic lane.
   "Traffic lane" means that portion of any roadway, either marked or unmarked,
being not less than eight and one-half feet in width.
(Ord. 4558 § 2 (part), 1999)
10.04.185   Transportation network company.
   "Transportation network company" means an organization, including, but not
limited to, a corporation, limited liability company, partnership, sole
proprietor, or any other entity, operating in California that provides
prearranged transportation services for compensation using an online-enabled
application or platform to connect passengers with drivers using a personal
vehicle.
(Ord. 5531 § 3, 2021)
10.04.190   Vehicle Code definitions.
   In addition to the definitions set forth above, all definitions of words and
phrases set forth in the Vehicle Code of the State of California are hereby
incorporated in this title as though set forth in full herein.
(Ord. 4558 § 2 (part), 1999)
Chapter 10.08
ENFORCEMENT AND OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC REGULATIONS*
Sections:
   
10.08.010   Authority of police and fire department.
   
10.08.015   Authority of parking enforcement contractor.
   
10.08.020   Unauthorized persons shall not direct traffic.
   
10.08.025   Community service officers.
   
10.08.030   Public employees to obey traffic regulations.
   
10.08.040   Exempt vehicles.
   
10.08.050   Accident and repossession reports.
   *   For state law as to required obedience to traffic-control devices and
signals - See Veh. C.A., §§ 21461-21462.
10.08.010   Authority of police and fire department.
   (a)   It shall be the duty of the members of the police department or such
persons as m assigned by the chief of police to enforce all street traffic laws
of this city and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in
this city.
   (b)   Members of the police department or such officers as are assigned by
the chief of police are authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand or
signal in conformance with traffic laws, provided that in the event of a fire
or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, members
of the police department may direct traffic as conditions may require,
notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws.
   (c)   Members of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire, may
direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate
vicinity.
(Ord. 1714 (part), 1956: prior code § 19.21)
10.08.015   Authority of parking enforcement contractor.
   The city may enter into a contract with a duly qualified company, approved
by the chief of police, to provide enforcement of
Chapter 10.50 relating to RPP District parking violations (as permissible by
the Palo Alto Municipal Code.)
(Ord. 5294 § 3, 2015)
10.08.020   Unauthorized persons shall not direct traffic.
   No person other than a member of the police department or a person assigned
by the chief of police or person authorized by law shall direct or attempt to
direct traffic by voice, hand or other signal, except that persons may operate
when provided any mechanical pushbutton signal erected by order of the city
manager.
(Ord. 1714 (part), 1956: prior code § 19.22)
10.08.025   Community service officers.
   (a)   Each community service officer shall be appointed by the city manager
and shall be issued a badge plainly designating his office. He shall be sworn
in as a special police officer of the city and may operate authorized emergency
vehicles of the police department of the city; provided, however, that a
community service officer is not otherwise to be a member of the police
department of the city.
   (b)   Each community service officer shall keep his badge in his possession
and shall wear an insignia plainly designating his office while engaged in the
discharge of his duties.
   (c)   Each community service officer is charged with the duty of enforcing
all laws of the city and of the state applicable to bicycles and bicyclists and
to enforce all traffic laws of the city and of the state applicable to traffic
within bicycle lanes and bicycle paths.
   (d)   It is unlawful for any person to resist or interfere with a community
service officer in the discharge of his duties.
(Ord. 2690 § 2, 1972)
10.08.030   Public employees to obey traffic regulations.
   The provisions of this title shall apply to the driver of any vehicle owned
by or used in the service of the United States Government, this state, any
county or city, and it shall be unlawful for any said driver to violate any of
the provisions of this title except as otherwise permitted in this title or by
state statute.
(Ord. 1714 (part), 1956: prior code § 19.23)
10.08.040   Exempt vehicles.
   (a)   The provisions of this title regulating the operation, parking and
standing of vehicles shall not apply to any vehicle of the police or fire
departments, any public ambulance or any public utility vehicle or any private
ambulance, which public utility vehicle or private ambulance has qualified as
an authorized emergency vehicle, when any vehicle mentioned in this section is
operated in the manner specified in the Vehicle Code in response to an
emergency call.
   (b)   The foregoing exemptions shall not, however, protect the driver of any
such vehicle from the consequences of his willful disregard of the safety of
others.
   (c)   The provisions of this title regulating the parking or standing of
vehicles shall not apply to any vehicle of a city department or public utility
while necessarily in use for construction or maintenance work upon the streets
of this city.
(Ord 1714 (part), 1956: prior code § 19.24)
10.08.050   Accident and repossession reports.
   (a)   The driver of any vehicle or the person in charge of any animal who is
involved in an accident resulting in death or injury to any person, damage to
the property of any one person in excess of one hundred dollars or any damage
to city-owned property shall, within twenty-four hours, report such accident to
the police department on a form provided by the police department.
   (b)   Whenever the driver of a vehicle is physically incapable of giving a
report, and there was another occupant capable of doing so, such occupant shall
give or cause such report to be given.
   (c)   The person in charge of any garage or repair shop to which is brought
any motor vehicle which shows evidence of having been involved in an accident
of which report must be made, as provided in subsection (a), shall, during such
periods as designated by the chief of police, notify the police department
immediately after such motor vehicle is received.
   (d)   Every person, firm or corporation, or officer, manager, agent or
employee thereof who repossesses in the city any motor vehicle sold, exchanged
or financed by such person, firm or corporation, shall, immediately after such
repossession, make out and file, either in person or by authorized agent, at
the Palo Alto police department, a full and complete report of the repossession
of such vehicle or vehicles. The report shall be written and shall contain the
name and address of the person, firm or corporation making such repossession,
the name and address of the person, firm or corporation from whom such
possession was made, the make, the state license number, motor number, style
and seating capacity of the motor vehicle repossessed. Such report shall not be
required when a repossession is made with the knowledge of the person in charge
of such vehicle.
(Ord 1714 (part), 1956: prior code § 19.25)
Chapter 10.10
TEMPORARY STREET CLOSURES*
Sections:
   
10.10.010   Temporary street closures, defined and classified.
   
10.10.020   Permit required - Violations.
   
10.10.030   Exemptions.
   
10.10.040   Application for permit.
   
10.10.050   Time of filing.
   
10.10.060   Police protection.
   
10.10.070   Solicitation - Sales - Fires.
   
10.10.080   Granting or denial of permit.
   
10.10.090   Appeals.
   
10.10.100   Revocation of permit.
   
10.10.110   Prohibited activities.
   
10.10.120   Public conduct during temporary street closures.
   
10.10.130   Severability.
   *   Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history: Ordinance Nos. 2593, 3008 and
3364.
10.10.010   Temporary street closures, defined and classified.
   (a)   A temporary street closure is: (1) any march, demonstration,
procession or motorcade consisting of persons, animals, or vehicles or a
combination thereof upon the streets, parks or other public grounds within the
city with an intent of attracting public attention that interferes with or has
a tendency to interfere with the normal flow or regulation of traffic upon the
streets, parks or other public grounds; or (2) any meeting, demonstration,
picket line, rally or gathering of more than twenty-five persons for a common
purpose as a result of prior planning that interferes with or has a tendency to
interfere with the normal flow or regulation of pedestrian or vehicular traffic
or occupies any public area in a place open to the general public.
   (b)   A temporary street closure that exceeds one city block in length or
obstructs more than one intersection in the city, whether or not such
occurrence is moving, and which is not conducted, managed or sponsored for
commercial or advertising purposes or profit shall be designated Class A.
   (c)   A temporary street closure not exceeding one city block or one
intersection on other than arterial or collector streets, in the city of Palo
Alto, and along which at least two-thirds of the area is in a residential zone,
and to which a majority of owners, residents or tenants of properties fronting
upon such area consent, which is sponsored solely by such residents, tenants or
owners, and is not for commercial or advertising purposes or profit shall be
designated Class B.
(Ord. 4406 § 1 (part), 1997)
10.10.020   Permit required - Violations.
   It is unlawful for any person to participate in, advertise for or in any way
attempt to promote, organize, control, manage, solicit, or induce participation
in a temporary street closure unless a permit is first obtained from the chief
of police. No person shall violate any of the terms of a permit for temporary
street closure or this chapter, nor join or participate in any permitted
activity under this chapter over the objection of the permittee, nor in any
manner interfere with the progress or orderly conduct of a temporary street
closure. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section
9.04.010, a permit for temporary street closure issued by the chief of police
may allow consumption of alcoholic beverages pursuant to and during the life of
the permit.
(Ord. 4406 § 1 (part), 1997)
10.10.030   Exemptions.
   This chapter shall not apply to the following:
   (a)   Funeral processions;
   (b)   Students going to and from school classes or participating in
educational activities, provided that such conduct is under the immediate
direction and supervision of the proper school authorities;
   (c)   A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions; and
   (d)   Spontaneous events occasioned by news or affairs coming into public
knowledge within three days of such temporary street closure, provided that the
organizer thereof gives written notice to the city at least twenty-four hours
prior to such temporary street closure.
(Ord. 4406 § 1 (part), 1997)
10.10.040   Application for permit.
   Applications for permits shall be made on a form supplied by the city and
shall contain the following information:
   (a)   Name of the person or persons and organization sponsoring a temporary
street closure. If an organization, the application shall contain the names of
the president or chairperson, and all other persons: (1) having an interest or
position of management or control in such organization, and (2) who are or will
be engaged in organizing, promoting, controlling, managing or soliciting
participation in such temporary street closure;
   (b)   The residence and business address and phone numbers of each person
and organization listed in subsection (a);
   (c)   The date, and beginning and ending hours of such temporary street
closure;
   (d)   The proposed route, or such intersections or blocks in which such
closure will occur;
   (e)   Estimated number of persons who will participate;
   (f)   Purpose of the temporary street closure;
   (g)   Whether parking is requested to be restricted or prohibited during
such closure;
   (h)   Quantity, wattage, decibel output and general information about all
sound amplification equipment to be used;
   (i)   Whether or not charity, gratuity, or offering will be solicited or
accepted, or sales of food, beverages or other merchandise will occur;
   (j)   Whether such temporary street closure will occupy all or only a
portion of streets or intersections involved;
   (k)   Estimated number of animals, equestrian units, animal-drawn
conveyances, floats, vehicles, bicycles, motorized displays, and identifiable
marching units such as bands, color guards and drill teams to participate;
   (l)   Locations of assembly and dispersal of all persons and units listed in
subsections (e) and (k);
   (m)   Whether a permit has been requested or obtained from any other
jurisdiction in which the activity shall commence, terminate or occur in part;
   (n)   Such other information as the chief of police deems reasonably
necessary in order to carry out his or her duties under this chapter.
Applicants for Class B temporary street closures need not furnish items (k),
(l), and (m) above.
(Ord. 4406 § 1 (part), 1997)
10.10.050   Time of filing.
   The temporary street closure application shall be filed not less than ten
nor more than one hundred eighty days in advance of the proposed date of such
closure. Failure to file within such period is sufficient grounds for denial of
a permit. The chief of police may waive the minimum ten-day filing period and
accept an application filed within a shorter period if, after due consideration
of the date, time, place, and nature of the temporary street closure, the
anticipated number of participants, and the city services required in
connection with the event, the chief of police determines that the waiver will
not present a hazard to public safety.
(Ord. 4406 § 1 (part), 1997)
10.10.060   Police protection.
   (a)   The chief of police shall determine whether and to what extent
additional police protection is reasonably necessary for the temporary street
closure for traffic control and public safety. The chief of police shall base
this decision on the size, location, duration, time and date of the event, the
expected sale or service of alcoholic beverages, the number of streets and
intersections blocked, and the need to detour or preempt citizen travel and use
of the streets and sidewalks. The speech content of the event shall not be a
factor in determining the amount of police protection necessary. If possible,
without disruption of ordinary police services or compromise of public safety,
regularly scheduled on-duty personnel will police the event. If additional
police protection for the temporary street closure is deemed necessary by the
chief of police, he or she shall so inform the applicant for the permit. The
applicant then shall have the duty to secure the police protection deemed
necessary by the chief of police at the sole expense of the applicant.
   (b)   Persons seeking a temporary street closure for the sole purpose of
public issue speech protected under the First Amendment are not required to pay
for any police protection provided by the city.
(Ord. 4406 § 1 (part), 1997)
10.10.070   Solicitation - Sales - Fires.
   In the event that a charitable solicitation, collection or gratuity is
involved, or food, beverages, or other merchandise is to be sold, Chapters
4.10 or
4.30, whichever is applicable, shall be complied with prior to issuance of a
permit under this chapter. Any use of candles, torches, fires, or other
combustible substances shall be in accordance with Title 15 of the Palo Alto
Municipal Code.
(Ord. 4406 § 1 (part), 1997)
10.10.080   Granting or denial of permit.
   (a)   The chief of police shall issue a permit when, from a consideration of
the application and from such other information as may otherwise be lawfully
obtained, he or she finds that:
   (1)   The conduct of the temporary street closure will not substantially
interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other pedestrian or vehicular
traffic contiguous to its route or location;
   (2)   The conduct of the temporary street closure will not require the
diversion of so great a number of police officers to properly police the line
of movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police
protection of the city;
   (3)   The concentration of persons, animals, and vehicles at public assembly
points of the temporary street closure will not unduly interfere with proper
fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to
such public assembly areas;
   (4)   The conduct of the temporary street closure is not reasonably likely
to cause injury to persons or property;
   (5)   The temporary street closure is scheduled to move from its point of
origin to its point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable
delays en route;
   (6)   Adequate sanitation and other required health facilities are or will
be made available in or adjacent to any public assembly areas;
   (7)   There are sufficient parking places near the site of the temporary
street closure to accommodate the number of vehicles reasonably expected;
   (8)   The applicant has secured the police protection required by the
permit;
   (9)   The temporary street closure is not for the primary purpose of
advertising any product, goods or event that is primarily for private profit,
and the temporary street closure itself is not primarily for profit. The
prohibition against advertising any product, goods or event shall not apply to
signs identifying organizations or sponsors furnishing or sponsoring exhibits
or structures used in the temporary street closure;
   (10)   No temporary street closure permit application for the same time and
location is already granted or has been received and will be granted;
   (11)   No temporary street closure permit application for the same time and
location is already granted or has been received and will be granted, and the
police resources required for that prior temporary street closure are so great
that in combination with the subsequent proposed application, the resulting
deployment of police services would have an immediate and adverse effect upon
the welfare and safety of persons and property;
   (12)   No event is scheduled elsewhere in the city where the police
resources required for that event are so great that the deployment of police
services for the proposed temporary street closure would have an immediate and
adverse effect upon the welfare and safety of persons and property; and
   (13)   The applicant has made a false, misleading or fraudulent statement of
material fact in the application for a permit or in any other document required
pursuant to this chapter.
   The chief of police shall act promptly upon a timely filed application for a
temporary street closure permit but in no event shall grant or deny a permit
less than forty-eight hours prior to the event. If the chief of police
disapproves the application, he or she shall notify the applicant either by
personal delivery or certified mail at least forty-eight hours prior to the
event of his action and state the reasons for denial.
   The chief of police, in denying an application for a temporary street
closure permit, may authorize the conduct of the temporary street closure at a
date, time, location, or route different from that named by the applicant. An
applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall, within five days after
notice of the action of the chief of police, file a written notice of
acceptance with the chief of police.
   An alternate temporary street closure permit shall conform to the
requirements of, and shall have the effect of, a temporary street closure
permit issued under this chapter.
(Ord. 4406 § 1 (part), 1997)
10.10.090   Appeals.
   Upon a denial of a permit by the chief of police, the applicant may appeal
by filing the application within seventy-two hours or two city working days,
whichever is longer, with the city manager, who shall set the appeal for
hearing within forty-eight hours. After holding a hearing, the city manager may
reverse, affirm or modify in any respect the determination of the chief of
police. Following an appeal the applicant may immediately seek a review of the
city manager's decision in a court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. 4406 § 1 (part), 1997)
10.10.100   Revocation of permit.
   The chief of police shall have the authority to revoke a temporary street
closure permit immediately upon violation of the conditions or standards for
issuance as set forth in this chapter or when a public emergency arises such
that the police resources required for that emergency are so great that
deployment of police services for the temporary street closure would have an
immediate and adverse effect upon the welfare and safety of persons or
property. Notice of revocation of a permit shall be delivered in writing to at
least one person named upon the permit by personal service or by certified
mail, or if the closure has commenced, orally or written by personal contact or
service or by telephone. Continuance of a temporary street closure after such
notice has been delivered is unlawful.
(Ord. 4406 § 1 (part), 1997)
10.10.110   Prohibited activities.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to stage, present, or conduct any
temporary street closure without first having obtained a permit as herein
provided.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to participate in a temporary
street closure for which the person knows a permit has not been granted.
   (c)   It shall be unlawful for any person in charge of, or responsible for
the conduct of, a duly licensed temporary street closure to knowingly fail to
comply with any condition of the permit.
   (d)   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any temporary street
closure activity that would constitute a substantial hazard to the public
safety or that would materially interfere with or endanger the public peace or
rights of residents to the quiet and peaceful enjoyment of their property.
   (e)   It shall be unlawful for any person participating in any temporary
street closure to carry or possess any length of metal, lumber, wood, or
similar material for purposes of displaying a sign, poster, plaque or notice,
unless such object is one-fourth inch (1/4") or less in thickness and two
inches or less in width, or if not generally rectangular in shape, such object
shall not exceed three-fourths inch (3/4") in its thickest dimension.
   (f)   It shall be unlawful for any person to carry any sign, poster, plaque,
or notice, whether or not mounted on a length of material as specified in
subsection (e) of this section, unless such sign, poster, plaque, or notice is
constructed or made of a cloth, paper, or cardboard material.
   (g)   It shall be unlawful for any person participating in a temporary
street closure to utilize sound amplification equipment at decibel levels that
exceed those limits imposed by
Chapter 9.10.
   (h)   It shall be unlawful for any person to ride, drive, or cause to be
ridden or driven any animal or any animal-drawn vehicle upon any public street,
unless specifically authorized by the permit.
(Ord. 4406 § 1 (part), 1997)
10.10.120   Public conduct during temporary street closures.
   (a)   No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct or impede, or interfere
with any temporary street closure or with any person, vehicle or animal
participating or used in a temporary street closure.
   (b)   No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles or persons
comprising a temporary street closure when such vehicles or persons are in
motion and are conspicuously designated as a temporary street closure.
   (c)   The chief of police shall have the authority, when reasonably
necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a street
constituting a part of the route of a temporary street closure. The chief of
police shall post signs to that effect, and it shall be unlawful for any person
to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation thereof.
(Ord. 4406 § 1 (part), 1997)
10.10.130   Severability.
   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is
for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of
competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions of this chapter.
(Ord. 4406 § 1 (part), 1997)
Chapter 10.12
TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES*
Sections:
   
10.12.010   Authority to install traffic-control devices.
   
10.12.020   When traffic-control devices required for enforcement.
   
10.12.030   Reserved.
   
10.12.040   Installation of traffic signals.
   
10.12.050   Lane markings.
   
10.12.060   Distinctive roadway markings.
   
10.12.070   Authority to remove, relocate or discontinue.
   
10.12.080   Hours of operation.
   
10.12.090   Regulation of speed by traffic signals.
   
10.12.100   Barriers and lights where work is being done.
   *   For state law authorizing local authorities to place and maintain
traffic signs, signals and other traffic-control devices upon streets and
highways - See Veh. C.A., § 21351.
10.12.010   Authority to install traffic-control devices.
   (a)   The city manager shall have the power and duty to place and maintain
or cause to be placed and maintained official traffic-control devices when and
as required under the traffic ordinances of this city to make effective the
provisions of said ordinances.
   (b)   Whenever the Vehicle Code requires, for the effectiveness of any
provision thereof, that traffic-control devices be installed to give notice to
the public of the application of such law, the city manager is authorized to
install or cause to be installed the necessary devices, subject to any
limitations or restrictions set forth in the law applicable thereto.
   (c)   The city manager may also place and maintain or cause to be placed and
maintained such additional traffic-control devices as he may deem necessary to
regulate traffic or to guide or warn traffic, but he shall make such
determination only upon the basis of traffic engineering principles and traffic
investigations and in accordance with such standards, limitations and rules as
may be set forth in the traffic ordinances of this city or as may be determined
by ordinance or resolution of the legislative body of this city.
(Ord. 1714 (part), 1956: prior code § 19.31)
10.12.020   When traffic-control devices required for enforcement.
   No provision of the Vehicle Code or of this title for which signs are
required shall be enforced against an alleged violator unless appropriate signs
are in place and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant
person, giving notice of such provisions of the traffic laws.
(Ord. 1714 (part), 1956: prior code § 19.32)
10.12.030   Reserved.
   (Repealed by Ord. 4453 § 65, 1997)
10.12.040   Installation of traffic signals.
   (a)   The city manager is directed to install and maintain official traffic
signals at those intersections and other places where traffic conditions are
such as to require that the flow of traffic be alternately interrupted and
released in order to prevent or relieve traffic congestion or to protect life
or property from exceptional hazard.
   (b)   The city manager shall ascertain and determine the locations where
such signals are required by resort to field observation, traffic counts, and
other traffic information as may be pertinent, and his determinations therefrom
shall be made in accordance with those traffic engineering and safety standards
and instructions set forth in the Traffic Manual or its successor, issued by
the Division of Highways of the State Department of Public Works or its
successor, and as set forth in policies and warrants for traffic-control
devices, adopted by ordinance or resolution of the legislative body of this
city.
   (c)   Whenever the city manager installs and maintains an official traffic
signal at any intersection, he shall likewise erect and maintain at such
intersection street name signs visible to the principal flow of traffic unless
such street name signs have previously been placed and are maintained at any
such intersection.
(Ord. 2713 § 1, 1973: Ord. 1714 (part), 1956: prior code § 19.34)
10.12.050   Lane markings.
   The city manager is authorized to mark center lines and lane lines upon the
surface of the roadway to indicate the course to be traveled by vehicles and
may place signs temporarily designating lanes to be used by traffic moving in a
particular direction, regardless of the center line of the highway.
(Ord. 1714 (part), 1956: prior code § 19.35)
10.12.060   Distinctive roadway markings.
   The city manager is authorized to place and maintain distinctive roadway
markings as described in the Vehicle Code on those streets or parts of streets
where the volume of traffic or the vertical or other curvature of the roadway
renders it hazardous to drive on the left side of such marking or signs and
markings. Such marking or signs and marking shall have the same effect as
similar markings placed by the State Department of Public Works pursuant to
provisions of the Vehicle Code.
(Ord. 1714 (part), 1956: prior code § 19.36)
10.12.070   Authority to remove, relocate or discontinue.
   The city manager is authorized to remove, relocate or discontinue the
operation of any traffic-control device not specifically required by state law
or this title whenever he shall determine in any particular case that the
conditions which warranted or required the installation no longer exist or
obtain.
(Ord. 1714 (part), 1956: prior code § 19.37)
10.12.080   Hours of operation.
   The city manager shall determine the hours and days during which any
traffic-control device shall be in operation or be in effect, except in those
cases where such hours or days are specified in this title.
(Ord. 1714 (part), 1956: prior code § 19.38)
10.12.090   Regulation of speed by traffic signals.
   The city manager is authorized to regulate the timing of traffic signals so
as to permit the movement of traffic in an orderly and safe manner at speeds
slightly at variance from the speeds otherwise applicable within the district
or at intersections and shall erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof.
(Ord. 1714 (part), 1956: prior code § 19.153)
10.12.100   Barriers and lights where work is being done.
   (a)   Any person by whom or under whose immediate direction or by whose
immediate authority as principal or as contractor or employer any portion of a
public street may be made dangerous shall:
   (1)   Erect and, so long as the danger continues, maintain, around the
portion of the street or highway so made dangerous, a good and substantial
barrier;
   (2)   Cause to be maintained during every night from sunset to sunrise
sufficient lights, torches or flashers plainly visible from a distance of five
hundred feet on that portion of the street or crossing so made dangerous.
(Ord. 1714 (part), 1956: prior code § 19.39)
Chapter 10.16
TURNING MOVEMENTS*
Sections:
   
10.16.010   Authority to place and obedience to turning markers at
intersections.
   
10.16.020   Authority to place restricted turn signs.
   
10.16.030   Reserved.
   
10.16.040   Authority to prohibit right turns against traffic stop signal.
   *   For state law as to power of local authorities to prohibit the making of
turning movements at intersections - See Veh. C.A. § 22113.
10.16.010   Authority to place and obedience to turning markers at
intersections.
   (a)   The city manager is authorized to place markers, buttons, or signs
within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be traveled by
vehicles turning at such intersections, and the city manager is authorized to
allocate and indicate more than one lane of traffic from which drivers of
vehicles may make right or left hand turns, and the course to be traveled as so
indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by this code or any
other law or ordinance.
   (b)   When authorized markers, buttons or other indications are placed
within an intersection, indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles
turning thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of such
indications.
(Ord. 1714 (part), 1956: prior code § 19.41)
10.16.020   Authority to place restricted turn signs.
   The city manager is authorized to determine those intersections at which
drivers of vehicles shall not make a right, left or U turn, and shall place
proper signs at such intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited
between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event
the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs or they may be removed when
such turns are permitted.
(Ord. 1714 (part), 1956: prior code § 19.42)
10.16.030   Reserved.
   (Repealed by Ord. 4453 § 64, 1997)
10.16.040   Authority to prohibit right turns against traffic stop signal.
   The city manager is authorized to determine those intersections within any
business or residence district at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a
right turn against a red or stop signal and shall erect proper signs giving
notice of such prohibition. No driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions
of any such sign.
(Ord. 1714 (part), 1956: prior code § 19.44)
Chapter 10.20
ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS*
Sections:
   
10.20.010   Authority to place signs.
   *   For state law authorizing cities to designate one-way streets - See Veh.
C.A. § 21657.
10.20.010   Authority to place signs.
   Whenever any ordinance or resolution of this city designates any one-way
street or alley, the city manager shall place and maintain signs giving notice
thereof, and no such regulation shall be effective unless such signs are in
place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be
placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite
direction is prohibited.
(Ord. 1714 (part), 1956: prior code § 19.51)
Chapter 10.24
SPECIAL STOPS REQUIRED
Sections:
   
10.24.010   Stop and yield right-of-way signs.
   
10.24.020   Emerging from alley, driveway or building.
10.24.010   Stop and yield right-of-way signs.
   (a)   Whenever any ordinance or resolution of this city designates and
describes any street or portion thereof as a through street, or any
intersection at which vehicles are required to stop at one or more entrances
thereto, or any intersection at which vehicles are required to yield the right-
of-way, or any railroad grade crossing at which vehicles are required to stop,
the city manager shall erect and maintain stop signs and yield right-of-way
signs as follows:
   (b)   A stop sign shall be erected on each and every street intersecting
such through street or portion thereof so designated and at those entrances of
other intersections where a stop is required and at any railroad grade crossing
so designated; and a yield right-of-way sign shall be erected at those
entrances of intersections where motorists are required to yield the right-of-
way. Every such sign shall conform with and shall be placed as provided in
Sections 21355 and 21356 of the Vehicle Code.
(Ord. 4453 § 59, 1997: Ord. 1714 (part), 1956: prior code § 19.61)
10.24.020   Emerging from alley, driveway or building.
   The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall
stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or into the
sidewalk area extending across any alley way.
(Ord 1714 (part), 1956: prior code § 19.62)
Chapter 10.28
MISCELLANEOUS DRIVING RULES
Sections:
   
10.28.010   Reserved.
   
10.28.020   Driving vehicles on sidewalk.
   
10.28.030   New pavement and street markings.
   
10.28.040   Traffic barriers.
   
10.28.050   Vehicles prohibited - Oregon Avenue pedestrian overcrossing.
10.28.010   Reserved.
   (Repealed by Ord. 4453 § 61, 1997)
10.28.020   Driving vehicles on sidewalk.
   The driver of a vehicle shall not drive within any sidewalk area or parkway
except at a permanent or temporary driveway.
(Ord. 1714 (part), 1956: prior code § 19.73)
10.28.030   New pavement and street markings.
   No person shall ride or drive any animal or any vehicle over or across any
newly made pavement or freshly painted marking in any street when a barrier,
sign, cone marker or other warning device is in place warning persons not to
drive over or across such pavement or marking.
(Ord. 1714 (part), 1956: prior code § 19.74)
10.28.040   Traffic barriers.
   No person shall operate a vehicle contrary to the directions or provisions
of any barrier or sign erected: (1) pursuant to the provisions of any ordinance
of the city of Palo Alto; (2) by any public utility; (3) by any department of
the city of Palo Alto; or (4) by any other person pursuant to law or contract
with the city; nor shall any unauthorized person move or alter the position of
any such barrier or sign.
(Ord. 1714 (part), 1956: prior code § 19.75)
10.28.050   Vehicles prohibited - Oregon Avenue pedestrian overcrossing.
   No person shall operate a vehicle on the Oregon Avenue pedestrian
overcrossing across Bayshore Freeway.
(Ord. 2470 § 2, 1968)
Chapter 10.32
PEDESTRIANS*
Sections:
   
10.32.010   Establishment of crosswalks authorized.
   
10.32.020   Use of crosswalks required.
   
10.32.030   Limited right to use of roadway.
   
10.32.040   Pedestrians prohibited - Certain overpass.
   
10.32.050   Pedestrians prohibited - Foothill Expressway.
   *   For state law authorizing local authorities to prohibit pedestrians from
crossing roadways at other than crosswalks - See Veh. C.A., § 21961.
10.32.010   Establishment of crosswalks authorized.
   (a)   The city manager is hereby authorized to establish and maintain
crosswalks and to designate them by appropriate devices or painted signs upon
the surface of the roadway.
   (b)   The city manager may place signs at or adjacent to an intersection in
respect to any crosswalk directing that pedestrians shall not cross in the
crosswalk so indicated.
(Ord. 1714 (part), 1956: prior code § 19.81)
10.32.020   Use of crosswalks required.
   (a)   No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than by a crosswalk in any
business district.
   (b)   In all other districts, no pedestrian shall cross a roadway at any
place other than by a route at right angles to the curb or by the shortest
route to the opposite curb except in a marked crosswalk.
(Ord. 1714 (part), 1956: prior code § 19.82)
10.32.030   Limited right to use of roadway.
   No person shall cross the roadway of any portion of a grade separation
except at a pedestrian crosswalk.
(Ord 1714 (part), 1956: prior code § 19.83)
10.32.040   Pedestrians prohibited - Certain overpass.
   No pedestrian shall cross Bayshore Freeway upon Embarcadero Road Overpass.
(Ord 2496 § 2, 1969: Ord. 2470 § 3, 1968)
10.32.050   Pedestrians prohibited - Foothill Expressway.
   (a)   No person, other than peace officers acting in the performance of
their duties or authorized maintenance or construction personnel, shall, except
in designated crosswalks, walk upon or drive any livestock upon the Foothill
Expressway at any location on said expressway between Page Mill Road and the
southerly city limits at Adobe Creek.
   (b)   Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) hereinabove, the
driver and passengers of a disabled vehicle stopped on Foothill Expressway at
any location between Page Mill Road and the southerly city limits at Adobe
Creek may walk to the nearest exit, in either direction, on that side of the
expressway upon which the vehicle is disabled, from which telephone or auto
repair services are available.
(Ord 2844 § 1, 1975)
Chapter 10.34
ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLES*
Sections:
   
10.34.010   Declaration of purpose.
   
10.34.020   Declaration of public nuisance.
   
10.34.030   Administration of chapter.
   
10.34.040   Notice of violation.
   
10.34.050   Hearing.
   
10.34.060   Conduct of hearing.
   
10.34.070   Collection of costs.
   
10.34.080   Removal.
   
10.34.090   Repair or reconstruction prohibited.
   
10.34.100   Notice to state agencies - Appraisal.
   
10.34.110   Inapplicability of chapter.
   *   Editor's Note: Chapter 10.34, formerly codified as Chapter 9.64 of this
code, was renumbered and relocated by Section 53 of Ordinance 4453.
10.34.010   Declaration of purpose.
   This chapter is enacted pursuant to authorization contained in the
California Vehicle Code, particularly Sections 9250.7, 22660, 22702, and 22710,
as the same may be amended from time to time, or successor legislation in order
to effectuate the removal of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative
vehicles or parts thereof from private property or from public property, not
including highways, and recovery of costs of administration and removal
thereof; and for the further purpose of qualifying for such funds as may be
made available by the state of California, Department of Public Works, from the
Abandoned Vehicle Trust Fund.
(Ord. 4453 § 53 (part), 1997: Ord. 2738 § 2 (part), 1973)
10.34.020   Declaration of public nuisance.
   Abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicles, or parts thereof,
upon public property or private property, except highways, are public
nuisances, and shall be abated and disposed of as provided in this chapter, in
addition to such other remedies as may be provided in this code or by law.
(Ord. 4453 § 53 (part), 1997: Ord. 2738 § 2 (part), 1973)
10.34.030   Administration of chapter.
   The city manager or such other regularly salaried, full-time employees of
the city of Palo Alto as may be delegated by the city manager, are hereby
authorized to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter, except
that actual removal of vehicles or parts thereof from property may be by any
person so authorized by the city manager or his delegate.
(Ord. 4453 § 53 (part), 1997: Ord. 2738 § 2 (part), 1973)
10.34.040   Notice of violation.
Whenever the existence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative
vehicle, or parts thereof, on private property or public property, not
including highways, is made known to the city manager, he shall give not less
than ten days' notice of intention to abate and remove the vehicle or part
thereof as a public nuisance, and of the hearing rights of the owner of the
property on which the vehicle is located and the owner of the vehicle, by
sending such notice by registered or certified mail, to the owner of the land
as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to the last registered and
legal owner of record unless the vehicle is in such condition that
identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. Such notice
shall include notice to the property owner that he may appear in person at a
hearing or may present a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the
presence of the vehicle on the land, with his reasons for such denial, in lieu
of appearing.
(Ord. 4453 § 53 (part), 1997: Ord. 2738 § 2 (part), 1973)
10.34.050   Hearing.
   If, within ten days from the mailing of the notice of intention to abate and
remove the vehicle, the owner of the vehicle or the owner of the land on which
such vehicle is located requests a hearing in writing to the city manager or
his delegate, or if the owner of the land on which the vehicle is located
submits a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of
the vehicle on his land within such time period, in which case said statement
shall be construed as a request for hearing which does not require the presence
of the owner submitting such request, the city manager or his delegate shall
hold a hearing within thirty days of the receipt of such request or sworn
written statement. If such request or sworn written statement is not received
within such period, the city manager or his delegate shall have the authority
to remove the vehicle as provided in this chapter.
(Ord. 4453 § 53 (part), 1997: Ord. 2738 § 2 (part), 1973)
10.34.060   Conduct of hearing.
   The owner of the land on which the vehicle is located may appear in person
at the hearing or present a sworn written statement denying responsibility for
the presence of the vehicle on the land, with his reasons for such denial. If
the city manager or his delegate determines at the hearing that the vehicle was
placed on the land without the consent of the landowner and that he has not
subsequently acquiesced in its presence, then the costs of administration or
removal of the vehicle shall not be assessed against the property upon which
the vehicle is located, or otherwise attempted to be collected from such owner.
(Ord. 4453 § 53 (part), 1997: Ord. 2738 § 2 (part), 1973)
10.34.070   Collection of costs.
   Subject to the limitations, exceptions and results of hearings contained in
this chapter, the costs of administration of this chapter and removal of the
vehicle or parts thereof shall be collected from the owner of the land on which
the vehicle is located, pursuant to Section 38773.5 of the Government Code of
the State of California and Sections
8.08.060 through
8.08.090 of the Palo Alto Municipal Code, inclusive, as they may be amended
from time to time, or successor legislation. The city manager or his delegate
is authorized to assume the costs of administration and/or removal of
abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles, or parts thereof,
whenever the decision on a hearing held pursuant to this chapter, or other
circumstances, equities, hardships, or the best interests of the city will best
be served thereby.
(Ord. 4453 § 53 (part), 1997: Ord. 2738 § 2 (part), 1973)
10.34.080   Removal.
   Following the expiration of the period for notice provided hereinabove, or
the hearing if the same be held, the city manager or his delegate shall cause
the removal of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles, or parts
thereof, from private property or public property, not including highways. Such
vehicles, or parts thereof, may be removed to any scrap yard, automobile
dismantler's yard, or any suitable site operated by the city for processing as
scrap, or may be given such other final disposition as the city manager deems
appropriate.
(Ord. 4453 § 53 (part), 1997: Ord. 2738 § 2 (part), 1973)
10.34.090   Repair or reconstruction prohibited.
   No vehicle, or parts thereof, removed pursuant to this chapter shall be
reconstructed or made operable.
(Ord. 4453 § 53 (part), 1997: Ord. 2738 § 2 (part), 1973)
10.34.100   Notice to state agencies - Appraisal.
   Within five days after the date of removal, the city manager or his delegate
shall cause such vehicle or parts thereof removed to be appraised, and shall
forward to the Department of Motor Vehicles of the State of California such
information as is available identifying the vehicle or part thereof, and any
evidence of registration, including but not limited to, registration
certificates of title or license plates. Any city employee other than employees
of the police department shall mail or personally deliver a written report
identifying the vehicle and its location to the office of the Department of
California Highway Patrol located nearest the vehicle prior to removing the
same or causing such removal.
(Ord. 4453 § 53 (part), 1997: Ord. 2738 § 2 (part), 1973)
10.34.110   Inapplicability of chapter.
   This chapter shall not apply to:
   (a)   A vehicle or part thereof which is completely enclosed within a
building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other
public or private property;
   (b)   A vehicle or part thereof which is stored or parked in a lawful manner
on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler,
licensed vehicle dealer, or a junkyard.
   Nothing in this section shall authorize the maintenance of a public or
private nuisance, as defined under any provision of law other than this
chapter.
(Ord. 4453 § 53 (part), 1997: Ord. 2738 § 2 (part), 1973)
Chapter 10.36
STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING - GENERALLY
Sections:
   
10.36.010   Application of regulations.
   
10.36.020   Standing in parkways.
   
10.36.030   Use of streets or public parking facilities for storage of
vehicles.
   
10.36.040   Parking for sale, advertisement, or repairprohibited.
   
10.36.050   Parallel parking.
   
10.36.060   Angle parking.
   
10.36.070   Parking adjacent to schools.
   
10.36.080   Stopping or parking prohibited - Signs required.
   
10.36.090   Removal or defacement of markings.
   
10.36.100   Removal or defacement of signs.
   *   For state law relating to the stopping, standing and parking of motor
vehicles - See Veh. C.A. §§ 22500 - 22520.
10.36.010   Application of regulations.
   (a)   The provisions of this title prohibiting the stopping, standing or
parking of a vehicle shall apply except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle
to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with directions of a
police officer or official traffic control device.
   (b)   The provisions of this title imposing a time limit on standing or
parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more
restrictive provisions of the Vehicle Code or this title prohibiting or
limiting the standing or parking of vehicles in specified places or at
specified times.
   (c)   In addition to any other persons authorized by law, any employee of
the city classified as a Community Service Officer or Parking Enforcement
Officer is authorized to give the notice required by the Vehicle Code of the
State of California of any violation of said code or of local regulations
adopted pursuant thereto governing the stopping, standing or parking of
vehicles.
   (d)   For purposes of this chapter, the term "public parking facility" shall
mean any public parking lot or parking structure owned or leased by the city in
which parking by the general public is permitted.
(Ord. 4558 § 3 (part), 1999)
10.36.020   Standing in parkways.
   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within any parkway, except on
a permanent or temporary driveway.
(Ord. 4558 § 3 (part), 1999)
10.36.030   Use of streets or public parking facilities for storage of
vehicles.
   (a)   No person who owns or has possession, custody or control of any
vehicle shall park or leave such vehicle standing upon any street or alley or
public parking facility for a period of seventy-two consecutive hours or more.
For the purposes of this section, a vehicle shall be considered to have been
parked or left standing for seventy-two or more consecutive hours if it has
remained inoperable or has not been moved at least five tenths of a mile or
more during said seventy two hour period.
   (b)   In the event a vehicle is parked or left standing upon a street or
alley or public parking facility in excess of a consecutive period of seventy-
two hours, any member of the police department authorized by the chief of
police may remove such vehicle from the street as authorized by the California
Vehicle Code and subject to the provisions of this section.
   (c)   Prior to removing any vehicle, notice shall be affixed to the vehicle
advising that the vehicle will be removed for violation of this section after
seventy-two hours unless it is moved at least five tenths of a mile.
   (d)   Whenever a member of the police department removes a vehicle pursuant
to this section and causes it to be stored as permitted by the California
Vehicle Code, the chief of police or his designee shall comply with the
requirements of Section 22852 of the California Vehicle Code relating to post-
storage notice and hearing for registered owners and legal owners of record.
(Ord. 4558 § 3 (part), 1999)
10.36.040   Parking for sale, advertisement, or repairprohibited.
   (a)   No person shall park a vehicle upon any street or alley or public
parking facility for the purpose of:
   (1)   Advertisement to the public the private sale of that vehicle;
   (2)   Advertisement of any event or function on private property or on
public property hired for a private event or function to which the public is
invited.
   (b)   No person shall park a vehicle upon any street or alley or public
parking facility for the purpose of servicing, repairing or otherwise working
on such vehicle except repairs necessitated by an emergency.
(Ord. 4558 § 3 (part), 1999)
10.36.050   Parallel parking.
   (a)   Subject to other and more restrictive limitations, a vehicle may be
stopped or parked within eighteen inches of the left-hand curb facing in the
direction of traffic movement upon any one-way street unless the city manager
has caused signs to be erected prohibiting such stopping or standing.
   (b)   In the event a highway includes two or more separate roadways and
traffic is restricted to one direction upon any such roadway, no person shall
stand or park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of such one-way roadway unless
the city manager has caused signs to be erected permitting such standing or
parking.
   (c)   The city manager is authorized to determine when standing or parking
shall be prohibited upon the left-hand side of any one-way street or alley or
when standing or parking may be permitted upon the left-hand side of any one-
way roadway of a highway having two or more separate roadways and shall erect
signs giving notice thereof.
   (d) The requirement of parallel parking in this section shall not apply in
the event any commercial vehicle is actually engaged in the process of actively
loading or unloading freight or goods, in which case that vehicle may be backed
up to the curb, provided that such vehicle does not extend beyond the center
line of the street and does not block traffic thereby; however, pursuant to
Section
10.40.040 commercial vehicles may not stop, park, or stand in business
districts between the hours of 11 a.m. and 6 p.m. unless they are legally
parallel parked or are legally parked in any angle parking space.
(Ord. 5531 § 4, 2021: Ord. 4558 § 3 (part), 1999)
10.36.060   Angle parking.
   (a)   Whenever any ordinance or resolution of this city designates and
describes any street or public parking facility or portion thereof upon which
angle parking shall be permitted, the city manager shall mark or sign such
street indicating the angle at which vehicles shall be parked.
   (b)   When signs or markings are in place indicating angle parking, as
herein provided, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at the
angle to the curb or edge of the roadway indicated by such signs or markings.
(Ord. 4558 § 3 (part), 1999)
10.36.070   Parking adjacent to schools.
   (a)   The city manager is authorized to place signs and to place markings on
curbs, pavement, and similar areas to provide adequate control for vehicle
parking and loading upon any street or portion thereof adjacent to any school
property in accordance with those traffic engineering and safety standards and
instructions set forth in policies and warrants for traffic control devices
near schools, adopted by ordinance or resolution of the legislative body of
this city.
   (b)   When official signs or markings are installed indicating no parking
upon a street or portion thereof adjacent to any school property, no person
shall park a vehicle in any such designated place.
(Ord. 4558 § 3 (part), 1999)
10.36.080   Stopping or parking prohibited - Signs required.
   (a)   The city manager is authorized to appropriately sign or mark the
following places and when so signed or marked no person shall stop, stand or
park a vehicle in any of said places:
   (1)   At any place within thirty feet of a crosswalk at an intersection in
any business district except that a bus may stop at a designated bus stop;
   (2)   Within fifty feet of the approach to any traffic signal, boulevard
stop sign or official electric flashing device;
   (3)   At any place where the city manager determines that it is necessary or
desirable.
(Ord. 4558 § 3 (part), 1999)
10.36.090   Removal or defacement of markings.
   It is unlawful for any person to remove, erase, deface, obliterate, or
render unusable for the purpose of enforcement of this title any chalk mark,
marker or other device placed on a vehicle by the city for the purpose of
measuring the passage of time or the movement of a vehicle stopped, standing or
parked on any street, or in any public parking facility.
(Ord. 4558 § 3 (part), 1999)
10.36.100   Removal or defacement of signs.
   It is unlawful for any person to remove, erase, deface, obliterate, or
render unusable for the purpose of enforcement of this title any sign, marking,
or device placed by the city for the purpose of indicating prohibitions or
restrictions on stopping, standing or parking of vehicles on any street, alley,
or public parking facility.
(Ord. 4558 § 3 (part), 1999)
Chapter 10.40
STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING - LOADING AND UNLOADING
Sections:
   
10.40.010   Authority to establish loading zones.
   
10.40.020   Signs or curb markings to indicate no stopping and parking
regulations.
   
10.40.025   Parking or standing in cross-hatched areas adjacent to disabled
parking spaces.
   
10.40.030   Effect of permission to load or unload.
   
10.40.040   Parking regulations for commercial vehicles - Parking distance from
curbs.
   
10.40.045   Special parking permit for construction or maintenance work.
   
10.40.050   Standing for loading or unloading only.
   
10.40.060   Standing in passenger loading zone.
   
10.40.070   Standing in any alley.
   
10.40.080   Bicycle and motorcycle parking spaces.
   
10.40.090   Taxi stands.
   
10.40.100   Bus zones.
   
10.40.110   Transportation network company (TNC) vehicles.
10.40.010   Authority to establish loading zones.
   (a)   The city manager is hereby authorized to determine and to mark by
signs or curb markings loading zones and passenger loading zones and disabled
parking zones as follows:
   (1)   On any street, alley, or public parking facility within any business
district;
   (2)   On any street, alley, or public parking facility in front of or
adjacent to any place of business, school, park, public building, hall or place
used for the purpose of public assembly.
   (b)   In no event shall more than one-half of the total curb length in any
block be reserved for loading zone purposes.
   (c)   Whenever curb marking is used, loading zones shall be indicated by
yellow paint and posted with a sign indicating "LOADING ZONE".
   (d)   Whenever curb marking is used, passenger loading zones shall be
indicated by white paint and posted with a sign indicating "PASSENGER LOADING
ZONE".
   (e)   Disabled parking spaces shall be indicated by blue space markings and,
in addition, an adjacent and appropriately posted sign conforming to the
requirements of the California Vehicle Code.
   (f)   Disabled parking loading areas shall be indicated by white cross-
hatched lines adjacent to a disabled parking space.
(Ord. 4558 § 4 (part), 1999)
10.40.020   Signs or curb markings to indicate no stopping and parking
regulations.
   (a)   The city manager is authorized, subject to the provisions and
limitations of this title, to place signs or the following curb markings on any
street, alley, or public parking facility to indicate parking or standing
regulations, and curb markings shall have the meaning as herein set forth:
   (1)   Red shall mean no stopping, standing or parking at any time whether
the vehicle is attended or unattended except that a bus may stop in a red zone
marked or signed as a bus zone.
   (2)   Yellow shall mean no stopping, standing or parking during the period
of time designated by posted signage for any purpose other than the active
loading or unloading of passengers or materials; provided that the loading or
unloading of passengers shall not consume more than three minutes nor the
loading or unloading of materials more than twenty minutes by commercial
vehicles during which the operator must be in attendance, under any
circumstances during times when parking is restricted at a yellow zone.
   (3)   White shall mean no stopping, standing or parking at any time, unless
limited to specific hours and/or days by posted signs, for any purpose other
than the active loading or unloading of passengers which shall not exceed three
minutes.
   (4)   Green shall mean no standing or parking for a period of time longer
than the specified time limit and on the days indicated by the posted signs.
   (5)   Blue shall mean no stopping, standing or parking except for vehicles
that lawfully display a disabled placard or disabled license plate while
transporting a disabled person. Such restrictions shall apply at all times.
   (b)   When the city manager, as authorized under this chapter, has caused
signs or curb markings to be placed, no person shall stop, stand or park a
vehicle adjacent to any such legible sign or curb marking in violation of any
of the provisions of this title except as specifically authorized by law.
(Ord. 5531 § 5 (part), 2021: Ord. 4558 § 4 (part), 1999)
10.40.025   Parking or standing in cross-hatched areas adjacent to disabled
parking spaces.
   No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle in any pavement area marked
by cross-hatched lines and adjacent to a parking stall or space designated for
disabled persons or disabled veterans, upon any street or upon any city-owned
or operated public parking facility or upon any private off-street parking
facility. These cross-hatched areas are designated for the loading and
unloading of vehicles for disabled persons or disabled veterans only.
(Ord. 4558 § 4 (part), 1999)
10.40.030   Effect of permission to load or unload.
   (a)   Permission herein granted to stop or stand a vehicle for purposes of
active loading or unloading of materials shall apply only to commercial
vehicles and shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor and in no
event for more than twenty minutes.
   (b)   The loading or unloading of materials shall apply only to commercial
deliveries including the delivery or pickup of express and parcel post packages
and United States mail.
   (c)   Permission herein granted to stop or park for purposes of active
loading or unloading passengers shall include the loading or unloading of
personal baggage but shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor and in
no event for more than three minutes.
   (d)   The provisions of this section shall be enforced so as to accommodate
necessary and reasonable loading or unloading but without permitting abuse of
the privileges hereby granted.
(Ord. 5531 § 5 (part), 2021: Ord. 4558 § 4 (part), 1999)
10.40.040   Parking regulations for commercial vehicles - Parking distance from
curbs.
   (a)   No person shall stop, park or leave standing any vehicle, whether
attended or unattended, unless both right-hand wheels (or either both right-
hand wheels or both left-hand wheels on a one-way street) are parallel with and
within eighteen inches from the curb edge of a street or highway except when
necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the
directions of a police officer or traffic-control device.
   (b)   No person shall stop, park or leave standing any commercial vehicle
for the purpose of loading, delivering or unloading of freight or materials in
any business district between the hours of eleven a.m. and six p.m. unless such
vehicle is parked so that both right-hand wheels (or either both right-hand
wheels or both left-hand wheels on a one-way street) are parallel with and
within eighteen inches of the curb or unless said vehicle is legally parked in
any angle parking space.
   (c)   The chief transportation official, in case of undue hardship such as
extremely large commercial vehicles or commercial vehicles at the terminal of a
long haul, is authorized to issue a permit for parking to load or unload in the
business district between the hours of eleven a.m. and six p.m. even though
curb space may not be readily available. Permits, when issued, shall contain
the make and type of vehicle, the license number, the name of the applicant,
the location where and time when the permit shall be in effect, and the manner
of parking or other restrictions necessary to insure the usual flow of traffic.
The permit shall be attached to the windshield of the vehicle at all times when
the permit is in effect.
(Ord. 4558 § 4 (part), 1999)
10.40.045   Special parking permit for construction or maintenance work.
   (a)   The chief transportation official may issue a permit for the temporary
use of any parking space in a public street or in a public parking facility
upon a showing that the applicant will be moving property or conducting
construction and/or maintenance work in the immediate area and that no
alternative off-street site for the parking of vehicles or for the temporary
storage of equipment and/or materials is available reasonably near the work
site. Such permit shall entitle the holder temporarily to use a designated
parking space or spaces in a public street or a public parking facility as
specified in the permit without regard to time limits otherwise imposed, but
shall not permit illegal parking or use and parking or use of unauthorized
places.
   (b)   A permit, when issued for the use of a vehicle, shall contain the name
of the permittee, the make and type of vehicle, the license number, and the
location where and time when the permit shall be in effect. A permit, when
issued for the temporary storage of equipment and/or materials, shall contain
the name of permittee, the specific type of equipment and/or materials to be
stored and the location where and the time when the permit shall be in effect.
When a single permit is issued for both parking and storage, the information
required for both parking and storage permits, as set forth in this chapter,
shall be contained therein.
   (c)   When issued for parking or for storage, the permit shall be displayed
as directed by the city.
   (d)   No permit shall be issued for any initial period greater than thirty
working days, but the chief transportation official may renew the permit for
additional periods not to exceed thirty working days each. The fee for such
permit shall be established in the municipal fee schedule. No permit shall be
issued until said fee has been paid to the city.
   (e)   In addition to the permits described in this section, the chief
transportation official may issue permits authorizing the temporary use by
commercial vehicles of any parking space in a public street or in a public
parking facility upon a showing that the applicant provides emergency repair
work. Such permit shall entitle the holder to use a parking space in a public
street or a public parking facility without regard to the limits otherwise
imposed, but shall not permit illegal parking or parking in unauthorized
places; the permit shall authorize parking for the duration of the emergency
only. Each use of the permit shall be recorded with the date, time, place, and
nature of the emergency, as well as with other information required by the
forms provided for reporting purposes. The completed form shall be submitted to
the chief transportation official on a monthly basis for verification.
   A permit shall be effective for one year and shall contain the name of the
permittee, the make and type of vehicles, the license numbers and the effective
dates of the permit. The permit shall be displayed as directed by the city. No
person shall reproduce a permit. The annual fee for such permit shall be
established in the municipal fee schedule. No permit shall be issued until said
fee has been paid to the city.
   It is unlawful and an infraction for any person:
   (1)   To use an emergency repair parking permit for other than parking for
emergency repair work;
   (2)   To use an emergency repair parking permit for other than commercial
vehicles;
   (3)   To use an expired or revoked emergency repair parking permit; or
   (4)   To reproduce an emergency repair parking permit. Two violations in any
calendar year shall automatically revoke privileges for the next succeeding
twelve months.
   For purposes of this subsection, "emergency repair work" means repair work
done to a structure or to mechanical, electrical, or plumbing devices where
there exists a threat to life or property.
(Ord. 5531 § 5 (part), 2021: Ord. 4558 § 4 (part), 1999)
10.40.050   Standing for loading or unloading only.
   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any yellow loading zone for
any purpose other than active loading or unloading passengers or materials for
such time as is permitted in Section
10.40.030.
(Ord. 5531 § 5 (part), 2021: Ord. 4558 § 4 (part), 1999)
10.40.060   Standing in passenger loading zone.
   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any passenger loading zone
for any purpose other than the active loading or unloading of passengers for
such time as is specified in Section
10.40.030.
(Ord. 5531 § 5 (part), 2021: Ord. 4558 § 4 (part), 1999)
10.40.070   Standing in any alley.
   When official signs prohibiting such parking are in place, no person shall
stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose other than the active loading or
unloading of materials in any alley. Such parking shall not exceed twenty
minutes. In no event shall the driver of such vehicle leave less than one
traffic lane for unobstructed passage. When an alley is designated as a one-way
alley, such parking by vehicles shall be permitted on the right side only.
(Ord. 5531 § 5 (part), 2021: Ord. 4558 § 4 (part), 1999)
10.40.080   Bicycle and motorcycle parking spaces.
   (a)   The city manager is authorized to designate and establish bicycle and
motorcycle parking spaces for use at such places and during such times as the
city manager may deem suitable and necessary. The city manager may also
authorize the placing of bicycle parking racks in the spaces so designated.
   (b)   When official signs or markings restricting parking to bicycles only
are in place, only bicycles shall be parked in such places, and it is unlawful
for any person to park or stand any vehicle other than a bicycle or other
nonpowered two-wheeled vehicles in such space.
   (c)   When official signs or markings restricting parking to motorcycles
only are in place, only motorcycles shall be parked in such places, and it is
unlawful for any person to park or stand any vehicle other than a motorcycle or
other self-propelled two or three wheeled vehicles in such space.
(Ord. 4558 § 4 (part), 1999)
10.40.090   Taxi stands.
   (a)   The city manager is authorized to determine the location of and to
mark taxi stands.
   (b)   Such taxi stands shall be indicated by signs or a white line stenciled
with the words "TAXI ONLY" upon the tops of all curbs and places specified for
taxicabs only.
   (c)   No driver of any taxicab shall park or stand the same upon any public
highway in any business district in the city for any period of time longer than
is necessary to discharge or receive passengers then occupying or then waiting
for such taxicab; provided, that a taxicab may be parked in a taxi stand
established pursuant to subsection (a) of this section.
   (d)   When official signs or markings designating such taxi stands are in
place, no person other than the driver of a taxicab shall park or stand any
vehicle in any taxi stand.
(Ord. 4558 § 4 (part), 1999)
10.40.100   Bus zones.
   (a)   The city manager is authorized to establish bus zones for the loading
and unloading of buses or common carriers of passengers and to determine the
location thereof subject to the limitations set forth in this section.
   (b)   The word "bus," as used in this section, means any motor bus, motor
coach or passenger stage used as a common carrier of passengers.
   (c)   No bus zone shall exceed eighty feet in length, except that when
satisfactory evidence has been presented to the city manager showing the
necessity therefor, the city manager may extend bus zones not to exceed a total
length of one hundred thirty feet.
   (d)   Bus zones shall normally be established on the far side of an
intersection.
   (e)   Such bus zones shall be indicated by signs or by red curbing marked as
a bus loading zone.
   (f)   No bus shall stand in any bus zone longer than necessary to load or
unload passengers.
   (g)   No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle except a bus in any
bus zone.
(Ord. 4558 § 4 (part), 1999)
10.40.110   Transportation network company (TNC) vehicles.
   No owner or driver of a TNC vehicle shall park or stand the same upon any
public highway or street for any period of time longer than is necessary to
discharge or receive passengers.
(Ord. 5531 § 6, 2021)
Chapter 10.44
STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING - PROHIBITED OR RESTRICTED
Sections:
   
10.44.010   Restrictions established - Signs designating.
   
10.44.015   Definitions.
   
10.44.020   Standing or parking, two a.m. to six a.m.
   
10.44.021   Hardship permit.
   
10.44.030   Parking prohibited on grade.
   
10.44.040   Parking space markings.
   
10.44.050   Temporary parking and street sweeping restrictions.
   
10.44.060   Parking vehicles held for commercial sale or repair.
   
10.44.070   Parking on city property.
   
10.44.080   Vehicles not to obstruct streets, alleys, or public parking
facilities.
   
10.44.090   Requiring ignitions locked and keys removed from motor vehicles.
10.44.010   Restrictions established - Signs designating.
   (a)   The city council shall by ordinance or resolution establish such
parking, or stopping, standing and parking restrictions or prohibitions as may
be necessary, and the city manager shall designate such streets, portions of
streets, or city-owned parking facilities by appropriate signs or markings
giving effect to such parking or stopping, standing and parking restrictions or
prohibitions. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city manager may establish
such parking, or stopping, standing and parking restrictions or prohibitions
for periods of time not to exceed four months at which time such restrictions
or prohibitions shall no longer be of any force and effect unless duly
established by ordinance or resolution of the city council. The city manager
shall designate streets or portions of streets by appropriate signs or
markings, giving effect to such parking or stopping, standing and parking
restrictions or prohibitions.
   (b)   When authorized signs are in place giving notice of such prohibition
or limitation, no person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle in violation of
such prohibition or limitation.
   (c)   Whenever the stopping, standing or parking of a vehicle has been
prohibited, restricted, or limited as to time by this chapter or any resolution
enacted pursuant hereto, the continued standing or parking of such vehicle for
an additional period longer than the maxi-mum permissible period of parking in
such space or location after a citation therefor has been issued shall
constitute a separate and ad-ditional violation. If no such period of time is
designated, stopping, standing or parking for an additional period longer than
one hour after a citation has been issued, shall constitute a separate and
additional violation.
(Ord. 4642 §11, 2000: Ord. 4558 § 5 (part), 1999)
10.44.015   Definitions.
   (a)   For the purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the
meaning ascribed to them in this section:
   (1)   "Oversized vehicle" means any vehicle exceeding seven feet in height
or exceeding twenty feet in overall length or exceeding seven feet in width
(including any load or accessory thereon other than antennas), provided that
this definition shall not apply to vehicles which exceed these dimensions
solely because of modifications required to accomodate a disability and the
vehicle is lawfully displaying a disabled placard or license;
   (2)   "Camper shell" means a structure designed to cover and/or protect the
bed area of a pickup truck but removed therefrom;
   (3)   "Trailer" means a vehicle designed or utilized for being drawn by a
motor vehicle.
   (4)   "Residential zone" means all lands located within the following zoning
districts: RE, Rl, R2, RMD, RM-20, RM-30, and RM-40; where one side of a street
is located within one of these residential districts, then the portion of the
opposite side of the street directly across from the residential district shall
also be included in the definition of a residential zone;
   (5)   "Public facility zone" means all lands located within a PF zone; where
one side of a street is located within a public facility zone, then the portion
of the opposite side of the street directly across from the public facility
zone shall also be included in the restrictions pertaining to a public facility
zone.
(Ord. 5460 § 15, 2019: Ord. 4558 § 5 (part), 1999)
10.44.020   Standing or parking, two a.m. to six a.m.
   (a)   No person shall, between the hours of two a.m. and six a.m. of any
day, unless authorized by a hardship permit issued pursuant to Section
10.44.021 or a construction or maintenance permit issued pursuant to Section
10.40.045, park upon streets or alleys located within a residential zone or
public facility zone any of the following vehicles:
   (1)   Oversized vehicles;
   (2)   Trailers;
   (3)   Camper shells;
   (4)   Tow trucks as defined by California Vehicle Code Section 615;
   (5)   Special construction equipment as defined by California Vehicle Code
Section 565.
   (b)   Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, no signs or markings
are necessary to give effect to the restrictions and prohibitions contained in
this section.
(Ord. 4558 § 5 (part), 1999)
10.44.021   Hardship permit.
   Persons who have obtained hardship permits pursuant to this section shall be
exempt from the provisions of Section
10.44.020 during the duration of said permit.
   (a)   Eligibility. Any resident of the city of Palo Alto may be eligible for
a one-time nonrenewable hardship permit for an oversized vehicle if such
resident can show a "hardship." For the purposes of this section "hardship"
means that the applicant has no legal offstreet parking space adequate to
accommodate the vehicle for which the permit is sought at the street address
specified in the permit application.
   (b)   Classes and Duration of Permits. There shall be two classes of
permits: (i) resident permit; and (ii) guest permits. Any resident of Palo Alto
may obtain a resident permit for a specified vehicle upon establishing actual
residence at an address within the city. The maximum duration of this permit
shall be thirty days but shall not exceed the actual duration of the hardship.
Any resident of Palo Alto may obtain a guest permit for a specified vehicle
registered to a non-resident guest of the applicant. The duration of guest
permits shall not exceed fourteen days and shall not be renewable within thirty
days following expiration.
   (c)   Fees. The fees for hardship permits shall be set forth in the
municipal fee schedule. No hardship permit shall be issued until said fee has
been paid to the supervisor of revenue collections.
   (d)   Procedures and Regulations. Applications for hardship permits shall be
submitted to the supervisor of revenue collections. The supervisor of revenue
collections may issue a hardship permit if it is determined that the
application of Section
10.44.020 will create a hardship on the applicant or his guest. The supervisor
of revenue collections may establish additional procedures and regulations for
the implementation of this section which are consistent with this section and
with Section
10.44.020 of this code.
(Ord. 4558 § 5 (part), 1999)
10.44.030   Parking prohibited on grade.
   No person shall park or leave standing any vehicle unattended on a highway
when upon any grade exceeding three percent within any business or residential
district without blocking the wheels of said vehicle by turning them against
the curb or by other means.
(Ord. 4558 § 5 (part), 1999)
10.44.040   Parking space markings.
   (a)   The city manager is authorized to install and maintain parking space
markings to indicate parking spaces where authorized parking is permitted.
   (b)   When such parking space markings are placed in a street, alley, or
public parking facility, subject to other and more restrictive limitations, no
vehicle shall be stopped, left standing or parked other than within a single
space unless the size or shape of such vehicle makes compliance impossible.
   (c)   No vehicle over six feet wide or fifteen feet long (including loads or
accessories) shall park or stand in a parking space marked as a small car or
compact car space.
(Ord. 4558 § 5 (part), 1999)
10.44.050   Temporary parking and street sweeping restrictions.
   (a)   Whenever the chief of police, director of public works, or director of
utilities determines that traffic congestion or conflict is likely to result
from construction or maintenance work, the holding of public or private
assemblages, gatherings or functions or for the movement of equipment,
articles, or structures of unusual size interfering with normal flow of
traffic, those officials shall have power and authority to restrict the
operation, parking or standing of vehicles at the particular streets, alleys,
or public parking facilities (and for the duration) determined to be necessary
or desirable to avoid such traffic congestion or conflict. No person shall
operate, park, or leave standing any vehicle in violation of such restrictions
where temporary signs, devices or barricades are erected or posted indicating
that the operation, parking or standing of vehicles is restricted.
   (b)   Whenever the director of public works determines that parking or
standing of vehicles on any city street, alley, or public parking facility
should be prohibited or restricted for the purpose of street sweeping, no
vehicle shall be parked or allowed to stand on any portion of the street,
alley, or public parking facility in violation of signs posted therefor, and
removal of vehicles parked in violation of such signs is authorized.
   (c)   When signs, devices or barricades authorized by the provisions of this
section are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall operate, park or
stand any vehicle contrary to the directions and provisions of such signs.
Whenever signs are erected or placed at least 24 hours in advance of the
prohibition against parking or standing and those signs warn that removal is
authorized for violation of the prohibition, the chief of police is authorized
to remove vehicles parking or standing in violation of the prohibition.
Whenever a vehicle is removed pursuant to this section and is stored as
permitted by the California Vehicle Code, the chief of police shall comply with
the requirements of Section 22852 of the California Vehicle Code relating to
post-storage notice and hearing for registered owners and legal owners of
record.
(Ord. 4558 § 5 (part), 1999)
10.44.060   Parking vehicles held for commercial sale or repair.
   It is unlawful for any person who deals in or whose business involves the
sale, trade, shipment or other disposition, repossession or repair of new or
used vehicles to park or leave standing on one or more streets, alleys, or
public parking facilities any vehicle held for sale, trade, repossession,
repair, shipment or other disposition for more than two hours in the aggregate
during any one day. If two or more such vehicles are in the possession or
custody of such person, the two-hour aggregate period shall commence when the
first vehicle is left standing upon any street, alley or public parking
facility and shall include and apply to all other such vehicles, whether parked
at the same time or at a later time, or at the same or different location on
any city street, alley or public parking facility.
(Ord. 4558 § 5 (part), 1999)
10.44.070   Parking on city property.
   (a)   Whenever the city manager determines that the orderly, efficient
conduct of the city's business requires that parking or standing of vehicles on
city property owned or controlled by the city other than city streets or alleys
should be prohibited, limited or restricted, the city manager shall have the
power and authority to order signs to be erected or posted or curb markings to
be placed indicating that the parking of vehicles is thus prohibited, limited
or restricted.
   (b)   When signs or curb markings authorized by the provisions of this
section are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall park or stand any
vehicle contrary to the directions or provisions of such signs or curb
markings.
(Ord. 4558 § 5 (part), 1999)
10.44.080   Vehicles not to obstruct streets, alleys, or public parking
facilities.
   No person shall operate or stand or park any vehicle on any street, alley,
or any public parking facility owned or controlled by the city in such a manner
as to obstruct the free use of such street, alley, or any public parking
facility.
(Ord. 4558 § 5 (part), 1999)
10.44.090   Requiring ignitions locked and keys removed from motor vehicles.
   No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle, except a commercial motor
vehicle, shall allow it to stand unattended on any highway, public street, or
any other public place, or on a parking facility open to the public use,
without first stopping the engine, locking the ignition and removing the
ignition key from the vehicle. The registered owner of a vehicle found in
violation of this section shall be held prima facie responsible for any such
vehicle. Violation of this section shall not mitigate the offense of theft of
such motor vehicle.
(Ord. 4558 § 5 (part), 1999)
Chapter 10.45
VALET PARKING
Sections:
   
10.45.010   Valet parking defined.
   
10.45.020   Valet parking permit required.
   
10.45.030   Permit application.
   
10.45.040   Application fee.
   
10.45.050   Approval of permit - Findings.
   
10.45.060   Liability insurance - Indemnity.
   
10.45.070   Permit provisions and restrictions.
   
10.45.080   General provisions for permittees.
   
10.45.090   Suspension and revocation of permits.
   
10.45.100   Violations.
   
10.45.110   Citation and removal of unauthorized vehicles.
10.45.010   Valet parking defined.
   "Valet parking" means providing the service of parking vehicles for persons
attending any business, activity, or event where that service uses any city
street or alley or city parking facility.
(Ord. 4603 § 2 (part), 1999)
10.45.020   Valet parking permit required.
   (a)   No person (including any natural person, partnership, firm,
association or corporation) shall engage in, conduct, or carry on the activity
of valet parking without having obtained a valet parking permit. A valet
parking permit shall be required for providing the service of parking vehicles
for persons attending any business, activity, or event (whether located within
or without the city) if that service uses any city street or alley or city
parking facility as the location for either (i) transferring operation of the
vehicle from its driver to the provider of the valet parking service, (ii)
parking the vehicle, or (iii) transferring the vehicle to or from the parking
location. For purposes of this chapter, a city street is considered to be used
for valet parking if any portion of the traffic lanes, curbside parking, or
driveways within a city sidewalk is the location where the vehicle is parked or
where operation of the vehicle is transferred from its driver to the valet
parking service provider.
   (b)   The city manager or designee of the city manager may grant a revocable
permit for valet parking upon written application therefor, and upon certain
findings, as set forth in Section
10.45.050.
(Ord. 4603 § 2 (part), 1999)
10.45.030   Permit application.
   (a)   Application for a valet parking permit shall be made by an authorized
representative of the valet parking service for which the application is made.
   (b)   Application shall be made on a form or forms supplied by the city and
shall, at a minimum, include:
   (1)   The name and location of the business, activity or event proposed to
be served, along with a statement signed by an authorized representative for
that business, activity or event confirming that there is a need for the
proposed parking service and consenting to the service. A separate application
shall be made for each location where the valet parking service provider will
provide valet parking services to a business, activity or event.
   (2)   Information as to the amount of seating or other measure of the
capacity of the business, activity or event to be served.
   (3)   The duration of operation, the hours of operation and the number of
employees of the applicant who will be assigned to provide the parking services
for which the application is being sought.
   (4)   The name, location and telephone number where an authorized
representative of the applicant will be available at all times during the hours
of proposed operation under the permit.
   (5)   The location or locations where vehicles are proposed to be parked or
stored during parking operations, and the number of parking spaces in each
location that the applicant has the right to use for parking or storing
vehicles.
   (6)   The location of any proposed signs and any proposed attendant stands,
and the routes proposed to be used between any proposed passenger loading
location and the proposed parking or storage location.
   (7)   A signed statement from the owner or person in control of any parking
facility designated in the application as a location where vehicles are
proposed to be parked or stored, stating the parking facility's availability to
accommodate the vehicles proposed by the applicant to be parked or stored; the
number of spaces in such parking facility; and an estimate of the amount
(percentage) of use of the parking facility with and without the applicant's
proposed use. Where the parking facility is part of a building or premises
devoted to other uses that require off-street parking, the statement shall also
include information as to the number of parking spaces that are required by law
to be provided in the parking facility to serve such other uses.
   (8)   A copy of a written contract or covenant giving the applicant the
right to use each facility for parking or storage proposed by the application,
which contains a provision precluding cancellation of the applicant's right
except by giving at least ten days' prior written notice of such cancellation
to the applicant and the city.
(Ord. 4603 § 2 (part), 1999)
10.45.040   Application fee.
   The application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee, as
set forth in the municipal fee schedule.
(Ord. 4603 § 2 (part), 1999)
10.45.050   Approval of permit - Findings.
   The city manager or designee may approve the issuance of a revocable permit
to an applicant upon the determination that the proposed valet parking service
activity would not unduly restrict the reasonable flow of traffic; would not
unduly restrict public parking activities; would not create a hazard to public
safety; and would not otherwise be detrimental to the public interest. Such
determinations shall include a specific finding that the applicant has
presented satisfactory proof that it has the right to use a sufficient number
of private off-street parking spaces to provide for the reasonably expected
number of vehicles that it will be parking or storing pursuant to the permit.
   For any business or activity which is proposed to provide valet parking
service in excess of one year, the permit shall be operative for one year from
its issuance and shall be renewable annually upon submission of the required
application and fees unless sooner suspended or revoked. For any business,
activity or event which is proposed to provide valet parking service for a
duration less than one year, the permit shall be operative for the duration
provided in the permit unless sooner suspended or revoked and the permit shall
be nonrenewable.
(Ord. 4603 § 2 (part), 1999)
10.45.060   Liability insurance - Indemnity.
   (a)   No valet parking permit shall be issued or remain in effect unless
there is in full force and effect a policy of comprehensive general liability
insurance containing coverage provisions and limits prescribed by the risk
manager, executed by an insurance company approved by the risk manager, whereby
all persons who carry out the activities described in the permit are insured
against claims, loss, or liability for damage to property and for injury to or
death of any person as a result of the permittee's operations in the city of
Palo Alto.
   (b)   Such policy of insurance shall contain an endorsement providing that
the policy will not be canceled until notice in writing has been given to the
city, addressed in care of the city clerk, at least thirty days immediately
prior to the time such cancellation becomes effective.
   (c)   Such policy of insurance shall name the city, its officers, agents and
employees as additional insureds.
   (d)   The permittee, its officers, agents and employees shall indemnify,
defend and hold harmless the city, its officers, agents and employees from any
loss, liability, claim, injury or damage arising or alleged to arise from the
willful or negligent acts or omissions of the permittee, its officers, agents
or employees in connection with the activities described in the permit.
   (e)   The permittee shall maintain workers' compensation insurance for each
person engaged in the valet parking service to either drive a vehicle of a
customer or handle keys of a vehicle of a customer.
(Ord. 4603 § 2 (part), 1999)
10.45.070   Permit provisions and restrictions.
   (a)   Any permit issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked at any time
with or without cause, by giving the permittee ten days' prior written notice.
   (b)   The permit shall require that the permittee use a specified route of
travel between the vehicle drop-off and pick-up area and the parking location.
The permit shall also require that patron's vehicles are not left parked or
standing in loading/unloading zones more than the minimal time necessary to
accomplish passenger loading/unloading. The permit shall prohibit the parking
of patron's vehicles in public on-street parking spaces. If the permit allows
overflow valet parking in designated public parking facilities, such overflow
parking shall be permitted only after five p.m. on normal business workdays
(Monday through Friday, excepting holidays), but such overflow parking shall be
permitted on weekends (Saturday/Sunday) and holidays without restriction as to
time of day. Overflow parking shall not be permitted in public parking
facilities on any occasion when the private parking spaces required by permit
are not fully utilized. Overflow parking shall be authorized only for
designated public parking facilities which are underutilized by the general
public.
   (c)   The permit may allow the permittee to use a specified number of on-
street parking spaces for pick-up and drop-off of vehicles. The permittee shall
be required to pay to the city a fee as set forth in the municipal fee schedule
for the use of such parking spaces.
   (d)   The permit shall specify the location, size and content of any signage
or attendant stands permitted at the vehicle pick-up and drop-off location.
   (e)   The permit shall specify the days of the week and hours of the day
when the parking services are permitted. The permit shall provide for temporary
suspension of the right to conduct valet parking activities using any street or
alley or city parking facility which is temporarily closed or restricted for
vehicular traffic because of construction or because of special events.
   (f)   The permit may permit the use of designated public parking facilities
for overflow valet parking when private parking facility spaces are fully
utilized and certain public parking facilities are underutilized, and no fee
shall be charged for the use of those public parking facilities.
   (g)   Any permit issued pursuant to this section may be subject to such
additional terms and conditions as the city manager or designee considers
reasonably necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
(Ord. 4603 § 2 (part), 1999)
10.45.080   General provisions for permittees.
   (a)   The permittee and its employees shall at all times obey all traffic
rules and regulations.
   (b)   The permittee shall provide adequate staffing to avoid the queuing of
cars in travel lanes. No double parking or blockage of travel lanes shall be
allowed.
   (c)   The permittee shall keep a minimum of six feet of sidewalk clearance
at all times, and shall not interfere with pedestrian traffic.
   (d)   The permittee shall maintain the valet parking permit at the site of
its operations, or at such other site as may be specified in the permit, and
shall produce it for inspection by any public officer or member of the public
upon request.
   (e)   The permittee shall not park any patron's vehicle in public on-street
parking spaces. The permittee shall not park any patron's vehicle in public
parking facilities unless all private parking spaces required to be utilized by
its permit are fully utilized. The permittee shall not park any patron's
vehicle in public parking facilities other than those designated for overflow
parking in its permit or at times other than those in which overflow parking is
authorized by the permit.
   (f)   The permittee shall not allow any person engaged in the valet parking
service to either drive a vehicle of a customer or handle keys of a vehicle of
a customer unless the permittee has certified that the person has a valid
California driver's license and has not been convicted of reckless driving or
driving while under the influence of alcohol or narcotics within seven years
preceding that date of certification. The permittee shall submit to the city a
monthly list of such employees, certifying by name of employee and dates of
employment that these conditions have been met. Each employee while engaged in
the valet parking service to either drive a vehicle of a customer or handle
keys of a vehicle of a customer shall display on that employee's person plainly
visible identification provided by the valet parking service permittee.
(Ord. 4603 § 2 (part), 1999)
10.45.090   Suspension and revocation of permits.
   The city manager or designee may suspend for a period of up to one year, or
may revoke, a valet parking permit if there is reasonable cause to believe
that:
   (a)   The permittee has operated or managed the valet parking service in a
manner which violates any provision of this chapter or any restriction or
prohibition imposed in the permit;
   (b)   Any employees of the permittee engaged in providing valet parking
services under the permit have violated any provision of this chapter or any
restriction or prohibition imposed in the permit and the permittee has
permitted them to do so, or failed to prevent them from doing so. The employer
shall be responsible for those acts of its employees which are done in the
course and scope of their employment;
   (c)   The permittee willfully made a materially false or misleading
statement, or omission of fact on any application, or in any supplementary
materials submitted or in any interview conducted in the processing of the
application for the permit;
   (d)   The permittee is operating or managing the valet parking service in a
manner which poses a danger to the health and safety of employees, customers,
and/or the public.
   Whenever the city manager has reasonable cause to believe that grounds for
the suspension or revocation of a permit exists, the city manager or designee
shall give the permittee written notice stating the alleged grounds for the
suspension or revocation and the effective date of the suspension or
revocation. This notice will be by certified mail or personal delivery to the
permittee, and shall provide the permittee with information on the appeal
process.
   Upon receipt of a request for an appeal hearing, the city manager or
designee shall notify the permit holder in writing by personal delivery or
certified mail of the date, time, and place of the hearing, which shall not be
less than ten business days after the service of the notice. At the hearing,
the permittee shall have the right to appear and be represented by counsel and
to present evidence and arguments which are relevant to the grounds for the
appeal, as stated in the written request for an appeal hearing. If the
permittee requires the services of an interpreter for the hearing, the
applicant shall arrange for the services of a court-certified interpreter at
the permittee's expense. Within ten business days after the hearing, the city
manager or designee shall issue a written decision which states whether the
permit shall be suspended or revoked, the length of any suspension and the
effective date of the suspension or revocation. The decision of the city
manager or designee shall be served on the permittee by personal service or by
certified mail. The decision of the city manager or designee shall be final and
not subject to appeal.
   Upon a written decision of the city manager or designee which suspends or
revokes a permit, the permittee shall surrender the permit to the city manager
immediately after service of the notice of the written decision.
   No application for any valet parking permit issued under this chapter shall
be accepted by the city manager from the same applicant within one year
following revocation of a permit issued under this chapter or while the
applicant has a suspended permit.
(Ord. 4603 § 2 (part), 1999)
10.45.100   Violations.
   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or of any permit
restriction issued pursuant to this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1.08 of this code. The permittee(s) named in any permit issued pursuant
to this chapter shall be also be punishable as a misdemeanant for the conduct
of any person employed in the provision of the valet parking service which
violates any restriction of the permit if the permittee(s) aid or abet or
conspire for the commission of those permit violations.
(Ord. 4603 § 2 (part), 1999)
10.45.110   Citation and removal of unauthorized vehicles.
   When signs are posted restricting the parking or standing of vehicles in
designated on-street parking spaces for valet parking only during designated
time periods, no person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle in violation of
those restrictions except for the purposes of immediate loading or unloading of
passengers either for valet parking or for patronizing the business, activity
or event for which valet parking is provided. Violation of this section shall
be citable as a parking violation punishable by a parking penalty as provided
in
Chapter 10.60. Any vehicle stopped, standing, or parked in violation of this
section shall be subject to removal under the authority of California Vehicle
Code Section 22651 subdivision (m).
(Ord. 4603 § 2 (part), 1999)
Chapter 10.46
COLLEGE TERRACE RESIDENTIAL PARKINGPERMIT PROGRAM (RPPP)
Sections:
   
10.46.010   Definitions.
   
10.46.020   Permit parking exemption.
   
10.46.030   Designation of initial residential permit parking area.
   
10.46.040   Designation of additional residential permit parking area.
   
10.46.050   Withdrawal as a residential permit parking area.
   
10.46.060   Issuance of residential parking permits.
   
10.46.070   Guest permits.
   
10.46.080   Parking permit fees.
   
10.46.090   Time limitations.
   
10.46.100   Revocation of permit.
   
10.46.110   Violation– Penalty.
   
10.46.120   Chapter interpretation.
10.46.010   Definitions.
   As used in this chapter:
   (a)   “Address” means and includes any residential address. Each dwelling
unit within an apartment building that is distinguished by an apartment number
shall be considered an address.
   (b)   “Block” means any street segment intersected by two other streets.
Blocks include the following:
North-South Blocks
      1)   Yale Street from Stanford Avenue to OxfordAvenue
      2)   Yale Street from Oxford Avenue to CollegeAvenue
      3)   Yale Street from College Avenue to Cambridge Avenue
      4)   Yale Street from Cambridge Avenue to California Avenue
      5)   Williams Street from Stanford Avenue to College Avenue
      6)   Williams Street from College Avenue to California Avenue
      7)   Wellesley Street from Stanford Avenue to Oxford Avenue
      8)   Wellesley Street from Oxford Avenue to College Avenue
      9)   Wellesley Street from College Avenue to Library
      10)   Wellesley Street from Library to CaliforniaAvenue
      11)   Cornell Street from Stanford Avenue to College Avenue
      12)   Cornell Street from College Avenue to California Avenue
      13)   Princeton Street from Stanford Avenue to College Avenue
      14)   Princeton Street from College Avenue to California Avenue
      15)   Oberlin Street from Stanford Avenue to College Avenue
      16)   Oberlin Street from College Avenue to California Avenue
      17)   Harvard Street from Stanford Avenue to College Avenue
      18)   Harvard Street from College Avenue to California Avenue
      19)   Hanover Street from Stanford Avenue to College Avenue
      20)   Hanover Street from College Avenue to California Avenue
      21)   Dartmouth Street from Stanford Avenue to Werry Park
      22)   Dartmouth Street from Werry Park to College Avenue
      23)   Dartmouth Street from College Avenue to Weisshaar Park
      24)   Dartmouth Street from Weisshaar Park to California Avenue
      25)   Columbia Street from Stanford Avenue to College Avenue
      26)   Columbia Street from College Avenue to California Avenue
      27)   Bowdoin Street from Stanford Avenue to College Avenue
      28)   Bowdoin Street from College Avenue to California Avenue
      29)   Amherst Street from Stanford Avenue to College Avenue
      30)   Amherst Street from College Avenue to California Avenue
      31)   Staunton Court from Oxford Avenue to College Avenue
East-West Blocks
      1)    Stanford Avenue from El Camino Real to Yale Street
      2)    Stanford Avenue from Yale Street to Williams Street
      3)   Stanford Avenue from Williams Street to Wellesley Street
      4)   Stanford Avenue from Wellesley Street to Cornell Street
      5)   Stanford Avenue from Cornell Street to Princeton Street
      6)   Stanford Avenue from Princeton Street to Oberlin Street
      7)   Stanford Avenue from Oberlin Street to Harvard Street
      8)   Stanford Avenue from Harvard Street to Escondido Street
      9)   Stanford Avenue from Escondido Street to Hanover Street
      10)   Stanford Avenue from Hanover Street to Dartmouth Street
      11)   Stanford Avenue from Dartmouth Street to Columbia Street
      12)   Stanford Avenue from Columbia Street to Bowdoin Street
      13)   Stanford Avenue from Bowdoin Street to Amherst Street
      14)   College Avenue from Yale Street to WilliamsStreet
      15)   College Avenue from Williams Street to Wellesley Street
      16)   College Avenue from Wellesley Street to Cornell Street
      17)   College Avenue from Cornell Street to Princeton Street
      18)   College Avenue from Princeton Street to Oberlin Street
      19)   College Avenue from Oberlin Street to Harvard Street
      20)   College Avenue from Harvard Street to Hanover Street
      21)   College Avenue from Hanover Street to Dartmouth Street
      22)   College Avenue from Dartmouth Street to Columbia Street
      23)   College Avenue from Columbia Street to Bowdoin Street
      24)   College Avenue from Bowdoin Street to Amherst Street
      25)   California Avenue from Yale Street to Williams Street
      26)   California Avenue from Williams Street to Wellesley Street
      27)   California Avenue from Wellesley Street to Cornell Street
      28)   California Avenue from Cornell Street to Princeton Street
      29)   California Avenue from Princeton Street to Oberlin Street
      30)   California Avenue from Oberlin Street to Harvard Street
      31)   California Avenue from Harvard Street to Hanover Street
      32)   California Avenue from Hanover Street to Dartmouth Street
      33)   California Avenue from Dartmouth Street toColumbia Street
      34)   California Avenue from Columbia Street toBowdoin Street
      35)   California Avenue from Bowdoin Street toAmherst Street
      36)   Oxford Avenue from Stanton Court to YaleStreet
      37)   Cambridge Avenue from El Camino Real toYale Street
   (c)   “College Terrace” means the area bounded by El Camino Real on the
east, Amherst Street on the west, California Avenue on the south, and Stanford
Avenue on the north. The residential portion of the CN zone on the east side of
Yale Street, the north side of Cambridge Avenue, the west side of Stanton Court
and Oxford Avenue from Staunton Court to Yale, is also included in the boundary
of College Terrace. Areas, including block faces on the north side of Stanford
Avenue and on the south side of California Avenue are excluded.
   (d)   “Day care center” means and includes any state-licensed day care
center with five or more employees.
   (e)   “Designated residential parking area,” sometimes referred to as
“residential permit parking area,” means any block upon which the Council
imposes parking limitations pursuant to the authority granted by this chapter.
   (f)   “Guest parking permit” means a parking permit issued pursuant to this
chapter or an ordinance or resolution enacted pursuant to authority granted
herein, which when displayed as directed by the city shall exempt the motor
vehicle from parking time restrictions established pursuant to this chapter.
   (g)   “Guest” means an individual who calls upon a resident in the
designated residential permit parking area with specific intent to spend time
in or about that resident’s residence for the purpose of social intercourse or
to provide a service.
   (h)   “Motor vehicle” means and includes automobile, truck, motorcycle or
other motor driven form of transportation.
   (i)   “Neighborhood-serving establishment” means all libraries, schools, day
care centers, and nonprofit public service organizations.
   (j)   “Nonresident vehicle” means a motor vehicle not eligible to be issued
a residential parking permit, pursuant to the terms and conditions of this
chapter, for the specific area in which it is parked.
   (k)   “One-day guest parking permit” means a parking permit issued pursuant
to this chapter which when displayed as directed by the city, shall exempt the
motor vehicle from parking time restrictions established pursuant to this
chapter or an ordinance or resolution enacted pursuant to authority granted
herein, for the date indicated upon the face of said permit or as authorized by
a virtual permit.
   (l)   “Residential parking permit” means a permit issued under this chapter
which, when displayed as directed by the city, shall exempt said motor vehicle
from parking time restrictions established pursuant to this chapter.
   (m)   “Residence” means a legal residential addressand shall exclude
business addresses.
   (n)   “Resident” means any person sixteen (16) years of age or older whose
legal residential address isin the designated residential permit parking area.
   (o)   “RPPP” means residential parking permit program.
   (p)   “RPPP year” means and includes the daysbetween September 1 and August
31 of the following year.
   (q)   “School” means and includes any state-licensed preschool, elementary,
middle, junior high, orhigh school with five or more employees.
   (r)   "Virtual permit" allows the holder to park according to the type of
permit purchased without displaying a physical permit affixed to or displayed
in a vehicle. A virtual permit relies on cross-referencing a vehicle's license
plate or other vehicle-specific identifier with the city's parking permit
database to identify any valid parking permits for that vehicle.
(Ord. 5531 § 7 (part), 2021: Ord. 5060 § 3, 2009)
10.46.020   Permit parking exemption.
   (a)   A motor vehicle displaying a valid residential parking permit issued
pursuant to the terms of this Chapter shall be permitted to stand or be parked
in the residential permit parking area for which the permit has been issued
without being limited by time restrictions established pursuant to this
chapter. Any motor vehicle that does not display a valid residential parking
permit shall be subject to the time restrictions and consequent penalties in
effect for the residential permit parking area.
   (b)   A residential parking permit shall not guarantee or reserve to the
holder thereof an on-street parking space within the designated residential
permit parking area.
   (c)   This chapter shall not exempt the permit parking holder from other
traffic controls and regulations existing in the designated residential
permitparking area.
   (d)   This chapter shall not permit the permit parking holder to leave
standing his or her vehicle formore than seventy-two hours.
(Ord. 5060 § 3, 2009)
10.46.030   Designation of initial residential permit parking area.
   The initial residential permit parking area is identified in the Updated
College Terrace Residential Parking Permit Program map, attached hereto as
Exhibit A and incorporated by this reference.
(Ord. 5060 § 3, 2009)
10.46.040   Designation of additional residential permit parking area.
   (a)   City staff shall consider for designation anyproposed block in College
Terrace for which a petition has been submitted which meets and satisfiesthe
following requirements:
   (1)   The petition shall contain a description or a map showing the proposed
residential permit parkingarea.
   (2)   Said description or map shall be followedin the petition by the
following statement:
“We, the undersigned, are residents in the proposed residential permit parking
area described in this petition. We understand that, if this area is designated
as a residentialpermit parking area, certain restrictions will be placed upon
on-street parking within the designated area; that subject to the regulations
and restrictions established by the City Council, guests to residences will be
eligible to use permits exempting them from such parking restrictions; that the
annual fee for a residential parking permit will be as set forthin the City of
Palo Alto Municipal FeeSchedule; that a residential parking permit may be
issued to a resident of a residential address and/or to each additional
resident of the same address; that no more than one residential parking permit
shall be issued to each motor vehicle owned or leased for which application is
made; that fees for guest parking permits (either one-day or annual guest
parking permits) are as set forthin the City Municipal Fee Schedule. Wethe
undersigned hereby request that the Council of the City of Palo Alto consider
thispetition for establishment of the above described areas as a residential
permit parking area.”
   (3)   The aforementioned statement shall be followed by a signature, printed
name, address, and date of signing of the petition by residents representing at
least fifty-one percent of the addresses within each proposed block. In
addition, the petition sponsor must certify that a reasonable means of inquiry
was undertaken to assure the validity of petition signatures. Receipt of a
petition representing at least fifty-one percent of the addresses within a
proposed area will initiate the residential permit parking review process.
Subsequent counter petitions received from residents within a proposed block
will be reviewed, but they willin no way invalidate the initial petition
requestingestablishment of residential permit parkingor terminate the review
process.
   (4)   Both sides of a street must be included in each block area unless
determined by the City Manager or his or her designee to be impractical or
undesirable.
   (b)   Upon receipt by City staff of a petition as described in subsection
(a) of this section, City staff shall:
   (1)   Undertake or cause to be undertaken such surveys or studies deemed
necessary;
   (2)   Conduct an official voting ballot of the blocks requesting
participation in the RPPP. The ballot shall allow each residence to vote in
favor oragainst the RPPP and their block to be included inthe program. All
blocks with at least fifty-one (51)percent of the addresses supporting the RPPP
willbe considered for inclusion in the program.
   (3)   Cause to be drafted a resolution which would establish a residential
permit parking area based upon the aforementioned petition, survey, studies and
vote, including any regulations and time restrictions as established in this
chapter.
   (c)   The City Council may approve, reject, or modify the resolution
establishing a residential permitparking area. The City Council must approvethe
resolution in order to establish a residential permit parking area.
   (d)   Blocks determined to meet the established requirements set forth
herein will be included in the current RPPP year and terminating no less than
one year following.
(Ord. 5060 § 3, 2009)
10.46.050   Withdrawal as a residential permit parking area.
   (a)   Once a block is enrolled, there is a one year waiting period before it
may withdraw from the RPPP program. A block may withdraw from the program
following submission of a petition by the following statement:
   “(1)   We, the undersigned, are residents in the College Terrace residential
permit parking area described in this petition. We request that the block
described in this petition beremoved from the College Terrace residential
parking permit program. We understand that, if this area is removed as a
residential permit parking area that nonresidents may park along the block
without time restrictions of the RPPP but it does not exempt vehicles from
other traffic controls and regulations existing in the College Terrace
neighborhood.
   (2)   The aforementioned statement shall be followed by a signature, printed
name, address, and date of signing of the petition byresidents representing at
least fifty-one percent of the addresses within each proposed block requesting
removal from theprogram. In addition, the petition sponsor must certify that a
reasonable means of inquiry was undertaken to assure the validity of petition
signatures. Receipt of a petition representing at least fifty-one percent of
the addresses within a proposed area will initiate the residential permit
parking withdrawal process. The city shall conduct an official vote of the
blocks requesting withdrawal in the RPPP. Results of the petition and vote will
be used in determining whether the block may be removed from the program.
Removal from the RPPP shall be administered by the City Manager or his or her
designee.”
(Ord. 5060 § 3, 2009)
10.46.060   Issuance of residential parking permits.
   (a)   Residential parking permits shall be issued by the city in accordance
with requirements set forth in this chapter. Each such permit shall be designed
to state or reflect thereon the identification of the particular residential
permit parking area (i.e., College Terrace) as well as the license number of
the motor vehicle for which it is issued. The city may also issue virtual
permits in combination with or instead of physical permits. No more than one
residential parking permit shall be issued to each motor vehicle owned or
leased for which application is made.
   (b)   The city shall issue residential parking permits with a term of one
year from September 1 to August 31 regardless of when during the year a
resident purchases the parking permit, to motor vehicles which comply with the
requirements setforth in this chapter. Purchase of permits will be available
starting thirty days prior to the beginning of thenext RPPP year. A grace
period will be recognized from September 1 to September 30 for residents with a
permit from the previous year. Vehicles displaying a permit from the previous
year will not be cited during the grace period.
   (c)   Residents applying for a permit will be required to provide proof of
vehicle ownership and residency. A vehicle registration form as well as one of
the following shall be required at the time of registration showing College
Terrace residency:
   •   Driver’s license – indicating College TerraceAddress
   •   Rental agreement – with name of resident
   •   Current (i.e., not more than sixty days old) utility bill with street
address noted
   (d)   One residential parking permit may be issued for each vehicle owned,
leased or any person who can demonstrate that they are currently a resident of
the area for which the permit is to be issued.
   (e)   A residential parking permit may be issued for any vehicle owned,
leased or any person who is employed by or a representative of a neighborhood-
serving establishment located within the particular residential permit parking
area. Each employee or representative of a neighborhood-serving establishment
will be allowed to obtain one permit for each vehicle they own or lease subject
to the following criteria which shall be used to establish the eligibility of a
neighborhood-serving establishment and the maximum number of permits to be
issued:
   (1)   An establishment for which there is no off-street parking and no
financially feasible way of creating adequate off-street parking on the site of
the establishment;
   (2)   In areas where it appears that the number of permits sold per block
would exceed the number of legal on-street parking spaces per block the initial
sale would be limited to two or possibly one permit per neighborhood-serving
establishment;
   (3)   Distribution of permits shall be through a designated representative
of the establishment who will be responsible for allocation of the permits to
employees.
   (f)   Renewal of residential parking permits shall be subject to the same
conditions imposed on new permits.
   (g)   The residential parking permit shall be displayed as directed by the
city. The city may issue a residential parking permit in any form, including as
a virtual permit.
   (h)   The Director of the Office of Transportation is authorized to issue
such rules and regulations, not inconsistent with this chapter, governing the
issuance and display of residential parking permits.
   (i)   Any person to whom a residential parking permit has been issued
pursuant to this section shall be deemed a parking permit holder.
(Ord. 5531 § 7 (part), 2021: Ord. 5060 § 3, 2009)
10.46.070   Guest permits.
   (a)   The city shall issue guest parking permits in accordance with this
section. A guest parking permit shall be of limited duration, but shall
otherwise grant to the holder thereof all the rights and privileges of a
regular residential parking permit. Guest parking permit shall be of two types:
   (1)   One-day guest parking permits; and
   (2)   Annual guest parking permits.
   (b)   A one-day guest parking permit shall clearly display the date upon
which it becomes effective, and shall designate the particular residential
permit parking area for which it applies (i.e., College Terrace). A one- day
guest parking permit shall, during the date indicated upon the face of said
permit, exempt the applicable vehicle from parking time restrictions
established pursuant to this chapter. The city may also issue virtual permits
in combination with or instead of physical permits.
   (c)   An annual guest parking permit shall, for the period between September
1 and August 31 of the following year exempt the applicable vehicle from
parking time restrictions established pursuant to this chapter.
   (d)   Guest parking permits shall be displayed as directed by the city. The
city may issue guest parking permits in any form, including as a virtual
permit.
   (e)   The Director of the Office of Transportation is authorized to
establish rules and regulations, not inconsistent with this chapter, concerning
the issuance and display of guest parking permits to permit holders.
   (f)   An eligible applicant for a guest parking permit shall be any person
having obtained a residential parking permit pursuant to criteria set forth in
this chapter, but no more than two annual guest parking permits per address
shall be issued during a single RPPP year.
   (g)   The total number of one-day guest permits issued will be limited to
twenty permits in a three-month calendar quarter.
   (h)   The use of guest permits is restricted to visitors to the permit
parking area. Holders of residential parking permits are prohibited from
displaying guest permits in the permit parking area.
(Ord. 5531 § 7 (part), 2021: Ord. 5060 § 3, 2009)
10.46.080   Parking permit fees.
   (a)   The initial purchase of a residential parking permit for a vehicle
owned or leased of a resident and registered at a qualifying residence in
addition to vehicles owned, leased of an owner or employee of a qualifying
neighborhood serving center shall be assessed the corresponding fees set forth
in the city Municipal Fee Schedule.
   (b)   Renewal of residential parking permits shall be subject to the fees
set forth in the city Municipal Fee Schedule.
   (c)   Replacement of stolen, lost, or damaged residential parking permits
shall be subject to the feesset forth in the city Municipal Fee Schedule.
   (d)    Lost or stolen guest permits will be subjected to a higher
replacement fee as set forth in the City Municipal Fee Schedule.
   (e)   The fee for each guest parking permit (one-day and annual) will be as
set forth in the city Municipal Fee Schedule.
   (f)   Residential parking permit fees will be pro-rated for half year
increments. Thus permits applied for between September 1 and the last day of
February pay full price. Permits applied for between March 1 and August 31 pay
half price.
   (g)   One-day guest permits pay full price.
   (h)   No partial or full refund will be administered for any resident or
guest permit.
(Ord. 5531 § 7 (part), 2021: Ord. 5060 § 3, 2009)
10.46.090   Time limitations.
   (a)   Upon the adoption by the City Council of theresolution designating a
residential permit parking area, City staff shall cause appropriate signs to be
erected in the area, indicating prominently thereon the time limitation, period
of the day for its application, and conditions under which permit parking shall
be exempt therefrom.
   (b)   Vehicles not displaying a valid residential parking permit may park up
to two hours. After the two hour period, vehicles will be prohibited from re-
parking within the same block. These limits will be enforced every Monday,
Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, and Friday between eight a.m. and five p.m.,
except holidays. Vehicles not displaying a valid permit during these periods
and exceeding the two hour maximum parking allowance may be cited pursuant to
section
10.44.010(c) of this Code. All vehicles may utilize on-street parking in
College Terrace outside of this specified enforcement period.
   (c)   For the first ninety days following the effective date of this
ordinance, the Director of Planning and Development Services shall provide
monthly updates to the neighborhood and residents of the permit parking area,
outlining the parking conditions in the neighborhood as compared to parking
conditions prior to implementation. The Director shall also, not later than
three months after implementation of the program, provide an informational
report to the City Council summarizing such information and, if deemed
necessary, outlining changes to the residential permit parking regulations. If
the Director determines that parking problems are not substantially addressed
by the program, the Director may, after consultation and input from the
neighborhood, implement such changes to the time limitations described in
subsection (b). These may include, but are not limited to:
   (1)   No re-parking after two hours anywhere within the neighborhood area;
   (2)   No re-parking after two hours within a specific subarea of the
neighborhood.
If recommended by the Director, the revisions to theRPPP shall be installed not
later than thirty days afterpresentation and notice to the neighborhood. If,
during the thirty day period, a minimum of twenty-five percent of the program
participants provide written requests for Council review of the changes,
implementation shall be delayed until the Council reviews the changes at
thesoonest available date.
   (c)   Ambulances, fire department vehicles, police vehicles or public
utilities vehicles which have an official seal or logo identifying them as such
shall be exempt from the time restrictions established in this subsection.
   (d)   Motor vehicles identified as used by disabled persons meeting the
requirements of Section 22511.5 of the California Vehicle Code shall be exempt
from time posted time limitations.
(Ord. 5494 § 3, 2020: Ord. 5060 § 3, 2009)
10.46.100   Revocation of permit.
   In addition to all other remedies, the City may temporarily revoke (for a
period of time not to exceed ten working days) the residential parking permit
of any person found to be in violation of this chapter by providing written
notice of the temporary revocation to the permittee. Such written notice shall
include a statement outlining the grounds for revoking the permit as well as
the date, time, and place set for a hearing before the Hearing Officer or his
or her representative to determine if the revocation shall be in effect until
the expiration of the permit. Written notice of the date, time and place of
such hearing shall be served upon the permittee five days prior to the date set
for such hearing.
   At the hearing before the Hearing Officer or his orher representative, the
permittee shall have the rightto be represented by an attorney, and/or to
present evidence and a written or oral argument, or both.
   No decision shall be invalidated because of the admission into the record
and the use of any proof of any fact in dispute of any evidence not admissible
under the common law or statutory rules of evidence.
   Within five working days after close of hearing, the Hearing Officer or his
or her representative shall enter his or her decision based upon the record
presented and notify the permittee in writing of such decision. The decision of
the Hearing Officer shall befinal. Failure, when so requested, to surrender a
residential parking permit so revoked shall constitute a violation of this
chapter. Any such violation is a misdemeanor. There will be no refunds for
revoked permits.
(Ord. 5060 § 3, 2009)
10.46.110   Violation– Penalty.
   (a)   It is unlawful and shall constitute a violation of this chapter for
any person to stand or park a motor vehicle, without a current residential
parking permit properly displayed, at a curb within a residential permit
parking area for a period of time exceeding the time limitation established for
such area.
   (b)   The following shall be unlawful:
   (1)   For any person to falsely represent himself orherself as eligible for
a parking permit or to furnish false information in an application therefore;
   (2)   For any person holding a valid parking permit issued pursuant hereto
to permit use or display of or to use or display such permit on a motor vehicle
other than that for which the permit was issued;
   (3)   For any person to copy, reproduce or otherwise bring into existence a
facsimile or counterfeit parking permit or permits without written
authorization from Revenue Collections;
   (4)   For any person to knowingly use or display a facsimile or counterfeit
parking permit in order to evade time limitations on parking applicable in a
residential parking permit area;
   (5)   For any person holding a valid parking permitissued pursuant hereto to
sell, give or exchangesaid permit to any other person;
   (6)   For any person to knowingly commit any act which is prohibited by the
terms of this chapter or any ordinance enacted by authority granted by this
chapter.
(Ord. 5060 § 3, 2009)
10.46.120   Chapter interpretation.
   Staff has discretion in the implementation, and/or interpretation of this
chapter.
(Ord. 5060 § 3, 2009)
Chapter 10.47
LARGE VEHICLE PARKING
Sections:
   
10.47.010   Definitions.
   
10.47.020   Designation of no large vehicle parking zones.
   
10.47.030   Posting of a no large vehicle parking zone.
   
10.47.040   Large vehicle parking prohibited.
10.47.010   Definitions.
   As used in this chapter, the following words or phrases are defined as
follows:
   (a)   "Large vehicle" means every vehicle which exceeds seven feet in height
or twenty feet in overall length or seven feet in width (including any load or
accessory thereon other than antennas), provided that this definition shall not
apply to vehicles which exceed these dimensions solely because of modifications
required to accommodate a disability and the vehicle is lawfully displaying a
disabled placard or license.
   (b)   "No large vehicle parking zone" is defined as a street, or portion
thereof, where no large vehicles may be parked and which is posted by signs or
other markings which give notice that large vehicle parking is prohibited.
   (c)   "Park" is defined as set forth in Section
10.04.080 of the Palo Alto Municipal Code.
   (d)   "Street" is defined as set forth in Section
1.04.050(a)(8) of the Palo Alto Municipal Code.
   (e)   "Vehicle" is defined as set forth in Section 670 of the California
Vehicle Code, as amended.
(Ord. 4667 § 2 (part), 2000)
10.47.020   Designation of no large vehicle parking zones.
   The city manager may, in the city manager's sole discretion, designate a
street, or portions thereof, as a "no large vehicle parking zone" whenever the
city manager determines that parking of large vehicles upon such street, or
portions thereof, creates either a safety hazard, nuisance, or activities
incompatible with the zoning district. The city manager may consider the
following factors in making the determination:
   1.   Safety hazards, potential nuisance and the compatibility of the zoning
district with activities relating to large vehicle parking.
   2.   Pedestrian and vehicular visibility from intersecting streets or
driveways.
   3.   Width of the street(s) in the affected zone.
   4.   Number of vehicles parked on the street in the affected zone at the
time of the study.
   5.   Other relevant data including, but not limited to, citizen complaints,
volume and speed of traffic, and the size of vehicles parked in the affected
zone.
   Any determination made pursuant to this chapter is a plan or design of, or
improvement to, public property which may be approved by the city manager.
(Ord. 4667 § 2 (part), 2000)
10.47.030   Posting of a no large vehicle parking zone.
   If a zone is designated as a "no large vehicle parking zone," it shall be
posted by signs or other markings which give notice that large vehicle parking
is prohibited.
(Ord. 4667 § 2 (part), 2000)
10.47.040   Large vehicle parking prohibited.
   No person shall park a large vehicle in any zone posted as a "no large
vehicle parking zone." This prohibition shall not apply to any commercial
vehicle parked in a residential district while making pickups or deliveries of
goods, wares, or merchandise from or to any building or structure located on
the restricted street. This prohibition also shall not apply to any commercial
vehicle parked in a residential district for the purpose of delivering
materials to be used in the repair, alteration, remodeling, or reconstruction
of any building or structure for which a building permit has previously been
obtained.
(Ord. 4667 § 2 (part), 2000)
Chapter 10.48
TRUCKS AND TRUCK ROUTES
Sections:
   
10.48.010   Certain vehicles prohibited in business district.
   
10.48.020   Definitions.
   
10.48.030   Trucks prohibited on restricted streets.
   
10.48.040   Through truck routes established.
   
10.48.050   Local truck routes established.
   
10.48.060   Truck traffic originating outside city.
   
10.48.070   Truck traffic originating inside city.
   
10.48.080   Weigh-in.
   
10.48.090   Exceptions.
   
10.48.100   Grading permits.
10.48.010   Certain vehicles prohibited in business district.
   No operator of the following vehicles shall drive the same in any business
district between the hours of seven a.m. and six p.m. on any day except Sunday.
   Any vehicle so loaded that any part of its load extends more than three feet
to the front or more than ten feet to the rear of said vehicle.
(Ord. 2125 (part), 1963: Ord. 1714 (part), 1956: prior code § 19.131)
10.48.020   Definitions.
   (a)   For the purpose of this chapter, unless it is plainly evident from the
context that a different meaning is intended, certain terms used herein are
defined as follows:
   (1)   "Destination" or "destinations" mean either a single delivery or
several deliveries within multiple delivery zones as delineated on the maps
attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter and made a part thereof.*
   * Editor's Note: The maps referred to herein may be found at the end of this
title in a printed edition of this code.
   (2)   "Local truck route" means any street as herein designated upon which
trucks with an origin and/or destination within the city may operate only
between the hours of seven a.m. and seven p.m.
   (3)   "Restricted street" means all streets in the city except through truck
routes and local truck routes as herein established.
   (4)   "Through truck route" means any street as herein designated upon which
the unrestricted use of trucks is permitted.
   (5)   "Truck" means any vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight of seven
tons.
(Ord. 2181 (part), 1963: Ord. 2280 (part), 1966: Ord. 1714 (part), 1956: prior
code § 19.132(a))
10.48.030   Trucks prohibited on restricted streets.
   (a)   All streets or parts of streets in the city of Palo Alto other than
those designated in this section as through or local truck routes are hereby
designated as restricted streets.
   (b)   When appropriate signs are erected, as hereinafter provided, no person
shall operate, drive or cause or permit to be operated or driven, any truck on
any restricted street, except as hereinafter provided.
(Ord. 2181 (part), 1963: Ord. 1714 (part), 1956: prior code § 19.132(b))
10.48.040   Through truck routes established.
   The following named streets are hereby declared to be through truck routes
for the movement of trucks, and the city engineer is hereby authorized and
directed to designate such streets by appropriate signs as "THROUGH TRUCK
ROUTE," which method of designation the city council has determined will best
serve to give notice of this chapter.
Street From To
Street                              From               To
Alma Street                         Palo Alto Avenue   South city limit
Arboretum Road                      Willow Road        Quarry Road
Bayshore Freeway and Frontage Roads North city limit   South city limit
Charleston Road                     Fabian Way         South city limit
El Camino Real                      North city limit   South city limit
Fabian Way                          West Frontage Road Charleston Road
Los Trancos Woods Road              Los Trancos Creek  Los Trancos Creek
Middlefield Road                    San Antonio Avenue South city limit
Page Mill Road                      West city limit    Alma Street
Palo Alto Avenue                    El Camino Real     Alma Street
San Antonio Avenue                  West city limit    East city limit
Willow Road                         West city limit    Arboretum Road
 
(Ord. 2181 (part), 1963: Ord. 1714 (part), 1956: prior code § 19.132(c))
10.48.050   Local truck routes established.
   The following named streets are hereby declared to be local truck routes
upon which trucks with an origin and/or destination within the city may operate
only between the hours of seven a.m. and seven p.m.
 
Street                    From             To
Embarcadero Road          El Camino Real   Alma Street
Embarcadero Road          Bayshore Freeway City refuse disposal area
Hillview Avenue Boulevard Arastradero Road Junipero Serra
Lytton Avenue             Alma Street      Middlefield Road
Middlefield Road          North city limit Lytton Avenue
University Avenue         El Camino Real   Alma Street
   Oregon Avenue from Alma Street to Bayshore Freeway is hereby declared to be
a truck route twenty-four hours a day but only for trucks making pickups or
deliveries from or to the Middlefield Road multiple delivery zone; as to all
other trucks Oregon Avenue from Alma Street to Bayshore Freeway is hereby
declared to be a restricted street twenty-four hours a day.
   (Ord. 2282, 1966: Ord. 2281, 1966: Ord. 2280 (part), 1966: Ord. 2181 (part),
1963: Ord. 1714 (part), 1956: prior code § 19.132(d))
10.48.060   Truck traffic originating outside city.
   (a)   Entering City. No truck shall enter or leave the city except on a
through or local truck route.
   (b)   Outside Destination, Through Traffic. All trucks entering the city for
destinations outside the city shall operate only over a through truck route.
   (c)   Inside Destination. All trucks entering the city for destinations in
the city shall proceed only over a through or local truck route and shall
deviate therefrom only by the shortest and most direct route to the nearest
through or local truck route, except that a truck may go directly to the next
destination by the shortest and most direct route without renaming to the
nearest through or local truck route if it will result in a shorter distance
being traveled on restricted streets.
(Ord. 2181 (part), 1963: Ord. 1714 (part), 1956: prior code § 19.132(e))
10.48.070   Truck traffic originating inside city.
   (a)   Portion of Trip Outside of the City. If any portion of a truck's trip
is outside of the city even though its origin is inside the city it shall be
considered as an outside origin trip upon re-entry into the city and Section
10.48.060 shall apply.
   (b)   Outside Destinations. All trucks, on a trip originating in the city
and traveling in the city for destinations outside the city, shall proceed by
the shortest and most direct route to the nearest through or local truck route.
   (c)   Inside Destinations. All trucks, on a trip originating in the city and
traveling entirely within the city for destinations in the city, shall proceed
by the shortest and most direct route to the nearest through or local truck
route and shall deviate therefrom only by the shortest and most direct route
between each destination and the nearest through or local truck route except
that a truck may go directly to the next destination by the shortest and most
direct route without returning to the nearest through or local truck route if
it will result in a shorter distance being traveled on restricted streets.
(Ord. 2181 (part), 1963: Ord. 1714 (part), 1956: prior code § 19.132(f))
10.48.080   Weigh-in.
   Any police officer shall have the authority to require any person driving or
in control of any commercial vehicle not proceeding over a through truck route
to proceed to any public or private scale available for the purpose of weighing
and determining whether this section has been complied with.
(Ord. 2181 (part), 1963: Ord. 1714 (part), 1956: prior code § 19.132(g))
10.48.090   Exceptions.
   (a)   The provisions of this chapter shall not prohibit the operation of any
truck coming from a through truck route having ingress or egress by direct
route to and from a restricted street when necessary for the purpose of making
pickups or deliveries of goods, wares, and merchandise from or to any building
or structure located on the restricted street or for the purpose of delivering
materials to be used in the actual and bona fide repair, alteration,
remodeling, or construction of any building or structure upon the restricted
street for which a building permit has previously been obtained so long as the
operator of such truck takes a route as prescribed in Sections
10.48.060 and
10.48.070 hereof.
   (b)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
   (1)   Passenger buses under the jurisdiction of the public utilities
commission and school buses;
   (2)   Any vehicle owned or operated by a public utility, or by the city, or
any vehicle used for the removal of refuse under contract with the city;
   (3)   Any vehicle which is authorized by written contract with the city to
use the Palo Alto solid waste disposal site;
   (4)   Any authorized emergency vehicle.
(Ord. 3855 § 1, 1989: Ord. 2661, 1972: Ord. 2181 (part), 1963: Ord. 1714
(part), 1956: prior code § 19.132(h))
10.48.100   Grading permits.
   Truck routes designated in permits issued under the provisions of
Chapter 16.28 of this code shall be in compliance with routes established in
this chapter.
(Ord. 2181 (part), 1963: Ord. 1714 (part), 1956: prior code § 19.132(i))
Chapter 10.50
RESIDENTIAL PREFERENTIAL PARKING DISTRICTS
Sections:
   
10.50.010   Purpose.
   
10.50.020   Definitions.
   
10.50.030   RFP designation criteria.
   
10.50.040   Initiation by City Council.
   
10.50.050   Initiation by neighborhood petition.
   
10.50.060   Establishment of residential preferential parking districts.
   
10.50.070   Administration of districts.
   
10.50.080   Annexation of new areas to existing districts.
   
10.50.085   Eligibility areas.
   
10.50.090   Modification or termination of districts.
   
10.50.100   Violations and penalties.
   
10.50.110   Revocation of permit.
10.50.010   Purpose.
   Residential preferential parking districts are intended to restore and
enhance the quality of life in residential neighborhoods by reducing the impact
of parking associated with nearby businesses and institutional uses. The
procedures and standards in this chapter are intended to provide flexibility so
that the city council may adopt, after consultation with residents and
neighboring businesses and institutions, parking programs that appropriately
protect each neighborhood's unique characteristics. Residential preferential
parking districts should be designed to accommodate non-residential parking
when this can be done while meeting the parking availability standards
determined by the city to be appropriate for the district in question.
Residential preferential parking programs may be designed to reduce non-
residential parking over time to give non-residential parkers time to find
other modes of transportation or parking locations.
(Ord. 5294 § 1 (part), 2015)
10.50.020   Definitions.
   The following words and phrases shall have the following meanings:
   (a)   "Director" shall mean the director of the office of transportation.
   (b)   "Dwelling unit" shall mean a self-contained house, apartment, stock
cooperative unit, or condominium unit occupied by a single household
exclusively for residential purposes. These residential purposes may include
lawful home occupations.
   (c)   "Employee permit" shall mean a permit issued to an employee working at
a business located within an RPP District or as defined in an RPP district
specific resolution.
   (d)   "Guest permit" shall mean a permit issued to a resident on an annual
basis for use by a person visiting a residence in an RPP District or for
workers providing services such as caregiving, gardening, repair maintenance
and construction, to the resident. The number of guest permits issued to
residents shall be specified in administrative regulations adopted by the
director.
   (e)   "Non-resident vehicle" shall mean a vehicle operated by a person whose
destination is not to a residence within the Residential Preferential Parking
District.
   (f)   "Resident" shall mean a natural person living in a dwelling unit in an
RPP District.
   (g)   "Residential Preferential Parking District" or "RPP District" shall
mean a geographical area in which the city council has established a
preferential parking permit system pursuant to California Vehicle Code section
22507.
   (h)   "Visitor permit" shall mean a temporary 24-hour permit issued to a
resident for use by a person visiting a residence in an RPP District.
(Ord. 5531 § 8 (part), 2021: Ord. 5494 § 41, 2020: Ord. 5294 § 1 (part), 2015)
10.50.030   RPP designation criteria.
   The council may designate an area as a Residential Preferential Parking
District based upon the following criteria:
   (a)   That non-resident vehicles do, or may, substantially interfere with
the use of on-street or alley parking spaces by neighborhood residents;
   (b)   That the interference by the non-resident vehicles occurs at regular
and frequent intervals, either daily or weekly;
   (c)   That the non-resident vehicles parked in the area of the proposed
district create traffic congestion, noise, or other disruption (including
shortage of parking spaces for residents and their visitors) that disrupts
neighborhood life;
   (d)   Other alternative parking strategies are not feasible or practical.
(Ord. 5294 § 1 (part), 2015)
10.50.040   Initiation by city council.
   The city council may, by motion, initiate consideration of a RPP District by
directing staff to undertake the analysis and outreach process set forth in
Section 10.50.050(d) and (e).
(Ord. 5294 § 1 (part), 2015)
10.50.050   Initiation by neighborhood petition.
   Residents may request the formation of an RPP District in their
neighborhood. The request shall be made, and considered, in the following
manner:
   (a)   Form of Application.
   (1)   The director shall establish a standard form for the application for
the formation of a new RPP District, as well as a list of submittal
requirements for use by interested residents. These requirements shall include
a narrative describing the nature and perceived source of non-residential
parking impact, as well as suggested district boundaries. The director shall
also approve a standard form for use in demonstrating resident support for the
application.
   (2)   Residents shall initiate a request for establishment of an RPP
District by neighborhood petition by completing the official application form.
    (3)   Residents are encouraged to consult with the employers and employees
thought to be the source of the parking impact as they develop their proposals.
   (b)   Timing and Review of Applications. Each calendar year, the director
shall review all applications received prior to March 31st of that year to
determine whether the RPP District criteria established in this Chapter and the
administrative guidelines are met.
   (c)   Prioritization of Applications. Applications determined by the
director to meet the criteria in paragraph (b) above shall be presented to the
planning and transportation commission. The commission shall review the
requests and recommend to the director which proposal or proposals should be
given priority for review and possible implementation in the current calendar
year. In making its recommendations, the commission shall consider the severity
of non-residential parking impact, the demonstrated level of neighborhood
support, and the staff resources needed to process requests.
   (d)   Staff Review of Applications and Community Outreach. Once an
application has been selected for council consideration during the current
calendar year, staff shall promptly review the application, gather additional
information and conduct a community outreach program. At a minimum the review
process shall include the following:
   (1)   The city shall complete parking occupancy studies to quantify the
nature of the problem identified in the petition. Data shall be collected when
schools in the Palo Alto Unified School District and Stanford University are in
session, unless these institutions are irrelevant to the problem to be
addressed.
   (2)   Upon completion of the consultation and outreach process, the city
attorney shall prepare a draft resolution containing the proposed boundaries
and hours of enforcement. Staff shall undertake a survey of resident support
within the RPP District. The results of this survey shall be included in and
reported to the planning and transportation commission and the city council.
   (e)   Planning and Transportation Commission Review. Staff shall bring the
proposed RPP District to the planning and transportation commission no later
than September of the calendar year in which consideration began. The
commission shall review the draft resolution at a noticed public hearing and
make a recommendation to the city council regarding the RPP District. This
recommendation may include proposed modifications of the boundaries. The
commission's recommendation shall be forwarded to the city council no later
than September 30th.
(Ord. 5531 § 8 (part), 2021: Ord. 5494 § 42, 2020: Ord. 5294 § 1 (part), 2015)
10.50.060   Establishment of Residential Preferential Parking Districts.
   (a)   Adoption of Resolution Establishing District. Following the completion
of the procedures described in Section 10.50.050, the City Council shall hold a
public hearing on a proposed resolution to establish the Residential
Preferential Parking District. The resolution may specify a trial period of up
to two years. Any such trial period shall begin running after the signs have
been posted and permits issued. The council may adopt, modify, or reject the
proposed resolution.
   (b)   Resolution. The resolution shall specify:
   (1)   The findings that the criteria set forth in Section 10.50.030 have
been met.
   (2)   The term of the trial period, if applicable.
   (3)   The boundaries and name of the residential preferential parking
district. The boundary map may also define areas which will become subject to
the regulations of the Residential Preferential Parking District in the future
if the council approves a resident petition for annexation as provided in
Section 10.50.080 below.
   (4)   Hours and days of enforcement of parking regulations and other
restrictions that shall be in effect for non-permit holders, such as two-hour
parking limits, overnight parking limits, or "no re-parking" zones.
   (5)   The number of permits, if any, to be issued to merchants or other non-
residential users, which number may be scheduled to reduce over time.
   (6)   Resident permit rates which are set by city council policy will be
uniform across each district.
   (7)   Such other matters as the council may deem necessary and desirable,
including but not limited to fee rates and whether non-residential parking
permits are allowed to be issued and transferred.
   (c)   Permanent Adoption. Before the expiration of the trial period, if
applicable, the city council shall hold a noticed public hearing and determine
whether the RPP District should be made permanent as originally adopted,
modified or terminated. The council's action shall be in the form of a
resolution.
(Ord. 5294 § 1 (part), 2015)
10.50.070   Administration of districts.
   (a)   Issuance and Fees.
   (1)   No permit will be issued to any applicant until that applicant has
paid all of his or her outstanding parking citations, including all civil
penalties and related fees.
   (2)   A residential parking permit may be issued for a motor vehicle if the
following requirements are met:
   (A)   The applicant demonstrates that he or she is currently a resident of
the area for which the permit is to be issued.
   (B)   The applicant demonstrates that he or she has ownership or continuing
custody of the motor vehicle for which the permit is to be issued.
   (C)   Any motor vehicle to be issued a permit must have a vehicle
registration indicating registration within the area for which the permit is to
be issued.
   (3)   Visitor or guest parking permits may be issued for those vehicles or
to those individuals or households that qualify for those permits under the
resolution establishing the RPP District.
   (4)   Employee parking permits may be issued to those individuals and for
those vehicles that qualify for such permits under the resolution establishing
the RPP District.
   (b)   All permits shall be displayed as directed by the city.
   (c)   No Guarantee of Availability of Parking. A parking permit shall not
guarantee or reserve to the permit holder an on-street parking space within the
designated residential preferential parking zone.
   (d)   Restrictions and Conditions. Each permit issued pursuant to this
Section shall be subject to each and every condition and restriction set forth
in this Chapter and as provided for in the resolution establishing the specific
RPP District, as may be amended from time to time. The issuance of such permit
shall not be construed to waive compliance with any other applicable parking
law, regulation or ordinance.
   (e)   Exemptions. The following vehicles are exempt from RPP District
parking restrictions in this Chapter:
   (1)   A vehicle owned or operated by a public or private utility, when used
in the course of business.
   (2)   A vehicle owned or operated by a governmental agency, when used in the
course of official government business.
   (3)   A vehicle for which an authorized emergency vehicle permit has been
issued by the Commissioner of the California Highway Patrol, when used in the
course of business.
   (4)   A vehicle parked or standing while actively delivering materials or
freight.
   (5)   A vehicle displaying an authorized exemption permit issued by the City
of Palo Alto.
   (6)   A vehicle displaying a State of California or military-issued disabled
person placard or license plates.
   (7)   A vehicle parked for the purpose of attending or participating in an
event taking place at a school within the Palo Alto Unified School District or
another event venue within the RPP District, provided that the vehicle is
parked within two blocks of the venue, the venue has requested and received
approval from the city at least fourteen days before the event date, and the
venue distributes notices to all addresses within a two-block radius of the
venue. The RPP District resolution shall specify the covered venues and number
of permitted events per year.
   (8)   All vehicles are exempt from parking restrictions pursuant to this
Chapter on the following holidays: January 1, July 4, Thanksgiving Day, and
December 25.
   (f)   Authority of Staff.
   (1)   The director is authorized to adopt administrative regulations that
are consistent with the purposes of this Chapter. Prior to adoption the
director shall conduct a noticed public meeting soliciting input on such
guidelines.
   (2)   The police department or private parking enforcement contractor as
approved by the chief of police shall have the authority to enforce the
administrative regulations established pursuant to this Chapter.
(Ord. 5531 § 8 (part), 2021: Ord. 5294 § 1 (part), 2015)
10.50.080   Annexation of new areas to existing districts.
   Residents of any block may petition the director for annexation into a
contiguous RPP District. The petition shall be on forms provided by the
department. If the petition meets the criteria established in administrative
regulations adopted by the director, a resolution annexing it to the RPP
District shall be prepared by the city attorney and submitted to the city
council, together with the director's recommendation on the proposed
annexation. The city council may approve, deny, or modify the annexation.
(Ord. 5294 § 1 (part), 2015)
10.50.085   Eligibility areas.
   (a)   When it is determined that particular areas may experience spill-over
from previously designated RPP Districts, the Council may designate by
resolution those areas as an Eligibility Area.
   (b)   Designated Eligibility Areas may petition the director for annexation
into an existing RPP District. The petition shall be on forms provided by the
department. If the petition meets the criteria established in the
administrative guidelines adopted by the director, the director shall approve
the Eligibility Area for annexation.
(Ord. 5380 § 2, 2016)
10.50.090   Modification or termination of districts.
   (a)   Opting out. After final adoption of an RPP District, Residents may
file an application with the director to opt out of the RPP District. The
minimum number of blocks and percentage of units supporting the opt-out shall
be specified by the director in the administrative guidelines. Applications for
opting out shall be made in the form and manner prescribed by the director and
shall be acted up on by the director.
   (b)   Timing and Review of Opt Out Applications. Each calendar year, the
director shall review all opt out applications received prior to March 31st of
the year to determine whether the opt out criteria established in the
administrative guidelines are met.
   (c)   Dissolution. The city council following a noticed public hearing may
adopt a resolution dissolving the RPP District:
   (1)   Upon receipt and verification of a petition signed by 50% or more of
all the households within an approved RPP District boundary; or
   (2)   Upon findings by the city council that the criteria for designating
the RPP District are no longer satisfied.
(Ord. 5494 § 43, 2020: Ord. 5380 § 3, 2016: Ord. 5294 § 1 (part), 2015)
10.50.100   Violations and Penalties.
   (a)   No person shall park a vehicle adjacent to any curb in a residential
preferential parking zone in violation of any posted or noticed prohibition or
restriction, unless the person has a valid and current residential preferential
parking permit, visitor permit, guest permit or employee permit for that
vehicle, or is otherwise exempt. Use of any permit issued under this chapter
shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter and the administrative
regulations. Violations of this subsection shall be punishable by a civil
penalty under
Chapter 10.60.010.
   (b)   In RPP Districts with a time limit for non-permitted vehicles,
vehicles not displaying a valid permit may park up to the posted time limit
during the period designated by posted signage. After the maximum time limit
period, vehicles will be prohibited from re-parking within the same district.
   (c)   No person shall sell, rent, or lease, or cause to be sold, rented, or
leased for any value or consideration any RPP District parking permit, visitor
permit or guest permit. Upon violation of this subsection, all permits issued
to for the benefit of the dwelling unit or business establishment for which the
sold, rented, or leased permit was authorized shall be void. Violation of this
subsection (b) shall be punishable as an infraction.
   (d)   No person shall buy or otherwise acquire for value or use any RPP
District parking permit, guest permit or visitor permit except as provided for
in this chapter. Violation of this subsection (c) shall be punishable as an
infraction.
(Ord. 5531 § 8 (part), 2021: Ord. 5294 § 1 (part), 2015)
10.50.110   Revocation of permit.
   In addition to all other remedies, the city may temporarily revoke (for a
period of time not to exceed ten working days) a parking permit issued under
this chatper of any person found to be in violation of this chapter by
providing written notice of the temporary revocation to the permittee. Such
written notice shall include a statement outlining the grounds for revoking the
permit as well as the date, time, and place set for a hearing before the
Hearing Officer or their representative to determine if the revocation shall be
in effect until the expiration of the permit. Written notice of the date, time
and place of such hearing shall be served upon the permittee five days prior to
the date set for such hearing.
   At the hearing before the Hearing Officer or their representative, the
permittee shall have the right to present evidence and a written or oral
argument, or both.
   No decision shall be invalidated because of the admission into the record
and the use of any proof of any fact in dispute of any evidence not admissible
under the common law or statutory rules of evidence.
   Within five working days after close of hearing, the Hearing Officer or
their representative shall enter their decision based upon the record presented
and notify the permittee in writing of such decision. The decision of the
Hearing Officer shall be final. Failure, when so requested, to surrender a
parking permit so revoked shall constitute a violation of this section. There
will be no refunds for revoked permits.
(Ord. 5531 § 9, 2021)
Chapter 10.51
CRESCENT PARK NO OVERNIGHT PARKING PROGRAM
Sections:
   
10.51.010   Purpose.
   
10.51.020   Definitions.
   
10.51.030   Designation of Crescent Park no overnight parking area.
   
10.51.040   Inclusion of approved parking areas.
   
10.51.050   Annexation of new restricted parking areas.
   
10.51.060   Administration of restricted parking area.
   
10.51.065   Modification or termination of restricted parking areas.
   
10.51.070   Violations and penalties.
10.51.010   Purpose.
   The Crescent Park no overnight parking program is intended to restore and
enhance the quality of life in the Crescent Park neighborhood by reducing the
impact of parking associated with nearby residences, businesses or other
neighboring uses. Restricted parking areas should be designed to accommodate
non-residential parking when this can be done, while meeting the parking
availability standards determined by the city to be appropriate for the area in
question.
(Ord. 5398 § 2 (part), 2016)
10.51.020   Definitions.
   The following words and phrases as used in this chapter shall have the
following meanings.
   (a)   "Crescent Park" means the area bound by Edgewood Drive on the
northeast, Channing Avenue on the south, Lincoln Avenue on the west, University
Avenue on the northwest and including the entirety of Crescent Drive.
   (b)   "Director" shall mean the chief transportation official.
   (c)   "Dwelling unit" shall mean any self-contained house, apartment, stock
cooperative, or condominium occupied solely for residential purposes.
   (d)   "Restricted parking area" shall mean a residential area upon which the
council imposes overnight parking limitations pursuant to the authority granted
by this chapter.
   (e)   "Resident" shall mean any person who lives in a dwelling unit located
in a residential restricted parking area.
   (f)   "Overnight residential parking permit" shall mean a permit issued
under this chapter which, when displayed as directed by the city, shall exempt
said motor vehicle from parking time restrictions established pursuant to this
chapter.
   (g)   "Guest" shall mean a person visiting residents living in a residential
preferential parking zone.
   (h)   "Guest parking permit" shall mean a parking permit issued pursuant to
this chapter or an ordinance or resolution enacted pursuant to authority
granted herein, which when displayed as directed by the city, as described
herein, shall exempt the motor vehicle from parking time restrictions
established pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. 5531 § 10 (part), 2021: Ord. 5494 § 44, 2020: Ord. 5398 § 2 (part), 2016)
10.51.030   Designation of Crescent Park no overnight parking area.
   (a)   Area.
   (1)   The following streets or street segments are approved for the Crescent
Park no overnight parking program:
Crescent Park Street or Street Segment
Crescent Park Street or Street Segment
Edgewood Drive between Southwood and Channing
Newell Road between Edgewood and Newell Place
Phillips Road
Madison Way
Hamilton Ave between Lincoln and Alester
Jefferson Drive
Southwood Drive
Crescent Drive
Dana Avenue between Center and Alester
East Crescent Drive
West Crescent Drive
Island Drive
Kings Lane
Center Drive between University and Pitman
Pitman Avenue, 1432 to 1494 Pitman
University Avenue between Palm and East Crescent
Louisa Court
Arcadia Place
 
   (2)   The following streets or street segments are tentatively approved for
the Crescent Park no overnight parking program.
Crescent Park Street or Street Segment
Crescent Park Street or Street Segment
Channing Avenue between Lincoln and West Bayshore
Center Drive between Pitman to Channing
Lincoln Avenue between Channing and Hamilton (south side)
Dana Avenue from Lincoln to Center
Hamilton Avenue from Alester to Greer
Ashby Drive
Pitman Avenue from 1494 to Lincoln
Dana Avenue between Lincoln and Center
Forest Avenue between Lincoln and Center
Lincoln Avenue between Hamilton and Channing
University Avenue between Hale and Palm
Alester Avenue
Patricia Lane
Jackson Drive
Sandalwood Court
Wildwood Lane
Ivy Lane
Hilbar Lane
Alannah Court
De Soto Drive
Sharon Court
Tevis Place
Kent Place
Regent Place
Somerset Place
Kirby Place
Palm Street
Maples Street
Marlowe Street
Chaucer Street between Palo Alto Ave and University
Palo Alto Avenue between Hale and Marlowe
 
   (b)   Parking restriction hours.
      (1)   Vehicles not displaying a valid overnight residential parking
permit are prohibited from parking within the restricted parking area between
two a.m. and five a.m. every day of the week. All vehicles may utilize on-
street parking in Crescent Park outside of this specified enforcement period.
      (2)   City staff shall cause appropriate signs to be erected in that
area, indicating prominently thereon the time limitation and period of the day
for its application.
(Ord. 5440 § 1, 2018: Ord. 5398 § 2 (part), 2016)
10.51.040   Inclusion of approved parking areas.
   (a)   Eligibility for inclusion. Residents of any street or street segment
tentatively approved for inclusion may petition the director for inclusion into
the Crescent Park no overnight parking area. If the petition meets the criteria
established in Section
10.51.040(b) and the administrative regulations adopted by the director,
parking restrictions will be implemented on that block.
   (b)   City staff shall consider for designation any proposed street or
street segment in Crescent Park which satisfies the following enumerated
requirements:
   (1)   Residents submit a petition, prepared for residents by city staff and
signed by at least one member of fifty percent of the parcels on the street.
   (2)   Upon receipt of a completed petition, city staff shall issue a postal
survey to verify participation and interest of all residents in the proposed
restricted parking area.
   (3)   At least seventy percent of responses to the survey received by city
staff shall be in support of participation in the restricted overnight parking
program.
   (c)   Following validation of majority support, city staff shall implement
signs within the newly designated restricted parking area and notify residents
of eligibility to purchase parking permits.
(Ord. 5531 § 10 (part), 2021: Ord. 5398 § 2 (part), 2016)
10.51.050   Annexation of new restricted parking areas.
   (a)   Eligibility for annexation. Residents of any street or street segment
adjacent to an existing restricted parking area within Crescent Park may
petition the director for annexation into a contiguous Crescent Park no
overnight parking area. If the petition meets the criteria established in
Section
10.51.050(b) and the administrative regulations adopted by the director, a
resolution annexing it to the restricted parking area shall be prepared by the
city attorney and submitted to the city council, together with the director's
recommendation on the proposed annexation. The city council may approve, deny,
or modify the annexation.
   (b)   City staff shall consider for designation any proposed street or
street segment in Crescent Park which satisfies the following enumerated
requirements:
   (1)   Residents submit a petition, prepared for residents by city staff and
signed by at least one member of fifty percent of the parcels on the street.
   (2)   Upon receipt of a completed petition, city staff shall issue a postal
survey to verify participation and interest of all residents in the proposed
restricted parking area.
   (3)   At least seventy percent of responses to the survey received by city
staff shall be in support of participation in the restricted overnight parking
program.
   (c)   Following validation of majority support, city staff shall implement
signs within the newly designated restricted parking area and notify residents
of eligibility to purchase parking permits at city hall.
(Ord. 5398 § 2 (part), 2016)
10.51.060   Administration of restricted parking area.
   (a)   Issuance and fees.
   (1)   No permit will be issued to any applicant until that applicant has
paid all of his or her outstanding parking citations, including all civil
penalties and related fees.
   (2)   An overnight residential parking permit may be issued for a dwelling
if the following requirements are met:
   (A)   The applicant demonstrates that he or she is currently a resident of
the restricted parking area for which the permit is to be issued.
   (B)   The applicant demonstrates that he or she has ownership or continuing
custody of the motor vehicle for which the permit is to be issued.
   (C)   Any dwelling to be issued a permit must have a vehicle registration
indicating registration within the area for which the permit is to be issued.
   (3)   Visitor or guest parking permits may be issued for those individuals
or dwellings that qualify for those permits under the resolution establishing
the restricted parking area.
   (b)   No guarantee of availability of parking. An overnight residential
parking permit shall not guarantee or reserve to the permit holder an on-street
parking space within the designated residential preferential parking zone.
   (c)   Restrictions and conditions. Each permit issued pursuant to this
section shall be subject to each and every condition and restriction set forth
in this chapter and as provided for in the resolution establishing the specific
restricted parking area, as may be amended from time to time. The issuance of
such permit shall not be construed to waive compliance with any other
applicable parking law, regulation or ordinance.
   (d)   Exemptions. The following vehicles are exempt from the Crescent Park
overnight parking restrictions in this chapter:
   (1)   A vehicle owned or operated by a public or private utility, when used
in the course of business.
   (2)   A vehicle owned or operated by a governmental agency, when used in the
course of official government business.
   (3)   A vehicle for which an authorized emergency vehicle permit has been
issued by the commissioner of the California Highway Patrol, when used in the
course of business.
   (4)   A vehicle parked or standing while actively delivering materials or
freight.
   (5)   A vehicle displaying an authorized exemption permit issued by the City
of Palo Alto.
   (6)   A vehicle displaying a State of California or military-issued disabled
person placard or license plates.
   (7)   A vehicle parked for the purpose of attending or participating in an
event taking place at a school within the Palo Alto unified school district or
another event venue within the restricted parking area, provided that the
vehicle is parked within two blocks of the venue, the venue has requested and
received approval from the city at least fourteen days before the event date,
and the venue distributes notices to all addresses within a two-block radius of
the venue. The restricted parking area resolution shall specify the covered
venues and number of permitted events per year.
   (8)   All vehicles are exempt from parking restrictions pursuant to this
chapter on the following holidays: January 1, July 4, Thanksgiving Day, and
December 25.
   (e)   Authority of staff.
   (1)   The director is authorized to adopt administrative regulations that
are consistent with the purposes of this chapter.
   (2)   The director has the discretion to grant the issuance of any
additional permits to a dwelling for which the maximum residential parking
permits has previously been issued. Any permit approved by the director that is
in addition to the two overnight residential parking permits issued pursuant to
this chapter may be subject to additional fees and limitations as designated by
the director.
   (3)   The police department or private parking enforcement contractor as
approved by the city shall have the authority to enforce this chapter and the
administrative regulations established pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. 5531 § 10 (part), 2021: Ord. 5398 § 2 (part), 2016)
10.51.065   Modification or termination of restricted parking areas.
   (a)   Opting out. After final adoption of a designated restricted parking
area, an application to opt out may be filed with the director, subject to the
following:
   (1)   The minimum number of blocks and percentage of dwelling units
supporting the opt-out shall be specified by the director in the administrative
guidelines.
   (2)   Each legal dwelling unit, as defined in Section
18.04.030(b)(46) of this code, shall be entitled to one vote towards the
determination of support.
   (3)   Applications for opting out shall be made in the form and manner
prescribed by the director and shall be acted upon by the director.
   (b)   Dissolution. The city council, following a noticed public hearing, may
adopt a resolution dissolving a designated restricted parking area:
   (1)   Upon receipt and verification of a signed petition representing fifty
percent or more of the affected dwelling units within a designated restricted
parking area; or
   (2)   Upon findings by the city council that the criteria for designating
the restricted parking area are no longer satisfied.
(Ord. 5494 § 45, part: Ord. 5440 § 2, 2018)
10.51.070   Violations and penalties.
   (a)   It is unlawful and shall constitute a violation of this chapter for
any person to stand or park a motor vehicle, without a current overnight
residential parking permit properly displayed, at a curb within a restricted
parking area during the time limitations established for such area.
   (b)   The following shall be unlawful:
   (1)   For any person to falsely represent himself or herself as eligible for
an overnight residential parking permit or to furnish false information in an
application therefore;
   (2)   For any person to copy, reproduce or otherwise bring into existence a
facsimile or counterfeit parking permit or permits without written
authorization from revenue collections;
   (3)   For any person to knowingly use or display a facsimile or counterfeit
parking permit in order to evade time limitations on parking applicable in a
restricted parking area;
   (4)   For any person holding a valid parking permit issued pursuant hereto
to sell, give or exchange said permit to any other person;
   (5)   For any person to knowingly commit any act which is prohibited by the
terms of this chapter or any ordinance enacted by authority granted by this
chapter.
(Ord. 5398 § 2 (part), 2016)
Chapter 10.52
TRAINS
Sections:
   
10.52.010   Railway trains not to block streets.
   
10.52.020   Reserved.
10.52.010   Railway trains not to block streets.
   It is unlawful for the operator of any railway train or car to operate the
same in such a manner as to prevent the use of any street for purposes of
travel for a period of time longer than five minutes.
(Ord. 1714 (part), 1956: prior code § 19.141)
10.52.020   Reserved.
   Repealed by Ord. 4453 § 63, 1997)
Chapter 10.56
SPECIAL SPEED ZONES*
Sections:
   
10.56.010   Twenty-five miles per hour prima facie speed limit justified.
   
10.56.015   Thirty miles per hour prima facie speed limit.
   
10.56.020   Thirty-five miles per hour prima facie speed limit.
   
10.56.025   Forty miles per hour prima facie speed limit.
   
10.56.030   Forty-five miles per hour prima facie speed limit.
   
10.56.035   Twenty miles per hour school zones speed limit.
 
   *   For state law requiring justification of local speed limits by
engineering and traffic surveys for radar enforcement purposes - See C.V.C. §
40802(b); for state law authorizing the increase or decrease of local speed
limits - See C.V.C. §§ 22357 and 22358; for state law regulating school zone
speed - See C.V.C. § 22353(b)(2).
10.56.010   Twenty-five miles per hour prima facie speed limit justified.
   It is determined that the state twenty-five miles per hour prima facie speed
limit for business or residence districts is justified, as required by state
law, with respect to the following streets or portions of streets by
engineering and traffic surveys conducted by the city and completed on the
dates shown below:
Road Segment Name Survey Completion Date
Road Segment Name                                        Survey Completion Date
Alma St from El Camino Real to University Ave            September 2023
Amaranta Ave from Los Robles Ave to Maybell Ave          November 2017
Arboretum Rd from Sand Hill Rd to Quarry Rd              November 2017
Birch St from California Ave to Page Mill Exp            November 2017
California Ave from Park Blvd to El Camino Real          November 2017
California Ave from El Camino Real to Hanover St         November 2017
Charleston Rd from Fabian Way to South City Limit        September 2023
Charleston Rd from Middlefield Rd to Fabian Way          September 2023
Charleston Rd from El Camino Real to Alma St             September 2023
Channing Ave from W Bayshore Rd to Newell Rd             November 2017
Channing Ave from Newell Rd to Guinda Ave                November 2017
Channing Ave from Guinda Ave to Alma St                  November 2017
Charleston Rd from Alma St to Middlefield Rd             September 2023
Churchill Ave from Embarcadero Rd to Alma St             November 2017
Churchill Ave from Alma St to El Camino Real             November 2017
Colorado Ave from W Bayshore Rd to Middlefield Rd        November 2017
E Meadow Dr from W Bayshore Rd to Louis Rd               November 2017
El Camino Way from Los Robles Ave to Maybell Ave         September 2023
Embarcadero Rd from El Camino Real to Alma St            October 2023
Guinda Ave from Lytton Ave to Channing Ave               November 2017
Hamilton Ave from Middlefield Rd to Alma St              November 2017
High St from Lytton Ave to Channing Ave                  November 2017
Homer Ave from Guinda Ave to Alma St                     November 2017
Laguna Ave from Matadero Ave to Los Robles Ave           November 2017
Lambert Ave from Park Blvd to El Camino Real             November 2017
Loma Verde Ave from W Bayshore Rd to Middlefield Rd      November 2017
Loma Verde Ave from Middlefield Rd to Alma St            November 2017
Los Robles Ave from Laguna Ave to El Camino Real         November 2017
Louis Rd from Embarcadero Rd to Oregon Exp               November 2017
Louis Rd from Oregon Exp to Loma Verde Rd                September 2023
Louis Rd from Loma Verde Rd to Charleston Rd             September 2023
Lytton Ave from Alma St to Middlefield Rd                November 2017
Matadero Ave from El Camino Real to Laguna Ave           November 2017
Middlefield Rd from University Ave to Embarcadero Rd     September 2023
Middlefield Rd from University Ave to Northern City      September 2023
Limits
Middlefield Rd from Embarcadero Rd to Oregon Exp         November 2017
Newell Rd from East City Limit to Channing Ave           November 2017
Newell Rd from Channing Ave to Embarcadero Rd            November 2017
N California Ave from Embarcadero Rd to Middlefield Rd   September 2023
N California Ave from Middlefield Rd to Alma St          November 2017
Park Blvd from California Ave to Lambert Ave             September 2023
Peter Coutts Rd from Stanford Ave to Page Mill Rd        November 2017
Porter Dr from Hillview Ave to Page Mill Rd              September 2023
Quarry Rd from El Camino Real to Campus Dr               October 2023
Stanford Ave from El Camino Real to Peter Coutts Rd      November 2017
Stanford Ave from Peter Coutts Rd to Junipero Serra Blvd November 2017
University Ave from Middlefield Rd to Alma St            November 2017
Waverley St from Lytton Ave to Channing Ave              November 2017
Waverley St from Channing Ave to Embarcadero Rd          November 2017
W Meadow Dr from Alma St to El Camino Way                November 2017
 
(Ord. 5668 § 2, 2025: Ord. 5421 § 2, 2017: Ord. 4298 § 1, 1995: Ord. 4206 § 1,
1994: Ord. 3991 § 1, 1990: Ord. 3857 § 1, 1989: Ord. 3645 § 1, 1985: Ord. 3483
§ 1, 1983: Ord. 3238 § 1, 1980: Ord. 3085 Exhibit A (part), 1978: Ord. 2891 §
1, 1975: Ord. 2740 § 1 (part), 1973: Ord. 2541, 1970: Ord. 2375, 1967: Ord.
2340 (part), 1967: Ord. 2331, 1967: Ord. 2225, 1965: Ord. 2192, 1964: Ord.
2191, 1964: Ord. 2188, 1964: Ord. 2008, 1961: Ord. 1994, 1961: Ord. 1714
(part), 1956: prior code § 19.152)
10.56.015   Thirty miles per hour prima facie speed limit.
   It is determined and justified upon the basis of engineering and traffic
surveys that a speed greater than the twenty-five miles per hour prima facie
speed limit set forth in Section 22352 of the Vehicle Code of the state, would
facilitate the orderly movement of vehicular traffic and would be reasonable
and safe under the conditions found to exist upon the streets, or portions
thereof, set forth in this section, and it is hereby declared that thirty miles
per hour shall be the prima facie speed limit upon these streets, or portions
thereof, except for school zones, as shown below:
 
Road Segment Name                               Survey Completion Date
Fabian Way from Charleston Rd to W Bayshore Rd  September 2023
Hansen Way from El Camino Real to Page Mill Exp September 2023
Hanover St from Page Mill Rd to Hillview Ave    September 2023
Hillview Ave from Hanover St to Foothill Exp    September 2023
Sand Hill Rd from El Camino Real to Arboretum   November 2017
W Bayshore Rd from Oregon Exp to Colorado Ave   November 2017
 
(Ord. 5668 § 3, 2025: Ord. 5421 § 3, 2017: Ord. 4298 § 2, 1995: Ord. 3991 § 2,
1990: Ord. 3645 § 2, 1985: Ord. 3238 § 2, 1980)
10.56.020   Thirty-five miles per hour prima facie speed limit.
   It is determined and justified upon the basis of engineering and traffic
surveys that a speed greater than the twenty-five miles per hour prima facie
speed limit set forth in Section 22352 of the Vehicle Code of the state, would
facilitate the orderly movement of vehicular traffic and would be reasonable
and safe under the conditions found to exist upon the streets, or portions
thereof, set forth in this section, and it is hereby declared that thirty-five
miles per hour shall be the prima facie speed limit upon these streets, or
portions thereof, except for school zones, as shown below:
Road Segment Name Survey Completion Date
Road Segment Name                                        Survey Completion Date
Alma St from Lincoln Ave to Oregon Expy                  November 2017
Alma St from Oregon Exp to E Meadow Dr                   November 2017
Alma St from E Meadow Dr to South City Limit             November 2017
Arastradero Rd from Purissima Rd to Deer Creek Rd        November 2017
Arastradero Rd from Deer Creek Rd to Foothill Exp        November 2017
Deer Creek Rd from western city limits to Arastradero Rd September 2023
Hillview Ave from Foothill Exp to Arastradero Rd         November 2017
Oregon Exp from Middlefield Rd to Highway 101            June 2014
Oregon Exp from Middlefield Rd to Alma St                November 2017
Page Mill Rd from El Camino Real to Hanover St           June 2014
Page Mill Rd from Hanover St to Foothill Exp             June 2014
Sand Hill Rd from Arboretum to West City limit           November 2017
San Antonio Rd from Alma St Overpass to Middlefield Rd   September 2023
San Antonio Rd from Middlefield Rd to Charleston Rd      September 2023
San Antonio Rd from Charleston Rd to East City Limit     June 2014
W Bayshore Rd from Oregon Exp to Loma Verde Ave          November 2017
W Bayshore Rd from Loma Verde to Fabian Way              September 2023
 
(Ord. 5668 § 4, 2025: Ord. 5421 § 4, 2017: Ord. 4298 § 3, 1995: Ord. 4206 § 2,
1994: Ord. 3991 § 3, 1990: Ord. 3857 § 2, 1989: Ord. 3645 § 3, 1985: Ord. 3483
§ 2, 1983: Ord. 3085 Exhibit A (part), 1978: Ord. 2740 § 1 (part), 1973)
10.56.025   Forty miles per hour prima facie speed limit.
   It is determined and justified upon the basis of engineering and traffic
surveys that a speed greater than the twenty-five miles per hour prima facie
speed limit set forth in Section 22352 of the Vehicle Code of the state, would
facilitate the orderly movement of vehicular traffic and would be reasonable
and safe under the conditions found to exist upon the streets, or portions
thereof, set forth in this section, and it is hereby declared that forty miles
per hour shall be the prima facie speed limit upon these streets, or portions
thereof, except for school zones, as shown below:
 
Road Segment Name                                       Survey Completion Date
E Bayshore from Embarcadero Road Bicycle and Pedestrian November 2017
Overcrossing to Adobe Creek
 
(Ord. 5668 § 5, 2025: Ord. 5421 § 5, 2017: Ord. 4298 § 4, 1995: Ord. 3991 § 4,
1990: Ord. 3645 § 4, 1985)
10.56.030   Forty-five miles per hour prima facie speed limit.
   It is determined and justified upon the basis of engineering and traffic
surveys that a speed greater than the twenty-five miles per hour prima facie
speed limit set forth in Section 22352 of the Vehicle Code of the state, would
facilitate the orderly movement of vehicular traffic and would be reasonable
and safe under the conditions found to exist upon the streets, or portions
thereof, set forth in this section, and it is hereby declared that forty-five
miles per hour shall be the prima facie speed limit upon these streets, or
portions thereof, except for school zones, as shown below:
 
Road Segment Name                                   Survey Completion Date
Foothill Expressway from Page Mill Rd to South City November 2017
Limit
 
(Ord. 5421 § 6, 2017: Ord. 4298 § 5, 1995: Ord. 4206 § 3, 1994: Ord. 3991 § 5,
1990: Ord. 3857 § 3, 1989: Ord. 3645 § 5, 1985: Ord. 3483 § 3, 1983: Ord. 3085
Exhibit A (part), 1978: Ord. 2891 § 2, 1975: Ord. 2740 § 1 (part), 1973)
10.56.035   Twenty miles per hour school zones speed limit.
   It is determined and justified pursuant to California Vehicle Code Section
22358.4(b)(1) that twenty miles per hour shall be the prima facie speed limit
on the road segments shown below at a distance within 500 feet from or of the
school grounds while children are going to or leaving the school, either during
school hours or during the noon recess period.
 School name Road Segment Name
   School name                                          Road Segment Name
1  Addison Elementary School                            Middlefield Rd
                                                        Webster St
                                                        Addison Ave
                                                        Lincoln Ave
2  Palo Alto High School                                Churchill Ave
                                                        Embarcadero Rd
3  Walter Hays Elementary School                        Embarcadero Rd
                                                        Middlefield Rd
4  Duveneck Elementary School                           Channing Ave
                                                        Alester Ave
5  Jordan Middle School                                 California Ave
                                                        Middlefield Rd
6  Ohlone Elementary School                             Amarillo Ave
7  El Carmelo Elementary School                         El Carmelo Ave
                                                        Loma Verde Ave
                                                        Bryant St
                                                        Ramona St
8  Palo Verde Elementary School                         Louis Rd
                                                        Rorke Way
9  Fairmeadow Elementary School                         East Meadow Dr
10 JLS Middle School                                    East Meadow Dr
11 Herbert Elementary School                            Charleston Rd
12 Barron Park Elementary School                        Barron Ave
13 Juana Briones Elementary School                      Maybell Dr
                                                        Gerogia Ave
                                                        Orme St
14 Terman Elementary School                             Terman Ave
                                                        Arastradero Rd
15 Gunn High School                                     Arastradero Rd
16 Escondido Elementary School                          Stanford Ave
17 Discovery Children’s House Montessori School       University Ave
                                                        Kellogg Ave
18 Castilleja School                                    Bryant St
                                                        Emerson St
19 St. Elizabeth Seton School                           Channing Ave
                                                        Harriet St
                                                        Louis Rd
20 Stratford School                                     Middlefield Rd
                                                        N California Ave
21 Keys School                                          Sutter Ave
22 Bowman School                                        Donald Dr
23 Cornerstone                                          Manuela Ave
24 Esther B Clark/Sand Hill                             Clark Way
25 International School of the Peninsula- Cowper Campus Cowper St
26 Keys School - El Camino Campus                       El Camino Way
27 Living Wisdom                                        College Ave
                                                        Middlefield Rd
28 Tru School                                           Fulton St
                                                        Melville Ave
 
(Ord. 5428 § 2, 2018: Ord. 5421 § 7, 2017)
Chapter 10.60
PARKING VIOLATIONS*
Sections:
   
10.60.010   Parking violations punishable as civil penalties.
   
10.60.020   Notice of parking violations and notice of delinquent parking
violations.
   
10.60.030   Police department review of parking violations.
   
10.60.040   Appeal of parking violations to parking examiner.
   
10.60.050   Designation and qualifications of parking examiner.
   
10.60.060   Hearings before the parking examiner.
   
10.60.070   Permit parking in city lots.
   *   Editor's Note: Former Chapter 10.60, Parking Meters, previously codified
herein and containing portions of Ordinance Nos. 1714, 1910, 2318, 2388, 2397,
2508, 2960 and 3367, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 4159.
10.60.010   Parking violations punishable as civil penalties.
   Except as otherwise provided, violations of any provision of Chapters
10.36,
10.40,
10.44,
10.46,
10.47, and
10.50 of this Title 10 (hereinafter referred to as a "parking violation") shall
be punishable by a civil penalty (hereinafter referred to as a "parking
penalty"). These parking penalties, together with any late payment penalties,
administrative fee, and other related charges shall be established by ordinance
or resolution of the city council.
(Ord. 5294 § 4, 2015; Ord. 4667 § 1, 2000: (Ord. 4453 § 54, 1997: Ord. 4325 § 1
(part), 1996: Ord. 4159 § 2 (part), 1993)
10.60.020   Notice of parking violations and notice of delinquent parking
violations.
   The amount of the parking penalty applicable to a parking violation and the
time and procedure for the registered owner or the lessee or rentee of the
vehicle to deposit the parking penalty or contest the penalty shall be
indicated upon the notice of parking violation when it is served by being
affixed to the vehicle or as otherwise provided by law. If the parking penalty
is not paid within the time and in the manner stated on the notice of parking
violation, the police department or its designated processing agency shall
deliver or mail to the registered owner of the vehicle a notice of delinquent
parking violation.
(Ord. 4325 § 1 (part), 1996: Ord. 4159 § 2 (part), 1993)
10.60.030   Police department review of parking violations.
   Within twenty-one calendar days of the issuance of a notice of parking
violation or within fourteen calendar days from the mailing of a notice of
delinquent parking violation (whichever is later), a person may request (by
telephone, in writing, or in person) an initial review by the police
department. Upon this review, the notice of parking violation or notice of
delinquent parking violation and all penalties and fees based thereon may be
canceled by the police department if a determination is made that either the
violation did not occur, that extenuating circumstances make dismissal of the
citation appropriate in the interest of justice, or that the registered owner
was not responsible for the violation; however, under no circumstances shall a
personal relationship with any officer, public official, or law enforcement
agency be grounds for cancellation. The decision of the police department shall
be mailed to the person requesting review.
(Ord. 4325 § 1 (part), 1996: Ord. 4159 § 2 (part), 1993)
10.60.040   Appeal of parking violations to parking examiner.
   Within twenty-one calendar days from the mailing to the person contesting
the notice of parking violation or notice of delinquent parking violation of
the results of the police department's initial review, that person may request
(by telephone, in writing, or in person) an administrative review before a
parking examiner by depositing the full amount of the parking penalty. If the
person provides proof of financial inability to deposit the full amount of the
parking violation (according to standards developed and included in the police
department's notice of decision upon initial review), the requirement for
payment of the parking penalty as a prerequisite to contesting it shall be
waived. If the vehicle is immobilized or impounded for unpaid parking
violations, the requirement for payment of parking penalties as a prerequisite
to contesting them shall also be waived.
(Ord. 4325 § 1 (part), 1996: Ord. 4159 § 2 (part), 1993)
10.60.050   Designation and qualifications of parking examiner.
   The city manager shall designate a parking examiner having the
qualifications, training, and objectivity necessary to perform the duties of
that position. The parking examiner shall not be employed, managed, or
controlled by a person whose primary duties are parking enforcement, parking
citation, processing, collection, or issuance. The parking examiner's continued
employment, performance evaluation, compensation, and benefits shall not be
directly or indirectly linked to the amount of fines collected as a result of
decisions by the parking examiner.
(Ord. 4325 § 1 (part), 1996: Ord. 4159 § 2 (part), 1993)
10.60.060   Hearings before the parking examiner.
   The parking examiner shall notify the person contesting the parking penalty
of the date and time scheduled for hearing and provide the option of proceeding
on a written statement or in person at that time. The hearing shall be
conducted within the boundaries of the city within ninety calendar days
following receipt of the request for an administrative hearing; provided,
however, that the person requesting the hearing shall be entitled to one
continuance not exceeding twenty-one calendar days. If the person requesting a
hearing is a minor, that person shall be permitted to appear at a hearing or
admit responsibility for the parking violation without the necessity of the
appointment of a guardian and may be proceeded against in the same manner as
against an adult. Prima facie evidence of the parking violation shall be
established by the police department's production at the hearing of the notice
of parking violation (or a copy thereof), information from the California
Department of Motor Vehicles identifying the registered owner of the vehicle,
and the decision of the police department being contested. Hearings shall be
conducted informally, to be guided by rules of legal evidence, according to
written procedures established by the police department and approved by the
city manager. The appellant shall be entitled to testify and to present
witnesses. Upon completion of the hearing, the parking examiner may cancel the
notice of parking violation and all penalties and fees based thereon if a
determination is made that either the violation did not occur, that extenuating
circumstances make dismissal of the citation appropriate in the interest of
justice, or that the registered owner was not responsible for the violation;
however, under no circumstances shall a personal relationship with any officer,
public official, or law enforcement agency be grounds for cancellation. The
decision of the parking examiner shall be mailed or personally delivered to the
appellant and shall be final and not subject to reconsideration. Following a
determination by the examiner that a person has committed the violation, the
examiner may allow payment of the parking penalty in installments, or the
police department may allow for deferred payment or allow for payments in
installments, if the person provides evidence satisfactory to the examiner or
to the police department, as the case may be, of an inability to pay the
parking penalty in full. Unless canceled by decision of the police department
or the parking examiner, the parking penalty and all late charges and fees
based thereon shall be collectible as provided by the laws of California.
(Ord. 4325 § 1 (part), 1996: Ord. 4159 § 2 (part), 1993)
10.60.070   Permit parking in city lots.
   (a)   The city manager or designee is authorized to set aside any portion or
all of any city-owned parking lot for permit parking and to issue permits
therefor as provided in this section.
   (b)   The city manager or designee may issue parking permits upon
application therefor and upon the payment of a fee in an amount to be
determined by the city manager or municipal fee schedule. Such permit shall
designate the parking lot for which it is issued and shall be displayed as
directed by the city. Such permit may contain such instructions as to its use
as may be deemed appropriate by the city manager. The city manager or designee
may issue virtual parking permits instead of, or in combination with, physical
parking permits.
   (c)   The city manager or designee shall install signs in the permit parking
areas indicating that they are reserved for permit parking only, and the holder
of such a permit properly displayed may park in any such space on the lot, but
only in such space.
   (d)   A vehicle with a permit shall not park for more than seventy-two
consecutive hours in the same city-owned public parking facility. This
subsection shall not apply to official city vehicles.
   (e)   No person who owns or has possession, custody or control of a vehicle
shall park that vehicle or allow it to be parked in any permit parking space in
a permit area where sign indicating that such space is reserved for permit
parking only without displaying a valid permit therefor. This prohibition shall
only apply to the use of such spaces during the period as indicated on the
posted signage.
(Ord. 5531 § 11, 2021: Ord. 4558 § 6 (part), 1999: Ord. 4325 § 1 (part), 1996:
Ord. 4159 § 2 (part), 1993)
Chapter 10.62
IDLING OF VEHICLES
Sections:
   
10.62.010   Intent and purpose.
   
10.62.020   Definitions.
   
10.62.030   Restriction of vehicle idling.
   
10.62.040   Enforcement.
   
10.62.050   Penalties.
10.62.010    Intent and purpose.
   It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to discourage the idling of
vehicle engines in the City of Palo Alto in order to protect public health,
improve environmental conditions, conserve energy and resources, promote
economic efficiency, and improve quality of life. This intent and purpose shall
be effectuated through primarily educational means.
(Ord. 5448 § 2 (part), 2018)
10.62.020   Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, these words shall have the following
definitions:
   (a)   “Idle” or “idling” means to operate a vehicle's internal combustion
engine while the vehicle is stationary.
   (b)   “Vehicle” is defined as in California Vehicle Code section 670.
(Ord. 5448 § 2 (part), 2018)
10.62.030   Restriction of vehicle idling.
   (a)   A vehicle owner or a vehicle operator shall not cause or permit the
vehicle to idle on public property, in public rights of way, or on private
property that is open to the general public within city limits for more than 3
consecutive minutes.
   (b)   Subsection (a) of this section shall not apply in any of the following
circumstances:
   (1)   A vehicle is forced to remain stationary because of an official
traffic control device, direction of a law enforcement official, or any traffic
conditions beyond the operator's control, including traffic congestion,
railroad crossings, construction zones, security checkpoints, and vehicle
queues for drive-through goods and services;
   (2)   Idling is necessary to operate defrosters, heaters, air conditioners,
or other equipment to prevent a safety or health emergency for human or animal
occupants, or to prevent the aggravation of a passenger's disability or health
condition, but not
merely to maintain the comfort of vehicle occupants;
   (3)   Idling is necessary to provide heat to an occupied vehicle if the
outside ambient temperature is below 40 degrees Fahrenheit, or idling is
necessary to provide cooling to an occupied vehicle if the outside temperature
is more than 85 degrees Fahrenheit;
   (4)   Idling is necessary to power heaters or air conditioners to maintain
the comfort of vehicle occupants while waiting for assistance when a vehicle is
immobilized due to mechanical problems;
   (5)   An emergency or law enforcement vehicle, including police, fire,
ambulance, public safety, military, or any vehicle being used in an emergency
capacity, idles in the course of or in preparation for emergency or law
enforcement duties;
   (6)   An armored vehicle idles while in the course of business;
   (7)   Idling is necessary to power auxiliary work equipment that is actively
in use, including, but not limited to, cargo refrigeration units, waste
collectors/compactors, lifts, winches, pumps, compressors, drills, mixers, and
other safety and construction equipment. Auxiliary work equipment does not
include equipment primarily intended for vehicle cabin comfort or occupancy,
such as air conditioning, heating, radio, television, digital displays, or
kitchen appliances;
   (8)   Idling is necessary for any vehicle maintenance, service, repair,
inspection, research and development, or diagnostics;
   (9)   An engine is operated in accordance with instructions from the vehicle
manufacturer for proper operation;
   (10)   Idling is necessary for a licensed private security provider to
perform security duties;
   (11)   A vehicle designed to carry 15 or more passengers idles to maintain
comfortable cabin temperatures while paying passengers are on board for up to
10 minutes prior to a scheduled embarkation; or
   (12)   Applicable federal, state, or local law requires idling.
(Ord. 5448 § 2 (part), 2018)
10.62.040   Enforcement.
   Until such time as the City Council designates, by resolution, an intent to
administratively enforce this chapter and includes this chapter in a revision
to the city's administrative penalty schedule, the city shall not be authorized
to enforce this chapter under
Chapter 1.08 (Violations),
1.12 (Administrative Penalties - Citations),
1.16 (Administrative Compliance Orders), or by any criminal or civil means.
Upon passage of such a resolution or resolutions, enforcement of this chapter
shall be available solely through the administrative mechanisms in
Chapters 1.12 and
1.16 of this code, and/or written warnings.
(Ord. 5448 § 2 (part), 2018)
10.62.050   Penalties.
   The maximum penalty for a first violation of this chapter occurring within a
calendar year shall be a written warning with no fine. The maximum fine shall
be $100.00 for a second violation and $150.00 for a third and any subsequent
violation of this chapter occurring within a calendar year.
(Ord. 5448 § 2 (part), 2018)
Chapter 10.64
BICYCLES, ROLLER SKATES AND COASTERS*
Sections:
   
10.64.004   Bicycle lanes and paths established.
   
10.64.008   City manager to implement establishment of bicycle lanes and paths.
   
10.64.020   Establishment of licensing agency.
   
10.64.030   Daily report by buyers of secondhand bicycles.
   
10.64.040   Reserved.
   
10.64.050   Removal or alteration of tags or numbers.
   
10.64.080   Sirens and whistles.
   
10.64.090   Handlebar grips.
   
10.64.100   Carriers.
   
10.64.110   Compliance with mechanical standards.
   
10.64.120   Rules of the road.
   
10.64.130   Riding bicycles on sidewalks and in undercrossings.
   
10.64.140   Riding bicycles on streets.
   
10.64.150   Vehicles prohibited from bicycle paths.
   
10.64.160   Hitching rides on vehicles.
   
10.64.170   Passengers on vehicles and other devices.
   
10.64.180   Towing.
   
10.64.190   Racing.
   
10.64.200   Trick riding.
   
10.64.210   Parking and parking spaces.
   
10.64.220   Speed limits on shared-use paths.
   
10.64.230   Use of roller skates, skateboards and coasters prohibited in
business districts.
   
10.64.240   Use of coasters, roller skates, skateboards and similar devices.
   
10.64.241   Use of skateboards in residential districts.
   
10.64.242   Hours for skateboard riding.
   
10.64.243   Rules of the road for skateboarders.
   
10.64.244   Safety of skateboard riders.
   
10.64.245   Manner of skateboard operation.
   
10.64.250   Enforcement.
   
10.64.251   Parents of skateboard riders.
   *   For state law providing that traffic laws apply to persons riding
bicycles - See Veh. C.A. § 21050; for provisions prohibiting bicycles from
vehicular crossings except when signs indicate otherwise - See Veh. C.A. §
23330.
10.64.004   Bicycle lanes and paths established.
   The council establishes those bicycle lanes and paths as designated on the
Master Plan attached to Resolution No. 4441. adopted by the council of the city
on April 19, 1971, as said map is thereafter and from time to time hereafter
amended.
(Ord. 2652 § 1, 1972)
10.64.008   City manager to implement establishment of bicycle lanes and paths.
   The city manager is authorized, empowered, and directed to implement the
establishment of the bicycle lanes and paths as designated on the Master Plan.
(Ord. 2652 § 2, 1972)
10.64.020   Establishment of licensing agency.
   The city shall be a licensing agency for the licensing of bicycles in
accordance with all provisions of Division 16.7 of the California Vehicle Code.
(Ord. 2877 § 2, 1975: Ord. 2051 (part), 1961: prior code § 16.02)
10.64.030   Daily report by buyers of secondhand bicycles.
   Every person engaged in the business of buying secondhand bicycles is
required to make a daily report to the police department, giving the name and
address of the person from whom the bicycle was purchased, the description of
each bicycle purchased, the frame number thereof, and the number of the license
tag thereon, if any.
(Ord. 2877 § 4, 1975: Ord. 2051 (part), 1961: prior code § 16.04)
10.64.040   Reserved.
   (Repealed by Ord. 4453 § 62, 1997)
10.64.050   Removal or alteration of tags or numbers.
   No person shall willfully or maliciously remove, destroy, mutilate or alter
the number of any bicycle frame licensed pursuant to this chapter. No person
shall remove, destroy, mutilate or alter any license tag or registration
certificate during the time in which such license tag or registration
certificate is operative; provided, however, that nothing in this chapter shall
prohibit the city from stamping numbers on the frames of bicycles on which no
serial number can be found, or on which the number is illegible or insufficient
for identification purposes.
(Ord. 2877 § 6, 1975: Ord. 2051 (part), 1961: prior code § 16.06)
10.64.080   Sirens and whistles.
   No person shall equip a bicycle with a siren or whistle or operate or use a
bicycle so equipped; provided, that nothing in this section prohibits the
equipping, operation or use of a bicycle with an unusual kind of bicycle horn
or bell as approved by the chief of police.
(Ord. 2877 § 10 (part), 1975: Ord. 2051 (part), 1961: prior code § 16.12)
10.64.090   Handlebar grips.
   Every bicycle that is equipped with handlebar grips must have the grips
securely glued or cemented to the handlebars.
(Ord. 2877 § 10 (part), 1975: Ord. 2051 (part), 1961: prior code § 16.13)
10.64.100   Carriers.
   Every bicycle equipped with a carrier must have the carrier securely
attached to the bicycle.
(Ord. 2877 § 10 (part), 1975: Ord. 2051 (part), 1961: prior code § 16.14)
10.64.110   Compliance with mechanical standards.
   It is unlawful for any person to ride or operate a bicycle in the city
unless the bicycle is equipped as provided in this chapter and unless the
bicycle is in safe mechanical condition.
(Ord. 2877 § 10 (part), 1975: Ord. 2051 (part), 1961: prior code § 16.20)
10.64.120   Rules of the road.
   It is unlawful for any person to ride or operate a bicycle in the city in
violation of the rules of the road as set forth in Sections
10.64.130 through
10.64.210.
(Ord. 2877 § 10 (part), 1975: Ord. 2051 (part), 1961: prior code § 16.21)
10.64.130   Riding bicycles on sidewalks and in undercrossings.
   (a)   No person shall ride or operate a bicycle upon any sidewalk in a
business district.
   (b)   No person shall ride or operate a bicycle upon any sidewalk in the
University Avenue undercrossing below Alma Street and the Palo Alto train
station or in the California Avenue undercrossing below Alma Street and the
California Avenue train station when others are present.
   (c)   Any person riding or operating a bicycle upon any sidewalk shall
exercise due care and shall yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians.
   (d)   No person riding or operating a bicycle upon any sidewalk where a
bicycle lane or path has been established shall travel in a direction other
than as posted.
(Ord. 5433 § 2, 2018: Ord. 3055 § 1, 1978: Ord. 2877 910 (part), 1975: Ord.
2652 § 7, 1972: Ord. 2496 (part), 1969: Ord. 2470 (part), 1968: Ord. 2051
(part), 1961: prior code § 16.22)
10.64.140   Riding bicycles on streets.
   Any person riding or operating a bicycle upon any street where a bicycle
lane or path appropriate to his direction of travel is established and
officially designated may ride or operate such bicycle in such bicycle lane or
path or on the sidewalk where otherwise allowed by this code. "Street" means a
way or place of whatever nature publicly maintained and open to the use of the
public for purposes of travel.
(Ord. 2877 § 10 (part), 1975: Ord. 2771 § 1, 1974: Ord. 2652 § 8, 1972)
10.64.150   Vehicles prohibited from bicycle paths.
   No person shall operate a vehicle within an established and officially
designated bicycle path except for purposes of ingress or egress to and from
driveways, or for purposes of intersectional travel.
(Ord. 4453 § 60, 1997: Ord. 2877 § 10 (part), 1975: Ord. 2652 § 9, 1972)
10.64.160   Hitching rides on vehicles.
   No person riding or occupying any bicycle, coaster, roller skates, roller
blades, sled, skateboard, toy vehicle, motorcycle, moped, or any other similar
human-powered or motor-powered device shall attach the same or himself or
herself to any vehicle or device when upon a public right-of-way, or upon any
land, property, or facilities owned or controlled by the city of Palo Alto.
(Ord. 3880 § 1 (part), 1989: Ord. 3233 § 7, 1980: Ord. 2972 § 1 (part), 1977:
Ord. 2877 § 10 (part), 1975: Ord. 2652 § 10, 1972: Ord. 2051 (part), 1961:
prior code § 16.23)
10.64.170   Passengers on vehicles and other devices.
   No person riding or operating a bicycle, when upon a public right-of-way or
upon park or open space lands owned and/or controlled by the city of Palo Alto,
shall be permitted to carry another person upon the bicycle; provided, however,
that this prohibition shall not apply to bicycles which are built for two
persons to ride and propel the same or to the carrying of a child when the
child is securely fastened to a seat designed to carry a child or to the rider
or operator if the child is under two years of age.
(Ord. 4642 §12, 2000: Ord. 3233 § 8, 1980: Ord. 2877 § 10 (part), 1975: Ord.
2051 (part), 1961: prior code § 16.24)
10.64.180   Towing.
   No person riding or operating a bicycle, moped, motorcycle, sled, toy
vehicle, or any other similar human-powered or motor-powered device upon a
public right-of-way or upon park or open space lands owned and/or controlled by
the city of Palo Alto shall tow any other vehicle or person, including a
skateboard and rider, except that bicycle trailers used for delivery or
transportation of newspapers, magazines, people or merchandise may be towed
when being used in such activity.
(Ord. 4642 §13, 2000: Ord. 3233 § 9, 1980: Ord. 2972 § 1 (part) 1977: Ord 2877
§ 10 (part) 1975: Ord. 2051 (part), 1961: prior code § 16.25)
10.64.190   Racing.
   No person riding or operating a bicycle, moped, skateboard, roller skates,
roller blades, sled, toy vehicle, or any other similar human-powered or motor-
powered device upon a public right-of-way or upon any land, property, or
facilities owned or controlled by the city of Palo Alto, shall participate in
any race, speed, or endurance contest unless such race, speed or endurance
contest has the written permission of the city manager and is under the
supervision of the chief of police.
(Ord. 3880 § 1 (part), 1989: Ord. 3233 § 10, 1980: Ord. 2877 § 10 (part), 1975:
Ord. 2051 (part), 1961: prior code § 16.26)
10.64.200   Trick riding.
   No person riding or operating a bicycle, moped, coaster, roller skates,
roller blades, sled, skateboard, toy vehicle, or motorcycle shall perform any
acrobatic, fancy, stunt, or trick riding upon any public right-of-way, or upon
any space, land, property or facilities owned or controlled by the city of Palo
Alto.
(Ord. 3880 § 1 (part), 1989: Ord. 3233 § 11, 1980: Ord. 2877 § 10 (part), 1975:
Ord. 2051 (part), 1961: prior code § 16.27)
10.64.210   Parking and parking spaces.
   (a)   No person shall park a bicycle against any window or parking meter or
on the main-traveled portion of the sidewalk, nor in such manner as to
constitute a hazard to pedestrians, traffic or property.
   (b)   Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, when
bicycle parking spaces have been established and designated by official signs
and markings pursuant to
Chapter 10.40, no person shall park a bicycle in the vicinity thereof except in
such bicycle parking spaces.
(Ord. 2877 § 10 (part), 1975: Ord. 2051 (part), 1961: prior code § 16.28)
10.64.220   Speed limits on shared-use paths.
   (a)   No person shall ride or operate any bicycle, skateboard, or any other
transportation vehicle or device in excess of fifteen miles per hour upon on a
shared-use path when pedestrians are present.
   (b)   No person shall operate any transportation vehicle or device at a
speed greater than is reasonable for safe operation, nor in any manner which
may endanger the safety of others.
(Ord. 5433 § 3, 2018)
10.64.230   Use of roller skates, skateboards and coasters prohibited in
business districts.
   No person shall skate with roller skates, or roller blades, propel any
coaster wagon or vehicle or ride any skateboard upon any sidewalk, or roadway,
or upon any public right-of-way, or upon any land, property or facilities owned
or controlled by city of Palo Alto, if such right-of-way, land, property or
facility is located within any business district of the city as defined in
California Vehicle Code, Section 235, and as it may hereafter be amended.
(Ord. 3880 § 1 (part), 1989: Ord. 2972 § 1 (part), 1977: Ord. 2877 § 10 (part),
1975: Ord. 2051 (part), 1961: prior code § 16.45)
10.64.240   Use of coasters, roller skates, skateboards and similar devices.
   No persons upon roller skates, roller blades, or riding in or by means of
any coaster, skateboard, toy vehicle or similar device shall go upon any
roadway or upon any city owned, operated, or controlled parking lots, garages,
or other city-owned property and facilities, except as otherwise provided in
this chapter.
(Ord. 3880 § 1 (part), 1989: Ord. 3684 § 1, 1986: Ord. 2972 § 1 (part), 1977:
Ord. 2877 § 10 (part), 1975: Ord. 2051 (part), 1961: prior code § 16.46)
10.64.241   Use of skateboards in residential districts.
   The riding of skateboards shall be permitted upon public sidewalks and
roadways in residential districts of the city of Palo Alto with the exception
that the riding of skateboards shall not be permitted:
   (a)   Upon any freeway, or upon any of the following arterial and/or
collector roadways or streets:
   Alma Street
   Arastradero Road
   Arboretum Way
   California Avenue
   Coyote Deer Creek
   East Bayshore Road
   El Camino Real
   El Camino Way
   Embarcadero Road
   Foothill Expressway
   Hanover Street (South of California)
   Hansen Way
   Hillview Avenue
   Middle field Road
   Oregon Expressway
   Page Mill Road
   Palo Alto Avenue
   Porter Way
   San Antonio Road
   Sand Hill Road
   Skyline Boulevard
   Stanford Avenue
   University Avenue
   West Bayshore Road;
   (b)   Upon any public or private sidewalk or ramp, or accessway specially
designed for use by the handicapped;
   (c)   Upon any private or public property where not otherwise prohibited by
any provision of this chapter, when such property has been posted pursuant to
this section. The city manager or his designee is authorized to post or erect
or cause to be posted or erected, signs, at the owner's expense, prohibiting
the riding of skateboards or similar devices, in or on those premises for which
such a request has been made to, and approved by, the chief of police or his
designee.
(Ord. 3880 § 2 (part), 1989)
10.64.242   Hours for skateboard riding.
   A reflective device or devices or reflective clothing, arranged or worn on
the person of the rider in a manner which is visible from all directions, shall
be used while riding a skateboard in the city of Palo Alto from sunset until
sunrise the following day.
(Ord. 3880 § 2 (part), 1989)
10.64.243   Rules of the road for skateboarders.
   Persons riding skateboards, as otherwise permitted under this chapter, shall
obey the following rules of the road:
   (a)   Obey all stop signs, traffic signals, yield signs, and such other
traffic-control devices;
   (b)   When in the roadway, travel to the far right side of the roadway;
   (c)   Yield the right-of-way to pedestrians whenever and wherever they are
encountered;
   (d)   Not impede or interfere with the flow of vehicular traffic;
   (e)   Yield to approaching vehicles when entering any roadway;
   (f)   Not impede or interfere with the flow of bicycle traffic in bicycle
lanes;
   (g)   When on sidewalks, proceed with due care and at a safe speed;
   (h)   Not allow any other person, or persons, to ride the skateboard
simultaneously with the rider.
(Ord. 3880 § 2 (part), 1989)
10.64.244   Safety of skateboard riders.
   Persons who ride skateboards shall not wear headphones while riding
skateboards.
(Ord. 3880 § 2 (part), 1989)
10.64.245   Manner of skateboard operation.
   No person shall ride a skateboard recklessly, or in such a manner as to
cause danger or injury to himself or to others.
(Ord. 3880 § 2 (part), 1989)
10.64.250   Enforcement.
   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an
infraction and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1.08 of this code. Where any provision of this chapter or of state law
with respect to bicycles, roller skates, skateboards and coasters has been
violated by any juvenile under the age of eighteen years, in lieu of the
institution of criminal proceedings under
Chapter 1.08 or of proceedings in the juvenile court, the chief of police may
prohibit the operation upon the streets, alleys, and public places in the city
for a period not to exceed thirty days of a bicycle, roller skate, skateboard
or coaster so used in such violation, and in such event the bicycle, roller
skate, skateboard or coaster so used in such violation may be impounded by the
chief of police and retained during the period of operation which is
prohibited.
(Ord. 4712 § 2, 2001: Ord. 2877 § 10 (part), 1975: Ord. 2051 (part), 1961:
prior code § 16.47)
10.64.251   Parents of skateboard riders.
   The parent of any child, and/or the guardian of any ward, shall not
authorize or knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any of the
provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 3880 § 2 (part) 1989)
Chapter 10.70
RESERVED*
   *   Editor’s Note: Chapter 10.70, Trip Reduction and Travel Demand,
previously codified herein, was repealed in its entirety by Section 10 of
Ordinance No. 5406.
Title 11 ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT PROCEDURE
Chapters:
   
11.04   General Provisions
Chapter 11.04
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sections:
   
11.04.010   Adoption of procedures.
   
11.04.020   Consistency.
   
11.04.030   Public review.
11.04.010   Adoption of procedures.
   The city shall adopt by resolution objectives, criteria, and procedures for
the evaluation of projects and the preparation of environmental impact reports
and negative declaration pursuant to Division 13 of the California Public
Resources Code.
(Ord. 3068 § 1 (part), 1978)
11.04.020   Consistency.
   The adopted objectives, criteria, and procedures shall be consistent with
the provisions of Division 13 of the California Public Resources Code and with
the guidelines adopted by the Secretary of the Resources Agency pursuant to
Section 21083 of the California Public Resources Code.
(Ord. 3068 § 1 (part), 1978)
11.04.030   Public review.
   A copy of the adopted objectives, criteria, and procedures shall be placed
in all city libraries for public review. Any person may obtain a copy from the
planning department at no charge or for a reasonable fee, as determined by the
city manager in the municipal fee schedule.
(Ord. 3068 § 1 (part), 1978)
Title 12 PUBLIC WORKS AND UTILITIES
Chapters:
   
12.04   Definitions
   
12.08   Maintenance and Construction of Streets, Sidewalks, Driveways, and
Driveway Approaches
   
12.09   Equipment or Facilities in Rights-of-Way
   
12.10   Street Cut Fees
   
12.11   Parklets
   
12.12   Encroachments
   
12.13   State Video Service Franchisees
   
12.16   Underground Utilities
   
12.20   Utility Rules and Regulations
   
12.24   Fluoridation
   
12.28   Utility Systems Revenue Bonds
   
12.32   Water Use Regulations
Chapter 12.04
DEFINITIONS
Sections:
   
12.04.010   Definitions generally.
   
12.04.020   Person.
   
12.04.030   Public works.
   
12.04.040   Utility or utilities or public utility or public utilities.
   
12.04.041   Communication services.
   
12.04.050   Underground utility district.
   
12.04.060   Poles and overhead lines and associated overhead structures.
12.04.010   Definitions generally.
   For the purposes of this Title 12, unless the context clearly requires a
different meaning, the words, terms and phrases hereafter set forth shall have
the meanings given them in this
Chapter 12.04 or, as appropriate,
Chapter 2.11 and
Chapter 12.13.
(Ord. 4945 § 17, 2007: Ord. 1886 (part), 1959: prior code § 33.01 (part))
12.04.020   Person.
   The term "person" shall mean an individual, a sole proprietor, a receiver, a
trustee, a general partnership, a limited partnership, a limited liability
partnership, a joint venture, a firm, an unincorporated association, a
syndicate, a club, a society, a trust, a private corporation, a public
corporation, a limited liability company, a municipal corporation, a county, a
state, a national gov-ernment, a county, state or federal agency, board or
commission, a water district, a municipal utility district, a public utility
district, a political subdivision, a school district, a drainage, irrigation,
levee, reclamation or a water conservation district; a mosquito abatement
district, or a flood control district, whether acting for himself, herself, or
itself or in any representative capacity.
(Ord. 5267 § 1, 2014; Ord. 4642 § 14, 2000: Ord. 1886 (part), 1959: prior code
§ 33.01(a))
12.04.030   Public works.
   The term "public works" shall mean structures, utilities and appurtenances
on, above or below the ground level which shall have been or are to be
installed, constructed or reconstructed for the use or convenience of the
general public or the residents of the area served by the public works,
including, but not limited to, streets, sidewalks, surface and subsurface storm
drainage facilities, sanitary sewage facilities, runways, taxiways and aprons
or other parts of a general aviation airport, gas, water, electric, broadband,
fiber optics and communications services equipment or facilities, easements,
street signs and drainage grades of private properties abutting or having any
effect upon such public works.
(Ord. 5267 § 2, 2014; Ord. 4945 § 18, 2007: Ord. 1886 (part), 1959: prior code
§ 33.01(b))
12.04.040   Utility or utilities or public utility or public utilities.
   The term "utility" or "utilities" or "public utility" or "public utilities"
shall mean and include any water, gas, sewer, refuse, storm drain, electric,
general aviation airport, broadband, fiber optics or communications service and
all persons supplying the same.
(Ord. 5267 § 3, 2014; Ord. 4945 § 19, 2007: Ord. 2231 (part), 1965: prior code
§ 37.101 (part))
12.04.041   Communication services.
   The term "communications service" or "communication services" shall mean and
include telephone, cable and video services as defined in the California Public
Utilities Code. The term "communications service equipment or facilities" means
any equipment or facilities as defined in Section
2.11.020(i) that are used to provide "communications service" or "communication
services."
(Ord. 4945 § 20, 2007: Ord. 3910 § 1, 1989)
12.04.050   Underground utility district.
   The terms "underground utility district" or "district" shall mean an area in
the city within which poles and overhead lines and associated overhead
structures are prohibited by this title.
(Ord. 2231 (part), 1965: prior code § 37.101 (part))
12.04.060   Poles and overhead lines and associated overhead structures.
   As used in Title 12, the phrase "poles and overhead lines and associated
structures" shall mean and include, but not be limited to, poles, towers,
supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms, cross-arms, braces,
transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches, communication circuits, vaults or
cabinets containing communications service equipment or facilities, appliances,
attachments and appurtenances located at or above ground level upon, along,
across or over the streets, alleys and public rights-of-way and other public
property of the city and used or useful in supplying electric service,
communications service or similar or associated service.
(Ord. 4945 § 21, 2007: (Ord. 2231 (part), 1965: prior code § 37.101 (part))
Chapter 12.08
MAINTENANCE AND CONSTRUCTION OF STREETS, SIDEWALKS, DRIVEWAYS, AND DRIVEWAY
APPROACHES
Sections:
   
12.08.010   Permit required.
   
12.08.020   Application for permit.
   
12.08.030   Exemptions.
   
12.08.040   Permit fee.
   
12.08.050   Revocation of permit.
   
12.08.060   Permit subject to regulation.
   
12.08.070   Obstructions during construction.
   
12.08.080   Cleanup.
   
12.08.090   Elimination of abandoned driveway.
   
12.08.100   Removal of monuments.
   
12.08.110   Variances.
   
12.08.120   Insurance required.
   
12.08.130   Sidewalks, driveways and driveway approaches.
   
12.08.140   Contracts with owners for street work.
12.08.010   Permit required.
   (a)   It is unlawful for any person, utility, or public utility, without
first obtaining a permit so to do from the director of public works-city
engineer, to perform any work within the public rights-of-way or any street or
sidewalk or within any city-owned property in the city, including, but not
limited to, the following:
   (1)   Construction or repair of any sidewalk, driveway approach, curb or
gutter;
   (2)   Cutting, breaking, or removing any curb;
   (3)   Excavating in, digging up, displacing, breaking or otherwise damaging
any public street or sidewalk; or
   (4)   Performing any work on poles or overhead lines and associated overhead
structures located in the public rights-of-way at or above any public street or
sidewalk.
   (b)   In cases of an emergency nature, including, but not limited, to
leaking or ruptured gas or water lines, it shall be a sufficient compliance
with this section if the necessary permit is obtained on the next succeeding
business day after an emergency opening has been made, provided the person,
utility, or public utility making the opening has provided barriers and
lighting adequate to protect the public in accordance with the city's public
works standard drawings and construction specifications.
(Ord. 4945 § 22, 2007: Ord. 4563 § 1, 1999: Ord. 1924, 1960: Ord. 1886 (part),
1959: prior code § 33.20)
12.08.020   Application for permit.
   Any person applying for a permit required by the provisions of Section
12.08.010 shall file with the city engineer an application therefor in writing
on a form to be furnished by the city for that purpose. Such form shall specify
the following:
   (a)   The name and residence of the applicant;
   (b)   The location of the property in front of which the proposed
construction or repair is to be made;
   (c)   The name of the person, firm or corporation who will perform the work;
   (d)   The nature, purpose and dimensions of the proposed work;
   (e)   The date of commencement and date of completion of the work;
   (f)   Such additional information as the city engineer may require.
(Ord. 1886 (part), 1959: prior code § 33.21)
12.08.030   Exemptions.
   (a)   The provisions of this chapter shall not be applicable to any
excavation work under the direction of competent city authorities by employees
of the city or by any contractor of the city performing work for and in behalf
of the city or to the property owner who personally installs a surface
improvement only of asphalt cement or brick in any parkway adjacent to his
property.
   (b)   The provisions of this chapter shall not be applicable to any
subdivider whose work is covered by a contract with the city.
(Ord. 1886 (part), 1959: prior code § 33.22)
12.08.040   Permit fee.
   (a)   No permit shall be issued by the city engineer to perform any of the
work described in Section
12.08.010 until the applicant has paid to the city a fee as estimated by the
city engineer and set forth in the municipal fee schedule; provided, that
should any person begin any street surface improvement or street excavation
without obtaining the necessary permit therefor, the applicable fee shall be
doubled.
   (b)   No fee shall be payable if the applicant for a permit is a government
body or agency.
(Ord. 2960 § 48, 1976: Ord. 2566 § 10, 1970: Ord. 1886 (part), 1959: prior code
§ 33.23)
12.08.050   Revocation of permit.
   The city engineer shall have the authority to revoke any permit heretofore
or hereafter granted under the provisions of this chapter when he finds that
the permittee has failed to comply with the requirements of the permit or any
provisions of this chapter or when he finds such action to be in the public
interest.
(Ord. 1886 (part), 1959: prior code § 33.24)
12.08.060   Permit subject to regulation.
   (a)   The permit issued by the director of public works-city engineer under
the provisions of this
Chapter 12.08 authorizes the permittee to perform the work specified therein
subject to the following regulations:
   (1)   All sidewalk, driveway approach, curb or gutter work shall be done by
a licensed contractor to the satisfaction of the city engineer and must be
constructed in accordance with the City of Palo Alto Department of Public Works
Standard Drawings and Specifications.
   (2)   All prepared sub-grades and surfaces shall be inspected and approved
by the city before any concrete is poured. All completed work shall be subject
to approval by the city. At least twenty-four hours' advance notice shall be
given to the city by the permittee so that the city may schedule inspections.
   (3)   No sidewalk, driveway approach, curb or curb and gutter shall be
constructed other than of concrete unless special permission therefor has first
been obtained from the city engineer.
   (4)   No permit shall be issued to remove any curbi unless a driveway
approach between curb and sidewalk is to be installed.
   (5)   The necessary adjustments to utility facilities, light standards, fire
hydrants, catch basins, street or railway signs, signals or other public
improvements or installations shall be accomplished without cost to the city.
   (6)   Permittee shall maintain the premises in a safe manner and shall
provide adequate barricades and lights at its own expense to protect the safety
of the public using the public rights-of-way, any adjacent streets or sidewalks
and other public property and shall indemnify and hold harmless the city free
from any damages incurred by its operations.
   (7)   All debris and surplus materials shall be removed promptly upon
completion of the work.
   (8)   All work shall be completed within thirty days from the date of
issuance of the permit, provided that such time may be extended by the city
engineer for good cause.
   (9)   In addition to the requirements of the City of Palo Alto Department of
Public Works Standard Drawings and Specifications, all driveways shall be
constructed in accordance with the following specifications:
   (A)   The distance between driveways, as measured from the radius return,
shall not be less than twenty feet.
   (B)   No more than fifty percent of the frontage upon any street of the lot
or lots or parcel of land to be served thereby shall be devoted to driveways,
nor shall any driveway exceed thirty-five feet in width.
   (C)   No driveway shall be located as to interfere with intersecting
sidewalks, crosswalks, traffic signals, lampposts, fire hydrants, or other
public improvements or facilities. A clear distance of thirty inches shall be
maintained between a driveway and any such installation.
(Ord. 4945 § 23, 2007: Ord. 3065 § 1, 1978: Ord. 1886 (part), 1959: prior code
§ 33.30)
12.08.070   Obstructions during construction.
   The permit granted pursuant to Section
12.08.010 shall prescribe the date when work shall begin and may include the
right to place or cause to be placed upon the street adjacent to the place
where the construction, alteration or repair work is to be performed such
materials or appliance as may be necessary for use in performing such work;
provided, however, that such materials and appliances shall not occupy more
than one-third of the roadway in front of said construction work and shall be
placed thereon subject to the direction and approval of the city engineer. All
materials, debris and appliances shall be so placed as not to obstruct any
gutterway and shall be so cared for as to prevent them from being blown or
otherwise carried into any catchbasin or any portion of the street other than
that lawfully occupied by such obstruction; provided, however, that the city
engineer may order such materials, appliances and debris, or any portion
thereof, to be removed within three days after written notice, and in the event
the same is not removed within the time prescribed by the city engineer, he may
cause the same to be removed and charge the costs thereof against the
permittee. The placing of materials, appliances and debris upon the street for
the purpose of such construction work and the removal thereof shall be held to
be a part of such construction work.
(Ord. 1886 (part), 1959: prior code § 33.31. 1959)
12.08.080   Cleanup.
   As the excavation work progresses, all streets and private properties shall
be thoroughly cleaned of all rubbish, excess earth, rock and other debris
resulting from such work. All cleanup operations at the location of such
excavation shall be accomplished at the expense of the permittee and shall be
completed to the satisfaction of the city engineer. From time to time as may be
ordered by the city engineer and in any event immediately after completion of
said work, the permittee shall at his or its own expense clean up and remove
all refuse and unused materials of any kind resulting from said work, and upon
failure to do so within twenty-four hours after having been notified to do so
by the city engineer, the work may be done by the city engineer and the cost
thereof charged to the permittee, and the permittee shall also be liable for
the cost thereof under the surety bond provided hereunder.
(Ord. 1886 (part), 1959: prior code § 33.32)
12.08.090   Elimination of abandoned driveway.
   The city engineer shall have the power and authority to determine that the
use for which a driveway was constructed has been abandoned and give written
notice requiring that the curb, parkway and sidewalk shall be restored to its
original condition or that a curb be constructed if none previously existed and
that the parkway and sidewalk be constructed to grade. Such notice shall be
given by depositing in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to
the owner of the property at the address shown on the last equalized assessment
roll of the city and shall be effective upon such mailing. If such work is not
commenced within thirty days after notice from the city engineer, the city may
proceed with such work in conformance with the provisions of the Streets and
Highways Code.
(Ord. 1886 (part), 1959: prior code § 33.33)
12.08.100   Removal of monuments.
   It is unlawful for any person to destroy, injure or remove any monument or
grade stake erected or placed by the city engineer, provided, if it shall
become necessary for any person in pursuit of any lawful purpose to have any
such monument or stake removed, notice of such necessity must be given to the
city engineer, who shall proceed forthwith at the cost of the person requiring
such removal to remove such monument and replace the same in its original
position as soon as the object shall be obtained for which the removal shall
have been made.
(Ord. 1886 (part), 1959: prior code § 33.34)
12.08.110   Variances.
   (a)   The city engineer is hereby authorized to grant in writing variances
from the provisions of Sections
12.08.060,
12.08.070 and
12.08.080 provided he first determines that the following conditions are
present:
   (1)   The variance requested arises from peculiar physical conditions not
ordinarily existing in similar districts in the city, or is due to the nature
of the business or operation upon the applicant's property;
   (2)   The variance requested is not against the public interest,
particularly safety, convenience and general welfare;
   (3)   The granting of the permit for the variance will not adversely affect
the rights of adjacent property owners or tenants; and
   (4)   The terms of this chapter will work unnecessary hardship upon the
applicant property owner or tenant.
   (b)   The decision of the city engineer on granting or denial of variances
shall be final.
(Ord. 1886 (part), 1959: prior code § 33.35)
12.08.120   Insurance required.
   No permit for the performance of any of the work specified in Section
12.08.010 of this chapter shall be granted until the applicant therefor has
placed on file with the city engineer a certificate of insurance of a
responsible and solvent corporation authorized to issue a policy of insurance
under the laws of the state of California that it has issued to or for the
benefit of such applicant the required insurance policy or policies. The
insurance policy or policies, including, but not limited to, commercial general
liability, commercial automobile liability, and property damage shall insure
the applicant for such permit, its directors, officers, agents and employees
and the city of Palo Alto, its officers, agents and employees against loss for
injury to or death of any person or damage to property arising out of or
resulting from the work authorized to be performed by such permit. The amount
of each policy for commercial general liability, commercial automobile
liability and property damage shall be not less than one million dollars on
account of any one occurrence or in the aggregate resulting in injury to or
death of one person or for damage to property. Such insurance shall contain an
endorsement specifying that it is primary coverage, any insurance carried by
the city being excess insurance only. The certificate of insurance shall
include a hold harmless and indemnity agreement in favor of the city.
(Ord. 4563 § 2, 1999: Ord. 1999, 1961: Ord. 1886 (part), 1959: prior code §
33.40)
12.08.130   Sidewalks, driveways and driveway approaches.
   The provisions of the Streets and Highways Code of the State of California,
shall be an alternative procedure governing the maintenance and the collection
of the cost or repair of sidewalks, driveways and driveway approaches in the
city of Palo Alto. For the purposes of this section, "sidewalk" as defined in
Section 5600 of said Code, shall also include a "driveway" and a "driveway
approach."
(Ord. 2068 (part), 1962: prior code § 33.02)
12.08.140   Contracts with owners for street work.
   As an alternative to the procedure provided in the Streets and Highways Code
for the maintenance and repair of sidewalks, driveways and driveway approaches,
the city manager may enter into contracts with owners of real property for the
city to do such work at the owners expense, and upon failure of the owner to
pay the cost thereof, for the same to become a lien on the tax roll against the
abutting property.
(Ord. 1886 (part), 1959: prior code § 33.03)
Chapter 12.09
EQUIPMENT OR FACILITIES IN RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Sections:
   
12.09.010   Regulations applicable to users of the public rights-of-way.
   
12.09.020   Maps and improvement plans.
12.09.010   Regulations applicable to users of the public rights-of-way.
   (a)   The construction, operation, maintenance and repair of equipment or
facilities in the public rights-of-way shall be performed in compliance with
all laws, practices, rules and regulations affecting such equipment or
facilities. This shall include, but not be limited to, applicable zoning and
safety codes, construction standards, drawings and specifications, and rules
and regulations for the provision of notice to persons that may be affected by
the construction of such equipment or facilities, and such directives governing
the time, place and manner in which such equipment or facilities may be
installed or constructed in the public rights-of-way. Any person, utility or
public utility engaged in the construction, operation, maintenance or repair of
equipment or facilities in the public rights-of-way or on public or private
property shall exercise reasonable care in the performance of all of its
activities and shall use commonly accepted methods and devices for the
prevention of failures and accidents that are likely to cause damage, injury,
or nuisance to the public or to property.
   (b)   Any public rights-of-way or public or private property that is
disturbed or damaged during the construction, operation, maintenance or repair
of facilities permitted under Title 12 by or on behalf of a permittee shall be
promptly repaired by that permittee at its cost and expense. Any public or
private property and any public rights-of-way shall be restored to the
satisfaction of the owner thereof or to its original condition existing before
the occurrence of any disturbance or damage or to a condition that does not
constitute a threat to the general health, safety or welfare of the public or
safe condition of property.
   (c)   A person, utility or public utility with equipment or facilities
located in the public rights-of-way shall, by a time specified by the director
of public works-city engineer, protect, support, temporarily disconnect,
relocate or remove any of its equipment or facilities, when such action
required by the city in the exercise of its governmental or proprietary powers,
by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, rights-of-way construction or
repair, including, but not limited to, re-grading, re-surfacing, or widening
thereof, street vacation, construction, installation or repair of sewers,
drains, water pipes, power lines, signal lines, tracks, or any other similar
system or utility, public works, public facility, or improvement, or for any
other purpose where the work would be aided by the removal or relocation of the
equipment or facilities of that person, utility or public utility.
   (1)   The city engineer shall provide notice, describing the location of the
facilities to be constructed, at least one week prior to the date and time by
which a person, utility or public utility must protect, support, temporarily
disconnect, relocate or remove its facilities.
   (2)   During an emergency, or in the event the equipment or facilities of a
person, utility or public utility in the public rights-of-way create or
contribute to an imminent threat or danger to person or property, the city may
protect, support, temporarily disconnect, remove or relocate any such equipment
or facilities without prior notice, and charge the owner thereof for costs
incurred.
   (d)   To accommodate the construction, operation, maintenance or repair of
facilities of another person, utility or public utility authorized to use the
public rights-of-way or public property, a permittee shall, by a time specified
by such person, utility or public utility, protect, support, temporarily
disconnect, relocate or remove its equipment or facilities. The permittee must
be given notice describing the proposed location of the construction,
operation, maintenance or repair work no less than fifteen days prior to the
date by which such work must be completed. The city engineer at the request of
those affected may resolve disputes concerning the responsibility for costs
associated with the removal or relocation of equipment or facilities among the
entities authorized to construct in the public rights-of-way or on public
property if the entities are unable to reach a resolution.
   (e)   A permittee shall, at the request of any person, utility or public
utility holding a valid permit issued by a government authority, temporarily
raise or lower its wires by a time specified to permit the moving of buildings
or other objects. A permittee shall be given no less than seven days' advance
notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes. The expense of such
temporary removal or the raising or lowering of wires shall be paid by the
person, utility or public utility requesting the same.
   (f)   A permittee shall remove its facilities in the public rights-of-way
that it intends to abandon within ninety days after it gives notice to the city
of its intention to abandon. If within such ninety-day period the city
determines that the safety, appearance, function or use of the public rights-
of-way or the facilities will be adversely affected, the permittee may abandon
its facilities after receipt of notice of the city. A permittee that abandons
its facilities must, upon request, transfer ownership of the facilities to the
city at no cost, and execute necessary quitclaim deeds and indemnify and hold
harmless the city against future costs associated with the mitigation or
elimination of any environmental hazard associated with such abandoned
facilities.
   (g)   A permittee that places facilities in an underground location shall be
a member of the regional notification center for subsurface installations
(Underground Services Alert) as may be required by Section 4216 et seq. of the
California Government Code. The permittee shall field-mark the locations of its
underground facilities upon request without cost to the city.
(Ord. 4945 § 25, 2007)
12.09.020   Maps and improvement plans.
   A person, utility or public utility owning or possessing equipment or
facilities in the public rights-of-way shall maintain and provide to the
director of public works-city engineer accurate maps and improvement plans, in
detail and scale as may be established by the city engineer, which identify the
location and size and contain a general description of all of its equipment or
facilities and any power supply sources, including, but not limited to,
voltages and connections. Maps and improvement plans shall be based on post-
construction inspections that are intended to verify the locations of such
equipment or facilities. The maps and improvement plans, which shall be
provided in three mil Mylar® as well as in compact disk format or other
commercially available electronic format specified by the city engineer, shall
be updated by the person, utility or public utility annually and provided to
the city engineer.
(Ord. 4945 § 26, 2007)
Chapter 12.10
STREET CUT FEES
Sections:
   
12.10.010   Purpose of street cut fee.
   
12.10.020   Establishment of street cut fee.
   
12.10.030   Variance from payment of street cut fee.
   
12.10.040   Exceptions.
   
12.10.050   Utility master plans.
   
12.10.060   Coordination with city.
12.10.010   Purpose of street cut fee.
   Excavations in paved streets owned and maintained by the city degrade and
shorten the life of the surface of the streets, and this degradation increases
the frequency and cost to the public of necessary resurfacing, maintenance, and
repair. It is appropriate that entities responsible for excavating into the
city's rights-of-way bear this burden rather than the taxpayers of the city. In
addition, establishment of a street cut fee will create an incentive for
coordination of efforts in excavating the streets to install, repair and
replace subsurface facilities and utilities.
(Ord. 4804 § 2 (part), 2003)
12.10.020   Establishment of street cut fee.
   No person shall excavate in the public right-of-way without, in addition to
all other requirements of this code, having first paid to the city a "street
cut fee." The amount of this street cut fee shall be set from time to time by
resolution, and shall not exceed the reasonable cost necessary to mitigate the
degradation to the public streets caused by such excavation. Funds collected as
street cut fees shall only be expended for the rehabilitation and resurfacing
of the public right-of-way.
(Ord. 4804 § 2 (part), 2003)
12.10.030   Variance from payment of street cut fee.
   Any person subject to the street cut fee may request that the director of
public works or designee waive the requirement of payment of the street cut fee
due to individual circumstances that demonstrate, on a case-by-case basis, that
the amount of the fee is not reasonably related to the projected impact of the
proposed excavation.
(Ord. 4804 § 2 (part), 2003)
12.10.040   Exceptions.
   (a)   Excavations in streets scheduled within one year of the date specified
in the Notice to Proceed for the city's annual street maintenance program
capital improvement project shall be exempt from the street cut fee. The
department of public works shall endeavor to notify public utilities of streets
so scheduled.
   (b)   No street cut fee shall be charged for underground utility district
projects, utility line relocations necessitated by city-funded street work
projects or by street vacations or abandonments.
   (c)   No street cut fee shall be charged with respect to excavation in a
sidewalk, driveway, curb, and gutter.
   (d)   No street cut fee shall be charged for emergency work as defined as
causing an imminent risk to public health and safety.
(Ord. 4804 § 2 (part), 2003)
12.10.050   Utility master plans.
   Any utility or public utility owning, operating or installing in the public
rights-of-way or any city street, alley, sidewalk, or any other public place
equipment or facilities providing water, sewer, gas or electric service,
communications service, or other utility service, shall prepare and submit to
the director of public works-city engineer a utility master plan, in a format
specified by the city engineer, that shows the location of the utility's or
public utility's equipment or facilities in the public rights-of-way or any
city street, alley, sidewalk and other public place that are anticipated to
exist for the five years after the plan is submitted and approved. Utilities
and public utilities shall submit an initial utility master plan no later than
180 days after the effective date of the ordinance adopting this Section
12.10.050. Thereafter, each utility and public utility shall submit annually a
revised and update utility master plan containing any reference to a planned
major utility works. As used in this section, the term "planned major utility
works" refers to any and all future excavations planned by the utility or
public utility when the utility master plan or update is submitted that will
affect the public rights-of-way or any city street, alley, sidewalk, or other
public place for more than a total of fifteen days, provided that the utility
or public utility shall not be required to show future excavations planned to
occur more than five years after the date that the utility master plan or
update is submitted and approved. Any and all utility master plans submitted
pursuant to this Section
12.10.050 shall be deemed confidential to the fullest extent provided by law
and used solely for purposes of coordination.
(Ord. 4945 § 27, 2007: Ord. 4804 § 2 (part), 2003)
12.10.060   Coordination with city.
   (a)   Before a person, utility or public utility applies for an "Application
and Permit for Construction in the Public Street" to construct in the public
rights-of-way or any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place, the
applicant shall notify the director of public works-city engineer, and the city
engineer, or designee, shall review on behalf of the applicant the utility
master plans and the city's five-year repaving plan on file with the department
of public works. The applicant shall coordinate, to the fullest extent
practicable, with the utility and street work shown on such plans to minimize
damage to, and avoid undue disruption and interference with the public use of
such public rights-of-way, streets, alleys, sidewalks or other public places.
Such coordination shall include:
   (1)   Whenever two or more parties have concurrently proposed a major
excavation in the same block during a five-year period, they shall meet and
confer with the director of utilities, or designee, regarding whether it is
feasible to conduct a joint operation. If the director, or designee, determines
that it is feasible to conduct a joint operation, a single contractor shall be
selected and a single application fee charged.
   (2)   Any person, utility or public utility aggrieved by the director's
decision to require a joint operation may, within thirty days of receipt of the
director's written notice, file an appeal with the city manager in written form
in a manner prescribed by the director. Within thirty days of the filing of a
timely appeal from the director's determination, the city manager shall review
the appeal and issue a recommendation to the council to uphold or overturn the
action or determination of the director. The recommendation of the city manager
shall be placed on the consent calendar of the council within thirty days of
the filing of the appeal. In determining such appeal, the council shall
consider the impact of the proposed excavation on the neighborhood, the
applicant's need to provide services to a property or area, facilitating the
deployment of new technology as directed pursuant to official city policy, and
the public health, safety, welfare and convenience. The council may adopt the
recommendation of the city manager, or remove the appeal from the consent
calendar, which shall require a majority vote, and take action to uphold or
overturn the recommendation of the city manager. The decision of the council is
final.
   (b)   To avoid future excavations and to reduce the number of street
excavations, any person, utility or public utility providing utility or
communications service shall be requested, when practicable, to install
sufficient conduit to accommodate the reasonably foreseeable future business
growth needs of that person, utility or public utility.
(Ord. 5455 § 3, 2018: Ord. 4945 § 28, 2007: Ord. 4804 § 2 (part), 2003)
Chapter 12.11
PARKLETS
Sections:
   
12.11.010   Definitions.
   
12.11.020   Permit required.
   
12.11.030   Fees.
   
12.11.040   Location and uses of parklets.
   
12.11.050   Regulations.
   
12.11.060   Violations.
   
12.11.070   Violations declared a public nuisance.
   
12.11.080   Enforcement - Criminal Enforcement Authority.
12.11.010   Definitions.
   The following definitions apply to this chapter:
   (a)    Parklet is a fixed encroachment placed in the curbside lane that is
used principally for commercial activity to the general public.
   (b)   Person includes a natural person or any type of corporate entity
recognized by law, or any combination thereof.
(Ord. 5594 § 2, 2024)
12.11.020   Permit required.
   No person shall erect, construct, alter, repair, raise, build or move any
parklet or portion thereof upon any easement, right-of-way or parcel of land
conveyed, granted or dedicated in any manner to the city for street, drainage,
sewer or public utility purposes, provided that the Director of Public Works or
designee may grant a revocable permit to the owner to construct such structure
or to do such work when in their opinion the construction and maintenance
thereof would not interfere with any city facilities located in such easement
and would not be detrimental to the best interest of the city.
   (a)   Such permit shall be subject to revocation at any time by the Director
of Public Works or designee and would be subject to such terms and conditions
as the city manager or designee may consider reasonable for the protection of
the best interests of the city including but not limited to provisions that the
permittee shall hold the city, its officers, agents and employees free and
harmless from any liability for injuries to persons or property resulting from
the construction or maintenance of such encroachment and that the removal of
the structure when so requested by the city manager or designee shall be at the
permittee's expense.
   (b)   Such permit shall also provide that upon failure of the permittee to
remove such structure within a reasonable time after notice from the city
manager or his or her designee, the same may be abated and removed by the city
and the cost thereof billed to the permitteee.
   (c)   Notwithstanding PAMC Section
2.30.210(h), the Director of Public Works or their designee may execute a
permit issued under this chapter that includes the rent, lease, license or use
of city real property for a term up to three years at a time.
   (d)   If the city is required to move or alter city infrastructure in order
to enable a parklet to be located in a specific location, the city may seek
reimbursement of such costs as a condition of granting the permit.
   (e)   Permits issued under this chapter shall not be transferable. In the
case a permittee intends to transfer operation of a parklet to another person,
the new proposed operator must apply for a new permit.
   (f)   No person shall encumber any city property interest granted under this
chapter and any such encumbrance shall be void as a matter of law.
   (g)   Permits shall be issued only in areas designated pursuant to PAMC
Section
12.11.040.
   (h)   Parklets shall not be eligible for an encroachment permit under PAMC
Chapter 12.10.
(Ord. 5594 § 2, 2024)
12.11.030   Fees.
   All applicable fees authorized by the City’s Municipal Fee Schedule must be
paid prior to the issuance or renewal of any permit issued under this chapter.
A permit shall not be valid unless and until all applicable fees are paid to
the city.
(Ord. 5594 § 2, 2024)
12.11.040   Location and uses of parklets.
   The City Council shall, by ordinance or resolution, designate area(s) of the
city in which Director of Public Works or designee may issue permits for
parklets under this chapter. The City Council shall also specify the allowable
uses for parklets in such area(s). Such designation does not require the city
to issue a permit to any specific person or location within such area(s) or
grant any vested rights to any person under this chapter.
(Ord. 5594 § 2, 2024)
12.11.050   Regulations.
   The Director of Public Works or designee may promulgate regulations relating
to the use, placement, location, construction, maintenance, cleaning,
operation, safety, and removal of parklets, as well as administration of this
chapter. This authority shall be construed as broadly as possible but shall not
be interpreted to conflict with any other provision of this chapter or other
applicable laws.
(Ord. 5594 § 2, 2024)
12.11.060   Violations.
   It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision or to fail to comply
with any of the requirements of this chapter, any permits or conditions thereof
granted under this chapter, and any regulations promulgated under this chapter.
Violators shall be subject to any penalty or penalties authorized by law,
including but not limited to: suspension or termination of permit(s) granted
under this chapter; administrative enforcement pursuant to Chapters
1.12 and
1.16 of this code; and criminal enforcement pursuant to Chapter 1.08 of this
code. Each separate day or any portion thereof during which any violation
occurs or continues shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense.
   A person who is the holder of a permit which is terminated by the city under
this section shall not be eligible for any new permit under this chapter for
one year from either (1) the date of termination or (2) the date the parklet is
fully removed from its location as determined by the city, whichever is later.
(Ord. 5594 § 2, 2024)
12.11.070   Violations declared a public nuisance.
   Any parklet constructed, altered, moved, replaced, or otherwise maintained,
or any use of property in a manner contrary to the provisions of this chapter
and all permits and regulations issued pursuant to it, is unlawful and a public
nuisance, and the city may commence such action or actions, proceeding or
proceedings as may be deemed appropriate for the abatement, removal, and
enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law, and shall take such other
steps and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant
such relief as will abate and remove such building or use and restrain and
enjoin any person, firm, or corporation from constructing, altering, moving,
replacing, or otherwise maintaining any parklet, or using any property in a
manner contrary to the provisions of this title. The remedies permitted for a
public nuisance shall not be exclusive and the city may take any enforcement
action available under law.
(Ord. 5594 § 2, 2024)
12.11.080   Enforcement - Criminal Enforcement Authority.
   The employee positions designated in this section are authorized to exercise
the authority provided in California Penal Code section 836.5 for violations of
this chapter. The designated employee positions are: (1) Chief Building
Official; (2) city engineer; (3) code enforcement officer (including supervisor
and lead); (4) Engineering Technician III within the Public Works Department;
(5) Senior Engineer within the Public Works Department; (6) Director of Public
Works; and (7) Assistant Director of Public Works.
(Ord. 5594 § 2, 2024)
Chapter 12.12
ENCROACHMENTS*
Sections:
   
12.12.010   Building on public easement - Encroachment permit.
   
12.12.020   Commercial sidewalk encroachment permit - Criteria and review
procedures.
   
12.12.030   Exemptions.
   *   For official plan line regulations - See
Chapter 20.04. For applicable zoning regulations - See Section 18.88.060.
12.12.010   Building on public easement - Encroachment permit.
   No person shall erect, construct, alter, repair, raise, build or move any
building, structure, sign, fence, paving or portion thereof upon any easement,
right-of-way or parcel of land conveyed, granted or dedicated in any manner to
the city for street, drainage, sewer or public utility purposes, provided that
the city manager or his designee may grant a revocable permit to the owner to
construct such structure or to do such work when in his opinion the
construction and maintenance thereof would not interfere with any city
facilities located in such easement and would not be detrimental to the best
interest of the city. Such permit would be subject to revocation at any time by
the city manager or his designee and would be subject to such terms and
conditions as the city manager or his designee may consider reasonable for the
protection of the best interests of the city including but not limited to
provisions that the permittee shall hold the city, its officers, agents and
employees free and harmless from any liability for injuries to persons or
property resulting from the construction or maintenance of such encroachment
and that the removal of the structure when so requested by the city manager or
his designee shall be at the permittee's expense. Such permit may also provide
that upon failure of the permittee to remove such structure within a reasonable
time after notice from the city manager or his designee, the same may be abated
and removed by the city and the cost thereof made a lien upon the property
pursuant to the provisions of
Chapter 9.56 of this code.
(Ord. 3128 § 1, 1979: Ord. 2015 (part), 1961: prior code § 33.50)
12.12.020   Commercial sidewalk encroachment permit - Criteria and review
procedures.
   Subject also to the general regulations contained in Section
12.12.010, permits may be granted for commercial sidewalk encroachments in
accordance with the following criteria and procedures:
   (a)   Use. Commercial sidewalk encroachments shall be restricted to:
   (1)   Outdoor sales and display areas of flower and plant shops; and
   (2)   Outdoor eating areas of eating and drinking establishments.
   (b)   Location and Clearance.
   (1)   Commercial sidewalk encroachments shall be permitted only on public
sidewalks in areas of the city zoned community commercial (CC), service
commercial (CS), and neighborhood commercial (CN) and commercial downtown (CD);
   (2)   No commercial sidewalk encroachment shall be located in a manner that:
   (A)   Impedes access to any city inspection, maintenance and operation
devices or controls;
   (B)   Blocks curbside access to a loading zone, as defined in Section
10.40.010; or
   (C)   Impedes pedestrian access from curbside vehicles to the adjacent
sidewalk.
   (3)   No commercial sidewalk encroachment shall be permitted:
   (A)   Within a minimum sidewalk clearance width of eight feet, measured
between fixed objects (such as building walls and utility poles), planter wells
and/or curbs; or
   (B)   On a public sidewalk within a distance of ten feet from corner curb
lines and corner crosswalks.
   (c)   Permit Application. Application for a commercial sidewalk encroachment
permit shall be made to the director of public works or designee, by the owner
or lessee, with the consent of the owner, of the adjacent property. Such
application shall contain all information necessary for a determination on the
application including, but not limited to:
   (1)   A statement of intended use, a map showing location and clearance
distances and a sketch of the proposed encroachment, showing dimensions and
color;
   (2)   A fee, as set forth in the municipal fee schedule; and
   (3)   A certificate of insurance and a hold harmless and indemnity agreement
in favor of the city shall be submitted in accordance with the provisions of
Section
12.08.120.
   (d)   Review and Action on Application. A complete application for a
commercial sidewalk encroachment permit shall be reviewed by city staff for a
determination as to whether such application complies with the regulations
contained in this chapter. Such review shall include a referral to the design
staff of the department of planning and development services for review and
comment. The design of the commercial sidewalk encroachment shall be evaluated
as to whether it is reasonably compatible in scale, design and color with the
character of adjacent and nearby building facades and public spaces. The
director of public works, or designee, shall grant or deny the application. All
actions that will be taken under this subsection (d) shall be exercised in
accordance with the written guidelines, rules and regulations of the city.
   (e)   Conditions. Conditions of approval may be imposed on commercial
sidewalk encroachment permits where they are required for the maintenance of
the public health, safety and welfare.
   (f)   Revocation of Permit. The director of public works, or designee, may
revoke a commercial sidewalk encroachment permit if he or she determines that
the conditions of the permit or any provision of this chapter are being
violated, or if municipal use of the area is required for reasons of public
health, safety, welfare or convenience. In the case of a revocation, the
permittee shall be notified and shall be entitled to a hearing before the
director of public works, or designee, in accordance with the written
guidelines, rule and regulations of the city.
   (g)   Penalty and Citation. Any person, firm or corporation violating any
provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be punishable as provided by law. The following designated
employee positions may enforce the provisions of this chapter by the issuance
of citations, pursuant to authority provided in California Penal Code Section
836.5: Chief building official and ordinance compliance inspector.
(Ord. 5494 § 3, 2020: Ord. 4563 § 3, 1999: Ord. 3720 § 1, 1986)
12.12.030   Exemptions.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
   (a)   The installation or maintenance of irrigation systems and controls
within landscaped areas between the curb and sidewalk or between the sidewalk
and the right-of-way used primarily by vehicles for which a permit specified in
Section
12.08.010 of
Chapter 12.08 of Title 12 has been issued.
   (b)   The installation or maintenance of curb outlets and drain pipes under
the sidewalk for drainage purposes for which a permit specified in Section
12.08.010 of
Chapter 12.08 of Title 12 has been issued.
   (c)   The installation of a structure or any part thereof for which a permit
has been issued in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 32 of the Uniform
Building Code, "Construction in the Public Right of Way," excepting therefrom
section 3203 of chapter 32 pertaining to space below the sidewalk.
(Ord. 4563 § 4, 1999)
Chapter 12.13
STATE VIDEO SERVICE FRANCHISEES
Sections:
   
12.13.010   Definitions.
   
12.13.020   Purposes and interpretations.
   
12.13.030   Permit application procedures.
   
12.13.040   Appeals.
12.13.010   Definitions.
   (a)   "State franchisee" shall have the same meaning as set forth in Section
2.11.020(o) of the Palo Alto Municipal Code.
   (b)   "Encroachment permit" means an encroachment permit, a street work
permit, a development review application, or other application or permit for
which a state franchisee is required to apply under
Chapter 2.11,
Chapter 12.08,
Chapter 12.10, this
Chapter 12.13,
Chapter 18.76 or
Chapter 18.77 of the Palo Alto Municipal Code.
   (c)   "Street work permit application" means the application and permit for
construction in the public street to be filed by a state franchisee with the
department of public works.
   (d)   "Development review application" means the form to request
architectural review to be filed by a state franchisee with the department of
planning and development services.
(Ord. 5494 § 3, 2020: Ord. 4945 § 30, 2007)
12.13.020   Purpose and interpretation.
   (a)   It is the purpose of this
Chapter 12.13 to comply with Section 5885(c) of the California Public Utilities
Code. The provisions of this
Chapter 12.13 that impose requirements or obligations on the city shall be
construed to apply, and shall be only applied, to the extent necessary to
comply with Section 5885(c) of the California Public Utilities Code.
   (b)   Except as provided in this
Chapter 12.13, all of the provisions of this Title 12 shall apply fully to a
state franchisee as if it were a "utility" or "public utility" within the
meaning of this Title 12.13.
(Ord. 4945 § 31, 2007)
12.13.030   Permit application procedures.
   (a)   A state franchisee who applies for an encroachment permit shall submit
an application which consists of a combined development review application and
a street work permit application. The director of planning and development
services shall be responsible for taking action on the development review
application, and the director of public works-city engineer shall be
responsible for taking action on the granting of an application for a street
work permit. The approval or denial of the development review application and
the street work permit application shall be issued within sixty days of receipt
of a combined complete application, which shall consist of the following:
   (1)   A completed development review application for architectural review
and a street work permit application;
   (2)   All construction plans, drawings and specifications pertaining to the
state franchisee's communications service equipment or facilities to be placed
in the public rights-of-way, prepared in accordance with the requirements of
the department of public works and other city departments that affect the
street work permit application, including, but not limited to, the city
arborist and the city department of utilities; and
   (3)   All design plans, drawings, specifications and documents pertaining to
the state franchisee's communications service equipment or facilities required
for architectural review pursuant to Section
18.76.020, including, but not limited to, a copy of any proposed notice to
property owners directly affected by the placement of the communications
service equipment or facilities in the public rights-of-way.
   An encroachment permit application, consisting of a development review
application and a street work permit application, is complete whenever the
state franchisee applicant has complied with all applicable requirements of
Title 2, Title 12 and Title 18 of the Palo Alto Municipal Code and applicable
state laws, including the California Environmental Quality Act and DIVCA, as
defined in Section
2.11.020(h).
   (b)   The sixty-day time period set forth in subsection (a) may be extended
by mutual agreement by the state franchisee applicant and the city engineer,
who may consult with the director of planning and development services before
reaching such agreement.
   (c)   If the development review application is denied by the director of
planning and development services, the city engineer shall deny the street work
permit application. The city engineer's denial shall constitute the denial of
the encroachment permit application. The city engineer shall provide the state
franchisee applicant with a notice of denial and a detailed explanation of the
reasons for such denial.
(Ord. 5494 § 3, 2020: Ord. 4945 § 32, 2007)
12.13.040   Appeals.
   A state franchisee applicant whose encroachment permit is denied under
Section
12.13.030 may file an appeal with the council within fourteen days of the
decision of the director of public works-city engineer. Within thirty days of
the filing of a timely appeal of the city engineer's decision, the council
shall hold a public hearing on the matter. At the public hearing, shall accept
into evidence and consider any materials and documents as may be submitted by
the state franchisee applicant and the city engineer. In determining such
appeal, the council shall consider whether the city engineer's denial is
consistent with Title 2, Title 12 or Title 18, as applicable, and other
applicable state and federal laws. If the council denies the state franchisee
applicant's appeal, its decision shall be given, in writing, setting forth a
detailed explanation of the reasons for such denial. The decision of the
council is final.
(Ord. 4945 § 33, 2007)
Chapter 12.16
UNDERGROUND UTILITIES
Sections:
   
12.16.010   Underground installation required for new construction.
   
12.16.020   Underground utility districts established.
   
12.16.030   Poles, overhead lines and associated overhead structures prohibited
in underground districts.
   
12.16.040   Council may designate additional underground utility districts.
   
12.16.050   Exceptions.
   
12.16.060   Special exceptions granted by city council.
   
12.16.070   Time extensions.
   
12.16.080   Notification to affected property owners and utilities.
   
12.16.090   Responsibility of property owner.
   
12.16.091   Financing service connection conversions.
   
12.16.092   Notice of intention.
   
12.16.093   Filing assessment list.
   
12.16.094   Payment of base cost - Establishment of special assessment lien.
   
12.16.095   Notice - Lien.
   
12.16.096   Collection and payment.
   
12.16.097   Funding of unpaid assessments.
   
12.16.100   Action on noncompliance.
   
12.16.110   Cost of removal a lien.
12.16.010   Underground installation required for new construction.
   The council finds and determines that the public interest requires that all
poles, overhead lines and associated overhead structures used in supplying
electric service, communications service or similar associated service to be
constructed in the city of Palo Alto after July 1, 1965, shall be placed in
underground locations in order to promote and preserve the health, safety and
general welfare of the public and to assure the orderly development of the city
of Palo Alto. The director of utilities, or designee, may authorize poles,
overhead lines and associated overhead structures for new construction when the
director determines that an installation in an underground location in any
particular instance would not be feasible or practicable. The decision of the
director is final.
(Ord. 4945 § 34, 2007: Ord. 4908 § 1, 2006: Ord. 2611 § 5, 1971: Ord. 2231
(part), 1965: prior code § 37.201)
12.16.020   Underground utility districts established.
   (a)   The council further finds and determines that the public interest
requires that the following described areas of the city of Palo Alto as
delineated with more particularity in those certain maps entitled Underground
Utility District Maps*, and made a part hereof by reference, be declared to be
and the same are declared to be and established as underground utility
districts, and persons maintaining poles and overhead lines and associated
overhead structures in such districts shall remove the same within the period
of time as indicated:
   (1)   District No. 1. All lands fronting on Oregon Avenue - removal by
September 1, 1965;
   (2)   District No. 2. Palo Alto Foothills Park - removal by January 1, 1967;
   (3)   District No. 3. Alexis Drive Area - removal by January 1, 1966;
   (4)   District No. 4. All lands adjacent to El Camino Real from Matadero
Creek to the southerly city limits of the city of Palo Alto - removal, in the
case of communication and similar or associated services, by February 1, 1968;
removal, in the case of electric and similar or associated services, within one
year from the date of the completion and acceptance of the proposed
improvements on El Camino Real to be constructed by the state of California
pursuant to that certain agreement between the state and the city dated April
18, 1967, additional notice to be given and hearing held after said completion
date has been determined;
   (5)   District No 5. All lands within the limits of the city of Palo Alto
fronting on the southwesterly side of El Camino Real between Maybell Avenue and
Vista Avenue - removal by May 15, 1968;
   (6)   District No. 6. All lands within Green Acres Unit II and adjacent
territory - removal by October 31, 1968;
   (7)   District No. 7. All lands within the Old Trace Road area - removal
ninety days after completion and acceptance of the work;
   (8)   District No. 8. Not yet established;
   (9)   District No. 9. All lands within the West Bayshore Road Area from
Chabot Terrace to Loma Verde Avenue - removal ninety days after completion and
acceptance of the work;
   (10)   District No. 10. All lands within the Laura Lane Area from East
Bayshore Road approximately four hundred forty feet northeasterly, and the Geng
Road Area from Embarcadero Road northwesterly approximately six hundred ten
feet - removal ninety days after completion and acceptance of the work;
   (11)   District No. 11. All lands within Stanford Industrial Park - removal
ninety days after completion and acceptance of the work;
   (12)   District No. 12. All lands within the city of Palo Alto adjacent to
Middlefield Road from Oregon Expressway to the southeasterly city limits -
removal ninety days after completion and acceptance of the work;
   (13)   District No. 13. All lands within the city of Palo Alto generally
fronting on California Avenue between El Camino Real and Amherst Street, and
lands in Stanford industrial Park between California Avenue and Page Mill Road
- removal ninety days after completion and acceptance of the work;
   (14)   District No. 14. All lands within the city of Palo Alto generally
fronting on Embarcadero Road from East Bayshore Road northeasterly and easterly
to Harbor Road, northerly in Harbor Road approximately eight hundred feet,
Embarcadero Way, Faber Place and Geng Road - removal ninety days after
completion and acceptance of the work;
   (15)   District No. 15. All lands within Green Acres I and adjacent
territory - removal ninety days after completion and acceptance of the work;
   (16)   District No. 16. Louis Road from East Meadow Drive to a point near
Loma Verde Avenue, together with properties fronting thereon which require
underground service conversion - removal ninety days after completion and
acceptance of the work;
   (17)   District No. 17. All lands within the city limits bounded by Florence
Street, University Avenue, Ramona Street and Lytton Avenue, excepting the
parcel at the southeasterly intersection of Florence Street and Lytton Avenue
and the two parcels lying southeasterly and southwesterly thereof fronting on
Florence Street and Lytton Avenue, respectively - removal ninety days after
completion and acceptance of the work;
   (18)   District No. 18. San Antonio Avenue from near the southerly approach
to the Bayshore Freeway interchange southerly to Middlefield Road - removal
ninety days after completion and acceptance of the work:
   (19)   District No. 19. All properties fronting on both sides of Ramona
Street from Forest Avenue to Homer Avenue - removal ninety days after
completion and acceptance of the work;
   (20)   District No. 20. All lands within the area of the city bounded by
Hamilton Avenue, Channing Avenue, Lincoln Avenue and Center Street;
   (21)   District No. 21. All lands within the area of the city fronting on
Page Mill Road between El Camino Real and Birch Avenue - removal ninety days
after completion and acceptance of the work;
   (22)   District No. 22. All lands within the area of the city of Palo Alto
bounded by Cambridge Avenue, El Camino Real, Sherman Avenue and Park Boulevard
- removal ninety days after completion and acceptance of the work;
   (23)   Reserved.
   (24)   District No. 24. All lands within the city bounded by Alma Street,
Lytton Avenue, Ramona Street and Forest Avenue plus the area bounded by
University Avenue, Bryant Street, Hamilton Avenue and Ramona Street, plus the
area bounded by Cowper Street, University Avenue, Webster Street and alleyway
between Cowper Street and Webster Street plus Assessment Parcel Number 120-3-68
located on Cowper Street, Assessment Parcel Number 120-27-045 located on Alma
Street and Assessment Parcel Number 120-27-047 located on High Street - removal
ninety days after completion and acceptance of the work;
   (25)   District No. 25. All lands within the city on Orme Street between Los
Robles Avenue and Juana Briones School - removal ninety days after completion
and acceptance of the work;
   (26)   District No. 26. All lands within the city within Arastradero Road
from Alto Mesa Avenue to Hillview Avenue and adjacent to Arastradero Road on
both sides from approximately fifty feet southerly of Alta Mesa Avenue to
Georgia Avenue - removal ninety days after completion and acceptance of the
work;
   (27)   District No. 27. All lands within the city on Cambridge Avenue
between Birch Street and Park Boulevard - removal ninety days after completion
and acceptance of the work;
   (28)   District No. 28. All lands within the city on Park Boulevard between
Sherman Avenue and Lambert Avenue - removal ninety days after completion and
acceptance of the work;
   (29)   District No. 29. All lands within the city of Palo Alto bounded by
Cowper Street, Hamilton Avenue, Bryant Street, and Lytton Avenue, plus one
block bounded by Tasso Street, University Avenue, Cowper Street, and Lytton
Avenue - removal ninety days after completion and acceptance of the work;
   (30)   District No. 30. All lands within the city of Palo Alto, county of
Santa Clara, bounded by San Francisquito Creek, Edgewood Drive, Island Drive,
Hamilton Avenue, Center Drive, Dana Avenue, Alester Avenue and Jackson Drive -
removal ninety days after completion and acceptance of work;
   (31)   District No. 31. All lands within the city of Palo Alto, county of
Santa Clara, bounded by the southeasterly side of University Avenue, west of
1270 University Avenue, the west side of Marlow Street, University Avenue,
Chaucer Street, Hamilton Avenue, parts of Seneca Street, and Fulton Avenue, all
as more particularly shown on the map referenced in Section 3 of Ordinance 3874
- removal ninety days after completion and acceptance of the work;
   (32)   District No. 32. All of the area in the county of Santa Clara, city
of Palo Alto, consisting of both sides of Middlefield Road from Palo Alto
Avenue and an area northwesterly of 116 Middlefield Road to the north to
Embarcadero Road to the south; all as more particularly shown on the map
referenced in Section 3 of Ordinance 3874 - removal ninety days after
completion and acceptance of the work;
   (33)   District No. 33. All of the area in the county of Santa Clara, city
of Palo Alto, encompassing the area bounded by Cowper Street, Hamilton Avenue,
Webster Street, Lytton Avenue, Middlefield Road and Forest Avenue, all as more
particularly described on that certain map entitled "Downtown Three Underground
Utility District Number 33," on file in the office of the city clerk;
   (34)   District No. 34. All of the area in the county of Santa Clara, city
of Palo Alto, encompassing the area bounded by Cowper Street, Addison Avenue,
Alma Street, and Forest Avenue, all as more particularly described on that
certain map entitled "Downtown IV and Channing/Addison Avenue Underground
Utility District Number 34," on file in the office of the city clerk;
   (35)   District No. 35. All of the area in the county of Santa Clara, city
of Palo Alto, encompassing the area bounded by Alma Avenue, Park Boulevard, El
Camino Real, and Churchill Avenue, all as more particularly described on that
certain map entitled "Southgate Underground Utility District Number 35," on
file in the office of the city clerk;
   (36)   District No. 36. All of the area in the county of Santa Clara, city
of Palo Alto, encompassing the areas contiguous with portions of Corporation
Way and East Bayshore Road, and Fabian Way, Fabian Street, San Antonio Road,
East Charleston Road, Industrial Avenue, Transport Street and Commercial
Street, all as more particularly described on that certain map entitled
"Commercial/Transport and Corporation Way Underground Utility District Number
36," on file in the office of the city clerk;
   (37)   District No. 37. All of the area in the county of Santa Clara, city
of Palo Alto, encompassing the areas contiguous with portions of Embarcadero
Road, Middlefield Road, Seale Avenue, Byron Street, Bret Harte Street, Mark
Twain Street, Newell Road, Guinda Street, Fulton Street and Tennyson Avenue,
all as more particularly described on that certain map entitled "Embarcadero/
Middlefield Road Underground Utility District Number 37," on file in the office
of the city clerk;
   (38)   District No. 38. All of the area in the county of Santa Clara, city
of Palo Alto, encompassing the areas contiguous with portions of High Street
and Cowper Street, and Oregon Expressway and Colorado Avenue, all as more
particularly described on that certain map entitled "High/Cowper/Oregon and
Colorado Avenue Underground Utility District Number 38," on file in the office
of the city clerk;
   (39)   District No. 39. All of the area in the County of Santa Clara, City
of Palo Alto, encompassing the areas contiguous with portions of Sherman/Grant/
Sheridan/Page-Mill/Park Blvd./Birch/Ash and El Camino Real all as more
particularly described on that certain map entitled "Sherman/El Camino Real/
Page Mill/Park Blvd. Underground Utility District Number 39," on file in the
office of the City Clerk;
   (40)   District No. 40. All of the area in the county of Santa Clara, city
of Palo Alto, encompassing the areas contiguous with portions of the north side
of 1700-1900 block of Edgewood Drive. All as more particularly described as
"1700-1900 Edgewood Drive Underground Utility District Number 40," on file in
the office of the city clerk;
   41.   District No. 41. All of the area in the County of Santa Clara, City of
Palo Alto, encompassing the areas contiguous with portions of Colorado Avenue/
Middlefield Road/Oregon Expressway/Cowper Street, and more particularly
described as "Underground District No. 41 Boundary Map," on file in the office
of the city clerk.
   42.   [Not used]
   43.   [Not used]
   (44)   District No. 44. All of the area in the County of Santa Clara, City
of Palo Alto, encompassing the areas contiguous with portions of 2500 block of
Embarcadero Road and city-owned Baylands. All as more particularly described as
Bayland Underground Utility District Number 44, on file in the office of the
city clerk.
   (45)   District No. 45. All of the area in the County of Santa Clara, City
of Palo Alto, encompassing the areas contiguous with portions of Palo Alto
Avenue, Alma Street, High Street, Lytton Avenue and Cambridge Avenue
Underground Utility District Number 45, on file in the office of the City
Clerk.
   (46)   District No. 46. All of the area in the County of Santa Clara, City
of Palo Alto, encompassing portions of the following avenues, roads, and
streets: Arastadero Rd., El Camino, W. Charleston. All as more particularly
described on that certain map entitled “Underground District No. 46 Boundary
Map” on file in the office of the City Clerk.
   (47)   District No. 47. All of the area in the County of Santa Clara, City
of Palo Alto, encompassing the areas contiguous with portions of the following
avenues, roads, and streets: Homer, Cowper, Addison, Middlefield, Channing and
Webster, all as more particularly described on that certain map entitled
"Proposed Underground District No. 47 Homer/Cowper/Addison/ Middlefield/
Channing/Webster" on file in the office of the City Clerk.
(Ord. 5276 § 2, 2014; Ord. 5180, § 2, 2013: Ord. 5003 § 2, 2008: Ord. 4882 § 2,
2005: Ord. 4858 § 2, 2004; Ord. 4822 § 2, 2004: Ord. 4814 § 2, 2004: Ord. 4483
§ 2,1998: Ord. 4408 § 2, 1997: Ord. 4280, § 2, 1995: Ord. 4208 § 2, 1994: Ord.
4138 § 2, 1993: Ord. 4112 § 2, 1992: Ord. 4028 § 2, 1991: Ord. 3963 § 2, 1990:
Ord. 3874 § 2, 1989: Ord. 3745 § 2, 1987: Ord. 3682 § 2, 1986: Ord. 3619 § 2
1985: Ord. 3616 § 2, 1985: Ord. 3605 § 2, 1985: Ord. 3464 § 2, 1983: Ord. 3408
§ 2, 1983: Ord. 3227 § 2, 1980: Ord. 3142 § 2, 1979: Ord. 3136 § 2, 1979: Ord.
3035 § 2, 1977: Ord. 2834 § 3, 1975: Ord. 2814 § 3, 1974: Ord. 2757 § 3, 1973:
Ord. 2653 § 2, 1972: Ord. 2628 § 3, 1971: Ord. 2616 (part), 1971: Ord. 2543
(part), 1970: Ord. 2502 (part), 1969: Ord. 2490 (part), 1969: Ord. 2486 (part),
1969: Ord. 2416 (part), 1968: Ord. 2411 (part), 1968: Ord. 2363 (part), 1967:
Ord. 2231 (part), 1965: prior code § 37.202)
*   Editor's Note: The maps referred to can be found at the end of this title
in a printed edition of this code.
12.16.030   Poles, overhead lines and associated overhead structures prohibited
in underground districts.
   (a)   Whenever any area of the city is declared to be an underground utility
district, it shall be unlawful for any person or utility to erect, construct,
use, or maintain poles, overhead lines and associated overhead structures
within the district after the date when the utilities are required to be
removed.
   (b)   From and after the effective date of the establishment of any
underground utility district, it shall be unlawful for any person or utility to
erect, construct, use or maintain poles, overhead lines and associated overhead
structures within the district.
   (c)   Any individual or utility who shall erect, construct, use or maintain
poles, overhead lines and associated overhead structures within any underground
utility district or who shall neglect to take down and remove such poles,
overhead lines and associated overhead structures within the time designated in
this chapter or who shall otherwise fail to comply with the provisions of this
chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be
punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars. Each consecutive
fifteen-day period during which the failure to comply with the provisions
hereof shall constitute a separate offense. Such violation is likewise hereby
declared to be a nuisance and may be abated by the city attorney in the manner
provided for the abatement of nuisances.
(Ord. 4908 § 2, 2006: Ord. 4642 § 15, 2000: Ord. 2231 (part), 1965: prior code
§ 37.203)
12.16.040   Council may designate additional underground utility districts.
   (a)   The city council may from time to time call public hearings to
ascertain whether the public necessity, health or safety requires the removal
of poles and overhead lines and associated overhead structures from some
designated area of the city. The city clerk shall publish a notice of the
public hearing and the director of utilities shall notify all affected property
owners as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and affected utilities by
mail of the time and place of such hearings at least thirty days prior to the
date thereof.
   (b)   If, after any such public hearing, the council finds that the public
necessity, health and safety require such removal the council shall, by
ordinance amending Section
12.16.020 of this chapter, declare such area an underground utility district.
Such ordinance shall include a description of the area comprising such district
and shall fix the time within which such poles and overhead lines and
associated overhead structures shall be removed and within which affected
property owners must be ready to receive underground service. The council shall
allow a reasonable time for such removal having due regard for the availability
of necessary labor, materials and equipment for such removal and for the
installation of such underground facilities as may be occasioned thereby.
(Ord. 3709 § 7, 1986: Ord. 2452, 1968: Ord. 2231 (part), 1965: prior code §
37.204)
12.16.050   Exceptions.
   (a)   The provisions of this
Chapter 12.16 shall not apply to the following types of facilities:
   (1)   Poles used exclusively for police and fire alarm boxes, traffic
control facilities, or any similar municipal-owned equipment installed under
the supervision and to the satisfaction of the director of utilities, or
designee;
   (2)   Poles used exclusively for street lighting;
   (3)   An electric distribution or transmission system in excess of fifteen
kilovolts, unless the director of utilities, or designee, determines that
underground installation of such distribution or transmission system is
feasible and practicable. The decision of the director in such matters is
final;
   (4)   When authorized by the director, or designee, poles, overhead lines
and associated overhead structures crossing or entering any potion of a
district from which poles, overhead lines and associated overhead structures
have been prohibited and originating in an area in which poles, overhead lines
and associated overhead structures are not prohibited;
   (5)   Overhead lines attached to the exterior surface of a building by means
of a bracket or other fixture and extending from one location on the building
to another location on the same building or to an adjacent building without
crossing any public street;
   (6)   Radio antenna and associated equipment and supporting structures used
for furnishing communications services;
   (7)   Changes in or additions of aerial drop lines and anchors or the
addition or replacement of lines and cables on poles in place on July 1, 1965;
or
   (8)   Service terminals, in pedestals, in above ground locations, used to
distribute communications service in underground systems.
(Ord. 4945 § 35, 2007: Ord. 4908 § 3, 2006: Ord. 2611 § 6, 1971: Ord. 2231
(part), 1965: prior code § 37.205)
12.16.060   Special exceptions granted by city council.
   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter the city council may
grant special exceptions on a permanent or temporary basis to the provisions
hereof on such terms as the city council may deem appropriate in cases of
emergency or unusual circumstances to any person to erect, construct, install,
maintain, use or operate poles and overhead lines and associated overhead
structures within any underground utility district provided that prior thereto
the city council shall have made a finding that granting of such special
exception does not violate the general purposes of this chapter, will not be
detrimental to the public interest, welfare, safety, peace or health and that
such action will not constitute a grant of special privilege inconsistent with
the limitations upon other properties in the underground utility district.
(Ord. 2231 (part), 1965: prior code § 37.206)
12.16.070   Time extensions.
   In the event that any act hereby required by any person or utility herein
referred to cannot be performed within the time herein provided on account of
shortage of materials, war, restraint by public authorities, strikes, or by any
circumstances beyond the control of the person or utility or by unusual
hardships, then the time within which such act shall be accomplished may be
extended by the director of utilities, or his designee, for a period not
exceeding one year.
(Ord. 4908 § 4, 2006: Ord. 2611 § 7, 1971: Ord. 2231 (part), 1965: prior code §
37.207)
12.16.080   Notification to affected property owners and utilities.
   (a)   Within thirty days after the establishment of the underground utility
district the director of utilities, or his designee, shall so notify all
affected property owners and utilities owning real property within the affected
area. The director of utilities, or his designee, shall further notify affected
property owners and utilities that poles, overhead lines and associated
overhead structures are to be removed and that if the affected owners and
utilities or the tenants or occupants of their property desire to continue to
receive electric, communication or similar associated service they shall make
all necessary facility changes on their premises so as to receive the services
at a new location subject to the applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of
the respective utilities on file with the California Public Utilities
Commission and the utility rules and regulations of the city of Palo Alto.
   (b)   Notification shall be made by mailing a copy of this chapter and the
ordinance which designates the area of an underground utility district to the
affected owners and utilities as shown on the last equalized tax roll of the
city. Failure to give such notice by mail or of the affected owners or
utilities addressed to receive the notice shall not affect the validity of such
ordinance nor the authority of the city to proceed under Section
12.16.100.
(Ord. 4908 § 5, 2006: Ord. 2611 § 8, 1971: Ord. 2231 (part), 1965: prior code §
37.208)
12.16.090   Responsibility of property owner.
   (a)   All conduits, conductors and associated equipment necessary to receive
electric, communication or similar associated services between service
conductors or underground pipes or conduits of the supplying utilities and the
service facilities to the building or structure being served shall be provided
by the person owning, operating, leasing or renting the affected property
subject to applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of the respective
utilities on file with the California Public Utilities Commission and the
utility rules and regulations of the city of Palo Alto.
   (b)   The underground service connection construction shall be accomplished
within the time specified in Section
12.16.020 or if the time is not specified therein, within thirty days after the
installation of the utilities facilities pursuant to the utility rules and
regulations of the city of Palo Alto.
(Ord. 4908 § 6, 2006: Ord. 2231 (part), 1965: prior code § 37.209)
12.16.091   Financing service connection conversions.
   (a)   Whenever the conversion to underground locations of poles, overhead
lines and associated overhead structures used in supplying electric,
communication or similar associated service is, under established policies and
procedures of the city to be financed entirely by the city within the area of
the public rights-of-way within any proposed underground utility district, the
cost of conversion to an underground location of the individual service
connections on private property (hereinafter referred to as "service
connection") may be accomplished in the manner hereinafter set forth in
Sections
12.16.092 to
12.16.097, inclusive.
   (b)   Each affected residential or nonresidential property owner who elects
to finance the cost of his service connection shall execute a loan agreement,
which may be recorded, and any other document to secure his obligation to pay
the city in accordance with this chapter. The affected owner shall prove to the
city he holds legal title to the affected real property.
(Ord. 4908 § 7, 2006: Ord. 2527 § 1, 1969)
12.16.092   Notice of intention.
   (a)   At the time of the call of the public hearing on the formation of such
an underground utility district, as required by Section
12.16.040, the council may authorize the city clerk, aided by the director of
utilities, or his designee, to include in the notice of hearing to be mailed to
all affected property owners, pursuant to Section
12.16.040, a statement to the effect that any affected owner has the option of
paying the cost of converting his service connection to an underground location
over a period of ten years with interest to be determined as provided by
Section
12.16.096. The notice shall include the information set forth in Section
12.16.091(b).
   (b)   The notice shall be accompanied by an appropriate form by which the
payment option specified in Section
12.16.096 may be exercised. The notice shall also set forth:
   (1)   The estimated cost of accomplishing the underground service connection
construction, as determined by the director of utilities, or his designee,
herein called the "base cost";
   (2)   An additional fixed amount per parcel, also to be determined by the
director of utilities, or his designee, representing the cost of making the
estimate, establishing the lien and other incidental administrative, legal and
engineering expense involved in the proceedings, herein called the "incidental
expense";
   (3)   The total amount of subdivision (1) plus subdivision (2), herein
called the "special assessment"; and
   (4)   The fact that the city, upon exercise of the payment option and the
accomplishment of the underground service connection construction as required
by Section
12.16.090, will pay the base cost and incidental expense to the affected owner
who accomplishes the underground service connection construction, subject to
the payment of the amount of the special assessment as hereinafter provided.
(Ord. 4908 § 8, 2006: Ord. 2611 § 9, 1971: Ord. 2527 § 2, 1969)
12.16.093   Filing assessment list.
   (a)   After the formation of the underground utility district but before the
accomplishment of the underground service connection construction, the council
shall determine the properties the affected owners of which have exercised the
option to pay the cost over a period of ten years and shall direct that the
base cost and incidental expense shall be paid by the city subject to payment
of the special assessment in the manner hereinafter set forth.
   (b)   A complete assessment roll or list of the affected properties subject
to the payments over a period of ten years, identifying them and setting forth
the respective amounts of the proposed special assessments, shall be prepared
by the director of utilities, or his designee, and filed in the offices of the
city clerk and the director of utilities and published and filed in the office
of the county of Santa Clara assessor.
(Ord. 4908 § 9, 2006: Ord. 2611 § 10, 1971: Ord. 2527 § 3, 1969)
12.16.094   Payment of base cost - Establishment of special assessment lien.
   Upon completion (pursuant to Section
12.16.090) of the underground service connection construction on any parcel as
to which the payment option has been exercised, the affected owner who
accomplished the construction may file with the director of utilities, or his
designee, a verified claim for the base cost and incidental expense. The claim
shall be audited and paid in the manner provided by law.
(Ord. 4908 § 10, 2006: Ord. 2527 § 4, 1969)
12.16.095   Notice - Lien.
   (a)   Concurrently with such payment on which the affected property owner
will pay over a period of ten years, the director of utilities, or his
designee, consistent with Section
12.16.093(b), shall publish and file the assessment roll or list in the office
of the county of Santa Clara assessor with respect to the payments over a
period of ten years or record a notice of assessment in the office of the
county of Santa Clara recorder in substantially the following form:
NOTICE OF ASSESSMENT
   Pursuant to the requirements of Sections
12.16.091 to
12.16.097, inclusive, of the Palo Alto Municipal Code, the undersigned director
of utilities, or his designee, hereby gives notice of a special assessment in
the amount of $ _________ against the following described property: [Insert
description]   Notice is further given that the special assessment shall become
a lien upon the property described herein upon the filing of the assessment
roll or list and the recording of this notice in the office of the county of
Santa Clara assessor.
The City of Palo Alto
By:      _____________________________
      Director of Utilities
Dated:   _____________________________
   (b)   The notice of assessment shall set forth the name of the owner of
record, the property address, the assessor's parcel number, the legal
description of the affected property, and a certification by the director of
utilities that the service connection cost has been paid by the city on behalf
of the owner of the described affected property against which the lien is filed
or recorded. Such lien shall remain a lien until a full release and discharge
is made pursuant to the provision of this chapter.
   (c)   Upon the filing of the assessment roll or the recordation of the
notice of assessment set forth in Section
12.16.095(a) and (b), the amount of the special assessment shall constitute a
lien on the parcel of property described in the notice for the amount of such
assessment until paid, with the same priority as special assessment liens
established pursuant to Title 13 of this code. All remedies available for the
enforcement and collection of liens established under Title 13 shall apply to
liens established under this chapter.
(Ord. 4908 § 11, 2006: Ord. 2527 § 5, 1969)
12.16.096   Collection and payment.
   The affected property owner shall pay the assessment and interest to the
city in accordance with paragraph (a).
   (a)   The principal amount of each of the assessments shall, upon filing or
recordation, become payable in equal annual installments over a period of ten
years as set forth in the notice provided for in Section
12.16.092, with interest computed at a rate equal to three-quarters of one
percent in excess of the rate shown in the New York Bond Buyer Index of
Municipal Bond Average Yields for twenty year bonds for the week next preceding
the day on which the underground utility district is ordered formed. The
amounts of principal and interest payable on each assessment shall be set forth
in the records of the director of utilities and transmitted to the county of
Santa Clara assessor. The amounts shown on the director of utilities' record
against the respective parcels of land shall be entered on the next tax roll
upon which general city taxes are to be collected. Thereafter, such amounts
shall be collected at the same time, and in the same manner, as general city
taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same interest and penalties,
and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquencies. All laws applicable
to the levy, collection and enforcement of city taxes are hereby made
applicable to such assessment installments and interest.
(Ord. 4908 § 12, 2006: Ord. 2527 § 6, 1969)
12.16.097   Funding of unpaid assessments.
   The council may, at any time, provide for the issuance of and sell bonds to
represent the unpaid principal amounts of any special assessments levied under
this chapter under any of the bond plans set forth in Title 13.
(Ord. 2527 § 7, 1969)
12.16.100   Action on noncompliance.
   (a)   In the event the person owning, operating, leasing or renting the
affected property does not comply with the provisions of Section
12.16.090 within the time specified therein the director of utilities, or his
designee, shall have the authority to order the disconnection and removal of
poles, overhead lines and associated overhead structures supplying utility
service to the affected property and the utility shall not be thereafter
required to provide service to such premises until the owner, tenant or
occupant makes the necessary changes.
   (b)   Noncompliance by any person owning, operating, leasing or renting the
affected property with the provisions of Section
12.16.090 shall constitute a misdemeanor. Until such time as notice is given
pursuant to the provisions of Section
12.16.080 the utility shall not be in violation of this chapter, or any
ordinance enacted pursuant to the provisions of Section
12.16.040 in continuing to maintain overhead facilities necessary to serve such
person during the period of such noncompliance and such reasonable time
thereafter as may be necessary to remove those facilities.
(Ord. 4908 § 13, 2006: Ord. 2231 (part), 1965: prior code § 37.210)
12.16.110   Cost of removal a lien.
   The cost of disconnecting and removing poles, overhead lines and associated
overhead structures supplying electric service incurred by the city under
Section
12.16.100 shall become a lien on the property theretofore served from the same.
The procedure for imposing such a lien shall be as provided in Sections
8.08.060-
8.08.090 of this code for weed abatement liens.
(Ord. 2231 (part), 1965: prior code § 37.211)
Chapter 12.20
UTILITY RULES AND REGULATIONS
Sections:
   
12.20.010   Council to adopt rules and regulations.
   
12.20.020   Knowing provision of false information.
   
12.20.030   Statute of limitations for challenges to gas rates, water service
rates, wastewater collection and disposal rates, refuse rates, storm water
management fees and fiber licensing service rates.
12.20.010   Council to adopt rules and regulations.
   The city council may by resolution adopt rules and regulations governing
utility, utilities, public utility, or public utilities services other than
communications services in the city and the fees and charges therefor. Every
person supplied with utility, utilities, public utility, or public utilities
services by the city shall be considered as having expressed consent to be
bound by such rules and regulations. It is unlawful for any person to disobey
or fail to observe any rule, regulation or rule and regulation.
(Ord. 5267 § 4, 2014; Ord. 4099 § 1, 1992: Ord. 2231 (part), 1965: prior code §
37.102)
12.20.020   Knowing provision of false information.
   It shall be unlawful for the purchaser of any electricity, gas, or water
from the city of Palo Alto, or the customer of any electric, gas, water,
wastewater, refuse, or storm drainage utility of the city of Palo Alto, or any
person receiving or using such electricity, gas, or water or wastewater,
refuse, or storm drainage utility service, to knowingly provide incorrect,
inaccurate, false, or misleading information of any kind to the city of Palo
Alto in connection with an application by such purchaser, customer, or person
for or receipt of electricity, gas, or water, or any electric, gas, water,
wastewater, refuse, or storm drainage utility service, or in connection with
any request for information made by the city of Palo Alto in accordance with
the Palo Alto Utilities Rules and Regulations adopted by resolution of the
council pursuant to Section
12.20.010.
(Ord. 4162 § 1, 1993)
12.20.030   Statute of limitations for challenges to gas rates, water service
rates, wastewater collection and disposal rates, refuse rates, storm water
management fees and fiber licensing service rates.
   Any judicial action or proceeding against the city, to attack, review, set
aside, void, or annul an ordinance, resolution, or motion fixing or changing a
rate or charge for: a) a gas commodity or a gas service furnished by city and
adopted on or after June 1, 2019, or b) for water service, wastewater
collection and disposal, refuse, storm water management, or fiber licensing
services furnished by city and adopted on or after June 1, 2020 shall be
commenced within 120 days of the effective date of that ordinance, resolution,
or motion.
(Ord. 5497 § 2, 2020: Ord. 5467 § 2, 2019)
Chapter 12.24
FLUORIDATION
Sections:
   
12.24.010   Authorized - Funds.
12.24.010   Authorized - Funds.
   (a)   The city manager is hereby authorized and directed to take the
necessary steps and means to add sufficient amounts of an approved fluoride
compound to all water served to consumers in the city of Palo Alto to produce
and maintain at all times in all parts of the distribution system one part of
fluoride to one million parts of water.
   (b)   Funds shall be appropriated in budgets subsequent to the fiscal year
1955-1956 in order to maintain such fluoridation.
(Ord. 1577 §§ 1, 2, 1954)
Chapter 12.28
UTILITY SYSTEMS REVENUE BONDS
Sections:
   
12.28.010   Definitions.
   
12.28.020   Definition in resolution.
   
12.28.030   Powers of council.
   
12.28.040   Procedures.
12.28.010   Definitions.
   As used in this chapter the following definitions shall apply:
   (a)   "Bond law" means the Revenue Bond Law of 1941, being Chapter 6,
commencing with Section 54300, of Part 1 of Division 2 of Title 5 of the
Government Code of the State of California.
   (b)   "Enterprise" means any revenue-producing improvement, building,
system, plant, works, facilities or undertaking used for or useful for any of
the purposes set forth in Section 54309 of the bond law, together with the
distribution of electric energy for lighting, heating, and power for public or
private uses, and the generation, production, transmission and distribution of
gas for public or private uses; Section 54310 of the bond law shall not apply.
   (c)   "Enterprise" includes, but is not limited to, all parts of the
enterprise, all appurtenances to it, and all of the various components of it
set forth in Section 54309.1 of the bond law.
(Ord. 3083 § 1 (part), 1978)
12.28.020   Definition in resolution.
   Subject to the limitations of Section
12.28.010, in any general resolution providing for the issuance of bonds for
acquiring, constructing, improving or financing any enterprise, the council may
define "enterprise" and that definition applies to the bonds authorized in said
resolution. Such definition may include any one or any combination of two or
more or all of the purposes set forth in Section
12.28.010(b).
(Ord. 3083 § 1 (part), 1978)
12.28.030   Powers of council.
   (a)   Issue Bonds. The council may provide for the issuance of and
authorize, issue, sell and deliver revenue bonds of the city for the purpose of
providing funds for the acquisition, construction, improving or financing of an
enterprise, including any or all expenses incidental thereto or connected
therewith.
   (b)   Acquire Project and Pledge Revenues. The council may acquire,
construct, improve or finance any project to improve any enterprise defined in
the resolution providing for the issuance of bonds pursuant to Section
12.28.020, and may pledge, place a charge upon, and assign all or any part of
the gross revenues of such enterprise for the security of the bonds.
   (c)   Bond Law. The council has and may exercise all of the powers set forth
in the bond law, subject to the restrictions therein set forth, except as in
this chapter otherwise expressly provided.
(Ord. 3083 § 1 (part), 1978)
12.28.040   Procedures.
   (a)   Bond Law. Except as otherwise expressly provided in this chapter, the
provisions of the bond law shall apply to the exercise of the powers set forth
in Section
12.28.030.
   (b)   General Resolution. The council may authorize and provide for the
issuance of the bonds by a general resolution to take effect upon adoption.
Such resolution shall state:
   (1)   The purpose or purposes for which the bonds are proposed to be issued;
   (2)   The total principal amount of the bonds;
   (3)   That the bonds are to be revenue bonds, payable exclusively from the
revenues of the enterprise and from such of the other funds referred to in
Section 54478 of the bond law as shall be specified in the resolution;
   (4)   That the bonds are not to be secured by the taxing power of the city;
and
   (5)   Such other matters authorized by the bond law as are deemed
appropriate by the council.
   (c)   Series Resolution. The council may issue, sell and deliver any series
of bonds by series resolution (which may be the general resolution referred to
in Section
12.28.040(b)) to take effect upon adoption. Such series resolution shall:
   (1)   Define and state the estimated cost of the project for which the
series of bonds are proposed to be issued;
   (2)   State the principal amount of such series of bonds;
   (3)   State the maximum rate of interest on such series of bonds; the
maximum discount at which such series of bonds may be sold and the dates on
which the interest thereon shall be payable; and
   (4)   State such other matters authorized by the bond law as are deemed
appropriate by the council.
   (d)   Municipal Bond Insurance. The council may cause the payment of
principal, premiums on redemption (if any) and interest on any series of bonds
to be insured or guaranteed, and may include the premiums on such insurance or
guaranty in determining the principal amount of such series of bonds.
   (e)   Nonapplicability of Certain Portions of Bond Law. Sections 54380 to
54387, inclusive, 54402(b) and 54418 of the bond law shall not apply.
(Ord. 3083 § 1 (part), 1978)
Chapter 12.32
WATER USE REGULATIONS
Sections:
   
12.32.010   Water use regulations.
   
12.32.015   Reserved.
   
12.32.020   Enforcement.
   
12.32.030   Reserved.
   
12.32.040   Indoor and outdoor water efficiency.
12.32.010   Water use regulations.
   No purchaser of water from the city of Palo Alto, nor any customers of the
water utility of the city of Palo Alto, shall use water or allow any other
person to use water under the control of such customer or purchaser in the
following ways:
   (a)   Potable water shall not be allowed to flood or run off into gutters:
driveways, sidewalks, streets or other unlandscaped areas.
   (b)   By means of a hose to wash cars, boats, trailers, buses or other
vehicles or to wash sidewalks, building structures, other hard-surfaced areas
or parts thereof without an operating automatic shut-off valve. Use of a hose
for such purposes should be avoided whenever possible.
   (c)   Potable water for consolidation of backfill and other nondomestic uses
in construction shall not be used if other water sources such as reclaimed
water are available, as determined by the director of utilities or his or her
designee. Applicants for hydrant permits from the city of Palo Alto shall be
deemed to have consented to restrictions on water use which may be imposed by
the director of utilities or his or her designee.
   (d)   Any broken or defective plumbing, sprinklers, watering or irrigation
systems which permit the escape or leakage of water shall be repaired or
replaced as soon as possible, but no later than the date established by the
director of utilities, or his or her designee, as reasonable after observation
of the broken or defective system.
   (e)   The irrigation of turf or ornamental landscapes, which serve purely
decorative purposes, and are distinguished from trees, edible gardens or
landscapes that provide more than a purely aesthetic function, with potable
water shall not be allowed between 10:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., except via hand
watering with a bucket or a hose with an operating shut-off valve.
   (f)   The use of potable water in a fountain or other decorative water
feature is prohibited, except where the water is part of a recirculating
system.
   (g)   The use of potable water for street sweepers and washers is prohibited
if non-potable water is available, as determined by the Director of Utilities,
or his or her designee.
   (h)   Commercial car washes must use recycled water systems, if recycled
water is available, as determined by the Director of Utilities, or his or her
designee, and economically feasible.
(Ord. 5385 § 1, 2016; Ord. 4041 § 1, 1991: Ord. 3964 § 1, 1990: Ord. 3884 § 2
(part), 1989)
12.32.015   Reserved.*
   *   Editor's Note: Section
12.32.015, pertaining to emergency water use regulations, previously codified
herein and containing portions of Ordinance Nos. 3960, 3984 and 4038 was
suspended, but specifically not repealed, by Ordinance No. 4150, § 2. In
pertinent part, said Section 2 of Ordinance No. 4150 states that Section
12.32.015 is "suspended until such time as water shortage emergency conditions
shall be subsequently found, determined, and declared by the Council to exist."
12.32.020   Enforcement.
   In addition to enforcing the provisions of this chapter against any person
as a misdemeanor, an infraction, or via the imposition of administrative fines
or penalties, the city manager and his designated employees are authorized to
enforce the provisions of this chapter against customers and water purchasers
of the utility as follows:
   (a)   Reports of alleged misuse of water in a manner contrary to the
provisions of this chapter shall be called to the attention of the party
responsible for the service connection misused and shall be investigated by the
utilities department personnel to the extent possible.
   (b)   Utilities department personnel shall issue a written warning to the
responsible party or parties.
   (c)   If a second or third incident of misuse of water in a manner contrary
to the provisions of this chapter is established to the satisfaction of the
utilities department personnel, up to two additional written warnings shall be
issued to the responsible party or parties, advising that the city may opt to
pursue available enforcement remedies, including the issuance of administrative
citations, fines, infractions punishable by penalties, misdemeanors, flow
restrictors, and termination of water service.
   (d)   For any subsequent incident by the same party, customer, or water
purchaser, or for any willful violation of this chapter, the city manager or
his designee may, in addition to the pursuit of any available enforcement
remedies, elect to install a flow restrictor upon the service connection of the
purchaser or customer at the purchaser's or customer's expense.
      (1)   Prior to installation of the water restrictor, the director of
utilities shall give written notice to the person responsible for the service
connection, which is to be restricted, of his intention to install a
restrictor. The person or persons to whom notice is to be given shall have five
business days from the date of service of the notice to request a hearing
before the city manager or his designee in order to present any and all
evidence they may have as to why a restrictor should not be installed or under
what conditions it might be installed.
      (2)   If a hearing is requested, the city manager or his designee shall
schedule a date and time for said hearing as soon as possible after the request
is filed, but not later than five business days after the filing or such
request for hearing.
      (3)   At the hearing, the person whose service connection is to be
restricted may offer evidence as to why the restrictor should not be installed
or under what conditions it might be installed.
      (4)   Utilities personnel shall also be allowed to offer whatever
evidence they may have as to why the restrictor should be allowed and under
what conditions. The city manager or his designees shall make a determination
as to whether the restrictor shall or shall not be installed and what
conditions, if any, should pertain.
      (5)   Upon a determination to install a restrictor after hearing, or the
failure of the affected party to request a hearing, the director of utilities,
under whatever conditions, if any, he may deem advisable under the
circumstances, may install a flow restrictor on the service connection of the
customer or purchaser of water whose service connection was used in the
violations observed or established and bill the costs of such installation to
said customer or purchaser in accordance with the following conditions:
         (A)   The first installation shall be for a period of three days;
         (B)   Subsequent installations shall be for a period to be determined
by the director of utilities, in an amount sufficient to accomplish the
purposes of this chapter. Flow restrictors shall be installed in accordance
with water utility rules and regulations.
   (e)   Records shall be kept by the department of utilities of the city of
Palo Alto of all enforcement actions taken under subsection (d) of this
section, and such records may be subject to disclosure as required by the
California Public Records Act.
(Ord. 5385 § 2, 2016; Ord. 3884 § 2 (part), 1989)
12.32.030   Reserved.*
*   Editor's Note: Section
12.32.030, Maximum Monthly Water Use, previously codified herein and containing
portions of Ordinance No. 4041, was suspended, but specifically not repealed,
by Ordinance No. 4150, § 2. In pertinent part, said Section 2 of Ordinance No.
4150 states that Section
12.32.030 is "suspended until such time as water shortage emergency conditions
shall be subsequently found, determined, and declared by the Council to exist."
12.32.040   Indoor and outdoor water efficiency.
   Pursuant to the California Water Conservation in Landscaping Act, also known
as the State Landscape Model Ordinance, Government Code §§ 65591, et seq. as
amended, a city is required to adopt the State Landscape Model Ordinance or
equivalent local landscape water efficiency requirements that are "at least as
effective" as the state ordinance in conserving water. The council has adopted
requirements that are at least as effective in reducing landscaping water use,
also known as outdoor water use, as well as additional requirements for
existing landscapes and indoor water use in Chapter
16.14 (California Green Building Code).
(Ord. 5108 § 2, 2010)
Title 13 IMPROVEMENT PROCEDURE*
Chapters:
   
13.04   General Provisions
   
13.08   General Procedure
   
13.12   Acquisition and Improvement Procedure
   
13.16   Assessment Bond Procedure
   
13.20   Severability - Validity - Reassessment
   
13.24   Reserved
   *   Editor's Note: The organization, boundaries, engineering documents,
filing procedures, notices, assessments, contracts and assessment bonds of the
city of Palo Alto were validated by Ordinance Nos. 2478 and 2529.
Chapter 13.04
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sections:
   
13.04.010   Assessment proceedings.
   
13.04.020   Applicability.
   
13.04.030   Alternative procedures.
   
13.04.040   Title not exclusive.
   
13.04.050   Section headings.
   
13.04.060   Provisions controlling.
   
13.04.070   Municipal affairs.
   
13.04.080   State affairs.
   
13.04.090   Single proceeding.
   
13.04.100   Chapter supplemental.
   
13.04.110   Definitions.
   
13.04.120   Incidental expenses in proceedings for an acquisition.
   
13.04.130   Incidental expenses in proceedings for an improvement.
   
13.04.140   References.
   
13.04.150   Notices.
   
13.04.160   Public and utility property.
   
13.04.170   Contributions and advances.
   
13.04.180   Connection charges and advances therefor.
   
13.04.190   Force account.
   
13.04.200   Revolving fund.
   
13.04.210   Assessment and diagram.
13.04.010   Assessment proceedings.
   Proceedings for the acquisition or construction, or both, of any public
improvement or property of a local nature or the acquisition of lands or
easements, or buildings or improvements or property, or any or more than one
thereof, therefor, may be had pursuant to this title, whether or not provided
in any general law.
(Ord. 2277 (part), 1966: prior code § 40.101)
13.04.020   Applicability.
   This title shall not apply to any proceedings in which the resolution of
intention was adopted prior to the effective date of this title, excepting as
herein expressly provided, and excepting proceedings for a supplemental
assessment, a reassessment, a refunding and the curative provisions hereof.
(Ord. 2277 (part), 1966: prior code § 40.102)
13.04.030   Alternative procedures.
   The procedures provided in the several sections or bond plans hereof are
alternative.
(Ord. 2277 (part), 1966: prior code § 40.103)
13.04.040   Title not exclusive.
   This title is not exclusive. The resolution of intention in any proceeding
under an act or general law may provide that such act or general law is
supplemented by any part or parts hereof.
(Ord. 2277 (part), 1966: prior code § 40.104)
13.04.050   Section headings.
   Titles to sections are a part of the same section. The term "Id," when used
in a title, means that the subject matter of such section is a part of the
subject matter of the last preceding section in the title of which the word
"Id" does not appear. When two "Ids" appear in a title, the subject matter of
such section is a part of the subject matter of the last preceding section in
the title of which the word "Id" does not appear and the subject matter of all
intervening sections.
(Ord. 2277 (part), 1966: prior code § 40.105)
13.04.060   Provisions controlling.
   The provisions of this title shall be controlling over the provisions of any
general law or act in conflict herewith in any proceeding taken hereunder.
(Ord. 2277 (part), 1966: prior code § 40.106)
13.04.070   Municipal affairs.
   This title is adopted pursuant to the municipal affairs provision being
Article II of the Charter of the City of Palo Alto. In proceedings had pursuant
hereto which are a municipal affair, the general laws herein referred to are
deemed a part hereof.
(Ord. 2277 (part), 1966: prior code § 40.107)
13.04.080   State affairs.
   In the event any proceeding had pursuant hereto shall be adjudged a state
affair, it is hereby declared to be the intention that said proceedings were
had pursuant to the general law or laws cited in this title, or chapters or
sections hereof specified in the resolution of intention therein.
(Ord. 2277 (part), 1966: prior code § 40.108)
13.04.090   Single proceeding.
   One or more acquisitions and improvements or acquisitions or improvements
may be had in a single proceeding.
(Ord. 2277 (part), 1966: prior code § 40.109)
13.04.100   Chapter supplemental.
   Chapters
13.04,
13.08,
13.12 and
13.20 are supplemental to and controlling over the provisions of each other
part of this title in conflict therewith.
(Ord. 2277 (part), 1966: prior code § 40.110)
13.04.110   Definitions.
   (a)   The following terms shall, for the purpose of this title, have the
meanings given them in this section:
   (1)   The words "acquisition" and "improvement," when used, referring to
that which is done, which is to be done, or which may be done under proceedings
had under this title, shall be understood to be generic and as being employed
for the purpose of brevity and to avoid repetition, and shall refer to and
include any or all of the things comprehended in the meaning of the words
acquire and improve herein.
   (2)   "Block," whether it be a regular or irregular block, means a parcel
larger than a lot which is bounded by a street or a boundary line of some other
parcel which is not a part of it.
   (3)   "City" means city of Palo Alto.
   (4)   "Clerk" and "city clerk" refer to the clerk of the city.
   (5)   "Contractor" means the person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, organization or business trust, and includes contracting owners or
their agents, to whom a contract for the performance of any work authorized is
awarded.
   (6)   "Council" or "city council" means the council of the city.
   (7)   "County" means Santa Clara County.
   (8)   "Engineer" and "city engineer" refer to city employees with such
titles or the equivalent duties.
   (9)   The words "general law" or the word "act" or the reference to any law
or act by its title mean an enactment of the Legislature of the State of
California. Unless herein otherwise provided, any law or act incorporated
herein or made applicable hereby shall be as now or hereafter amended or
codified at the time of adopting the resolution of intention in the
proceedings.
   (10)   "Lot," "land," "piece," or "parcel of land," whether used singly or
in combination, mean and include property owned or controlled by any person.
   (11)   "Owner" means the person owning the fee, or the person in whose name
the legal title to the property appears, by deed duly recorded in the county
recorder's office of the county in which the property is situated, or the
person in possession of the property or buildings under claim of ownership, or
exercising acts of ownership over the same for himself, or as life tenant, or
as the executor, administrator, or guardian of the owner. If the property is
leased, the possession of the tenant or lessee holding and occupying such
property shall be deemed to be the possession of the owner.
   (12)   "Parking place" means and includes a parking lot, garage, or sub-
surface structure, including the grading, paving, draining, sewering, lighting
or otherwise improving of such lot, and buildings and improvements necessary or
convenient for the parking of motor vehicles, including parking meters and
other equipment and facilities necessary or convenient therefor, together with
provisions necessary or convenient for ingress to and egress from such places.
   (13)   "Paved" or "repaved" means and includes pavement of any commonly used
paving material.
   (14)   "Place" means and includes any public street, alley or easement or
other public property which has been dedicated and accepted or is otherwise
publicly owned according to law, or which has been in common and undisputed use
by the public for a period of not less than five years next preceding, or which
is sought to be acquired in any proceeding undertaken pursuant to this title,
or which is sought to be acquired in conjunction with any proceeding undertaken
pursuant hereto.
   (15)   "Project" or "improvement" when used in the generic sense, means the
acquisition and/or improvement undertaken in a single proceeding.
   (16)   "Quarter block," when used with reference to an irregular block,
includes all lots or portions of lots having any frontage on either
intersecting street halfway from such intersection to the next street, or, if
no street intervenes, to a boundary line of some other parcel which is not a
part of that block.
   (17)   "Street" means and includes avenues, highways, lanes, alleys,
crossings or intersections and courts which have been dedicated and accepted
according to law or which have been in common and undisputed use by the public
for a period of not less than five years next preceding or which have been
dedicated to a semi-public use.
   (18)   "Street superintendent" or "superintendent of streets" refers to city
employees with such titles or the equivalent duties.
   (19)   "Treasurer" means the treasurer of the city.
   (20)   "Work" or "improvement" whether used singly or in combination, means
and includes any work which is authorized to be done or any improvement which
is authorized to be made under this title, as well as the construction,
reconstruction and repair of all or part of any such work or improvement.
(Ord. 4642 § 18, 2000: Ord. 2277 (part), 1966: prior code § 40.111)
13.04.120   Incidental expenses in proceedings for an acquisition.
   (a)   The term "incidental expenses," when referring to proceedings for an
acquisition, shall be deemed to mean and shall include:
   (1)   The amounts awarded to the defendants by the interlocutory judgments;
   (2)   The costs of the defendants;
   (3)   The compensation and expenses of the referees, as allowed by the
court;
   (4)   All other costs of the plaintiff in such action and expenses incurred
by it in the trial thereof, including the compensation paid expert appraisers
and witnesses;
   (5)   All expenses necessarily incurred in connection with such proceedings
for the publication, mailing and posting of resolutions, notices and orders in
any of the proceedings;
   (6)   For maps, plats, surveys, searches and certificates of title to the
property to be acquired;
   (7)   The compensation of the attorneys;
   (8)   The compensation of the engineers;
   (9)   The clerical, stenographic and printing expenses incident to the
actions;
   (10)   The estimated cost of preparing and selling the bonds; and
   (11)   Any other expenses incurred by authority of this title or incidental
to the completion of the acquisition in the manner herein specified.
(Ord. 2277 (part), 1966: prior code § 40.112)
13.04.130   Incidental expenses in proceedings for an improvement.
   (a)   Incidental expenses when referring to proceedings for an improvement,
shall be deemed to mean and shall include all expenses necessarily incurred in
the proceedings:
   (1)   For the publication, mailing and posting of resolutions, notices and
orders in any of such proceedings;
   (2)   The compensation of the attorneys;
   (3)   The compensation of the superintendent of work;
   (4)   The compensation of the engineers;
   (5)   The estimated cost of preparing and selling the bonds; and
   (6)   Any other expenses incurred by authority of this title or incidental
to the completion of the improvement in the manner herein specified.
(Ord. 2277 (part), 1966: prior code § 40.113)
13.04.140   References.
   (a)   Resolution of Intention. The resolution of intention shall specify the
parts of this title pursuant to which the proceedings are taken.
   (b)   References to Resolution of Intention. In all resolutions, notices,
orders and determinations, subsequent to the resolution of intention and the
notice of improvement, it shall be sufficient to refer to the resolution of
intention by number for a description of the work or improvement.
(Ord. 2277 (part), 1966: prior code § 40.114)
13.04.150   Notices.
   (a)   Notices when Expressly Provided. No notice, nor any publication of any
notice, order, resolution or other matter, other than that expressly provided
for in this title, shall be necessary to give validity to any of the
proceedings provided for herein.
   (b)   Failure to Designate Officer. Whenever any notice, resolution, order,
or other matter is required to be published or posted or mailed, and the duty
of posting or publishing or mailing or procuring the same, is not specifically
enjoined upon any officer or person, the clerk shall post or mail or procure
the publication or posting or mailing thereof, as the case may be.
   (c)   Publication and Filing. Notices, resolutions or other documents
required to be published shall be published twice in a newspaper of general
circulation in the city, unless fewer publications are provided by general law.
If any hearing is therein noticed, said hearing shall be had not less than ten
days after the first publication unless a shorter time is provided by general
law. The filing or recording of any maps, diagram or other documents required
to be filed or recorded in the office of the county recorder or in the office
of any other public official prior to any hearing or any other event shall be
filed or recorded not less than ten days prior to such hearing or event unless
a shorter time is provided by general law.
   (d)   Posting and Mailing. It shall not be necessary to post or mail any
notice, resolution or other document or make or file any affidavit in regard
thereto, unless no publication is provided or posting or mailing is necessary
to provide jurisdiction. In such event said posting or mailing shall be at
least ten days prior to any hearing provided therein unless a shorter time is
provided by general law.
   (e)   Where Posted. All documents provided to be posted, other than a notice
of improvement, shall be posted on or near the council chamber door or on any
bulletin board in or adjacent to the city hall.
   (f)   Mailing. When any notice, resolution or other document is required to
be mailed, it shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the property owners involved
as follows:
   (1)   To all persons owning real property proposed to be assessed, whose
names and addresses appear on the last equalized assessment roll for city
taxes, including the utility roll, at said addresses.
   (2)   In cases of transfers of land or parts thereof, subsequent to the date
on which the last assessor's roll was prepared, to such transferee, at his name
and address, as the same appear on the records in the assessor's office which
the assessor will use to prepare the next ensuing assessor's roll.
   (3)   To each person, including the owner or person having an interest in
property assessed by the state under Section 14 of Article XIII of the
California Constitution, who have filed with the county assessor for the
current fiscal year, a statement of his name, address, and a description of the
property owned by him, requesting that a notice of all proposals affecting such
property shall be mailed to him (Gov. Code 58905), at said address.
   (4)   To such person at his address or as otherwise known to the clerk.
   (5)   In case of doubt as to the name and address of any owner, the clerk
shall cause said notice to be conspicuously posted on the property of such
person in the assessment district, at or near the entrance thereto, so that it
will be visible to persons on, entering, leaving or passing said property.
   (g)   Notice of Improvement. Notices of improvement shall be entitled
"Notice of Improvement" in letters at least one-half inch in height. The
council may provide in the resolution of intention or other document fixing
hearing whether and where such notices shall be posted.
   (h)   Certificates. The certificate of the clerk or officer giving notice by
posting or mailing shall be conclusive proof of the giving of such notice, and
no affidavit shall be required.
   (i)   Notice Inviting Sealed Proposals or Bids. Notice inviting sealed
proposals or bids for the construction of improvements shall be published in
the same manner and for the same period of time as is provided by law for
general city contracts.
(Ord. 2443 (part), 1988: Ord. 2277 (part), 1966: prior code § 40.115)
13.04.160   Public and utility property.
   (a)   May Omit Public Property. If any lot or parcel of land belonging to
the United States, or to the state, or to any county, city, public agency,
mandatory of the government, school board, educational, penal or reform
institution is in use in the performance of a public function, and fronts upon
the proposed work, or is included within the district to be assessed to pay the
costs and expenses thereof, the legislative body may, in the resolution of
intention, to the extent consistent with the California Constitution declare
that such lots or parcels of land, or any of them, shall be omitted from the
assessment thereafter to be made to cover the costs and expenses of the work.
   (b)   Cost on Remaining Property. If any such lots or parcels of land are
omitted from the assessment, the total expense of all work done shall be
assessed on the remaining lots or parcels of land fronting on the work, or
lying within the limits of the assessment district, without regard to such
omitted lots or parcels of land.
   (c)   Payment. If the council, in the resolution of intention, declares that
any lot or parcel of land so owned and used shall be included in the
assessment, then the city shall be liable for such sums as may thereafter be so
assessed excepting for such portions as it shall by agreement collect from the
entity owning same; provided, however, that when such property is subject to
assessment as provided in Section 5302.5 of the Streets and Highways Code, the
provisions thereof shall apply.
   (d)   Utility Property. Property owned or used by any privately owned public
utility shall be assessed in the same manner as other property in the district.
(Ord. 4642 § 19, 2000: Ord. 2277 (part), 1966: prior code § 40.116)
13.04.170   Contributions and advances.
   (a)   Contributions. Contributions or partial payments from the United
States or the state or any agency of either, or from the county, may be
accepted and the same or any available city moneys applied to any part of the
costs of a project at any time during or after the proceedings and applied in
reduction of the amount assessed or to be assessed therefor.
   (b)   Purchase of Assessment, Warrant and Bonds. In any proceeding had
hereunder, the city may declare in the resolution of intention that it intends
to purchase the assessment, warrant or bonds to be issued therein.
   (c)   Id. - Payment. The city shall, upon the issuance of the assessment,
warrant or bonds, as the case may be, pay to the contractor, who shall have
been awarded the contract to do the work in such proceeding, in case of public
improvements, or into court, in case of acquisition proceedings, the principal
amount thereof.
   (d)   Id. - Bonds. Such bonds, when issued, shall be made payable to bearer.
   (e)   Id. - City. In such case, the city shall succeed to all rights under
such assessment, warrant and bonds.
   (f)   Id. - Subsequent Purchase. The city shall have like power to
subsequently acquire and own any bonds or assessments or contract issued or
levied or made hereunder, or now issued and outstanding, for any improvement
and/or acquisition of the city.
   (g)   Purchase and Sale of Delinquent Property. The city may bid and
purchase any real or personal property offered for sale for the nonpayment of
any improvement assessment levied and assessed under any of the provisions of
this part, or of any installment thereof, or penalties or costs or interest
thereon, or any suit brought to foreclose such assessment.
   (h)   Id. - Sale. Whenever any property shall have been acquired by the city
at any such sale, then such property, or any lien thereon or interest therein
created by such assessment, may be released, assigned, sold or otherwise
disposed of by city as it shall determine; provided, however, that no such
release, assignment, sale or other disposition of any such lien or interest, or
of any such property, shall be made unless there shall be first paid to the
city a sum of money equal to, and not less than the amount paid therefor by
city, together with all accrued penalties, costs, interest, and necessary
expenses incurred; provided, further, that if any lien or interest, or
property, cannot, as determined by council, be sold for the amounts or charges
computed as herein provided, then the council may by four-fifths vote of all
its members, sell any such lien or interest or property for the best price
obtainable according to its judgment.
   (i)   Advanced by City Without Bonds. The council may declare in the
resolution of intention or by separate resolution subsequently adopted that the
city intends to advance the entire cost of the project from available funds
without issuance of bonds. In such event the city shall pay all project costs
as they accrue, and shall succeed to all rights under the assessment and to all
rights which would have accrued under the bonds had they been issued.
   (j)   Reimbursement. The assessment and diagram and/or warrant shall be
recorded as in other cases and notice to pay assessments given in the time and
manner provided herein. Such notices shall provide in substance that the
assessment may be paid in cash in whole or in part at any time prior to the
notice hereinafter mentioned in subsection (k) of this section, but that the
amount unpaid as of July first of each year following the recordation of the
assessment will be increased by five percent.
   (k)   Id. - Notice of Installment Payment. The city may, at any time after
the expiration of thirty days from recordation of the assessment, give notice
by publication and mailing that the amounts unpaid on the thirtieth day after
such mailing are due and payable to the city in annual installments, not
necessarily equal, but not exceeding the maximum number of installments set
forth in the resolution of intention, with interest at rates to be fixed by the
council, but not to exceed the rate set forth in the resolution of intention.
   (l)   Id. - Payment. Thereafter, the annual proportion of each assessment
coming due in any year, together with the annual interest on such assessment,
shall be payable in the same manner and at the same time and in the same
installments and be subject to the same proportionate penalties and interest
after delinquency, as would have been the case had bonds been issued to
represent the unpaid assessments.
(Ord. 2277 (part), 1966: prior code § 40.117)
13.04.180   Connection charges and advances therefor.
   (a)   Connection Charge Assessments. Charges established by the city for the
privilege of connecting to the city's sanitary sewerage or water facilities, or
as a condition to providing sewer or water service, may be included in and
collected as part of any special assessments levied under the provisions of
this title.
   (b)   Division of Assessment. In any proceeding for the acquisition or
construction of sanitary sewerage facilities or water facilities or both, the
council may direct that each assessment be divided into two parts, one
representing a connection charge (hereinafter called "the connection charge
portion") and the other the balance remaining after deducting the connection
charge portion from the original total assessment (hereinafter called "the
remaining balance").
   (c)   Connection Charges - Establishment. Charges for the privilege of
connecting to the sanitary sewerage facilities and water distribution
facilities of the city are hereby established as a condition to the providing
of sewer or water service, to become effective in any given project area or
portion thereof upon adoption of the resolution ordering cash advances in any
project provided for in Section
13.04.180(e).
   (d)   Id. - Amount. The amount of such connection charge in each project
area or portion thereof shall be fixed in said resolution provided for in
Section
13.04.180(e).
   (e)   Cash Advances to Project. In any project in which the council directs
a division of assessments as provided in Section
13.04.180(b), the resolution directing such division shall provide for cash
advances to the project to represent all of the connection charge portions of
assessments except those as to which property owners have failed to exercise
the deduction option as provided in Section
13.04.180(f).
   (f)   Property Owners' Option. In any project as to which such charges are
fixed and cash advances ordered, one connection charge shall be included in
each individual assessment as finally confirmed by the council and recorded in
the office of the superintendent of streets. The owner of each parcel assessed,
in the notice to pay assessments, shall be given the option of reducing his
assessment by the amount of the connection charge included therein. The
original record of any assessment as to which the option is exercised, shall be
marked "$_________ paid by connection charge deduction" (inserting the amount
of charge to be deducted). Each connection charge deducted, as well as any
charge represented by the city's cash advance to the project, shall be payable
in cash at the time of connection to the facilities constructed in the
proceedings. If a connection charge is left in the assessment and either paid
in cash or allowed to go to bond, the property is entitled to a single
connection without payment of further charges therefor other than the cost of
constructing lateral connections not included in the proceedings and any
permit, inspection or other fees now or hereafter established by the city. The
council may, by resolution, change the amount of the charge at any time.
   If the option has not been exercised by the end of the case payment period,
the owner will be deemed to have elected to leave his assessment unchanged.
(Ord. 2277 (part), 1966: prior code § 40.118)
13.04.190   Force account.
   (a)   Force Account. The council may, by resolution adopted by a four-fifths
vote of all its members, in the manner provided in and controlled by the
provisions of the charter of said city as in effect at the time of the doing of
the work, determine and declare that in its opinion the work in question may be
more economically and satisfactorily performed by day labor, and/or the
materials and supplies purchased at a lower price in the open market, and to
order that the same be done by force account, in the manner herein stated,
without further observance of the provisions hereof with reference to the award
of contract, or execution of contract or bonds.
   (b)   City Engineer. In such case the city shall have the same rights as a
contractor, and such work and improvements shall be directed by the city
engineer.
   (c)   City Rights. When such work shall have been completed, the city shall
become the owner of the assessment made to pay the cost thereof, and of all
bonds issued thereon, with like power of enforcement as if held by a
contractor. No warrant need be issued in such case.
   (d)   Payment. The superintendent of streets or other city officer
designated by the council is authorized, after the assessment and diagram shall
have been recorded, to collect and receive payment of the several amounts due
thereon in the manner provided in such act under which the proceedings shall
have been taken, for, and in place of, such contractor, and his statement of
payments received, when filed, shall constitute and be in lieu of, the
contractor's return of the warrant and statement of payments received.
   (e)   Bonds. Such bonds, when issued, shall be made payable to bearer.
(Ord. 2277 (part), 1966: prior code § 40.119)
13.04.200   Revolving fund.
   (a)   Revolving Fund. In the exercise of any of the powers now or hereafter
provided for in this part, including the right to take immediate possession in
eminent domain proceedings, the council may create, use and reimburse a
revolving fund or funds.
   (b)   Procedure. The revolving fund may be established, operated,
reimbursed, reduced or dissolved, in which event Article 2, Chapter 3, Division
4, Title 4 of the Government Code shall apply.
(Ord. 2277 (part), 1966: prior code § 40.120)
13.04.210   Assessment and diagram.
   (a)   Assessment. Parcels may be described as contained on the assessment
roll on which city taxes are collected, or with reference to recorded maps or
deeds or assessors maps, or by other means sufficient for identifications.
   (b)   Diagram. The diagram may describe the property in reference to or be
copies of official maps or assessors maps, or be otherwise sufficient to
identify the several parcels thereon. It shall not be necessary to show thereon
their relationship to the acquisitions or improvements.
(Ord. 2277 (part), 1966: prior code § 40.121)
Chapter 13.08
GENERAL PROCEDURE
Sections:
   
13.08.010   Protests.
   
13.08.020   Hearings.
   
13.08.030   Modifications.
   
13.08.040   Supplemental assessment.
13.08.010   Protests.
   (a)   Authorized. Objections may be made to ordering improvements or
acquisitions, or to grades, or to an assessment, or the extent of the district,
or to any supplemental assessment or reassessment, the legality of any act or
proceedings, or to changes, or to any part of any thereof, at or before the
hour set for hearing thereon.
   (b)   Form. Protests shall be in writing, signed by the protestant, contain
a description of the property owned by him sufficient to identify same, and
state their interest therein and the nature of the protest, and be filed with
the city clerk.
   (c)   Legality. Objections to legality shall specify the illegality and no
other illegalities need be considered.
   (d)   Majority Protests. The council, by the affirmative vote of four-fifths
of its members, may overrule protests by the owners of more than half the area
to be assessed.
(Ord. 2277 (part), 1966: prior code § 40.201)
13.08.020   Hearings.
   (a)   Time. No hearing need be set for a longer period than the time
required for giving notice thereof.
   (b)   Hearing. At the hearing the council shall consider and pass upon the
protests, may remedy or correct any irregularity, and may order any
improvements or acquisition to be completed according to the plans and
specifications and to their satisfaction.
   (c)   Continuances. A hearing may be continued. Where any matter is noticed
for hearing and is not heard it shall be deemed submitted and may be acted upon
at any subsequent meeting.
(Ord. 2277 (part), 1966: prior code § 40.202)
13.08.030   Modifications.
   (a)   Authorized. During the progress of the project, the legislative body
may make changes in the improvements or acquisitions, the boundaries of the
proposed assessment district, or the assessment or the estimate of costs, or in
any of the proceedings or procedures.
   (b)   Notice. Where said changes result in extending the boundaries of the
assessment district, increasing the total amount to be collected, or increasing
improvements or acquisitions or making substitutions therein, or in the
proceedings or procedures, they shall not be ordered except after notice of its
intention so to do has been posted and published in the newspaper in which the
resolution of intention or notice of improvement was published, describing the
proposed changes and specifying the time and place of hearing.
   (c)   Protests. Protests may only be made against the proposed changes.
   (d)   Order. If no protests are made, or are found to be insufficient, or
have been overruled, immediately thereon the council may order such changes.
   (e)   Record. Said changes may be made upon the face of the plans,
specifications, estimate, diagram, assessment or other document affected, or by
an amended or supplemental document.
   (f)   Lien. The lien date of the original assessment shall not be affected
by such order. The lien date of such changes shall be the date on which the
original assessment was recorded.
(Ord. 2277 (part), 1966: prior code § 40.203)
13.08.040   Supplemental assessment.
   (a)   Authorized. If the first assessment for any improvement or
acquisition, or if the bonds issued to pay all costs, damages and expenses
incurred or to be incurred, including any judgments rendered, or to be
rendered, and the costs and expenses of such action or proceedings, or the
estimated amount of any thereof, are insufficient, the council may order a
supplemental assessment to raise such deficit.
   (b)   How Levied. The assessment shall be made and collected in the same
manner, as nearly as may be, as the first assessment, or a reassessment may be
had therefor, and said proceedings may be repeated until sufficient money is
raised to pay for same.
   (c)   Notice and Order. Notice shall be given, protests may be made, and
said supplemental assessment heard, confirmed and recorded as herein provided
for modifications.
   (d)   Payment. Proceedings for notice, demand and payment shall be had as
provided for the original assessment.
(Ord. 2277 (part), 1966: prior code § 40.204)
Chapter 13.12
ACQUISITION AND IMPROVEMENT PROCEDURE
Sections:
   
13.12.010   Investigation proceedings.
   
13.12.020   Improvement Act of 1911.
   
13.12.030   Street Opening Act of 1903.
   
13.12.040   Municipal Improvement Act of 1913.
   
13.12.050   Parking districts.
   
13.12.060   Other financing methods.
   
13.12.080   Parking authority.
13.12.010   Investigation proceedings.
   (a)   Necessity of Improvement. When it appears that the public convenience
and necessity require an acquisition and/or improvement and proceedings should
be taken without complying with the provisions of the Special Assessment
Investigation, Limitation and Majority Protest Act of 1931, a public hearing
shall be held on the said question of the public convenience and necessity
therefor which shall be called and notice of the time and place thereof shall
be given in accordance with the provisions of this section.
   (b)   Preliminary Determination of Necessity. A resolution of preliminary
determination shall be adopted describing in general terms the proposed
improvement or acquisition and setting a time and place when and where any and
all persons interested may appear and show cause, if any they have, why the
council should not find and determine that the public convenience and necessity
require the proposed acquisition or improvement without compliance with the
Investigation Act.
   (c)   Notice and Hearing. The resolution shall contain a notice of the time
and place of hearing. A copy of the resolution shall be published in two or
more issues of a newspaper published and circulated in the city, and a copy
shall be posted on or near the council chamber door or on a bulletin board in
or adjacent to the city hall. The posting and first publication shall be had at
least ten days before the date of hearing. The resolution may be consolidated
with the resolution of intention and the notice may be incorporated in the
notice of improvement.
   (d)   Objections. Any person interested may object to undertaking the
proceedings without first complying with the provisions of the Investigation
Act.
   (e)   Final Determination of Necessity. If no protests are made, or when the
protests shall have been heard and overruled, the council may adopt a
resolution finding and determining that the public convenience and necessity
require the proposed improvements and/or acquisitions, and that the
Investigation Act shall not apply. The finding may be incorporated in the
resolution ordering the improvement and/or acquisition.
   (f)   Modification. When proceedings are had for a change and modification,
the resolution of intention to change and modify shall be deemed a resolution
of intention and the resolution ordering the changes and modification shall be
deemed a resolution ordering the improvement or acquisition as to the changes
and modifications.
   (g)   Jurisdiction. The resolution determining the convenience and necessity
shall be adopted by the affirmative vote of four-fifths of the members of the
council, and its findings and determination shall be final and conclusive.
   (h)   Nonapplication. This section shall not apply to a proceeding which is
excepted from the provisions of the Investigation Act, or when the
investigation proceedings have been avoided or taken pursuant to said Act.
   (i)   Finality. When proceedings for any improvements and/or acquisitions or
any part thereof have been undertaken without compliance with the Investigation
Act or without proceedings under this section, proceedings may thereafter be
had under this section with reference thereto, and the order of the council
determining convenience and necessity therein shall be final and conclusive.
(Ord. 2277 (part), 1966: prior code § 40.401)
13.12.020   Improvement Act of 1911.
   (a)   Powers. When proceedings are taken pursuant to this section, the
Improvement Act of 1911 shall apply.
   (b)   Cash Assessments - Alternative Collection. As an alternative method
for the collection of cash assessments or assessments of less than fifty
dollars levied under the provisions of this section, the council may, and upon
the written request of the contractor or his assigns must by resolution adopted
at or before the first day of September, direct that such assessments be
collected upon the tax roll upon which general taxes are collected for the
city.
   (c)   Cash Assessments - Resolution, Contents. The resolution shall contain
a description of the properties so assessed, the amount of such assessments,
together with interest thereon from the date of filing the original list of
unpaid assessments and at the rate of one percent per month to the next
succeeding thirty-first day of December of the tax year for which such roll
shall have been prepared, and the total amounts of principal and interest on
each property.
   (d)   Cash Assessments - Filing. A certified copy of said resolution shall
be delivered immediately to the officer designated by law to extend city taxes
upon the tax roll on which they are collected.
   (e)   Cash Assessments - Extension on Roll. Said officer shall extend upon
such roll the total amounts of such assessments and interest.
   (f)   Cash Assessments - Collection. Said amounts shall be collected at the
same time and in the same manner, as general municipal taxes are collected, and
be subject to the same penalties and interest, and to the same procedure under
foreclosure and sale in case of delinquency, as provided for general municipal
taxes, all of which laws for the levy, enforcement and collection of which are
hereby made applicable to such special assessment taxes.
   (g)   Cash Assessments - Payment to Contractor. The assessments and the
interest so entered shall become due and payable to the contractor or his
assigns at the office of the city treasurer on the second day of January next
succeeding.
   (h)   Cash Assessments - Default. Upon default in payment, the lands so
assessed shall be sold in the same manner in which real property in such city
is sold for the nonpayment of general municipal taxes, and be subject to
redemption within one year from the date of sale in the same manner as such
real property is redeemed from such delinquent sale, and upon failure of such
redemption, shall in like manner be sold or pass by deed to the city. The city
shall not, however, be required to pay into the assessment fund any part of
such delinquency until such property be redeemed or sold and money received
therefor.
   (i)   Cash Assessments - Default - Resale. Upon receipt of such deed the
city shall thereupon offer and sell such property at public auction in the
manner provided by law for the sale of its tax deeded property, and the amount
of said assessment and the penalties and interest thereon less the costs of
said sale shall be paid to said contractor or his assigns.
   (j)   Cash Assessments - Default - No Bidder. In the event there shall have
been no bidder offering the amount then due on such property, it may, at the
city's election, be declared sold to the owner of such assessment, and in like
manner be deeded to him, and such assessment ordered satisfied of record.
(Ord. 2277 (part), 1966: prior code § 40.402)
13.12.030   Street Opening Act of 1903.
   (a)   Powers. When proceedings are taken pursuant to this section the Street
Opening Act of 1903 shall apply.
   (b)   Closing. Said proceedings may be for closing or abandoning any street
or easement, and the council may therein determine that no assessment is
necessary.
   (c)   Resolution of Intention. The ordinance of intention may be called a
resolution.
   (d)   Notice of Improvement. The notice of improvement shall be so called
and no map need be contained therein.
   (e)   Cash Assessments - Alternative Collection. Cash assessments or
assessments for less than fifty dollars may be collected as provided in the
alternative procedure of Section 13.12.120.
(Ord. 2277 (part), 1966: prior code § 40.403)
13.12.040   Municipal Improvement Act of 1913.
   (a)   Powers. When proceedings are taken pursuant to this section the
Municipal Improvement Act of 1913 shall apply.
   (b)   Hearing. The hearing on the report need not be set for more than ten
days beyond the date of setting.
   (c)   Bonds. Bonds may be issued upon any supplemental assessment and more
than one such assessment may be had.
   (d)   Payment - Time. The time provided for payment of assessments may be
thirty days.
   (e)   Payment - To Whom. Payment shall be made to the city treasurer unless
the council shall specify some other officer to whom payments are to be made.
   (f)   Eminent Domain. Proceeding in eminent domain may be exercised under
the Code of Civil Procedure.
   (g)   Stipulations for Judgment. Stipulations and proceeding thereon for
judgment may be had as provided in the Street Opening Act of 1903.
   (h)   Offset. Awards and assessments may be offset as provided in the Street
Opening Act of 1903.
   (i)   Referees. Reference to referees may be had as provided in the Street
Opening Act of 1903.
   (j)   Surplus. Where surplus is not used for maintenance of the improvement
and is ordered refunded and the assessment has been paid in cash in full, the
portion of the surplus applicable thereto shall be returned in cash to the
person paying it upon his furnishing satisfactory evidence of such payment. The
determination of the city controller as to the sufficiency of such proof and
the person to whom such money shall be paid shall be final and conclusive.
Where the assessment or any installment is unpaid, the credit shall be applied
upon such assessment or the earliest unpaid installment of principal and
interest. When bonds have been, or are provided to be issued under Bond Plan D
or E or G, the surplus shall be deposited in the bond interest and redemption
fund. Any surpluses remaining unexpended for a period of four years after final
completion of the project and payment of all costs and expenses thereof may be
transferred to the general fund. As to any such surpluses existing at the time
of the effective date of Ordinance No. 2204 (September 24, 1964), such
transfers may be ordered by the council after hearing following notice by
publication and posting of intention to do so.
(Ord. 2277 (part), 1966: prior code § 40.404)
13.12.050   Parking districts.
   (a)   Parking Place. "Parking place" includes a parking lot, garage, or sub-
surface structure, including the grading, paving, draining, sewering, lighting
or otherwise improving of such lot, and buildings and improvements necessary or
convenient for the parking of motor vehicles including parking meters and other
equipment and facilities necessary or convenient therefor, together with the
provisions necessary or convenient for ingress to and egress from such places.
   (b)   Power. There is hereby vested in the council the power to acquire,
construct, reconstruct, install, extend, enlarge, repair, improve, maintain and
operate public automobile parking places within the city; to acquire, by
purchase, lease or eminent domain the lands and public rights-of-way necessary
or convenient therefor, to acquire and construct public improvements and
equipment and facilities necessary or convenient therefor, and to levy
assessments and issue bonds to pay for the cost of the whole or any part
thereof and the expenses incidental thereto.
   (c)   District. The whole, or any portion, of the city may be formed into an
improvement and/or maintenance district and assessments may be levied upon, and
bonds may be issued against, the properties therein for the purpose of paying
for the costs of acquiring, constructing, reconstructing, installing,
extending, enlarging, repairing, improving, maintaining and operating parking
places, and the expenses incidental thereto. Proceedings for the formation of
such district or districts levying such assessments and issuing such bonds,
shall be had as provided in Chapters
13.12 and
13.16 of this title.
   (d)   Property. The city may purchase, lease, obtain, option upon, acquire
by gift, grant, bequest, devise, eminent domain, or otherwise and hold, sell,
lease, exchange, transfer, assign, or otherwise dispose of, any real or
personal property within the city, or any interest in, or improvement on, such
property. All property shall be acquired and held in the name of the city.
   (e)   City Lands. City lands or property may be acquired. In such event the
resolution of intention shall describe same and state the amount and manner of
payment of the compensation. In lieu thereof, the council may provide in said
resolution that the compensation for said property shall be an amount to be
fixed by the decision of two or three disinterested competent appraisers to be
appointed by the city council.
   (f)   Sale of Property. The council may sell any property acquired for
parking places which is not needed therefor. Any money received from such sale
may be used for the acquisition, construction or improving of other parking
places in said district. It may also be applied as a credit on any assessments
levied for the acquisition of such property, in which case the provisions of
Section
13.12.040(j) shall apply.
   (g)   Lease of Property. When, in its opinion, the public interest and
economy will be served thereby, the council may lease one or more parking
places and facilities. In so doing, the council may restrict or partially
restrict their use to owners and tenants of real property in the district and
classes of persons designated by such owners or tenants.
   (h)   Surplus Space. Surplus space may be rented or devoted to commercial
uses other than for the parking of automobiles when in the council's judgment
it is necessary or convenient to conduct or permit such use in order to utilize
properly the property as a parking space. Rentals received for such purposes
shall be deposited in the improvement fund or in the operating fund or in the
bond interest and redemption fund for said project as the council shall
determine.
   (i)   Fees and Rentals. The council may fix rentals, fees or other charges
for the properties, works and facilities of any parking place. In so doing, it
may establish rates, charges or rentals for the owners and tenants of such
properties and classes of persons designated by the owners or tenants which
differ from and are less than the rates, charges and rentals charged other
persons.
   (j)   Operation. Such parking places may be maintained and operated, and all
or any costs and expenses thereof, including rent, repairs, replacement, fuel,
power, electrical current, care, supervision, and any other items necessary for
the proper maintenance and operation thereof, may be expended for that purpose.
Included in such costs may be the cost of replacements, improvements and
extensions to any parking place necessary or convenient for the proper
operation thereof.
   (k)   Maintenance Cost. An annual assessment may be levied upon the real
property within the district established therefor for the purpose of
maintaining and operating such parking places. Such assessment shall be in an
amount clearly sufficient to pay any and all costs and expenses of maintaining
and operating such parking places then due or thereafter to accrue before the
proceeds of another levy shall be available therefor. Such levy shall be
apportioned among the properties within such district on the basis of the ad
valorem value of such land as shown on the last equalized secured and utility
tax rolls upon which city taxes are collected.
   (l)   Annual Report. When any part of the operative cost is to be paid by a
special levy, the city manager shall annually file with the city clerk a
written report stating in reasonable detail the estimated cost of maintenance
and operation for which an assessment is to be levied in that year, including
the cost of replacements, improvements and extensions to any parking place. It
shall also state the rate of the levy to be made therefor. When such report
shall have been preliminarily approved by the council, the clerk shall give
notice to interested persons that such report has been filed in his office and
open to inspection, and of a time and place when such report will be heard by
the council and an assessment ordered. Such notice may be by publication in a
newspaper published in the city, or if none, in one printed and published in
the county and circulated in the city, or by mail to the last assessees of the
property at their addresses appearing on the last city tax roll, or as known to
the clerk, at least ten days before the day set for hearing.
   (m)   Hearing on Report. The report shall be fully heard, and may be
altered, amended or supplemented by the council. When all objections have been
heard and action taken with reference thereto, by their having been overruled
or otherwise, such report shall be confirmed by resolution of the council. Such
levy shall become and remain a lien on the property described therein from the
date it is confirmed until paid.
   (n)   Id. - Collecting Assessment. The officer who performs such duty shall
compute and extend the amounts thereof on the next tax rolls on which city
taxes are collected, and it shall be collected in the same manner, and be
subject to the same penalties, costs and interest, and may be redeemed, and the
property sold for nonpayment thereof, and title shall pass to the purchaser, as
provided for city taxes, except that the period of redemption shall be one year
instead of five.
   (o)   Transfer of Funds. The city may advance funds for the acquisition,
construction or improving of such parking places, or for the maintenance and
operation thereof, and reimburse itself from the proceeds of any assessment
subsequently levied for that purpose. It may also make contributions thereto
from available funds.
   (p)   Pledge. The council may, at any time, make such pledge or pledges as
it shall determine, for the payment of the principal and interest of the bonds,
or for the maintenance and operation of the facilities acquired or to be
acquired therewith, or for adequate reserves, from the income and revenue of on
and off-street parking facilities.
   (q)   Covenants. The council may provide all proper and usual covenants for
the proper security and payment of the principal and interest of the bonds.
   (r)   Alteration of District Boundaries. The boundaries of such district or
of any district formed pursuant to any section of this title or pursuant to
Ordinance No. 844 or Ordinance No. 1928 or pursuant to general law may be
enlarged at any time either before or after the issuance of bonds. The
territory to be annexed shall be set forth in a resolution of intention to be
adopted by the council, which shall give notice that said matter, and all
persons interested, will be heard by the council at a time to be stated
therein, at the regular meeting place of the council.
   (s)   Id. - Publication. Such resolution shall be published.
   (t)   Id. - Hearing. The hearing may be adjourned from time to time. At the
hearing the council shall have power to determine whether or not the entire
territory, or only a portion thereof, to be annexed will be benefited by being
annexed.
   (u)   Id. - Order. The council shall by resolution order the annexation of
such territory, defining its boundaries therein. Its decision thereon shall be
final and conclusive.
   (v)   Id. - Effect. Thereafter the property annexed shall be subject to
special levies for maintenance and operation and for any ad valorem bonds
issued for the acquisition or construction of the improvements.
   (w)   Id. - Terms and Conditions. The council may make such annexation
subject to one or more of the following terms and conditions:
   (1)   The payment of a fixed or determinable amount of money, either as a
lump sum or in installments, for the acquisition, use, or right of use of all
or part of the existing property of any district, or as compensation to the
district for the enjoyment by the annexing property of the privileges and
immunities of property in the district.
   (2)   The levying or fixing and the collection of (i) special, extraordinary
or additional assessments, or (ii) special, extraordinary or additional service
charges, rentals or rates, or (iii) both, for the purpose of providing for any
payment required pursuant to subdivision (1) of this subsection.
   (3)   The imposition, exemption, transfer, division or apportionment, as
among any affected districts of liability for payment of all or any part of
principal, interest and any other amounts which shall become due on account of
all or any part of any outstanding or then authorized but thereafter issued
bonds, including revenue bonds, or other contracts or obligations of any
district or any improvement district or zone therein and the levying or fixing
and the collection of any (i) assessments, or (ii) service charges, rentals or
rates, or (iii) both, as may be necessary to provide for such payment.
   (4)   The formation of a new improvement district or districts or zone or
the annexation or detachment of territory to or from any existing improvement
district or districts or zone.
   (5)   The incurring of new indebtedness or liability by or on behalf of all
or any part of any district or of any existing or proposed new improvement
district or zone therein.
   (6)   The issuance and sale of any bonds, including authorized but unissued
bonds.
   (7)   The acquisition, improvement, disposition, sale, transfer or division
of any property, real or personal.
   (8)   The disposition, transfer or division of any moneys or funds
(including cash on hand and moneys due but uncollected) and any other
obligations.
   (9)   The fixing and establishment of priorities of use or right of use or
capacity rights in any public improvements or facilities or of any other
property, real or personal.
   Any such terms and conditions selected by the council shall be set forth in
the resolution of intention, all persons interested may be heard thereon, and
such thereof as are determined by the council after the hearing to be in the
best interests of the annexing territory and the district, shall be set forth
in the resolution ordering the annexation.
   (x)   Deletion of Territory From Districts. The boundaries of such district
or any district formed pursuant to any section of this title or pursuant to
Ordinance No. 844 or Ordinance No. 1982, or pursuant to general law may be
revised at any time either before or after the issuance of bonds by the
deletion of territory therefrom in accordance with the procedures and
considerations specified for annexation of territory in subsections (r) through
(w) above. Any resolution of the council finally ordering any deletion of
territory from a district shall expressly find that such deletion shall not
affect the repayment of any bonds of the district as a consequence of such
deletion. It is expressly provided that a condition of approval of deletion of
territory shall include the payment of sufficient cash or the provision of
other securities approved by the city to mitigate any possible decrease in
security for any such bonds.
(Ord. 4415 § 1, 1997: Ord. 2443 (part), 1968: Ord. 2277 (part), 1966: prior
code § 40.405)
13.12.060   Other financing methods.
   (a)   Additional parking places and facilities or other acquisitions and
improvements for any assessment district may be acquired and improved by any or
all or any combination of the following methods:
   (1)   By a lump sum payment or by contract of purchase with payments made
annually or otherwise over a period of years;
   (2)   By lease or leaseback;
   (3)   Under lease with option to purchase.
   Payments under subdivision (1) and rentals under subdivision (2) and
payments and rentals under subdivision (3) may be paid from revenues derived
from the operation of the facilities and improvements of the district, from
income derived from the sale, rental or other productive use of any surplus
properties, improvements or facilities, from the proceeds of annual ad valorem
or other annual assessments levied under this title or any general law, or from
any other funds legally available therefor. Such annual assessments may be
levied for such purposes in addition to any other purposes otherwise authorized
by this title or any general law.
(Ord. 2443 § 4, 1968)
13.12.080   Parking authority.
   (a)   Parking Authority - Need. The council hereby declares that there is
need for a parking authority to function in the city, and that there is a need
for the city to exercise the power of parking authority.
   (b)   Name. The name of the parking authority shall be "City of Palo Alto
Parking Authority," hereinafter referred to as "the authority."
   (c)   Organization. The council hereby declares itself to be the authority,
and all of the rights, powers, duties, privileges and immunities, vested by law
in the authority, except as otherwise provided in this section, shall be vested
in the council as the parking authority.
   (d)   Source of Powers. This section is adopted pursuant to the municipal
affairs provision of the charter of the city and the Parking Law of 1949. To
the extent that any power granted to the authority herein is adjudged to be a
state affair, the source thereof shall be deemed to be the Parking Law of 1949.
To the extent that such power is adjudged to be a municipal affair, its source
shall be deemed to be Article XI, Section 6 of the State Constitution and said
municipal affairs provisions of the city charter.
   (e)   Powers - General. The authority shall have and may exercise all of the
powers granted to a parking authority by the Parking Law of 1949. The authority
shall also have and may exercise the powers hereinafter enumerated in this
section.
   (f)   Method of Financing. The method of financing of a project may include
any method authorized by the Parking Law of 1949, by any other applicable
general law, or by this code, and may consist of all, or any combination, of
said methods.
   (g)   Assessment Procedures. Prior to authorizing the execution of any
documents which would obligate the city to make payments or rentals from the
sources set forth in Section
13.12.060, the council shall conduct such proceedings under
Chapter 13.12 as are necessary for the levy of assessments thereunder;
provided, that if said proceedings are conducted pursuant to Section
13.12.040, the engineer's report shall consist only of the following items:
   (1)   A general plan of the proposed improvement sufficient to identify its
general nature, location and extent;
   (2)   A statement of the rentals or payments proposed to be made, the
sources of funds therefor, and the assessment formula or formulae proposed to
be applied;
   (3)   Any other engineering or financial data required by law to sanction
the levy of a legal and valid special assessment.
   The mailed notices of hearing shall, to the extent possible, set forth the
estimated annual assessments against the parcel covered by each notice.
   Subsection (x) of Section
13.16.130 shall apply in the event of assessment delinquencies.
   (h)   Issuance and Sale of Bonds. Section 33138 of the Parking Law of 1949
shall not apply. The authority may issue and sell its bonds at public or
private sale, at or below par, and at the interest rate fixed by the bid of the
purchaser.
(Ord. 2571 § 1, 1970)
Chapter 13.16
ASSESSMENT BOND PROCEDURE
Sections:
   
13.16.010   Purpose.
   
13.16.020   Declaration in resolution of intention.
   
13.16.030   Form - Interest - Execution.
   
13.16.040   Sale of bonds - Premiums.
   
13.16.050   Registration.
   
13.16.060   Payment of assessments with matured bonds and coupons.
   
13.16.070   Charges for collection costs.
   
13.16.080   Division of assessments.
   
13.16.090   Distribution of surplus remaining in redemption fund.
   
13.16.100   Bond plan A - Lot bonds.
   
13.16.110   Bond plan B - District bonds.
   
13.16.120   Bond plan C - District liability bonds.
   
13.16.130   Bond plan D - Ad valorem land bonds.
   
13.16.140   Bond plan E - Ad valorem realty bonds.
   
13.16.150   Bond plan G - Vehicle off-street parking bonds.
   
13.16.160   Bond plan H - Annual benefit assessment bonds.
   
13.16.170   Summary refunding.
   
13.16.180   Refunding proceedings without findings.
13.16.010   Purpose.
   When bonds are to be issued in any proceeding had and taken in connection
with any public improvement, and/or acquisition, and/or immediate possession,
and/or street closing, pursuant to this title, the same shall be issued, paid
and collected in accordance with this chapter.
(Ord. 2277 (part), 1966: prior code § 40.501(a))
13.16.020   Declaration in resolution of intention.
   When the council has determined that bonds shall be issued to represent the
cost and expenses of any proposed work or improvement or of the possession or
acquisition of any property in any such proceeding, it shall so declare in its
resolution of intention therefor, and shall specify pursuant to which plan
herein provided such bonds shall be issued, the date of their maturity
following the date of their issuance, the interest rate which they shall bear,
which shall not exceed six percent yearly; provided, however, that such
interest rate may be stated to be not to exceed a rate stated therein.
(Ord. 2277 (part), 1966: prior code § 40.501(b))
13.16.030   Form - Interest - Execution.
   (a)   Form of Bonds. Whenever any bonds are issued pursuant to any one of
the plans herein provided, such bonds shall be substantially in the form
provided in the particular plan specified, with such appropriate changes in the
wording of such bonds as to show that they had been issued pursuant to such
plan of this chapter.
   (b)   Date. The bonds shall be dated as the council shall determine;
provided, that in a proceeding had pursuant to Section
13.12.020, the written consent of the contractor and his assigns shall be
obtained before delaying their date.
   (c)   Interest. The interest shall be computed from a date on or after the
thirty-first day following the recordation of the assessment; provided,
however, that in a proceeding had pursuant to Section
13.12.020, the written consent of the contractor or his assigns shall be
obtained.
   (d)   Serial Amounts. The bonds shall be made to mature in such annual
serial amounts as the council shall determine.
   (e)   Divisions. The bonds may be issued in more than one division having
different dates and dates from which interest shall run.
   (f)   Execution. The signature on the interest coupons and all signatures
excepting one signature on the bonds may be by printed, engraved or
lithographed or other process.
(Ord. 2277 (part), 1966: prior code § 40.501(c)(1))
13.16.040   Sale of bonds - Premiums.
   (a)   Sale of Bonds. When any bonds issued hereunder are to be sold, they
may be sold by the council as it shall determine. The proceeds of such sale
shall be placed in the city treasury to the credit of the fund for which they
had been issued, and shall be applied exclusively to the purposes and objects
thereof.
   (b)   Premium. If any bonds are sold for an amount in excess of par, such
excess shall be paid into the fund for the improvement, unless the council
shall otherwise determine.
(Ord. 2277 (part), 1966: prior code § 40.501(i), (j))
13.16.050   Registration.
   (a)   Against Theft. The bonds may be registered against theft, in which
event Article 7, Chapter 4, Division 4, Title 4 of the Government Code shall
apply.
   (b)   Delinquent Bonds. Bonds may be registered for nonpayment, in which
event Article 2, Chapter 3, Part 1, Division 1, Title 5 of the Government Code
shall apply.
   (c)   Lost Bonds. New bonds or coupons may be issued to replace lost or
destroyed bonds, in which event the provisions of Article 3, Chapter 3, Part 1,
Division 2, Title 5 of the Government Code shall apply.
(Ord. 2277 (part), 1966: prior code § 40.501(k), (l), (m))
13.16.060   Payment of assessments with matured bonds and coupons.
   Payment of all or any portion of any assessment taxes levied to pay the
principal or interest due, or to become due, on the bonds of any district
formed under this title may be made within matured bonds or matured coupons of
such district. Such bonds and coupons shall be accepted and treated as cash,
and when so received shall be canceled, and the interest and sinking fund of
such district shall be credited with the face value thereof.
(Ord. 2277 (part), 1966: prior code § 40.501(n))
13.16.070   Charges for collection costs.
   In lieu of any provisions of the law relating thereto, the city in posting
assessments to the tax roll when collected thereon may add to the amount of
each principal and interest installment the sum of not to exceed one dollar to
cover the costs and expenses incurred by the city in the levy and collection of
said installments. This section shall not apply to the collection of unposted
or unbilled installments paid before their maturity.
(Ord. 2277 (part), 1966: prior code § 40.501(o))
13.16.080   Division of assessments.
   In lieu of the procedure provided in Sections
13.16.110 and
13.16.130 for the division of assessments, said assessments may be divided upon
the written application of the property owner affected in the manner provided
in the Revenue and Taxation Code for the division of taxes; provided, however,
that any such application shall be accompanied by a fee as set forth in the
municipal fee schedule if the original lot has been divided into two parcels,
or a fee as set forth in the municipal fee schedule for each if the original
lot has been divided into three or more parcels, plus county recording fees.
(Ord. 2960 § 49, 1976: Ord. 2768 § 1, 1974: Ord. 2277 (part), 1966: prior code
§ 40.501(p))
13.16.090   Distribution of surplus remaining in redemption fund.
   In the event of a surplus remaining in the redemption fund after payment of
all bonds issued under any plan mentioned in this chapter and the interest
thereon, for retirement of which such fund was established, such surplus,
subject to any other special provision therefor in this chapter, shall be
applied first to repayment to the city of any balance due it for contributions
and advances which it may have made to the redemption fund and of any special
taxes which it may have levied in aid thereof other than any regular taxes
levied to retire any such bonds, and also of any moneys due it for costs
incurred or charges allowed, together with interest on such sums at the rate
mentioned in said bonds. The excess, if any, shall be paid into the general
fund of the city.
(Ord. 2277 (part), 1966: prior code § 40.501(q))
13.16.100   Bond plan A - Lot bonds.
   (a)   Powers. When bonds are issued pursuant to this plan, the bond
provisions of the Improvement Act of 1911 shall apply.
   (b)   Interest. When the assessment is levied under Section
13.12.020, interest shall run from the date of filing the list of unpaid
assessments. Otherwise, interest shall run from a date to be determined by the
council.
   (c)   Assessments under Fifty Dollars. As an alternative method for the
collection of such assessments which are of an amount less than fifty dollars,
proceedings may be had in accordance with the alternative provisions of Section
13.12.020.
(Ord. 2277 (part), 1966: prior code § 40.502)
13.16.110   Bond plan B - District bonds.
   (a)   Powers. Where bonds are issued pursuant to this plan, the Improvement
Bond Act of 1915 shall apply.
   (b)   Assessments under Fifty Dollars. Bonds may be issued in the total
amount of all assessments in amounts of less than fifty dollars which are
unpaid at such time, to mature at the same time as the maturity of the first
series of such serial bonds, and which assessments shall become due and payable
at the same time as that portion of the larger assessments which has been
collected for the payment of the first series of the serial bonds and the
interest thereon.
   (c)   Unpaid List. The list of unpaid assessments filed with the city
treasurer by the street superintendent shall separately state in such list the
total of the assessments which are of fifty dollars or over in amount, and the
assessments which are under fifty dollars in amount.
   (d)   Denominations. Bonds for the amount of the assessments which are not
an even multiple of not less than one hundred dollars or more than one thousand
dollars may be made to mature at the same time as the first series of bonds.
   (e)   Payment of Assessments after Bonds Issued. After the bonds are issued,
the assessment on any parcel may be paid in advance in the manner provided in
the 1915 Act by paying to the treasurer the unpaid balance of principal, plus
one year's interest, plus five percent of the unpaid principal amount of the
assessment, plus ten dollars for the cost of publication of notice of call. The
person paying shall not be entitled to any refund.
   (f)   Calling Bonds. When sufficient surplus moneys are in the redemption
fund with which to call a bond, the treasurer shall call and retire a bond in
the manner provided in the 1915 Act; provided, that the notice need only be
given for a period of thirty days.
(Ord. 2277 (part), 1966: prior code § 40.503)
13.16.120   Bond plan C - District liability bonds.
   (a)   Powers. When bonds are issued pursuant to this plan, the provisions of
Section
13.16.110 shall apply, except as provided in this section.
   (b)   Bond Form. Appropriate changes shall be made in the form of the bonds
to show that they have been issued for a public improvement or acquisition
pursuant to this chapter.
   (c)   Supplemental Advances. The provisions of the Improvement Bond Act of
1915 which require the city to advance, as a loan to the bond redemption fund
from available surplus funds, the amount of any delinquent installment of
principal, interest and penalties thereon shall not be mandatory and shall not
be enforceable.
   (d)   Supplemental Levies. The provisions of the 1915 Act which require that
the city shall cause to be levied a special tax of not to exceed ten cents on
the one hundred dollars of taxable property in the city shall be restricted to
the taxable property within the assessment district created in the proceedings
or other district deemed benefited thereby and described in the resolution of
intention, and shall not be enforceable against the city as a whole.
   (e)   Advance Payment and Calling Bonds. Subsections (e) and (f) of Section
13.16.110, shall apply to this section.
(Ord. 2277 (part), 1966: prior code § 40.504)
13.16.130   Bond plan D - Ad valorem land bonds.
   (a)   Powers. There is hereby vested in the council the power to issue
serial ad valorem land bonds upon any district created under this title.
   (b)   Assessment District. The proposed district shall be described in the
resolution of intention and established as provided in the section of
Chapter 13.12 pursuant to which said proceedings are had.
   (c)   Improvement Bonds. If said proceedings are had pursuant to Section
13.12.020 hereof, then upon completion of the work, the person appointed by the
council to be in charge of the work shall prepare and file with the council a
declaration that the work has been completed according to the contract
therefor, together with an itemized statement of the cost of such work and of
the expenses incidental to said proceedings, estimated to the conclusion of
said proceedings. The amount of any contribution shall be stated therein as
well as the balance for which bonds are to be issued. When the bonds have been
issued they shall be delivered to the contractor upon his paying to the city
any moneys due it for incidental expenses as stated in the declaration. The
council may provide in the resolution of intention that the contractor shall be
paid in cash from advances to be made to said project or from the proceeds of
the sale of the bonds, in which event the bonds shall be issued as provided for
the issuance of acquisition bonds.
   (d)   Acquisition Bonds. If the proceedings are had pursuant to Section
13.12.030, then upon the entry of all interlocutory judgments in any eminent
domain proceedings brought pursuant thereto, proceedings shall be had
substantially as provided herein for the issuance of improvement bonds. The
bonds shall be sold by the council and the proceeds shall be used to pay the
costs and expenses of the project.
   (e)   Municipal Improvement District Bonds. If proceedings are had pursuant
to Section
13.12.040, then in the resolution ordering the acquisitions or improvements the
council shall determine the estimated cost of said acquisitions and
improvements and of the expenses incidental thereto, and the total estimated
amount of the bonds to be issued. The bonds shall be issued and sold and the
proceeds shall be used to pay the costs and expenses of the project.
   (f)   Possession Bonds. If assessment proceedings are had pursuant to
Sections
13.12.030 and
13.12.040, and proceedings shall be had for the taking of immediate possession
of the property to be acquired, then the person in charge of said proposed
acquisitions shall prepare and file with the city an estimate of the amount of
money necessary to be deposited in court for immediate possession, and
proceedings shall be had for the issuance and sale of bonds therefor as
provided for the issuance of acquisition bonds. In such event the council shall
issue only such amount of additional bonds as is necessary to provide for the
additional costs of said project and the proceeds of the possession bonds shall
be finally used to apply to the cost of the acquisitions and improvements and
expenses incidental thereto.
   (g)   Notice of Hearing. The clerk shall give notice of a time and place of
hearing on the declaration filed in relation to the issuance of any bonds to be
issued other than pursuant to Section
13.12.040. Such notice shall be published.
   (h)   Form of Notice. The notice shall refer to the resolution of intention
in the proceedings for identification, for a description of the work to be done
or acquisitions or improvements to be had and for the boundaries of the
assessment district, and notice shall be given therein to all persons
interested that it is proposed to hear the report and issue bonds pursuant to
this section, and any person feeling aggrieved by any act or determination done
or made in said proceedings or claiming that any previous acts or proceedings
were irregular, defective, erroneous or faulty, or claiming that the work or
improvement has not been performed according to the contract in a good and
substantial manner, or claiming that any potion of the work or improvement for
any reason was omitted or illegally included in the contract, or having any
objections or reasons why bonds should not be issued in the amount set forth in
the declaration and statement on file, may appear before the council at the
time and place so fixed by it and be heard.
   (i)   Hearing. All objections shall be made in writing and signed by the
protestant and any grounds not stated therein and filed at or before the time
fixed for hearing shall be deemed waived. The contractor or his assigns, and
any other person or persons interested in said matter, may appear and be heard
upon any of the matters referred to in said notice. The council may confirm,
amend, alter, modify or correct the report in such manner as it shall deem
just, and require the work to be completed according to its directions or those
of the person designated by it therefor.
   (j)   Issuance of Bonds. In the council's final order upon the hearing, or
in the resolution ordering the acquisitions or improvements when the
proceedings are had pursuant to Section
13.12.040, the council shall by resolution order the issuance of bonds. The
resolution shall state the total principal amount thereof, and the amount to
mature in each year during their term. The first maturity of the bonds may be
postponed for a period not beyond July second on the fifth calendar year
following their date. The bonds may be made to mature on July second over a
period not to exceed forty years from their date.
   (k)   Bonds, Form and Execution. The bonds shall be in such form, shall be
executed by the officers, and shall be made payable at the place or places
within or without the state as the council shall determine. The bonds shall be
negotiable in form and be payable to bearer.
   (l)   Issues - Series - Divisions. An issue of bonds shall constitute all of
the bonds issued pursuant to a resolution of intention. Each issue shall be
given a serial designation. The council may, in its discretion, divide the
issue into two or more divisions and fix different dates for the bonds of each
division, in which event the bonds of each division shall be made payable at
such time or times as the council shall determine. Possession bonds shall
constitute a division of an issue. All bonds of any issue shall have equal
priority.
   (m)   Callable Bonds. Bonds are not subject to call or redemption prior to
their fixed maturity date unless the right to exercise the call is expressly
stated on the face of the bonds. Provision may be made therein for a premium on
call.
   (n)   Supplemental Bonds. If the proceeds of the bonds for any reason are
less than the cost of the acquisitions and improvements and expenses incidental
thereto, additional bonds may be issued by filing with the clerk a declaration
or statement of the amount necessary therefor and by giving notice and holding
a hearing and determining the amount of bonds to be issued therefor as provided
herein for the issuance of bonds upon declaration, notice and hearing. The
bonds shall be deemed a division of the bonds of the main issue.
   (o)   Interest. Semi-annual interest coupons shall be attached to said bonds
and be made payable on the second days of January and July of each year,
excepting that the first coupon shall be for interest from their date to the
second day of January next succeeding four months after the date of such bonds.
Provision may be made for the payment of interest from the proceeds of the sale
of the bonds for the period of acquisition and construction of the project and
for one year thereafter. If upon presentation at maturity payment of any bond
is not made as herein provided, interest shall continue at the same rate until
the principal is paid in full.
   (p)   Ad Valorem Tax. For each district in which an issue of bonds has been
had pursuant hereto the council shall annually, until all of the bonds and
interest thereon have been paid in full, at the time of levying the taxes for
general city purposes, levy an ad valorem assessment upon all lands within said
district except publicly owned property, which levy shall be in an amount
clearly sufficient, together with any moneys which are or may be in the
redemption fund and after making adequate allowance for estimated delinquencies
to pay all of the principal of and interest on said bonds which shall become
payable before the proceeds of another such levy shall be available therefor.
   (q)   Id. - Method of Collection. Said special assessment levy shall be
levied and collected upon the last equalized secured and utility tax rolls upon
which general city taxes are collected. It shall be in addition to all other
taxes levied for general city purposes, and shall be levied, computed, entered,
collected and enforced in the same manner and by the same persons and at the
same time, and with the same penalties and interest, as are other taxes for
city purposes, and all laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement
of taxes for city purposes are hereby made applicable to said special
assessment levy, and be subject to redemption within one year from the date of
sale in the same manner as such real property is redeemed from the sale for
general city taxes, and if not redeemed shall in like manner pass to the
purchaser.
   (r)   Contributions. The council may annually, at or prior to the time the
levy is made, or at such other time as it shall determine, transfer to the
redemption fund of said bonds such amount or amounts as it shall determine.
   (s)   Zones. If, in the judgment of the council conducting the proceedings,
varying benefits to be derived by the different parcels of land lying within
the assessment district so require, the district may be divided into zones
according to benefits. The district may be divided into as many zones - up to
the total number of parcels of land in the district - as may be deemed
necessary, and each zone shall be composed of and include all the lands within
the district which will be benefited in like measure. The council shall also
determine the percentage of the sum to be raised each year by the levy and
collection of the special assessment taxes in the district for the payments on
the principal and interest of the bonds, which will be raised from the lands in
each zone. Each zone shall be designated by a different letter or number and
shall be plainly shown on the map or plat of the assessment district filed in
the office of the city clerk and referred to in the resolution of intention,
either by separate boundaries, coloring or other convenient and graphic method,
so that all persons interested may with accuracy ascertain within which zone
any parcel of land is located. It shall be sufficient in all cases where the
assessment district is to be divided into such zones according to benefits if
the resolution of intention states that fact and refers to the plat or map for
the boundaries and all details concerning the zones.
   (t)   Validity of Bonds and Tax Rate. All bonds issued and all taxes levied
and collected pursuant to the provisions of this section shall by their
issuance be conclusive evidence of the regularity, validity and legal
sufficiency of all proceedings, acts and determinations in anywise pertaining
thereto, and after the same are issued no tax levied or collected for the
purpose of paying the principal or interest on said bonds shall be held invalid
or illegal, or set aside by reason of any error, informality, irregularity,
omission or defect in the proceedings, not amounting to a want of due process
of law.
   (u)   Issuance of New Bonds when Proceedings for Bonds Irregular. When any
court of competent jurisdiction determines that any contract purporting to have
been made, or any proceedings, steps or actions purporting to have been taken,
or any bond or bonds issued, or any levy of assessment made, under this
section, is or are void, invalid or unenforceable for any reason, or shall for
any cause enjoin the issuance of any bonds proposed to be issued under said
code, said court shall also determine that new bonds shall be issued in the
place thereof. The council may also order the issuance of new bonds when it
determines the existence of such voidness, invalidity or unenforceability. In
such event the council shall cause a declaration to be filed which shall state
the amount of any work performed, improvements made, acquisitions had, and the
expenses incidental thereto, and the estimated cost of any to be had. The
declaration shall be noticed and heard and new bonds issued as herein provided
for acquisition bonds.
   (v)   Maintenance. An annual assessment may be levied for maintenance and/or
operation of the facilities acquired or constructed with the proceeds of the
bonds in the manner provided in Section
13.16.130.
   (w)   Alteration of Boundaries. The boundaries of the assessment district
may be enlarged at any time in the manner provided in Section
13.16.130.
   (x)   Supplemental Remedies. The supplemental security and remedy provisions
of Part 13 (commencing at Section 8800) of Division 10 of the Streets and
Highways Code shall apply. This section is adopted pursuant to Section 43240 of
the Government Code.
   (y)   Election. No assessment district shall be formed nor any bonds issued
nor assessments levied under this section unless and until such formation and
levy have been approved by majority vote of the qualified voters of the
assessment district in the manner herein provided. The election shall be called
and conducted in the manner provided in Article 6, commencing with Section
2285, of Chapter 3 of Part 4 of Division 1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of
the State of California, except that:
   (1)   If there are less than twelve registered voters, as defined in the
Elections Code, residing within the assessment district, the proposition
submitted at the election shall be approved by majority vote of both registered
voters and landowners as defined in Section 2285 of the Revenue and Taxation
Code.
   (2)   The election shall be conducted by the city clerk in the manner
provided for general city elections.
   (3)   The election may be held at any time not less than thirty nor more
than sixty days after the call of the election by the council.
(Ord. 2798 § 6, 1974: Ord. 2402 (part), 1968: Ord. 2277 (part), 1966: prior
code § 40.505)
13.16.140   Bond plan E - Ad valorem realty bonds.
   (a)   Powers. There is vested in the council the power to issue serial ad
valorem realty bonds upon any district created in this title.
   (b)   Ad Valorem Assessment. The annual ad valorem assessment to be levied
therein shall be upon all lands and improvements within the assessment district
excepting publicly owned property.
   (c)   Procedure. Except as in this section otherwise provided, all of the
provisions of Section
13.16.130 shall apply.
(Ord. 2277 (part), 1966: prior code § 40.506)
13.16.150   Bond plan G - Vehicle off-street parking bonds.
   (a)   Powers. There is vested in the council the power to issue vehicle off-
street parking bonds upon any off-street parking assessment district created
under this title to finance the cost of acquiring, constructing, improving and
extending vehicle off-street parking places and facilities and the costs
incidental thereto and to the proceedings and the financing thereof.
   (b)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide a procedure by
which assessment bonds may be issued for the purposes set forth in subsection
(a) above and to permit the bond fund to receive the proceeds of pledges of
revenues and contributions and to allow the annual assessments to reflect
changes in benefits which have taken place during the preceding year and to
reflect appropriate credits to properties which provide or will provide private
off-street parking places and facilities.
   (c)   Declaration in Resolution of Intention. When the council determines
that bonds shall be issued under this section, it shall declare in its
resolution of intention therefor that said proceedings shall be conducted
pursuant to Sections
13.12.040 and
13.12.050, and bonds shall be issued in the total amount of the cost of the
project, exclusive of contributions pursuant to this section.
   (d)   Assessment District. The proposed off-street parking assessment
district shall be described in the resolution of intention and established as
now or hereafter provided in Sections
13.12.040 and
13.12.050.
   (e)   Fixed Lien Assessment Provisions. The council may provide, in the
resolution of intention, that a fixed portion or percentage of the cost of any
project will be financed by fixed lien assessments and the issuance of bonds to
represent unpaid fixed lien assessments levied and issued, respectively, in the
manner provided in Chapters
13.12 and
13.16, or under state law. Except to the extent of such fixed lien assessment
financing, no assessment or diagram shall be made or required as part of the
engineer's report provided in Section
13.12.040 or state law. The respective provisions of other sections of this
chapter with reference to the making, confirmation, recordation, levy,
collection, payment and enforcement of fixed lien assessments, reassessments or
supplemental assessments shall be and remain inapplicable in such proceedings,
except to the extent that fixed lien financing is provided in the resolution of
intention.
   (f)   Provisions Applicable to G Bonds and Proceedings. The provisions of
Chapters
13.04,
13.08 and
13.20 and of Sections
13.12.010,
13.12.040 and
13.12.050, and of Sections
13.16.010 and
13.16.130 (other than subsection (y) of Section
13.16.130), except as in this section expressly otherwise provided, are
applicable to any portion of the proceedings which relate to the authorization,
issuance and sale of bonds under this section.
   (g)   Redemption Fund. A fund to be designated Bond G, Series No. _____,
interest and redemption fund, in this section called the bond fund, shall be
created and maintained for each issue of bonds.
   (h)   Trust Fund. All moneys pledged or contributed to the payment of the
bonds and the interest thereon, and all annual assessments levied therefor, as
hereinafter provided, shall be deposited in the bond fund for such issue, shall
constitute a trust fund therefor, and shall not be expended for any other
purpose; provided, that if any moneys remain in the bond fund after the payment
of all the bonds and the interest thereon, they shall be transferred to the
city general fund, unless a maintenance district has been created for the
improvements acquired and constructed from the proceeds of said bonds, in which
event they shall be transferred to the maintenance fund of such district, and
be used for objects and purposes thereof.
   (i)   Budget. The city manager shall annually cause to be prepared a budget
for each bond issue hereunder, which shall include the following:
   (1)   The gross amount required to pay the principal of and interest on said
bonds which will become payable before the proceeds of the next succeeding
assessment levy hereunder becomes available therefor;
   (2)   The balance available therefor at the end of the fiscal year in the
bond fund;
   (3)   The amount estimated to become available therefor pursuant to any
pledge of revenues in the assessment proceedings from any revenues which may be
provided to be collected by the city on any vehicle off-street parking places
or facilities in or for the parking assessment district created for said bonds,
which amount shall be provided in the city budget for the fiscal year for which
an annual assessment is to be levied;
   (4)   The amount of revenues to be collected from street parking meters
within or without the parking district, which have been pledged for the
servicing of said bonds, which amount shall be provided in the city budget for
the fiscal year for which an annual assessment is to be levied;
   (5)   The amount of contributions, if any, which the city proposes to make
to the bond fund for the fiscal year for which an annual assessment is to be
levied, which amount shall be provided in the city budget for the fiscal year
for which an annual assessment is to be levied;
   (6)   The balance of the amount provided in subdivision (1) of this
subsection.
   (j)   Benefit Assessments. The amount provided in subdivision (6) of
subsection (i), including adequate provision for anticipated delinquencies,
shall be raised by an annual assessment on all real property within the parking
assessment district in the ratio of the adjusted square footage of floor areas
of nonresidential structures (other than those completely vacant on the lien
date), together with land area assessments if necessary, all determined as
hereafter provided, until all of the bonds and the interest to accrue thereon
have been paid in full. The formula set forth in this paragraph is hereinafter
referred to as "the ordinance formula."
   In lieu of the ordinance formula set forth in the first paragraph of this
subsection, the council may, in the resolution of intention, set forth a
different formula (herein called "the proceedings formula") to be used in
determining the annual apportionment of benefits in the levy of annual
assessments upon the real property within the proposed assessment district.
Such proceedings formula may include a provision for the granting of credits
against assessments to the extent that private off-street parking places and
facilities shall have been provided for the year by owners of real property
within the district.
   In stating the proceedings formula, the council may provide for reasonable
classifications of property based on zoning, land use, ownership and other
factors which affect benefits, including, without limitation, the fact that
land is greater than a fixed distance from a particular public parking facility
or a combination of distances from public parking facilities, at the time of a
levy.
   The proceedings formula may also be based, in whole or in part, upon parking
deficiencies, determined in accordance with the requirements of the applicable
provisions of the city planning and zoning ordinances.
   In the event that a proceedings formula is established, subsections (k) and
(l) shall apply only if the actions required therein are necessary under the
proceedings formula, and the engineer's report and all subsequent proceedings
shall be based on the proceedings formula.
   As used in this section, "real property" means all land and improvements
which are subject to special assessment for benefits from local improvements
under the State and Federal Constitutions.
   (k)   Determination of Gross Square Footage. On or before May 1st of each
year next succeeding the issuance of the bonds, the city assessor shall
determine from any records or other sources legally available to him the gross
number of square feet, based on exterior measurements, of the floor area of
each building or structure within the boundaries of the parking assessment
district, which is zoned and used for commercial purposes. A complete list of
said square footage figures, set opposite the assessor's parcel numbers to
which they pertain, shall be transmitted to the city planning officer. Any
references to square footage or adjusted square footage hereinafter mentioned
shall be deemed to refer to floor areas in buildings zoned and used for
commercial purposes as herein provided.
   (l)   Determination of Credits. Immediately upon receipt of the square
footage figures, the director of planning and community development shall
determine, for each parcel of land within the parking assessment district, the
number of off-street automobile parking spaces which would be required to be
provided under city ordinances generally then in effect, and the number being
provided by said parcel and which would be credited in satisfaction of said
requirement if said ordinances applied to said parcel. The figures, together
with the gross square footage figures provided under subsection (k), shall be
transmitted to the city manager.
   (m)   Preparation of Engineer's Report.
   (1)   Ordinance Formula. Immediately upon receipt of the foregoing data, the
city engineer shall prepare a report containing the following data as to each
parcel within the parking assessment district in columnarized form:
   (A)   A description of each parcel of land in the parking assessment
district, by a legal description, assessor's parcel number or other description
sufficient to identify the same;
   (B)   The gross number of square feet of floor area in any building or
structure on each parcel, as provided under subsection (k);
   (C)   The number of parking spaces required for each parcel, as provided by
the director of planning and community development;
   (D)   The number of off-street parking spaces provided in satisfaction
thereof, as provided by the director of planning and community development;
   (E)   The ratio of subdivision (1)(D) to subdivision (1)(C);
   (F)   The amount of adjusted square footage in each building or structure,
determined by reducing the gross square footage set forth in subdivision (1)(B)
by the ratio as set forth in subdivision (1)(E), and the total adjusted square
footage in the parking assessment district;
   (G)   The rate of assessment per adjusted square foot, determined by
dividing the figure provided by the city controller under subdivision (6) of
subsection (i) by the total amount of adjusted square footage in the parking
assessment district determined under subdivision (1)(F) of this subsection. The
rate of assessment shall in no event exceed a rate per adjusted square foot to
be determined by the council and set forth in the resolution of intention. In
the event that the proceeds of an assessment levied at the maximum rate in any
year are insufficient to raise the amount of money provided in subdivision (6)
of subsection (i), the balance shall be raised by an additional assessment on
the real property within the parking assessment district, in the ratio for
their land areas. The engineer's report for such year shall include a column
for such land area assessment.
   (2)   Proceedings Formula. If the resolution of intention states a
proceedings formula, the report shall show the various data, rates and factors
necessary to compute the annual assessments.
   (n)   Correction of Errors. If the assessment roll contains any error in the
description of the land or in any other respect, the city engineer may correct
the list at any time before it is finally approved by the city council. Any
error or change subsequent to such final approval, other than a decrease in any
assessment, must be accomplished on notice and hearing in the manner herein
provided for modifications, unless such notice is expressly waived by all of
the owners of the property involved in the change.
   (o)   Effect of Error. No error in the assessment roll shall render the
assessment of a parcel invalid.
   (p)   Certification and Filing. When the report has been completed, it shall
be signed by the city engineer, dated and filed with the city clerk, on or
before May 15th of each year.
   (q)   Hearing. Said report shall come on regularly for hearing by the
council at its regular meeting held on the second Monday of June in each year.
   (r)   Publication and Postage. The city clerk shall cause notice of the
hearing on the report to be given by publication and by posting.
   (s)   Notice by Mail - First Report. The city clerk shall cause notice of
the hearing on the first report for any bond issue to be mailed.
   (t)   Mailing - Subsequent Reports. Notices shall not be required to be
mailed to any person as to hearings on subsequent reports, when the report is
heard at the time fixed in subsection (q) above. If, for any reason, the report
cannot be heard on said date, the clerk shall fix another date, and shall mail
notice of said hearing. The clerk may, but is not required to, mail notices to
the owner of a parcel, the zoning, use, ownership or improvement of which has
changed in such a manner as to provide a relatively higher assessment thereon
than in the preceding year.
   (u)   Notice Form - Published and Posted Notice. The form of notice to be
published and posted shall be substantially as follows:
NOTICE OF HEARING ON PARKING ASSESSMENT ROLL PROJECT NO. _______ RESOLUTION OF
INTENTION NO. ________ adopted ________ ,19____
   NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that the city engineer has caused to be prepared and
filed with the city clerk a report which provides for levying special
assessment on the properties within the parking assessment district created and
established for the project and pursuant to the resolution of intention cited
above. Said report sets forth the amounts proposed to be levied for the fiscal
year 19 __ - __, upon the several parcels of real property in the parking
assessment district created to pay the principal and interest of the bonds
issued in said project, which report is open to public inspection.
   Said report will be heard by the council at its meeting to be held on the
_____ day of June, 19___, at the hour of seven-thirty o'clock p.m., council
chambers, city hall, Palo Alto, California, at which time said council will
examine said report and hear all persons interested therein.
   Any person interested, objecting to the amount of the assessment on any
parcel of real property owned by him, may file with the city clerk, at or
before the hour fixed for hearing, a protest in writing signed by him,
describing the parcel so that it may be identified, and stating the ground of
his protest, and may appear at said hearing and be heard in regard thereto.
   (v)   Id - Mailing. The form of mailed notice shall be substantially as set
forth in subsection (u) of this section, but shall also contain a description
of the parcel covered by the notice sufficient to identify it, and the amount
of the proposed assessment against said parcel as set forth in the report.
   (w)   Protests. The clerk shall endorse on each protest the date it is filed
with her, and shall show whether said protest was filed prior to the hour fixed
for hearing. No protest received after said hour shall be counted in
determining the quantum of protest, but the council may, in its discretion,
consider said protests in making its decision.
   (x)   Public Hearing. At the time and place fixed for the hearing, or at any
time to which the hearing is adjourned, the council shall:
   (1)   Hear all persons having an interest in any real property within the
parking assessment district;
   (2)   Hear all objections, protests or other written communications from any
persons interested in any real property within the parking assessment district;
   (3)   Take and receive oral and documentary evidence pertaining to the
matters contained in the report;
   (4)   Remedy and correct any error or informality in the report, and revise
and correct any of the acts or determinations of any city officers or
employees, as contained therein;
   (5)   Amend, alter, modify, correct and confirm said report and each of the
assessments therein.
   (y)   Certification. The report, together with the certificate of the clerk
as to the fact and date of approval by the council, shall be delivered, at or
before the time the council fixes the general city tax rate for said fiscal
year, to the officer designated by law to extend city taxes upon the tax roll
on which they are collected.
   (z)   Posting and Report. Said officer shall post to the tax roll the total
amount of the assessment proposed to be levied and collected for said year, as
set forth in said report.
   (aa)   Method of Collection. The special assessment shall be levied and
collected upon the last equalized secured and utility tax rolls upon which
general city taxes are collected. It shall be in addition to all other taxes
levied for general city purposes, and shall be levied, entered and collected
together with, and not separate from, general city taxes, and enforced in the
same manner and by the same persons and at the same time and with the same
penalties and interest as are other taxes for city purposes, and all laws
applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of taxes for city purposes
are made applicable to said special assessment levy, and the assessed real
property, if sold for taxes, shall be subject to redemption in the same manner
as such real property is redeemed from the sale for general city taxes and if
not redeemed shall in like manner pass to the purchaser.
   (bb)   Lien. The lien of the assessment levied under this section attaches
at the same times and has the same priorities as the lien for general taxes.
   (cc)   Contributions. The council may annually, at, or prior to, the time
the levy is made, or at such other time as it shall determine, transfer to the
bond fund such amount or amounts as it shall determine.
   (dd)   Public Property. If the ordinance formula applies, or the proceedings
formula so provides, public property (other than tax-deeded property), whether
or not in the performance of a public function, shall be exempt for the levy of
assessments to service bonds issued under this section.
   (ee)   Omitted Property. If any parcel of property is omitted from the tax
roll for any year it shall be added at the end of the roll and assessed as
contained in the report. If any property is omitted in any such report it shall
be assessed for the omitted amount in the next year after said omission is
discovered, and appropriate provisions shall be made in the report for said
year.
   (ff)   Reassessment. When any court of competent jurisdiction, or the
council of its own volition, determines that any levy of assessment pursuant to
this section is void, invalid or unenforceable for any reason, or any court,
for any reason, enjoins the collection of any such assessment, the council may
levy a reassessment.
   The engineer's report on reassessment shall be prepared and filed on order
of the council, notice given, hearing held and reassessment levied and
confirmed, all in the same manner as the original assessment, as nearly as may
be, except that the formula to be used in the determination of benefits or the
properties subject to assessment, or both, may be other and different from that
provided in this section, if required in order to be consistent with the
determinations and orders of the court.
   The reassessment shall be collected in the same manner as the original
assessment, except that if it is levied too late for inclusion in regular city
tax bills, it shall be collected on special bills to be prepared and mailed and
collected in the same manner as regular tax bills. Subsection (aa) shall apply
just as if regular city tax bills were used.
   The reassessment provisions of this subsection are alternative to the
reassessment provisions elsewhere contained in this title.
   If any reassessment levied under this subsection or any other part of this
title is held invalid for any reason, the council may conduct additional
reassessment proceedings under this title, or any state law, to the end that
the cost of the project is paid by the properties benefited thereby.
   (gg)   Id. - Lien. The lien of any reassessment shall attach at the same
time and have the same priority as the lien of the original assessment.
   (hh)   Security for existing bonds. If any invalidity is not in the bonds
themselves or in the issuance thereof, the council may so declare and conduct a
reassessment proceeding in the same manner as the proceedings for the formation
of the original district, but without the issuance of new bonds. In such event,
the reassessment proceedings shall constitute the proceedings providing a legal
authority for the issuance of the outstanding bonds, and the redemption fund
created in any such reassessment proceeding shall constitute a trust fund for
their payment.
   (ii)   Exchange of Existing Bonds. If the invalidity is in the bonds
themselves or in the issuance thereof, or if the council shall so determine in
the reassessment proceedings, new bonds shall be issued and exchanged for the
outstanding bonds. The new bonds shall mature in the amounts and at the times
provided for the outstanding bonds, as nearly as may be.
   If the council shall so determine, it may assign different bonds and allot
maturities as it shall deem equitable.
   (jj)   Limitation of Actions. The limitation of actions provided in Section
329.5 of the Code of Civil Procedure is applicable to any attack on or defense
against the collection of the annual assessment herein provided for.
   (kk)   Validating Proceedings. An action to determine the validity of any
assessment district, bonds, assessments, supplemental assessments,
reassessments, contracts or evidences of indebtedness, and of the proceedings
conducted in connection therewith pursuant to this section, may be brought
pursuant to Chapter 9 (commencing with Section 860) of Title 10 of Part 2 of
the Code of Civil Procedure.
(Ord. 3514 §24, 1984: Ord. 3507 §24, 1984: Ord. 2985 §1, 1977: Ord. 2798 § 1-5,
1974: Ord. 2528 (part), 1969: Ord. 2498 (part), 1969: Ord. 2452 (part), 1968:
Ord. 2443 (part), 1968: Ord. 2277 (part), 1966: prior code §40.507)
13.16.160   Bond plan H - Annual benefit assessment bonds.
   (a)   Powers. There is vested in the council the power to issue annual
benefit assessment bonds upon any district created in this title to finance any
public improvement authorized by Section
13.04.010.
   (b)   Procedure. All of the provisions of Section
13.16.150 shall apply, except those that refer or relate to vehicle off-street
parking facilities. All references to such facilities shall be deemed to refer
to the public improvement being financed under this section.
(Ord. 2798 § 7, 1974)
13.16.170   Summary refunding.
   If the council makes the following findings and determinations, any
outstanding bonds may be refunded or advance refunded by resolution, fiscal
agent agreement, or indenture adopted or approved without notice and hearing or
further process:
   (a)   That the total aggregate amount of the principal of and interest on
the refunding bonds is less than the total aggregate amount of the principal of
and interest on the bonds to be refunded;
   (b)   That each annual installment of principal of and interest on the
refunding bonds is less than the corresponding installment on the bond to be
refunded; and
   (c)   That the term of the refunding bonds is equal to or less than the
remaining term of the bonds to be refunded.
(Ord. 3887 § 1, 1989)
13.16.180   Refunding proceedings without findings.
   If the council is unable to make the findings required by Section
13.16.170, it may proceed with refunding proceedings as appropriate under the
applicable bond plan.
(Ord. 3887 § 2, 1989)
Chapter 13.20
SEVERABILITY - VALIDITY - REASSESSMENT
Sections:
   
13.20.010   Constitutionality.
   
13.20.020   Waiver.
   
13.20.030   Orders final.
   
13.20.040   Notice of award.
   
13.20.050   Liberally construed.
   
13.20.060   Validity.
   
13.20.070   Effect of publication.
   
13.20.080   Dedication.
   
13.20.090   Limitation of actions.
   
13.20.100   Limitation of actions - Annual levies.
   
13.20.110   Limitation of actions - Defense.
   
13.20.120   Validating proceeding.
   
13.20.130   Procedure.
   
13.20.140   Reassessment.
13.20.010   Constitutionality.
   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or word of this title
is held to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the
remaining portions of this title. The council hereby declares that it would
have adopted and passed this title and each part, chapter, article, division,
section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, and word hereof, irrespective of
the fact that any one or more of other parts, chapters, articles, divisions,
sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, phrases or words hereof be declared
invalid or unconstitutional.
(Ord. 2277 (part), 1966: prior code § 40.301)
13.20.020   Waiver.
   All objections not made within the time and manner provided are waived.
(Ord. 2277 (part), 1966: prior code § 40.302)
13.20.030   Orders final.
   All decisions and determinations of the council, upon notice and hearing,
shall be final and conclusive upon all persons entitled to appeal, as to all
errors, informalities, omissions and irregularities which might have been
avoided, or which might have been remedied, and as to illegalities not
amounting to a want of due process of law.
(Ord. 2277 (part), 1966: prior code § 40.303)
13.20.040   Notice of award.
   The notice to pay assessments under the Street Opening Act of 1903 or the
Municipal Improvement Act of 1913, and a notice confirming assessment or
reassessment under any other procedure herein, shall have like curative effect
as the notice of award under the Improvement Act of 1911.
(Ord. 2277 (part), 1966: prior code § 40.304)
13.20.050   Liberally construed.
   This title shall be liberally construed in order to effectuate its purpose.
No error, irregularity, informality, omission or illegality, and no neglect or
omission of any officer, in any procedure taken hereunder, which does not
directly affect the jurisdiction of the legislative body to order the work or
improvement, shall void or invalidate such proceeding or any assessment for the
cost of any work or acquisition hereunder. The exclusive remedy of any person
affected or aggrieved thereby shall be by appeal to the council in accordance
with the provisions hereof.
(Ord. 2277 (part), 1966: prior code § 40.305)
13.20.060   Validity.
   No step in any proceeding shall be invalidated or affected by any error or
mistake or departure from the provisions of this title as to the officer or
person posting or publishing or mailing, or procuring the publication or
posting or mailing, of any notice, resolution, order or other matter when such
notice is actually given for the time required.
(Ord. 2277 (part), 1966: prior code § 40.306)
13.20.070   Effect of publication.
   No assessment, reassessment, supplemental assessment, warrant, diagram or
bond, or any of their levy or issuance, and no proceedings for same, shall be
held invalid by any court for any error, informality, omission, irregularity,
illegality or other defect in the same, where the resolution of intention or
notice of improvement have been actually published as herein provided.
(Ord. 2277 (part), 1966: prior code § 40.307)
13.20.080   Dedication.
   No proceeding shall be held to be invalid upon the ground that the property
upon which the work or improvement or part thereof is to be or was done, had
not been lawfully dedicated or acquired, provided the same shall have been
lawfully dedicated or acquired or an order for immediate possession and use
thereof shall have been obtained at any time before judgment is entered in any
legal action.
(Ord. 2277 (part), 1966: prior code § 40.308)
13.20.090   Limitation of actions.
   No action, suit or proceedings to set aside, cancel, void, annul or correct
any assessment or reassessment, or to review any of the proceedings, acts or
determinations in any proceedings, or to question the validity or to enjoin the
collection of any assessments or reassessments or supplemental assessments
shall be maintained by any person unless such action, suit or proceedings shall
have been commenced within thirty days after the acquisition or improvement has
been ordered or such assessment shall have been confirmed.
(Ord. 2277 (part), 1966: prior code § 40.309)
13.20.100   Limitation of actions - Annual levies.
   Where such proceedings are for an ad valorem or other annual levy, the
period shall be thirty days after the ordering of said levy with reference to
said levy as to any levy, and thirty days after ordering the issuance of said
bonds with reference to their issuance as to any bonds. If such action or suit
is not brought within the time herein specified, all persons shall be barred
from any such action.
(Ord. 2443 § 10, 1968: Ord. 2277 (part), 1966: prior code § 40.310)
13.20.110   Limitation of actions - Defense.
   No defense based on invalidity or irregularity in any such proceedings shall
be raised or pleaded after the expiration of such thirty day period.
(Ord. 2277 (part), 1966: prior code § 40.311)
13.20.120   Validating proceeding.
   The city council, at any time after the adoption of the resolution of
intention, the proposed contractor, at any time after the award of the contract
to him, or the proposed purchaser of the warrant or any bonds to be issued, at
any time after the assignment of said warrant or award of said bonds to him,
may bring an action in the superior court of the state of California in and for
the county in which it is situated, to determine the validity of any such
proceedings and of such proposed contract, or of the assessment or tax levied
or to be levied, or of said bonds issued or to be issued.
(Ord. 2277 (part), 1966: prior code § 40.312)
13.20.130   Procedure.
   The validation procedure of the Improvement Act of 1911 shall apply.
(Ord. 2277 (part), 1966: prior code § 40.313)
13.20.140   Reassessment.
   (a)   Authorized. If in the opinion of the council, any assessment
heretofore or hereafter issued is void or unenforceable, for any cause, or if
bonds are issued to represent or be secured by any assessments and such
issuance is not effective through the curative provisions applicable thereto to
make them valid and enforceable, or if the previous assessment or bonds are
insufficient to pay the cost or estimated cost of the project, or if the
council shall determine that the public interest will be served thereby, a
reassessment may be had.
   (b)   Uncompleted Improvement. Where the assessment was for an uncompleted
improvement a reassessment may be had notwithstanding the improvement is not
completed. In such case the reassessment shall assess upon the lands benefited
the benefits derived from the improvement or to be derived from the improvement
when completed.
   (c)   When and How Much. The reassessment shall be made upon the demand of
the contractor or his assigns, or the owner or holder of bonds aggregating one-
third of the principal amount outstanding, or upon order of the legislative
body, and shall be made in the manner and form provided by the Improvement Act
of 1911 and Improvement Bond Act of 1915. Nothing contained herein shall
prevent the council from ordering a reassessment on its motion, and its
decision so to do shall be final.
   (d)   Interest. In the resolution ordering the reassessment, the council
shall determine whether said reassessment shall include interest and if so, the
rate at which and the date from which it shall be computed. In lieu thereof, it
may order that the reassessment shall bear interest at a rate and from a date
certain.
   (e)   Payment. If the bonds have not been issued, or if the bonds
outstanding are not to be replaced by new bonds, proceedings for notice to pay,
demand and payment shall be had as provided for the original assessment
(Ord. 2277 (part), 1966: prior code § 40.314)
Chapter 13.24
RESERVED*
*   Editor's Note: Former Chapter 13.24, Downtown Business Improvement Area,
previously codified herein, and derived from Ordinance No. 3388, was repealed
in its entirety by Ordinance No. 3591.
Title 14 RESERVED
 
Title 15 FIRE PREVENTION*
Chapters:
   
15.04   California Fire Code, California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 9
   
15.05   Reserved
   *   For state law authorizing the adoption of codes by reference, see Gov.
C.A., §§ 50022.1-50022.10.
Chapter 15.04
CALIFORNIA FIRE CODE, CALIFORNIA CODE OF
REGULATIONS, TITLE 24, PART 9
Sections:
   
15.04.010   2022 California Fire Code, Title 24, Part 9 adopted and amended.
   
15.04.020   Local amendments.
   
15.04.030   Section 102.5 amended - Application of residential code.
   
15.04.040   Section 103.2 Appointment deleted.
   
15.04.050   Sections 105.3.9 Permits/permit fees and 105.3.10 Operational
permits.
   
15.04.060   Table 105.5.9 Permit amounts of compressed gases.
   
15.04.070   Table 105.5.22 Permit amounts for hazardous materials.
   
15.04.080   Sections 105.5.25 and 105.5.53 and Sections 105.5.55 through
105.5.59 Operational permits.
   
15.04.090   Sections 105.6.3 Cryogenic fluids and 105.6.12 Hazardous materials
amended and Section 105.6.25 Construction permits added.
   
15.04.100   Sections 105.8.1 and 105.8.2 Fire and life safety.
   
15.04.110   Section 107.7 Certified Unified Program Agency Fees.
   
15.04.120   Section 108.1 Inspection authority.
   
15.04.130   Section 112.1.1 Enforcement/ citation authority.
   
15.04.140   Section 112.4 Violation penalties.
   
15.04.150   Definitions Section 202.
   
15.04.160   Section 316.7 Roof guiderails at interior courts.
   
15.04.170   320.3.13 Safety certification.
   
15.04.180   Section 322.4.2.2.1 through 322.4.2.2.3 Maximum quantity in a
control area.
   
15.04.190   Section 401.5 Making false report.
   
15.04.200   Section 503.1 Fire access roadways.
   
15.04.210   Section 503.2.1 Dimensions.
   
15.04.220   Section 503.2.2 Authority.
   
15.04.230   Section 504.5 Access control devices.
   
15.04.240   Section 505.1.1 and 505.1.2 Premises identification.
   
15.04.250   Section 509.1.2 Fire protection equipment identification.
   
15.04.260   Sections 603.11 through 603.13.
   
15.04.270   Section 605.5.2.1.1 Prohibitive locations.
   
15.04.280   Section 903.2 Automatic sprinkler systems, where required.
   
15.04.290   903.1.1 NFPA 13 sprinkler systems.
   
15.04.300   Section 903.3.1.2 NFPA 13R sprinkler systems.
   
15.04.310   Section 903.3.1.3 and 903.3.1.3.1 NFPA 13D sprinkler systems.
   
15.04.320   Section 903.4.3 Floor control valves.
   
15.04.330   Section 905.3.1 Standpipe systems.
   
15.04.340   Section 909.20.7 Smoke control systems - schedule.
   
15.04.350   Section 1008.3.3 Rooms and spaces.
   
15.04.360   Section 1031.2 Where required.
   
15.04.370   Section 1207.1.5 Large-scale fire test.
   
15.04.380   Section 1207.11.3 Location.
   
15.04.390   Section 3305.9 Fire walls.
   
15.04.400   Section 3312.1 and 3312.1.1.
   
15.04.410   Section 4902.1 Definition of wildland-urban interface fire area.
   
15.04.420   Sections 4903.2 and 4903.3 through 4903.4 General requirements for
wildland-urban interface fire areas.
   
15.04.430   Sections 4907.1 and 4907.4 Defensible space.
   
15.04.440   Section 5001.2.2.2 Health hazards.
   
15.04.450   Section 5007.1 Hazard materials management plan electronic
submissions.
   
15.04.460   Section 5003.1.3.1 Toxic, highly toxic, moderately toxic gases and
similarly used or handled materials.
   
15.04.470   Section 5003.1.5 Other health hazards including carcinogens,
irritants and sensitizers.
   
15.04.480   Section 5003.1.6 Additional secondary containment requirements.
   
15.04.490   Section 5003.2.2.1 Design and construction.
   
15.04.500   Section 5003.2.2.2 Additional regulations for supply piping for
health hazard materials.
   
15.04.510   Section 5003.3.1 Unauthorized discharges.
   
15.04.520   Section 5003.5.2 Ventilation ducting.
   
15.04.530   Section 5003.5.3 “H” occupancies.
   
15.04.540   Section 5003.9.11 Fire extinguishing systems for workstations
dispensing, handling or using hazardous materials.
   
15.04.550   Section 5003.10.4 Elevators utilized to transport hazardous
materials.
   
15.04.560   Section 5004.2.1 Spill control for hazardous material liquids.
   
15.04.570   Section 5004.2.2 and 5004.2.2.2 and Table 5004.2.2 Secondary
containment for hazardous material liquids and solids.
   
15.04.580   Section 5004.2.3 Containment pallets.
   
15.04.590   Section 5704.2.7.5.8 Overfill prevention.
   
15.04.600   Section 5704.2.7.5.9 Automatic filling of tanks.
   
15.04.610   Section 5707.3.3 Site plan.
   
15.04.620   Section 6001.1 Site scope.
   
15.04.630   Section 6002.1 Definitions.
   
15.04.640   Section 6004.1 Highly toxic and toxic compressed gases.
   
15.04.650   Sections 6004.2 and 6004.2.1 Indoor storage and use.
   
15.04.660   Section 6004.2.1.4 and Table 6004.2.1.4 Quantities.
   
15.04.670   Section 6004.4 through 6004.4.8.2 General indoor requirements.
15.04.010   2022 California Fire Code, Title 24, Part 9 adopted and amended.
   The California Fire Code, 2022 Edition, as adopted by the California Code of
Regulations Title 24, Part 9, and Appendices B, C, D, E, F, G, H, and K is
adopted as herein amended. One copy of the California Fire Code is on file and
open to public inspection in the Office of the City Clerk. Additional copies of
the secondary codes set forth within the California Fire Code, and the
amendments set forth in this chapter, are on file and open to public inspection
in the fire department administrative office.
   Whenever the phrase "California Fire Code" appears in this code or in any
ordinance of the city, such phrase shall be deemed and construed to refer to
and apply to the "California Fire Code, 2022 Edition" as adopted by the
California Code of Regulations Title 24, Part 9 and as adopted and amended by
this chapter.
(Ord. 5563 §1 (part), 2022)
15.04.020   Local amendments.
   The provisions of this chapter shall constitute local amendments to the
cross-referenced provisions of the California Fire Code, 2022 Edition, and
shall be deemed to replace the cross-referenced sections of said Code with the
respective provisions set forth in this chapter. Where used in this
Chapter 15.04, ellipses shall indicate text of the California Fire Code, 2022
Edition, that has been adopted without amendment but is omitted for brevity.
(Ord. 5563 §1 (part), 2022)
15.04.030   Section 102.5 amended - Application of residential code.
   Section 102.5 of the California Fire Code is amended to read as follows:
      102.5 Application of residential code. Where structures are designed and
constructed in accordance with the California Residential Code, the provisions
of this code shall apply as follows:
         1.   Construction and design provisions:
            a.   Provisions of this code pertaining to the exterior of the
structure shall apply, including, but not limited to, premises identification,
fire apparatus access, and water supplies.
            b.   Provisions of this code pertaining to the interior of the
structure shall apply when specifically required by this code including, but
not limited to, Sections 903.2 through 903.3.7 and Section 907.2.10.
            c.   Where interior or exterior systems or devices are installed,
construction permits required by Section 105.6 of this code shall also apply.
         2.   Administrative, operational, and maintenance provisions: all such
provisions of this code shall apply.
(Ord. 5563 §1 (part), 2022)
15.04.040   Section 103.2 Appointment deleted.
   Section 103.2 of the California Fire Code is deleted.
(Ord. 5563 §1 (part), 2022)
15.04.050   Sections 105.3.9 Permits/permit fees and 105.3.10 Operational
permits.
   Sections 105.3.9 and 105.3.10 are added to the California Fire Code to read
as follows:
      105.3.9 Permits/Permit fees. All permit fees shall be established by the
City Council as set forth in the municipal fee schedule.
      105.3.10 Operational permits. Operational permits are valid for one year
at which time they must be renewed by paying a fee specified in the municipal
fee schedule.
(Ord. 5563 §1 (part), 2022)
15.04.060   Table 105.5.9 Permit amounts for compressed gases.
   Table 105.5.9 of the California Fire Code is amended to read as follows:
   TABLE 105.5.9
   PERMIT AMOUNTS FOR COMPRESSED GASES1
TYPE OF GAS AMOUNT (cubic feet)2
            X 0.0283 for m3
TYPE OF GAS                                                AMOUNT (cubic feet)2
                                                           X 0.0283 for m3
Carbon dioxide used in carbon dioxide enrichment systems   875(100 lbs)
Flammable (except cryogenic and liquefied petroleum gases) 200
Highly toxic                                               Any amount
Inert and simple asphyxiant                                6,000
Irritant                                                   200
Moderately toxic                                           20
Other health hazards                                       650
Oxidizing (including oxygen)                               504
Pyrophoric                                                 Any amount
Radioactive                                                Any amount
Sensitizer                                                 200
Toxic                                                      Any Amount
Unstable (reactive)                                        Any amount
For SI: 1 cubic foot = 0.0283m3.
1   Refer to Chapters 27, 30, 32, 35, 37, 40 and 41 for additional requirements
and exceptions.
2   Cubic feet measured at normal Temperature and pressure.
(Ord. 5563 §1 (part), 2022)
15.04.070   Table 105.5.22 Permit amounts for hazardous materials.
   Table 105.5.22 of the California Fire Code is amended to read as follows:
   TABLE 105.5.22
   PERMIT AMOUNTS FOR HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
TYPE OF MATERIAL AMOUNT
TYPE OF MATERIAL               AMOUNT
Carcinogens                    10 pounds
Combustible liquids            See Section 105.6.16
Corrosive materials:           See Section 105.6.8
   Gases                    55 gallons
   Liquids                  500 pounds
   Solids
Cryogens                       See Section 105.6.10
Explosive materials            See Section 105.6.14
Flammable materials:           See Section 105.6.8
   Gases                    See Section 105.6.16
   Liquids                  10 pounds
   Solids
Highly toxic materials:        Any amount
Gases                          Any amount
Liquids                        Any amount
Solids
Moderately toxic gas           20 cubic feet
Organic peroxides:             Any Amount
Liquids: Class I-IV            No Permit Required
Liquids: Class V               Any Amount
Solids: Class I-IV             No Permit Required
Solids: Class V
Oxidizing materials:           504 Cubic Feet
Gases                          Any amount
Liquids                        Any amount
Solids
Other health hazards:          55 gallons
Solids                         500 pounds
Liquids
Pyrophoric materials:          Any amount
Gases                          Any amount
Liquids                        Any amount
Solids
Radioactive materials:         Any Amount
Gases                          See Section 105.6.47
Liquids                        See Section 105.6.47
Solids
Toxic materials:               Any amount
Gases                          Any amount
Liquids                        Any amount
Solids
Unstable (reactive) materials: Any amount
Gases                          Any amount
Liquids                        Any amount
Solids
Water reactive materials:      Any amount
Liquids                        Any amount
Solids
 
   For SI: 1 gallon = 3.785 L, 1 pound = 0.454kg.
   a.   20 gallons when Table 2703.1.1(1) Note k applies and hazard
identification signs in accordance with Section 2703.5 are provided for
quantities of 20 gallons or less.
   b.   200 pounds when Table 2703.1.1(1) Note k applies and hazard
identification signs in accordance with Section 2703.5 are provided for
quantities of 200 pounds or less.
(Ord. 5563 §1 (part), 2022)
15.04.080   Sections 105.5.25 and 105.5.53 and Sections 105.5.55 through
105.5.59 Operational permits.
   Sections 105.5.25 and 105.5.53 of the California Fire Code are amended and
Sections 105.5.55 through 105.5.59 are added to read as follows:
      [. . .]
      105.5.25 Hot work operations. An operational permit is required for hot
work including, but not limited to:
         1.   Public exhibitions and demonstrations where hot work is
conducted.
         2.   Use of portable hot work equipment inside a structure.
            Exception: (deleted)
         3.   Fixed-site hot work equipment, such as welding booths.
         4.   Hot work conducted within a wildfire risk area.
         5.   Application of roof coverings with the use of an open-flame
device.
         6.   (deleted)
      [. . .]
      105.5.53 Lithium batteries. An operational permit is required for an
accumulation of more than 15 cubic feet (0.42 m) of lithium-ion and lithium
metal batteries, where required by Section 322.1.
      [. . .]
      105.5.55 Liquid gas fueled equipment. An operational permit is required
for liquid gas fueled equipment.
      105.5.56 Battery operated equipment. An operational permit is required
for commercial/ industrial/research battery operated equipment.
      105.5.57 Underground storage tank. An operational permit is required for
Underground Storage Tanks.
      105.5.58 Radioactive materials. An operational permit is required to
store, use or handle any radioactive material or source.
      105.5.59 Day care permit. An operational permit is required to operate a
day care facility for more than six children or adults.
(Ord. 5563 §1 (part), 2022)
15.04.090   Sections 105.6.3 Cryogenic fluids and 105.6.12 Hazardous materials
amended and Section 105.6.25 Construction permits added.
   Sections 105.6.3 and 105.6.12 of the California Fire Code are amended, and
105.6.25 of the California Fire Code is added to read as follows:
      [. . .]
      105.6.3 Cryogenic fluids. A construction permit is required for
installation of or alteration to stationary cryogenic fluid storage systems
where the system capacity exceeds the amounts listed in Table 105.5.11.
Maintenance performed in accordance with this code is not considered to be an
alteration and does not require a construction permit.
      [. . .]
      105.6.12 Hazardous Materials. A construction permit is required to
install, repair damage to, abandon, remove, place temporarily out of service,
or close or substantially modify a storage facility or other area regulated by
Chapter 50 where the hazardous materials in use and when equipment is modified
or installed that uses, stores, processes, or conveys hazmat.
      Exceptions:
         1.   deleted
         2.   For repair work performed on an emergency basis, application for
permit shall be made within two working days of commencement work.
      [. . .]
      105.6.25 Underground fire service lines: installation or modification. A
construction permit is required for the installation, modification or removal
from service of underground fire service lines.
(Ord. 5563 § 1 (part), 2022)
15.04.100   Sections 105.8.1 and 105.8.2 Fire and life safety.
   Subsections 105.8.1 and 105.8.2 are added to the California Fire Code to
read as follows:
      105.8.1 Fire and life-safety plan review. Fire and life-safety plan
review of all new construction, all remodels, and all additions shall be
performed by the Fire Chief or his designee.
      105.8.2 Site Map and Floor plans. The fire code official may require as a
condition of final permit approval, a site map including the use of standard or
approved Palo Alto Fire Department symbols. Features would include interior
floor plans, on-site hydrant locations, FDC locations, key safe locations,
alarm panel locations, electrical panel locations, stairwell and elevator
locations, water shut off locations, hazardous materials locations, and other
significant design elements or fire service features. The site map is to be
provided in a format compatible with the City's Geographic Information System
(GIS) at time of construction. This requirement applies to newly constructed
buildings, facilities where hazardous materials are used or stored in
quantities exceeding permit amounts in Section 105, additions or permitted
remodels when in the opinion of the fire code official a site map is warranted.
(Ord. 5563 § 1 (part), 2022)
15.04.110   Section 107.7 Certified Unified Program Agency Fees.
   Section 107.7 is added to the California Fire Code to read as follows:
      107.7 Certified Unified Program Agency (CUPA) Fees. Pursuant to the
Participating Agency Agreement between the County of Santa Clara and the City
of Palo Alto dated July 1, 1997, or as amended, the Fire Department is
authorized to collect fees associated with the CUPA programs. The CUPA fees
will be collected on an annual   basis or as specified in the Palo Alto
Municipal Fee Schedule.
(Ord. 5563 § 1 (part), 2022)
15.04.120   Section 108.1 Inspection authority.
   Section 108.1 of the California Fire Code is amended to read as follows:
      108.1 Inspection authority. The fire code official is authorized to
inspect, as often as necessary, buildings and premises, including such other
hazards or appliances designated by the fire code official for the purposes of
ascertaining and causing to be corrected any conditions which would reasonably
tend to cause fire or contribute to its spread, result in an unauthorized
discharge of hazardous materials, or amount to any violation of this code or
any other law or standard affecting fire and life safety.
(Ord. 5563 §1 (part), 2022)
15.04.130   Section 112.1.1 Enforcement/ citation authority.
   Section 112.1.1 is added to the California Fire Code to read as follows:
      112.1.1 Penal code citation authority. The employee positions designated
in this section are authorized to exercise the authority provided in California
Penal Code section 836.5 for violations of the California Fire Code. The
designated employee positions are: Fire Chief, Deputy Fire Chief, Fire Marshal,
Fire Inspector, Hazardous Materials Specialist and Hazardous Materials
Inspector.
(Ord. 5563 §1 (part), 2022)
15.04.140   Section 112.4 Violation penalties.
   Section 112.4 of the California Fire Code is amended to read as follows:
      112.4 Violation penalties. It is unlawful for any person to violate any
provision or to fail to comply with any of the requirements of this Title 15 or
any permits, conditions, or variances granted under this Title, and violators
shall be subject to any penalty or penalties authorized by law, including but
not limited to: administrative enforcement pursuant to Chapters 1.12 and 1.16
of the Palo Alto Municipal Code; and criminal enforcement pursuant to Chapter
1.08 of the Palo Alto Municipal Code. Each separate day or any portion thereof
during which any violation of this chapter occurs or continues shall be deemed
to constitute a separate offense.
      When the Fire Chief or his/her designee determines that a violation of
this Chapter has occurred, the Fire Chief or his/her designee may record a
notice of pendency of code violation with the Office of the County Recorder
stating the address and owner of the property involved. When the violation has
been corrected, the Fire Chief or his/her designee shall issue and record a
release of the notice of pendency of code violation.
      [. . .]
(Ord. 5563 §1 (part), 2022)
15.04.150   Definitions Section 202.
   Except as noted herein, Section 202 is adopted in full. The following
definitions are amended or added to Section 202 of the California Fire Code to
read as follows:
      3D PRINTER. A machine used in the additive manufacturing process for
fabricating objects through the deposition of a material using a print head,
nozzle, or another printer technology.
      ADDITIVE MANUFACTURING. A process of joining materials to make objects
from 3D model data, usually layer upon layer, sometimes referred to as 3D
printing.
      The Code recognizes two types of additive manufacturing:
         1.   Industrial additive manufacturing. 3D printing operations that
typically utilize combustible powders or metals, an inert gas supply, a
combustible dust collection system, or that create a hazardous (classified)
location area or zone outside of the equipment.
         2.   Non-industrial additive manufacturing. 3D printing operations
that do not create a hazardous (classified) location area outside of the
equipment, and do not utilize an inert gas supply or a combustible dust
collection system.
      CORROSIVE LIQUID. Corrosive liquid is:
         1)   any liquid which, when in contact with living tissue, will cause
destruction or irreversible alteration of such tissue by chemical action; or
         2)   any liquid having a pH of 2 or less or 12.5 or more; or
         3)   any liquid classified as corrosive by the U.S. Department of
Transportation; or
         4)   any material exhibiting the characteristics of corrosivity in
accordance with Title 22, California Code of Regulations §66261.22.
      FALSE ALARM. The willful, knowing, or negligent initiation or
transmission of a signal, message, or other notification of an event of fire
when no such danger exists.
      MAXIMUM THRESHOLD QUANTITY (MAX TQ). Maximum threshold quantity is the
maximum quantity of a moderately toxic or toxic gas, which may be stored in a
single vessel before a more stringent category of regulation is applied. The
following equation shall be used to calculate the Max TQ:
         Max TQ (pounds) = LC50 (ppm) x 2 lb.
      MODERATELY TOXIC GAS. A moderately toxic gas is a chemical or substance
that has a median lethal concentration (LC50) in air more than 2000 parts per
million but not more than 5000 parts per million by volume of gas or vapor,
when administered by continuous inhalation for an hour, or less if death occurs
within one hour, to albino rats weighing between 200 and 300 grams each.
      OTHER HEALTH HAZARD MATERIAL. Other health hazard material is a hazardous
material which affects target organs of the body, including but not limited to,
those materials which produce liver damage, kidney damage, damage to the
nervous system, act on the blood to decrease hemoglobin function, deprive the
body tissue of oxygen or affect reproductive capabilities, including mutations
(chromosomal damage), sensitizers or teratogens (effect on fetuses),
carcinogens, and irritants.
      SECONDARY CONTAINMENT. Secondary containment is that level of containment
that is external to and separate from primary containment and is capable of
safely and securely containing the material, without discharge, for a period of
time reasonably necessary to ensure detection and remedy of the primary
containment failure.
      SPILL CONTROL. Spill control is that level of containment that is
external to and separate from the primary containment and is capable of safely
and securely containing the contents of the largest container and prevents the
materials from spreading to other parts of the room.
      WILDLAND-URBAN INTERFACE FIRE AREA. Wildland-urban interface fire area is
a geographical area identified by the State of California as a "Fire Hazard
Severity Zone" in accordance with Public Resources Code Sections 4201 through
4202 and Government Code Sections 51175 through 51189, or other areas
designated by the enforcing agency to be at a significant risk from wildfires.
Within the city limits of the City of Palo Alto, "Wildland-Urban Fire Interface
Area" shall also include all areas west of Interstate 280, and all other areas
recommended as a "Very High Fire Hazard Severity Zone" by the Director of the
California Department of Forestry.
      WORKSTATION. A workstation is a defined space or independent principal
piece of equipment using hazardous materials with a hazard rating of 1.
(Ord. 5563 § 1 (part), 2022)
15.04.160   Section 316.7 Roof guiderails at interior courts.
   Section 316.7 of the California Fire Code is added to read as follows:
      316.7 Roof guardrails at interior courts. Roof openings into interior
courts that are bounded on all sides by building walls shall be protected with
guardrails. The top of the guardrail shall not be less than 42 inches in height
above the adjacent roof surface that can be walked on. Intermediate rails shall
be designed and spaced such that a 12-inch diameter sphere cannot pass through.
(Ord. 5563 §1 (part), 2022)
15.04.170   320.3.13 Safety certification.
   Section 320.3.13 of the California Fire Code is added to read as follows:
      320.3.13 Safety certification. The equipment, process, training
procedures and occupancy associated with industrial additive manufacturing may
be required by the fire code official to receive a safety certification from
Underwriter's Laboratory or equivalent.
(Ord. 5563 §1 (part), 2022)
15.04.180   Section 322.4.2.2.1 through 322.4.2.2.3 Maximum quantity in a
control area.
   Section 322.4.2.2.1 through 322.4.2.2.3 are added to the California Fire
Code to read as follows:
      322.4.2.2.1 Maximum quantity in a control area. The aggregate amount of
lithium batteries stored and handled in a single control area shall not exceed
9,000 pounds (4086 kg).
      322.4.2.2.2 Number of control areas. The maximum number of control areas
within a building shall be four.
      322.4.2.2.3 Group H, Division 2 occupancy. Storage and handling of more
than 9,000 pounds of lithium batteries per control area shall be in an approved
Group H, Division 2 occupancy constructed in accordance with the Building Code
and provided throughout with approved automatic smoke detection and radiant-
energy detection systems.
(Ord. 5563 §1 (part), 2022)
15.04.190   Section 401.5 Making false report.
   Section 401.5 of the California Fire Code is amended to read as follows:
      401.5 Making false report. A person shall not, knowingly or unknowingly,
give, signal, or transmit a false alarm. Initiation or transmission in a
twelve-month period of three or more signals, messages, or other notifications
of an event of fire when no such danger exists shall be presumed negligent.
(Ord. 5563 §1 (part), 2022)
15.04.200   Section 503.1 Fire access roadways.
   Section 503.1 of the California Fire Code is amended to read as follows:
      503.1 Fire access roadways. Where required, fire apparatus access roads
shall be provided and maintained in accordance with Sections 503.1.1 through
503.1.3 and as per Fire Department Access Road Standards.
      [. . .]
(Ord. 5563 §1 (part), 2022)
15.04.210   Section 503.2.1 Dimensions.
   Section 503.2.1 of the California Fire Code is amended to read as follows:
      503.2.1 Dimensions. Fire apparatus access roads shall have an
unobstructed width of not less than 20 feet (6096 mm) exclusive of shoulders,
or as required by Appendix D, except for approved security gates in accordance
with Section 503.6, and an unobstructed vertical clearance of 13 feet 6 inches
(4115 mm).
(Ord. 5563 §1 (part), 2022)
15.04.220   Section 503.2.2 Authority.
   Section 503.2.2 of the California Fire Code is amended to read as follows:
      503.2.2 Authority. The fire code official shall have the authority to
require or permit modifications to the required access widths and/or vertical
clearance where they are inadequate for fire or rescue operations or where
necessary to meet the public safety objectives of the jurisdiction.
(Ord. 5563 §1 (part), 2022)
15.04.230   Section 504.5 Access control devices.
   Section 504.5 of the California Fire Code is amended to read as follows:
      504.5 Access control devices. When access control devices including bars,
grates, gates, electric or magnetic locks or similar devices, which would
inhibit rapid fire department emergency access to within and throughout the
building, are installed, such devices shall be approved by the fire code
official. All electrically powered access control devices shall be provided
with an approved means for deactivation or unlocking from a single location or
otherwise approved by the fire code official or his/her designee. Access
control devices shall also comply with Chapter 10 Egress.
(Ord. 5563 §1 (part), 2022)
15.04.240   Section 505.1.1 and 505.1.2 Premises identification.
   Sections 505.1.1 and 505.1.2 of the California Fire Code are added to read
as follows:
      505.1.1 Address illumination. Address identification required by Section
505.1 shall be illuminated.
      505.1.2 Address identification size. Address numbers and letters required
by Section 505.1 shall be sized as follows:
         1.   When the structure is between thirty-six (36) and fifty (50) feet
from the road or other emergency means of access, a minimum of one-half inch
(0.5") stroke by six inches (6") high is required.
         2.   When the structure is fifty (50) or more feet from the road or
other emergency means of access, a minimum of one inch (1") stroke by nine
inches (12") high is required.
(Ord. 5563 §1 (part), 2022)
15.04.250   Section 509.1.2 Fire protection equipment identification.
   Section 509.1.2 of the California Fire Code is added to read as follows:
      509.1.2 Fire Protection equipment identification. Exterior fire control
valves, standpipes, hose valves, fire department connection, post indicators,
fire service backflow preventers and other fire department appurtenances are to
be painted red for identification.
(Ord. 5563 §1 (part), 2022)
15.04.260   Sections 603.11 through 603.13.
   Section 603.11 through 603.13 is added to the California Fire Code to read
as follows:
      603.11 Immersion heaters. All electrical immersion heaters used in dip
tanks, sinks, vats and similar operations shall be provided with approved over-
temperature controls and low liquid level electrical disconnects. Manual reset
of required protection devices shall be provided.
      603.12 Electric vehicle service equipment - car chargers. Electric
vehicle service equipment shall be equipped with collision protection and an
emergency power disconnect switch as determined necessary by the Fire Code
Official.
      603.13 Energy storage system equipment - power walls. Energy storage
systems equipment shall be equipped with collision protection as determined
necessary by the Fire Code Official.
(Ord. 5563 §1 (part), 2022)
15.04.270   Section 605.5.2.1.1 Prohibitive locations.
   Section 605.5.2.1.1 of the California Fire Code is amended to read as
follows:
      605.5.2.1.1 Prohibitive Locations. The storage or use of portable outdoor
gas-fired heating appliances is prohibited in any of the following locations:
         1.   Inside of any occupancy where connected to the fuel gas
container.
         2.   Inside of tents, canopies and membrane structures.
         3.   On exterior balconies and rooftops.
         Exception: intentionally deleted
(Ord. 5563 §1 (part), 2022)
15.04.280   Section 903.2 Automatic sprinkler systems, where required.
   Section 903.2 of the California Fire Code is amended to read as follows:
      903.2 Automatic sprinkler systems, where required. Approved automatic
sprinkler systems in new buildings and structures and in existing modified
buildings and structures, shall be provided in the locations described in this
section. Automatic fire sprinklers shall be installed per the requirements set
forth in Sections 903.2.1 through 903.2.18 and as follows, whichever is the
more restrictive:
         1.   An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all
new buildings and structures.
         Exception: New non-residential occupancies, buildings or structures
that do not exceed 350 square feet of building area and contain no interior
plumbing fixtures.
         2.   An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all
existing buildings when modifications are made that create conditions described
in Sections 903.2.1 through 903.2.18, or that create an increase in fire area
to more than 3,600 square feet or when the addition is equal or greater than
50% of the existing building square footage whichever is more restrictive.
         3.   An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all
new or altered basements used for storage/utility/ occupancy or habitable space
regardless of size and throughout existing basements that are expanded by more
than 50%. If the addition or alteration is only the basement, then only the
basement is required to be fire sprinkler protected.
         4.   An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout when
either the roof structure and/or exterior wall structure have been removed,
altered and/or replaced in at least 50% of the existing structure.
         5.   An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout when
any change in use or occupancy creates a more hazardous fire/life safety
condition, as determined by the Fire Chief.
         Exception: Spaces or areas in telecommunications buildings used
exclusively for telecommunications equipment, associated electrical power
distribution equipment, batteries and standby engines, provided that those
spaces or areas are equipped throughout with an automatic smoke detection
system in accordance with Section 907.2 and are separated from the remainder of
the building by not less than 1-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance
with Section 707 or not less than 2-hour horizontal assemblies constructed in
accordance with Section 711, or both.
         [. . .]
(Ord. 5563 §1 (part), 2022)
15.04.290   903.3.1.1 NFPA 13 sprinkler systems.
   Section 903.1.1.1 of the California Fire Code is amended to read as follows:
      903.1.1.1 NFPA 13 sprinkler systems. Where the provisions of this code
require that a building or portion thereof be equipped throughout with an
automatic sprinkler system in accordance with this section, sprinklers shall be
installed throughout in accordance with NFPA 13 and State and local
requirements except as provided in Section 903.3.1.1.
         1.   For new buildings having no designated use or tenant, the minimum
sprinkler design density shall be Ordinary Hazard Group II / 1500 square feet.
         2.   Where future use or tenant is determined to require a higher
density, the sprinkler system shall be augmented to meet the higher density.
         3.   Light hazard shall be hydraulically designed to a 1500 square
foot most remote area or as required by the fire code official.
         4.   Laboratory areas within buildings shall be hydraulically designed
to Ordinary Hazard II density.
         5.   Parking areas where mechanical vehicle storage equipment is used
the fire sprinkler system shall be hydraulically designed to Extra Hazard II
density.
         6.   In multi-residential apartments, townhomes, and condominiums
         [. . .]
(Ord. 5563 §1 (part), 2022)
15.04.300   Section 903.3.1.2 NFPA 13R sprinkler systems.
   Section 903.3.1.2 of the California Fire Code is amended to read as follows:
      903.3.1.2 NFPA 13R sprinkler systems. Where allowed in buildings of Group
R occupancies, automatic sprinkler systems shall be installed throughout in
accordance with NFPA 13 and State and local standards.
      [. . .]
(Ord. 5563 §1 (part), 2022)
15.04.310   Section 903.3.1.3 and 903.3.1.3.1 NFPA 13D sprinkler systems.
   Section 903.3.1.3 of the California Fire Code is amended and 903.3.1.3.1 is
added to read as follows:
      903.3.1.2 NFPA 13D sprinkler systems. Where allowed, automatic sprinkler
systems installed in one- and two-family dwellings shall be installed
throughout in accordance with NFPA 13D and State and local standards. Fire
sprinkler protection shall be provided under rear covered patios extending over
4 ft perpendicular from the exterior of the structure.
      903.3.1.3.1 Increase in fire sprinkler design criteria. Structures
determined by the fire code official to have higher firefighting hazardous
condition, or located in the Wildland-Urban Interface Fire Area, shall have an
increase in fire sprinkler design criteria as determined by the fire code
official.
(Ord. 5563 § 1 (part), 2022)
15.04.320   Section 903.4.3 Floor control valves.
   Section 903.4.3 of the California Fire Code is amended to read as follows:
      903.4.3 Floor control valves. Automatic sprinkler systems serving
buildings two (2) or more stories in height shall have valves installed so as
to control the system independently on each floor including basements.
(Ord. 5563 § 1 (part), 2022)
15.04.330   Section 905.3.1 Standpipe systems.
   Section 905.3.1 of the California Fire Code is amended to read as follows:
      905.3.1 Standpipe systems. A Class I Standpipe System shall be installed
in new buildings or buildings being retrofitted with a fire sprinkler system
where the roof edge/ parapet is greater than 27 feet above the lowest level of
Fire apparatus access roadway and in below grade levels.
(Ord. 5563 § 1 (part), 2022)
15.04.340    Section 909.20.7 Smoke control systems - schedule.
   Section 909.20.7 is added to the California Fire Code to read as follows:
      909.20.7 Smoke control systems - schedule. A routine maintenance and
operational testing program shall be initiated immediately after the smoke
control system has passed the acceptance tests. A written schedule for routine
maintenance and operational testing shall be established and both shall occur
at least annually.
(Ord. 5563 § 1 (part), 2022)
15.04.350    Section 1008.3.3 Rooms and spaces.
   Section 1008.3.3 of the California Fire Code is amended to read as follows:
      1008.3.3 Rooms and spaces. In the event of power supply failure, an
emergency electrical system shall automatically illuminate all of the following
areas:
         1.   Electrical equipment rooms.
         2.   Fire command centers.
         3.   Fire pump rooms.
         4.   Generator rooms.
         5.   Public restrooms.
(Ord. 5563 § 1 (part), 2022)
15.04.360    Section 1031.2 Where required.
   Section 1031.2 of the California Fire Code is amended to read:
      1031.2 Where required. In addition to the means of egress required by
this chapter, emergency escape and rescue openings shall be provided in Group R
occupancies:
      Basements and sleeping rooms below the fourth story above grade plane
shall have not fewer than one emergency escape and rescue opening in accordance
with this section. Where basements contain one or more sleeping rooms, an
emergency escape and rescue opening shall be required in each sleeping room but
shall not be required in adjoining areas of the basement. Such openings shall
open directly into a public way or to a yard or court that opens to a public
way.
      Exceptions:
         1.   In Groups R-1 and R-2 occupancies constructed of Type I, Type
IIA, Type IIIA or Type IV construction equipped throughout with an approved
automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.
         2.   Group R-2.1 occupancies meeting the requirements for delayed
egress in accordance with Section 1010.2.13 may have operable windows that are
breakable in sleeping rooms permanently restricted to a maximum of 4-inch open
position.
         3.   Emergency escape and rescue openings are not required from
basements or sleeping rooms that have an exit door or exit access door that
opens directly into a public way or to a yard, court or exterior egress balcony
that opens to a public way.
         4.   Storm shelters and basements used only to house mechanical
equipment not exceeding a total floor area of 200 square feet (18.58 m2)
(Ord. 5563 § 1 (part), 2022)
15.04.370   Section 1207.1.5 Large-scale fire test.
   Section 1207.1.5 of the California Fire Code is amended to read:
      1207.1.5 Large-scale fire test. Where required elsewhere in Section 1207,
large-scale fire testing shall be conducted in accordance with NFPA 855, and UL
9540A. The testing shall be conducted or witnessed and reported by an approved
testing laboratory and show that a fire involving one ESS will not propagate to
an adjacent ESS, and where installed within buildings, enclosed areas and walk-
in units will be contained within the room, enclosed area or walk-in unit for a
duration equal to the fire-resistance rating of the room separation specified
in Section 1207.7.4. The test report shall be provided to the fire code
official for review and approval in accordance with Section 104.8.2.
(Ord. 5563 § 1 (part), 2022)
15.04.380    Section 1207.11.3 Location.
   Section 1207.11.3 of the California Fire Code is amended to read:
      1207.11.3 Location. ESS shall be installed only in the following
locations:
         1.   Detached garages and detached accessory structures.
         2.   Attached garages separated from the dwelling unit living space
and sleeping units in accordance with Section R302.6.
         3.   Outdoors installations or on the exterior side of the exterior
walls shall not be located not less than 3 feet (914 mm) from doors and windows
directly entering the dwelling unit and shall not be located below or above any
emergency escape and rescue openings.
         4.   Enclosed utility closets, basements, storage or utility spaces
within dwelling units with finished or noncombustible walls and ceilings. Walls
and ceilings of unfinished wood-framed construction shall be provided with not
less than 5/8-inch (15.9 mm) Type X gypsum wallboard.
         5.   ESS shall not be installed in sleeping rooms, closets, spaces
opening directly into sleeping rooms or in habitable spaces of dwelling units.
(Ord. 5563 § 1 (part), 2022)
15.04.390   Section 3305.9 Fire walls.
   Section 3305.9 is added to the California Fire Code to read as follows:
      3305.9 Fire walls. When firewalls are required, the wall construction
shall be completed (with all openings protected) immediately after the building
is sufficiently weather-protected at the location of the wall(s).
(Ord. 5563 § 1 (part), 2022)
15.04.400   Section 3312.1 and 3312.1.1.
   Section 3312.1 of the California Fire Code is amended to read as follows:
      3312.1 Stairways required. Each level above the first story in new multi-
story buildings shall be provided with at least two usable exit stairways after
the floor decking is installed. The stairways shall be continuous and shall
discharge to grade level. Stairways serving more than two floor levels shall be
enclosed (with openings adequately protected) after exterior walls/windows are
in place. Exit stairs in new and in existing, occupied buildings shall be
lighted and maintained clear of debris and construction materials at all times.
      Exception: For new multi-story buildings, one of the required exit stairs
may be obstructed on not more than two contiguous floor levels for the purposes
of stairway construction (i.e., installation of gypsum board, painting,
flooring, etc.).
      3312.1.1 Required means of egress. All new buildings under construction
shall have a least one unobstructed means of egress. All means of egress shall
be identified in the Fire Protection Plan.
(Ord. 5563 § 1 (part), 2022)
15.04.410   Section 4902.1 Definition of wildland-urban interface fire area.
   The definition of "wildland-urban interface fire area" in Section 4902.1 is
amended to read as follows:
      WILDLAND-URBAN INTERFACE FIRE AREA (WUI) A geographical area identified
by the State of California as a "Fire Hazard Severity Zone" in accordance with
Public Resources Code Sections 4201 through 4204 and Government Code Sections
51175 through 51189, or other areas designated by the enforcing agency to be at
a significant risk from wildfires. Within the city limits of the City of Palo
Alto, "Wildland-Urban Interface Fire Area" shall also include all areas west of
Interstate 280, and all other areas recommended as a "Very High Fire Hazard
Severity Zone" by the Director of the California Department of Forestry.
(Ord. 5563 § 1 (part), 2022)
15.04.420   Sections 4903.2 and 4903.3 through 4903.4 General requirements for
wildland-urban interface fire areas.
   Sections 4903.2 amended and 4903.3 through 4903.4 are added to the
California Fire Code to read as follows:
      4903.2 Contents. The fire protection plan shall be based on a project-
specific wildfire hazard assessment that includes considerations of location,
topography, aspect, and climatic and fire history. The plans shall identify
conformance with all applicable state wildfire protection regulations, statutes
and applicable local ordinances, whichever are more restrictive. The plan shall
address fire department access, egress, road and address signage, water supply,
building ignition and fire-resistance factors, fire protection systems and
equipment, defensible space and vegetation management in addition to fuel
reduction in accordance with Public Resources Code (PRC) 4290; the defensible
space requirements in accordance with PRC 4291 or Government Code 51182; and
the applicable building codes and standards for wildfire safety. The plan shall
identify mitigation measures to address the project's specific wildfire risk
and shall include the information required in Section 4903.2.1.
      4903.3 Cost. The cost of fire protection plan preparation and review
shall be the responsibility of the applicant.
      4903.4 Plan retention. The fire protection plan shall be retained by the
fire code official.
(Ord. 5563 § 1 (part), 2022)
15.04.430   Sections 4907.1 and 4907.4 Defensible space.
   Section 4907.1 is amended and Section 4907.4 is added to the California Fire
Code to read as follows:
      4907.1 General. Hazardous vegetation and fuels shall be managed to reduce
the severity of potential exterior wildfire exposure to buildings and to reduce
the risk of fire spreading to buildings as required by applicable laws and
regulations. Defensible space will be managed around all buildings and
structures in State Responsibility Areas (SRA) as required in Public Resources
Code 4291. Persons owning, leasing, controlling, operating or maintaining
buildings or structures in, upon or adjoining the Wildland-Urban Interface Fire
Area and persons owning, leasing or controlling land adjacent to such buildings
or structures, shall at all times:
         1.   Maintain an effective defensible space by removing and clearing
away flammable vegetation and combustible growth from areas within 30 feet
(9144 mm) of such buildings or structures.
         Exception: Single specimens of trees, ornamental shrubbery or similar
plants used as ground covers, provided that they do not form a means of rapidly
transmitting fire from the native growth to any structure.
         2.   Maintain additional effective defensible space by removing brush,
flammable vegetation and combustible growth located 30 feet to 100 feet (9144
mm to 30480 mm) from such buildings or structures, when required by the fire
code official due to steepness of terrain or other conditions that would cause
a defensible space of only 30 feet (9144 mm) to be insufficient.
         Exception: Grass and other vegetation located more than 30 feet (9144
mm) from buildings or structures and less than 18 inches (457 mm) in height
above the ground need not be removed where necessary to stabilize the soil and
prevent erosion.
         3.   Remove portions of trees, which extend within 10 feet (3048 mm)
of the outlet of a chimney.
         4.   Maintain trees adjacent to or overhanging a building free of
deadwood.
         5.   Maintain the roof of a structure free of leaves, needles or other
dead vegetative growth.
         6.   Remove flammable vegetation a minimum of 10 feet around liquefied
petroleum gas tanks/containers.
         7.   Firewood and combustible materials shall not be stored in
unenclosed spaces beneath buildings or structures, or on decks or under eaves,
canopies or other projections or overhangs. The storage of firewood and
combustible material within the defensible space shall be located a minimum of
30 feet (6096 mm) from structures and separated from the crown of trees by a
minimum horizontal distance of 15 feet (4572 mm).
         Exception: Firewood and combustible materials not for consumption on
the premises shall be stored as approved by the fire code official.
         8.   Clear areas within 10 feet (3048 mm) of fire apparatus access
roads and driveways to of non-fire-resistive vegetation growth.
         Exception: Grass and other vegetation located more than 30 feet (9144
mm) from buildings or structures and less than 18 inches (457 mm) in height
above the ground need not be removed where necessary to stabilize the soil and
prevent erosion.
      [. . .]
      4907.4 Corrective Actions. The executive body is authorized to instruct
the fire code official to give notice to the owner of the property upon which
conditions regulated by Section 4907.1 exist to correct such conditions. If the
owner fails to correct such conditions, the executive body is authorized to
cause the same to be done and make the expense of such correction a lien upon
the property where such condition exists.
(Ord. 5563 § 1 (part), 2022)
15.04.440   Section 5001.2.2.2 Health hazards.
   Section 5001.2.2.2 of the California Fire Code is amended to read as
follows:
      5001.2.2.2 Health Hazards. The material categories listed in this section
are classified as health hazards. A material with a primary classification as a
health hazard can also pose a physical hazard.
         1.   Highly toxic, toxic and moderately toxic.
         2.   Corrosive materials.
         3.   Moderately toxic gas.
         4.   Other health hazards.
(Ord. 5563 § 1 (part), 2022)
15.04.450    Section 5001.7 Hazard materials management plan electronic
submissions.
   Section 5001.7 is added to the California Fire Code to read as follows:
      5001.7 HMMP Electronic submissions Each applicant for a permit, a renewed
permit, or an amended permit pursuant to this title shall file an electronic
submission of all hazardous materials through California Environmental
Reporting System (CERS) for the fire chief's approval, to be known as a
hazardous materials management plan (HMMP), which shall demonstrate the
suitable storage of hazardous materials. The HMMP may be amended at any time
with the consent of the fire chief. The HMMP shall be a public record except as
otherwise specified. Section 18.23.100 in Title 18 identifies notification
requirements of the availability of the HMMP. Approval of the HMMP shall mean
that the HMMP has provided adequate information for the purposes of evaluating
the permit approval. Such approval shall not be understood to mean that the
city has made an independent determination of the adequacy of that which is
described in the HMMP electronic submission.
(Ord. 5563 § 1 (part), 2022)
15.04.460    Section 5003.1.3.1 Toxic, highly toxic, moderately toxic gases and
similarly used or handled materials.
   Section 5003.1.3.1 is added to the California Fire Code to read as follows:
      5003.1.3.1 Toxic, highly toxic, moderately toxic gases and similarly used
or handled materials. The storage, use, and handling of toxic, highly toxic and
moderately toxic gases in amounts exceeding Table 60004.2 or 60004.3 shall be
in accordance with this Chapter and Chapter 60. Any toxic, highly toxic or
moderately toxic material that is used or handled as a gas or vapor shall be in
accordance with the requirements for toxic, highly toxic or moderately toxic
gases.
(Ord. 5563 § 1 (part), 2022)
15.04.470   Section 5003.1.5 Other health hazards including carcinogens,
irritants and sensitizers.
   Section 5003.1.5 is added to the California Fire Code to read as follows:
      5003.1.5 Other health hazards including carcinogens, irritants and
sensitizers. The storage, use, and handling of materials classified as other
health hazards including carcinogens, irritants and sensitizers in amounts
exceeding 810 cubic feet for gases, 55 gallons for liquids and 5,000 pounds for
solids shall be in accordance with this Section 5003.
(Ord. 5563 § 1 (part), 2022)
15.04.480   Section 5003.1.6 Additional secondary containment requirements.
   Section 5003.1.6 is added to the California Fire Code to read as follows:
      5003.1.6 Additional secondary containment requirements. In addition to
the requirements set forth in Section 5004.2, an approved containment system is
required for any quantity of hazardous materials that are liquids or solids at
normal temperature and pressure (NTP), where a spill is determined to be a
plausible event and where such an event would endanger people, property or the
environment. The approved containment system may be required to include a
combination of spill control and secondary containment meeting the design and
construction requirements set forth in section 5004.2.
(Ord. 5563 § 1 (part), 2022)
15.04.490   Section 5003.2.2.1 Design and construction.
   Section 5003.2.2.1 of the California Fire Code is amended to read as
follows:
      5003.2.2.1 Design and construction. Piping, tubing, valves, fittings and
related components used for hazardous materials shall be in accordance with the
following:
         1.   Piping, tubing, valves, fittings and related components shall be
designed and fabricated from materials compatible with the material to be
contained and shall be of adequate strength and durability to withstand the
pressure, structural and seismic stress, and exposure to which they are
subject.
         2.   Piping and tubing shall be identified in accordance with ASME
A13.1 and the Santa Clara County Fire Chiefs Marking Requirements and
Guidelines for Hazardous Materials and Hazardous Waste to indicate the material
conveyed.
         3.   Manual valves or automatic remotely activated fail-safe emergency
shutoff valves shall be installed on supply piping and tubing and provided with
ready access at the following locations at the following locations:
            a.   The point of use.
            b.   The tank, cylinder or bulk use.
         4.   Manual emergency shutoff valves and controls for remotely
activated emergency shutoff valves shall be clearly visible, provided with
ready access and identified in an approved manner.
         5.   Backflow prevention or check valves shall be provided when the
backflow of hazardous materials could create a hazardous condition or cause the
unauthorized discharge of hazardous materials.
         6.   Where gases or liquids having a hazard ranking of: Health hazard
Class 3 or 4, Flammability Class 3 or 4, or Reactivity Class 4 in accordance
with NFPA 704 are carried in pressurized piping above 15 pounds per square inch
gauge (psig)(103 Kpa), an approved means of leak detection, emergency shutoff
and excess flow control shall be provided. Where the piping originates from
within a hazardous material storage room or area, the excess flow control shall
be located within the storage room or area. Where the piping originates from a
bulk source, the excess flow control shall be located as close to the bulk
source as practical.
         Exceptions:
            a.   Piping for inlet connections designed to prevent backflow.
            b.   Piping for pressure relief devices.
         7.   Secondary containment or equivalent protection from spills or
leaks shall be provided for piping for liquid hazardous materials and for
highly toxic and toxic corrosive gases above threshold quantities listed in
Tables 6004.2 and 6004.3. Secondary containment includes, but is not limited
to, double-walled piping.
         Exceptions:
            a.   Secondary containment is not required for toxic corrosive
gases if the piping is constructed of inert materials.
            b.   Piping under sub-atmospheric conditions if the piping is
equipped with an alarm and fail-safe-to-close valve activated by a loss of
vacuum.
         8.   Expansion chambers shall be provided between valves whenever the
regulated gas may be subjected to thermal expansion. Chambers shall be sized to
provide protection for piping and instrumentation and to accommodate the
expansion of regulated materials.
(Ord. 5563 § 1 (part), 2022)
15.04.500   Section 5003.2.2.2 Additional regulations for supply piping for
health hazard materials.
   Section 5003.2.2.2 of the California Fire Code is amended to read as
follows:
      5003.2.2.2 Additional regulations for supply piping for health hazard
materials. Supply piping and tubing for gases and liquids having a health
hazard ranking of 3 or 4 in accordance with ASME B31.3 and the following:
         1.   Piping and tubing utilized for the transmission of toxic, highly
toxic, or highly volatile corrosive liquids and gases shall have welded or
brazed connections throughout except for connections within an exhausted
enclosure if the material is a gas, or an approved method of drainage or
containment is provided for connections if the material is a liquid.
         2.   Piping and tubing shall not be located within corridors, within
any portion of a means of egress required to be enclosed in fire-resistance-
rated construction or in concealed spaces in areas not classified as Group H
Occupancies.
         Exception: Piping and tubing within the space defined by the walls of
corridors and the floor or roof above or in concealed space above other
occupancies when installed in accordance with Section 415.11.7.4 of the
California Building Code as required for Group H5 occupancies.
         3.   All primary piping for toxic, highly toxic and moderately toxic
gases shall pass a helium leak test of 1x10-9 cubic centimeters/second where
practical, or shall pass testing in accordance with an approved, nationally
recognized standard. Tests shall be conducted by a qualified "third party" not
involved with the construction of the piping and control systems.
(Ord. 5563 § 1 (part), 2022)
15.04.510   Section 5003.3.1 Unauthorized discharges.
   Section 5003.3.1 of the California Fire Code is amended to read as follows:
      5003.3.1 Unauthorized discharges. In the event hazardous materials are
released in quantities reportable under state, federal or local regulations or
when there is a threatened release that presents a threat to health, property
or the environment, the fire code official shall be notified immediately in an
approved manner and the following procedures required in accordance with
Sections 5003.3.1.1 through 5003.3.1.4.
(Ord. 5563 § 1 (part), 2022)
15.04.520   Section 5003.5.2 Ventilation ducting.
   Section 5003.5.2 is added to the California Fire Code to read as follows:
      5003.5.2 Ventilation ducting. Ducts venting hazardous materials
operations shall be labeled with the hazard class of the material being vented
and the direction of flow.
(Ord. 5563 § 1 (part), 2022)
15.04.530   Section 5003.5.3 "H" occupancies.
   Section 5003.5.4 is added to the California Fire Code to read as follows:
      5003.5.3 "H" Occupancies. In "H" occupancies, all piping and tubing may
be required to be identified when there is any possibility of confusion with
hazardous materials transport tubing or piping. Flow direction indicators are
required.
(Ord. 5563 § 1 (part), 2022)
15.04.540   Section 5003.9.11 Fire extinguishing systems for workstations
dispensing, handling or using hazardous materials.
   Section 5003.9.11 is added to the California Fire Code to read as follows:
      5003.9.11 Fire extinguishing systems for workstations dispensing,
handling or using hazardous materials. Combustible and non-combustible
workstations which dispense, handle or use hazardous materials shall be
protected by an approved automatic fire extinguishing system.
      Exception: Internal fire protection is not required for Biological Safety
Cabinets that carry NSF/ANSI certification where quantities of flammable
liquids in use or storage within the cabinet do not exceed 500 ml.
(Ord. 5563 § 1 (part), 2022)
15.04.550   Section 5003.10.4 Elevators utilized to transport hazardous
materials.
   Section 5003.10.4 of the California Fire Code is amended to read as follows:
      5003.10.4 Elevators utilized to transport hazardous materials.
      5003.10.4.1 When transporting hazardous materials, elevators shall have
no other passengers other than in the individual(s) handling the chemical
transport cart.
         5003.10.4.1.1 When transporting cryogenic or liquefied compressed
gases, there shall be no occupants in the elevator.
      5003.10.4.2 Hazardous materials liquid containers shall have a maximum
capacity of 20 liters (5.28 gal).
      5003.10.4.3 Highly toxic, toxic, and moderately toxic gases shall be
limited to a container of a maximum water capacity of 1 lb.
      5003.10.4.4 When transporting cryogenic or liquefied compressed gases
means shall be provided to prevent the elevator from being summoned to other
floors.
(Ord. 5563 § 1 (part), 2022)
15.04.560   Section 5004.2.1 Spill control for hazardous material liquids.
   Section 5004.2.1 of the California Fire Code is amended to read as follows:
      5004.2.1 Spill control for hazardous material liquids. Rooms, buildings
or areas used for storage of hazardous material liquids shall be provided with
spill control to prevent the flow of liquids to adjoining areas. Floors in
indoor locations and similar surfaces in outdoor locations shall be constructed
to contain a spill from the largest single vessel by one of the following
methods:
         1.   Liquid-tight sloped or recessed floors in indoor locations or
similar areas in outdoor locations.
         2.   Liquid-tight floors in indoor and outdoor locations or similar
areas provided with liquid-tight raised or recessed sills or dikes.
         3.   Sumps and collection systems, including containment pallets in
accordance with Section 5004.2.3.
         4.   Other approved engineered systems.
         Except for surfacing, the floors, sills, dikes, sumps and collection
systems shall be constructed of noncombustible material, and the liquid-tight
seal shall be compatible with the material stored. When liquid-tight sills or
dikes are provided, they are not required at perimeter openings having an open-
grate trench across the opening that connects to an approved collection system.
(Ord. 5563 § 1 (part), 2022)
15.04.570   Sections 5004.2.2 and 5004.2.2.2 and Table 5004.2.2 Secondary
containment for hazardous material liquids and solids.
   Table 5004.2.2 is deleted in its entirety.
   Sections 5004.2.2 and 5004.2.2.2 of the California Fire Code are amended to
read as follows:
      5004.2.2 Secondary containment for hazardous material liquids and solids.
Buildings, rooms or areas used for the storage of hazardous materials liquids
or solids shall be provided with secondary containment in accordance with this
section.
      [. . .]
      5004.2.2.2 Incompatible Materials. Incompatible materials shall be
separated from each other in independent secondary containment systems.
(Ord. 5563 § 1 (part), 2022)
15.04.580   Section 5004.2.3 Containment pallets.
   Section 5004.2.3 of the California Fire Code is amended to read as follows:
      5004.2.3 Containment pallets. Combustible containment pallets shall not
be used inside buildings to comply with Section 5004.2 where the individual
container capacity exceeds 55 gallons (208 L) or an aggregate capacity of
multiple containers exceeds 1,000 gallons (3785 L) for liquids or where the
individual container capacity exceeds 550 pounds (250 kg) or an aggregate of
multiple containers exceeds 10,000 pounds (4540 kg) for solids.
      Where used as an alternative to spill control and secondary containment
for outdoor storage in accordance with the exception in Section 5004.2,
containment pallets shall comply with all of the following:
         1.   A liquid-tight sump accessible for visual inspection shall be
provided;
         2.   The sump shall be designed to contain not less than 66 gallons
(250L);
         3.   Exposed surfaces shall be compatible with material stored;
      Containment pallets shall be protected to prevent collection of rainwater
within the sump of the containment pallet.
(Ord. 5563 § 1 (part), 2022)
15.04.590   Section 5704.2.7.5.8 Overfill prevention.
   Section 5704.2.7.5.8 of the California Fire Code is amended to read as
follows:
      5704.2.7.5.8 Overfill prevention. An approved means or method in
accordance with Section 5704.2.9.7.5 shall be provided to prevent overfill of
all Class I, II and IIIA liquid storage tanks. Storage tanks in refineries,
bulk plants or terminals regulated by Sections 5706.4 or 5706.7 shall have
overfill protection in accordance with API 2350.
      An approved means or method in accordance with Section 5704.2.9.7.5 shall
be provided to prevent the overfilling of Class IIIB liquid storage tanks
connected to fuel-burning equipment inside buildings.
      Exception: Outside aboveground tanks with a capacity of 1320 gallons
(5000 L) or less shall comply with Section 5704.2.9.7.5.1 (1.1)
(Ord. 5563 § 1 (part), 2022)
15.04.600   Section 5704.2.7.5.9 Automatic filling of tanks.
   Section 5704.2.7.5.9 is added to the California Fire Code to read as
follows:
      5704.2.7.5.9 Automatic filling of tanks. Systems that automatically fill
flammable or combustible liquid tanks shall be equipped with an approved
overfill protection system that sends an alarm signal to a constantly attended
location and immediately stops the filling of the tank. The alarm signal and
automatic shutoff shall be tested on an annual basis and records of such
testing shall be maintained on-site for a period of five (5) years.
(Ord. 5563 § 1 (part), 2022)
15.04.610   Section 5707.3.3 Site plan.
   Section 5707.3.3 of the California Fire Code is amended to read as follows:
      5707.3.3 Site plan. A site plan shall be developed for each location at
which mobile fueling occurs. The site plan shall be in sufficient detail to
indicate the following:
         1.   All buildings and structures.
         2.   Lot lines or property lines.
         3.   Electric car chargers.
         4.   Solar photovoltaic parking lot canopies.
         5.   Appurtenances on site and their use and function.
         6.   All uses adjacent to the lot lines of the site.
         7.   Fueling locations.
         8.   Locations of all storm drain openings and adjacent waterways or
wetlands.
         9.   Information regarding slope, natural drainage, curbing,
impounding.
         10.   How a spill will be kept on the site property.
         11.   Scale of the site plan.
(Ord. 5563 § 1 (part), 2022)
15.04.620   Section 6001.1 Site scope.
   Section 6001.1 of the California Fire Code is amended to read as follows:
      6001.1 Site scope. The storage and use of highly toxic, toxic and
moderately toxic materials shall comply with this chapter. Compressed gases
shall also comply with Chapter 53.
      Exceptions:
         1.   Display and storage in Group M and storage in Group S occupancies
complying with Section 5003.1 1.
         2.   Conditions involving pesticides or agricultural products as
follows:
            2.1.   Application and release of pesticide, agricultural products
and materials intended for use in weed abatement, erosion control, soil
amendment or similar applications when applied in accordance with the
manufacturer's instruction and label directions.
            2.2.   Transportation of pesticides in compliance with the Federal
Hazardous Materials Transportation Act and regulations thereunder.
            2.3.   Storage in dwellings or private garages of pesticides
registered by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency to be utilized in and
around the home, garden, pool, spa and patio.
(Ord. 5563 § 1 (part), 2022)
15.04.630   Section 6002.1 Definitions.
   The following definition is added to section 6002.1 of the California Fire
Code as defined in Chapter 2 of the California Fire Code and local amendments:
      MODERATELY TOXIC GAS. A moderately toxic gas is a chemical or substance
that has a median lethal concentration (LC50) in air more than 2000 parts per
million but not more than 5000 parts per million by volume of gas or vapor,
when administered by continuous inhalation for an hour, or less if death occurs
within one hour, to albino rats weighing between 200 and 300 grams each.
(Ord. 5563 § 1 (part), 2022)
15.04.640    Section 6004.1 Highly toxic and toxic compressed gases.
   Section 6004.1 of the California Fire Code is amended to read as follows:
      6004.1.1 The storage and use of highly toxic, toxic, and moderately toxic
compressed gases shall comply with this section.
      6004.1.1 Special limitations for indoor storage and use by occupancy. The
indoor storage and use of highly toxic, toxic, and moderately toxic compressed
gases in certain occupancies shall be subject to the limitations contained in
Sections 6004.1.1.1 through 6004.1.1 .3.
      6004.1.1.1 Group A, E, I or U occupancies. Moderately toxic, toxic and
highly toxic compressed gases shall not be stored or used within Group A, E, I
or U occupancies.
      Exception: Cylinders not exceeding 20 cubic feet (0.566 m3) at normal
temperature and pressure (NTP) are allowed within gas cabinets or fume hoods.
      6004.1.1.2 Group R occupancies. Moderately toxic, toxic, and highly toxic
compressed gases shall not be stored or used in Group R occupancies.
      6004.1.1.3 Offices, retail sales and classrooms. Moderately toxic, toxic
and highly toxic compressed gases shall not be stored or used in offices,
retail sales or classroom portions of Group B, F, M or S occupancies.
      Exception: In classrooms of Group B occupancies, cylinders with a
capacity not exceeding 20 cubic feet (0.566 m3) at NTP are allowed in gas
cabinets or fume hoods.
(Ord. 5563 § 1 (part), 2022)
15.04.650    Sections 6004.2 and 6004.2.1 Indoor storage and use.
   Sections 6004.2 and 6004.2.1 of the California Fire Code are amended to read
as follows:
      6004.2 Indoor storage and use. The indoor storage and use of highly
toxic, toxic, and moderately toxic compressed gases shall be in accordance with
Sections 6004.2.1 through 6004.2.2.10.3.
      6004.2.1 Applicability. The applicability of regulations governing the
indoor storage and use of highly toxic, toxic, and moderately toxic compressed
gases shall be as set forth in Sections 6004.2.1.1 through 6004.2.1.4.
(Ord. 5563 § 1 (part), 2022)
15.04.660   Section 6004.2.1.4 and Table 6004.2.1.4 Quantities.
   Section 6004.2.1.4 and Table 6004.2.1.4 of the California Fire Code are
added to read as follows:
      6004.2.1.4 Quantities. The indoor storage or use of highly toxic, toxic,
and moderately toxic gases in amounts exceeding the minimum threshold
quantities per control area set forth in Table 6004.2.1.4 but not exceeding
maximum allowable quantity per control area set forth in Table 5003.1.1(2)
shall be in accordance with Sections 5001, 5003, 6001, 6004.1, and 6004.4.
   Table 6004.2.1.4
 
Minimum Threshold Quantities for Highly Toxic, Toxic and Moderately Toxic
Gases for Indoor Storage and Use
Highly Toxic     20 cubic feet
Toxic            405 cubic feet
Moderately Toxic 405 cubic feet
(Ord. 5563 § 1 (part), 2022)
15.04.670   Section 6004.4 through 6004.4.8.2 General indoor requirements.
   Section 6004.4 through 6004.4.8.2 of the California Fire Code is added to
read as follows:
      6004.4. General indoor requirements. The general requirements applicable
to the indoor storage and use of highly toxic, toxic, and moderately toxic
compressed gases shall be in accordance with Sections 6004.4 through 6004.4.8.2
      6004.4.1 Cylinder and tank location. Cylinders shall be located within
gas cabinets, exhausted enclosures or gas rooms. Portable and stationary tanks
shall be located within gas rooms or exhausted enclosures.
      Exception:
         1.   Where a gas detection system is provided in accordance with
6004.4.8
      6004.4.2. Ventilated areas. The room or area in which gas cabinets or
exhausted enclosures are located shall be provided with exhaust ventilation.
Gas cabinets or exhausted enclosures shall not be used as the sole means of
exhaust for any room or area.
      6004.4.3. Piping and controls. In addition to the requirements of Section
5003.2.2, piping and controls on stationary tanks, portable tanks, and
cylinders shall comply with the following requirements:
         1.   Stationary tanks, portable tanks, and cylinders in use shall be
provided with a means of excess flow control on all tank and cylinder inlet or
outlet connections.
      Exceptions:
         1.   Inlet connections designed to prevent backflow.
         2.   Pressure relief devices.
      6004.4.4 Gas rooms. Gas rooms shall comply with Section 5003.8.4 and both
of the following requirements:
         1.   The exhaust ventilation from gas rooms shall be directed to an
exhaust system.
         2.   Gas rooms shall be equipped with an approved automatic sprinkler
system. Alternative fire-extinguishing systems shall not be used.
      6004.4.5 Treatment systems. The exhaust ventilation from gas cabinets,
exhausted enclosures and gas rooms, required in Section 6004.4.1 shall be
directed to a treatment system. The treatment system shall be utilized to
handle the accidental release of gas and to process exhaust ventilation. The
treatment system shall be designed in accordance with Sections 6004.2.2.7.1
through 6004.2.2.7.5 and Chapter 5 of the California Mechanical Code.
      Exceptions:
         1.   Highly toxic, toxic, and moderately toxic gases-storage. A
treatment system is not required for cylinders, containers and tanks in storage
where all of the following controls are provided:
            a.   Valve outlets are equipped with gas-tight outlet plugs or
caps.
            b.   Hand wheel-operated valves have handles secured to prevent
movement.
            c.   Approved containment vessels or containment systems are
provided in accordance with Section 6004.2.2.3.
         2.   Highly toxic, toxic, and moderately toxic gases-use. Treatment
systems are not required for highly toxic, toxic, and moderately toxic gases
supplied by stationary tanks, portable tanks, or cylinders where a gas
detection system complying with Section 6004.4.8 and listed or approved
automatic-closing fail-safe valves are provided. The gas detection system shall
have a sensing interval not exceeding 5 minutes. Automatic-closing fail-safe
valves shall be located immediately adjacent to cylinder valves and shall close
when gas is detected at the permissible exposure limit (PEL) by a gas sensor
monitoring the exhaust system at the point of discharge from the gas cabinet,
exhausted enclosure, ventilated enclosure or gas room.
      6004.4.5.1. Design. Treatment systems shall be capable of diluting,
adsorbing, containing, neutralizing, burning or otherwise processing the
contents of the largest single vessel of compressed gas. Where a total
containment system is used, the system shall be designed to handle the maximum
anticipated pressure of release to the system when it reaches equilibrium.
      6004.4.5.2. Performance. Treatment systems shall be designed to reduce
the maximum allowable discharge concentrations of the gas to one-half immediate
by dangerous to life and health (IDLH) at the point of discharge to the
atmosphere. Where more than one gas is emitted to the treatment system, the
treatment system shall be designed to handle the worst-case release based on
the release rate, the quantity and the IDLH for all compressed gases stored or
used.
      6004.4.5.3. Sizing. Treatment systems shall be sized to process the
maximum worst-case release of gas based on the maximum flow rate of release
from the largest vessel utilized. The entire contents of the largest compressed
gas vessel shall be considered.
      6004.4.5.4 Stationary tanks. Stationary tanks shall be labeled with the
maximum rate of release for the compressed gas contained based on valves or
fittings that are inserted directly into the tank. Where multiple valves or
fittings are provided, the maximum flow rate of release for valves or fittings
with the highest flow rate shall be indicated. Where liquefied compressed gases
are in contact with valves or fittings, the liquid flow rate shall be utilized
for computation purposes. Flow rates indicated on the label shall be converted
to cubic feet per minute (cfm/min) (m3/s) of gas at normal temperature and
pressure (NTP).
      6004.4.5.5 Portable tanks and cylinders. The maximum flow rate of release
for portable tanks and cylinders shall be calculated based on the total release
from the cylinder or tank within the time specified in Table 6004.2.2.7.5.
Where portable tanks or cylinders are equipped with approved excess flow or
reduced flow valves, the worst-case release shall be determined by the maximum
achievable flow from the valve as determined by the valve manufacturer or
compressed gas supplier. Reduced flow and excess flow valves shall be
permanently marked by the valve manufacturer to indicate the maximum design
flow rate. Such markings shall indicate the flow rate for air under normal
temperature and pressure.
      6004.4.6. Emergency power. Emergency power shall be provided for the
following systems in accordance with Section 604:
         1.   Exhaust ventilation system.
         2.   Treatment system.
         3.   Gas detection system.
         4.   Smoke detection system.
      6004.4.6.1. Fail-safe systems. Emergency power shall not be required for
mechanical exhaust ventilation and treatment systems where approved fail-safe
systems are installed and designed to stop gas flow.
      6004.4.7. Automatic fire detection system. An approved automatic fire
detection system shall be installed in rooms or areas where highly toxic,
toxic, and moderately toxic compressed gases are stored or used. Activation of
the detection system shall sound a local alarm. The fire detection system shall
comply with Section 907.
      6004.4.8. Gas detection system. A gas detection system complying with
Section 916 shall be provided to detect the presence of gas at or below the PEL
or ceiling limit of the gas for which detection is provided.
      Exceptions:
         1.   A gas detection system is not required for toxic and moderately
toxic gases when the physiological warning threshold level for the gas is at a
level below the accepted PEL for the gas.
      A gas detection system is not required for highly toxic, toxic, and
moderately toxic gases where cylinders, portable tanks, and all non-
continuously welded connects are within a gas cabinet or exhausted enclosures.
      6004.4.8.1. Alarms. The gas detection system shall initiate a local alarm
and transmit a signal to an approved location.
      6004.4.8.2. Shut off of gas supply. The gas detection system shall
automatically close the shut off valve at the source on gas supply piping and
tubing related to the system being monitored for whichever gas is detected.
      Exception: Automatic shutdown is not required for highly toxic, toxic,
and moderately toxic compressed gas systems where all of the following controls
are provided:
         1.   Constantly attended / supervised.
         2.   Provided with emergency shutoff valves that have ready access.
(Ord. 5563 § 1 (part), 2022)
Chapter 15.05
RESERVED*
*   Editor’s Note: Chapter 15.05, International Fire Code, previously codified
herein, was repealed in its entirety by Section 1 of Ordinance No. 5395.
Title 16 BUILDING REGULATIONS*
Chapters:
   
16.04   California Building Code, California Code of Regulations, Title 24,
Part 2, Volumes 1 &2
   
16.05   California Mechanical Code, California Code of Regulations, Title 24,
Part 4
   
16.06   2025 California Residential Code, California Code of Regulations, Title
24, Part 2.5
   
16.08   California Plumbing Code, California Code of Regulations, Title 24,
Part 5
   
16.09   Sewer Use Ordinance
   
16.10   Private Sewage Disposal Systems
   
16.11   Stormwater Pollution Prevention
   
16.12   Recycled Water
   16.13   Requirements for Food Facilities Related to Water Pollution
Prevention and Management of Fats, Oils, and Grease
   
16.14   California Green Building Standards Code, California Code of
Regulations, Title 24, Part 11
   16.15   Electric Vehicle Charging Stations
   
16.16   California Electrical Code, California Code of Regulations, Title 24,
Part 3
   
16.17   California Energy Code, California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part
6
   
16.18   2024 International Swimming Pool and Spa Code (ISPSC)
   
16.19   California Historical Building Code, California Code of Regulations,
Title 24, Part 8 and California Existing Building Code, California Code of
Regulations, Title 24, Part 10
   
16.20   Signs
   
16.24   Fences
   
16.28   Excavations, Grading and Fills
   
16.32   Moving and Relocating Buildings
   
16.36   House Numbering
   
16.38   Certificate of Use and Occupancy for Community Housing
   
16.40   Unsafe Buildings
   
16.42   Seismic Hazards Identification Program
   
16.44   Fallout Shelters
   
16.45   Transportation Impact Fee for New Nonresidential Development in the
Stanford Research Park/El Camino Real CS Zone
   
16.46   Approval of Projects with Impacts on Traffic in the San Antonio/West
Bayshore Area
   
16.47   Reserved
   
16.48   Reserved
   
16.49   Historic Preservation
   
16.50   Reserved
   
16.52   Flood Hazard Regulations
   
16.56   Handicapped Access Regulations - Appeal
   
16.57   In-Lieu Parking Fee for New Nonresidential Development in the
Commercial Downtown (CD) Zoning District
   
16.58   Development Impact Fees
   
16.59   Citywide Transportation Impact Fee
   
16.60   Charleston Arastradero Corridor Pedestrian and Bicyclist Safety Impact
Fee
   
16.61   Public Art for Private Developments
   
16.62   Expired Permits for Residential Construction and Demolition
   
16.63   Small Residential Rooftop Solar Energy Systems
   
16.64   Development Fee and In-lieu Payment Administration
   
16.65   Citywide Affordable Housing Requirements
   16.66   Hauled Liquid Waste
Chapter 16.04
CALIFORNIA BUILDING CODE, CALIFORNIA CODE OF REGULATIONS,
TITLE 24, PART 2, VOLUMES 1 &2*
Sections
   
16.04.010   2025 California Building Code, Title 24, Part 2, Volumes 1 & 2
adopted and amended.
   
16.04.020   Cross-references to California Building Code.
   
16.04.030   Local amendments.
   
16.04.040   Adoption of 2025 California Building Code Chapter 1, Division II -
Scope and Administration, Part 1 - Scope and Application and Part 2 -
Administration and Enforcement.
   
16.04.050   Section 101.1 Title.
   
16.04.060   Section 101.2.1 Appendices.
   
16.04.070   Section 101.4 Referenced codes.
   
16.04.080   Section 103 Code Compliance Agency.
   
16.04.090   Section 104.2.4.1 Flood hazard areas.
   
16.04.100   Section 104.3.1 Determination of substantially improved or
substantially damaged existing buildings and structures in flood hazard areas.
   
16.04.110   Section 105.2 Work exempt from permit.
   
16.04.120   Section 105.3.2 Time limitation of application.
   
16.04.130   Section 105.5 Expiration.
   
16.04.140   Section 106.1 Live loads posted.
   
16.04.150   Section 109.6 Refunds.
   
16.04.160   Section 109.7 Re-inspection fees.
   
16.04.170   Section 110.2.1 Preliminary accessibility compliance inspection.
   
16.04.180   Section 110.3.3 Lowest floor elevation.
   
16.04.190   Section 111.1 Use and occupancy.
   
16.04.200   Section 111.3 Temporary occupancy.
   
16.04.210   Section 111.5 Posting.
   
16.04.220   Section 113 Means of appeals.
   
16.04.225   Section 114 Violations.
   
16.04.230   Section 115 Stop work order.
   
16.04.235   Section 202 Definitions.
   
16.04.240   Section 502.1 Address identification.
   
16.04.250   Reserved.
   
16.04.260   Section 903.2 Automatic sprinkler systems, where required.
   
16.04.270   Section 903.3.1.1 NFPA 13 sprinkler systems.
   
16.04.280   Section 903.3.1.2 NFPA 13R sprinkler systems.
   
16.04.290   Section 903.3.1.3 NFPA 13D sprinkler systems.
   
16.04.300   Section 903.3.1.3.1 Increase in fire sprinkler design criteria.
   
16.04.310   Section 903.4.3 Floor control valves.
   
16.04.320   Section 905.3.1 Height.
   
16.04.330   Section 907.2.11.2.4 Smoke alarms.
   
16.04.340   Section 909.20.7 Smoke control systems schedule.
   
16.04.345   Section 915.6 Maintenance.
   
16.04.350   Section 1008.3 Illumination required by an emergency electrical
system.
   
16.04.360   Section 1031.2 Where required.
   
16.04.370   Reserved.
   
16.04.380   Section 1205.3.4 Roof guards at courts.
   
16.04.390   Section 1208.6 Dwelling unit and congregate residence superficial
floor area.
   
16.04.400   Section 1503.2.1 Locations.
   
16.04.410   Section 1612.1.1 Palo Alto Flood Hazard Regulations.
   
16.04.420   Section 1613.8 Suspended ceilings.
   
16.04.430   Reserved.
   
16.04.440   Section 1705.3 Concrete construction.
   
16.04.450   Section 1803.2 Investigations required.
   
16.04.460   Section 1803.5.11 Seismic design categories C through F.
   
16.04.470   Section 1809.7 Prescriptive footings for light-frame construction.
   
16.04.480   Section 1809.8 Plain concrete footings.
   
16.04.490   Section 1901.2 Plain and reinforced concrete.
   
16.04.500   Section 1905.6.2 Seismic design categories C, D, E and F.
   
16.04.510   section 1906 Footings for light-frame construction.
   
16.04.520   Section 1906.1 Plain concrete footings.
   
16.04.530   Section 1907.1 Structural slabs-on-ground.
   
16.04.535   Section 1907.2 Nonstructural slabs-on-ground
   
16.04.540   Reserved.
   
16.04.550   Reserved.
   
16.04.560   Section 2308.10.4 Braced wall panel construction.
   
16.04.570   Section 2308.10.5 Alternative bracing.
   
16.04.580   Table 2308.10.1 Wall bracing requirements.
   
16.04.590   Table 2308.10.3(1) Bracing methods.
   
16.04.600   Section 2308.10.9 Attachment of sheathing.
   
16.04.610   Section 2505 Shear wall construction.
   
16.04.620   Reserved.
   
16.04.630   Chapter 31B Public pools.
   
16.04.640   Section 3304.1 Excavation and fill.
*   Editor’s Note: Prior ordinance history: Prior code §§ 34.101, 34.102, and
portions of Ordinance Nos. 2436, 2605, 2809, 2960, 3056, 3215, 3248, 3255,
3667, 3881, 3911, 4090, 4250, 4256, 4304, 4453, 4559, 4769, 4976, 5099, 5216,
5389, 5477, 5508, 5564 and 5664.
16.04.010   2025 California Building Code, Title 24, Part 2, Volumes 1 & 2
adopted and amended.
   The California Building Code, 2025 Edition, Title 24, Part 2, Volumes 1 & 2
of the California Code of Regulations, together with those omissions,
amendments, exceptions, and additions thereto, is adopted and hereby
incorporated in this chapter by reference and made a part hereof the same as if
fully set forth herein.
   Unless superseded and expressly repealed, references in City of Palo Alto
forms, documents and regulations to the chapters and sections of any former
iteration of the California Code of Regulations, Title 24, shall be construed
to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within the California Code
of Regulations, Title 24, 2025. Ordinance No. 5564 and No. 5664 of the City of
Palo Alto and all other ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith
are hereby expressly repealed.
   Wherever the phrases “California Building Code” or “Building Code” are used
in this code or any ordinance of the City, such phrases shall be deemed and
construed to refer and apply to the California Building Code, 2025 Edition,
Title 24, Part 2 of the California Code of Regulations, as adopted by this
chapter.
   One copy of the California Building Code, 2025 Edition, has been filed for
use and examination of the public in the Office of the Chief Building Official
of the City of Palo Alto.
(Ord. 5674 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.04.020   Cross-references to California Building Code.
   The provisions of this chapter contain cross-references to the provisions of
the California Building Code, 2025 Edition, in order to facilitate reference
and comparison to those provisions.
(Ord. 5674 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.04.030   Local amendments.
    The provisions of this chapter shall constitute local amendments to the
cross-referenced provisions of the California Building Code, 2025 Edition, and
shall be deemed to replace the cross-referenced sections of said Code with the
respective provisions set forth in this chapter. Where used in this Chapter
16.04, ellipses shall indicate text of the California Building Code, 2025
Edition, that has been adopted without amendment but is omitted for brevity.
(Ord. 5674 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.04.040    Adoption of 2025 California Building Code Chapter 1, Division II -
Scope and Administration, Part 1 - Scope and Application and Part 2 -
Administration and Enforcement.
   Chapter 1, Division II, Parts 1 - Scope and Application and Part 2 -
Administration and Enforcement of the 2025 California Building Code are adopted
in their entirety, as amended herein.
(Ord. 5674 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.04.050   Section 101.1 Title.
   Section 101.1 of the California Building Code is amended to read:
   101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Building Code of City
of Palo Alto, hereinafter referred to as "this code".
(Ord. 5674 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.04.060   Section 101.2.1 Appendices.
   Section 101.2.1 of the California Building Code is amended to read:
   The following Appendix chapters and sections of the California Building
Code, 2025 Edition, are adopted and hereby incorporated in this Chapter by
reference and made a part hereof the same as if fully set forth herein:
   A.   Appendix I - Patio Covers (Sections I101 through I105)
   B.   Appendix J - Grading (Section J109.4 Drainage across property lines)
   C.   Appendix Q - Emergency Housing (Sections Q101 through Q110)
(Ord. 5674 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.04.070   Section 101.4 Referenced codes.
   Section 101.4 of the California Building Code is amended to add subdivisions
101.4.9 through 101.4.13, as follows:
   101.4 Referenced codes. The other codes listed in Section 101.4.1 through
101.4.13 and referenced elsewhere in this code shall be considered part of the
requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference.
   [. . .]
      101.4.9 Historical Buildings. The provisions of the California Historical
Code shall apply to the alteration, addition, and relocation to qualified
historical buildings or properties.
      101.4.10 Electrical. The provisions of the California Electrical Code
shall apply to the installation of electrical systems, including alterations,
repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances,  fixtures, fittings and
appurtenances thereto.
      101.4.11 Residential Buildings. The provisions of the California
Residential Code shall apply to all matters governing the design and
construction of detached, one- and two-family dwellings, townhouses not more
than three stories and separate means of egress, and structural accessory
thereto.
      101.4.12 Green Building Standards. The provisions of the California Green
Building Standards Code shall apply to all matters governing the "green
building" related planning, design construction, operation, use and occupancy
of newly constructed and altered buildings.
      101.4.13 International Swimming and Spa Code. The provisions of the 2024
International Swimming and Spa Code shall apply to the installation of private
swimming pools and spa facilities.
(Ord. 5674 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.04.080   Section 103 Code Compliance Agency.
   Section 103 of the California Building Code is amended to read:
      103.1 Creation of enforcement agency. The Planning and Development
Services Department is hereby created and the official in charge thereof shall
be known as the chief building official, also referred to as building official
or code official. The function of the department shall be the implementation,
administration, and enforcement of the provisions of this code.
      103.2 Appointment. The building official shall be appointed by the chief
appointing authority of the jurisdiction.
      103.3 Deputies. In accordance with the prescribed procedures of this
jurisdiction and with the concurrence of the appointing authority, the building
official shall have the authority to appoint assistant chief building
officials, manager supervisors, and other technical officers, inspectors, and
other employees. Such employees shall have powers as delegated by the building
official.
(Ord. 5674 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.04.090   Section 104.2.4.1 Flood hazard areas.
   Section 104.2.4.1 of the California Building Code is amended to read:
   104.2.4.1 Flood hazard areas. The city engineer or designee shall not grant
modifications to any provision required in flood hazard areas as established by
Section 1612.3 unless a determination has been made that:
      1.   A showing of good and sufficient cause that the unique
characteristics of the size, configuration or topography of the site render the
elevation standards of Section 1612 inappropriate.
      2.   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship by rendering the lot undevelopable.
      3.   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary
public expense, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with
existing laws or ordinances.
      4.   A determination that the variance is the minimum necessary to afford
relief, considering the flood hazard.
      5.   Submission to the applicant of written notice specifying the
difference between the design flood elevation and the elevation to which the
building is to be built, stating that the cost of flood insurance will be
commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced floor
elevation, and stating that construction below the design flood elevation
increases risks to life and property.
(Ord. 5674 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.04.100   Section 104.3.1 Determination of substantially improved or
substantially damaged existing buildings and structures in flood hazard areas.
   Section 104.3.1 of the California Building Code is amended to read:
   104.3.1 Determination of substantially improved or substantially damaged
existing buildings and structures in flood hazard areas. For applications for
reconstruction, rehabilitation, repair, alteration, addition or other
improvement of existing buildings or structures located in flood hazard areas,
the city engineer or designee shall determine if the proposed work constitutes
substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage. Where the city
engineer or designee determines that the proposed work constitutes substantial
improvement or repair of substantial damage, and where required by this code,
the city engineer or designee shall require the building to meet the
requirements of Section 1612 of the California Building Code, Section R306 of
the California Residential Code as amended, or Palo Alto Municipal Code 16.52
Flood Hazard Regulations, whichever is more stringent.
(Ord. 5674 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.04.110   Section 105.2 Work exempt from permit.
   Section 105.2 of the California Building Code is amended to read:
   105.2 Work exempt from permit. Exemptions from permit requirements of this
code shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any
manner in violation of the provisions of this code or any other laws or
ordinances of this jurisdiction. Permits shall not be required for the
following:
   Building:
      1.   One-story detached accessory structures used as tool and storage
sheds, playhouses and similar uses, provided that the floor area does not
exceed 120 square feet (11.15 m2). It is permissible that these structures
still be regulated by Section 710A, despite exemption from permit.
      2.   Wood fences, other than swimming pool barriers, not over 7 feet
(2,134 mm) high or concrete or masonry wall not over 4 feet (1,219 mm) high
when not subject to specific city of Palo Alto Planning and Zoning regulations.
      3.   Retaining walls that are not over 4 feet (1,219 mm) in height
measured from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall, unless
supporting a surcharge or impounding Class I, II or IIIA liquids.
      4.   Oil derricks.
      5.   Water tanks supported directly on grade if the capacity is not
greater than 5,000 gallons (18,925 L) and the ratio of height to diameter or
width is not greater than 2:1.
      6.   Sidewalks and driveways not more than 30 inches (762 mm) above
adjacent grade and not over any basement or story below and are not part of an
accessible route, accessible parking spaces, or required exits.
      7.   Wood decks not over 30 inches above surrounding grade or finishes,
not attached to a structure, or serving any part of the means of egress.
      8.   Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, counter tops and
similar finish work.
      9.   Temporary motion picture, television and theater stage sets and
scenery.
      10.   Prefabricated swimming pools accessory to a Group R-3 occupancy
that are less than 24 inches deep, do not exceed 5,000 gallons and are
installed entirely above ground.
      11.   Shade cloth structures constructed for nursery or agricultural
purposes, not including service systems.
      12.   Swings and other playground equipment accessory to detached one-
and two-family dwellings and not considered a public playground.
      13.   Window awnings supported by an exterior wall that do not project
more than 54 inches (1,372 mm) from the exterior wall and do not require
additional support of Group R-3 and U occupancies.
      14.   Nonfixed and movable fixtures, cases, racks, counters and
partitions not over 5 feet 9 inches (1,753 mm) in height.
   Electrical:
      1.   Repairs and maintenance: Minor repair work, including the
replacement of lamps or the connection of approved portable electrical
equipment to approved permanently installed receptacles.
      2.   Radio and television transmitting stations: The provisions of this
code shall not apply to electrical equipment used for radio and television
transmissions, but do apply to equipment and wiring for a power supply and the
installations of towers and antennas.
      3.   Temporary testing systems: A permit shall not be required for the
installation of any temporary system required for the testing or servicing of
electrical equipment or apparatus.
      4.   Temporary decorative lighting: Exterior listed plug-in decorative
lighting plugged into a waterproof GFCI receptacle outlet.
      5.   Replacement of overcurrent devices: Replacement of any overcurrent
device less than 1,200 amps of the same capacity in the same location.
      6.   Wiring for temporary theatre, motion picture or television stage
sets.
      7.   Electrical wiring, devices, appliances, apparatus, or equipment
operating at less than 25 volts and not capable of supplying more 50 watts of
energy.
   Gas:
      1.   Portable heating appliance.
      2.   Replacement of any minor part that does not alter approval of
equipment or make such equipment unsafe.
   Mechanical:
      1.    Portable heating appliance.
      2.   Portable ventilation equipment.
      3.   Portable cooling unit.
      4.   Steam, hot or chilled water piping within any heating or cooling
equipment regulated by this code.
      5.   Replacement of any part that does not alter its listing/approval or
make it unsafe.
      6.   Portable evaporative cooler.
      7.   Self-contained refrigeration system containing 10 pounds (4.54 kg)
or less of refrigerant and actuated by motors of 1 horsepower (0.75 kW) or
less.
   Plumbing:
      1.   The stopping of leaks in drains, water, soil, waste or vent pipe,
provided however, that if any concealed trap, drain pipe, water, soil, waste or
vent pipe becomes defective and it becomes necessary to remove and replace the
same with new material, such work shall be considered as new work and a permit
shall be obtained and inspection made as provided in this code.
      2.   The clearing of stoppages or the repairing of leaks in pipes, valves
or fixtures and the removal and reinstallation of water closets, provided that
such repairs do not involve or require the replacement or rearrangement of
valves, pipes or fixtures.
   [. . .]
(Ord. 5674 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.04.120   Section 105.3.2 Time limitation of application.
   Section 105.3.2 of Chapter 1 of the California Building Code is amended to
read:
      105.3.2 Time limitation of application. An accepted application for a
permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned 12 months
after the date of filing, unless such application has been pursued in good
faith or a permit has been issued; except that the building official is
authorized to grant one or more extensions and/or reactivations for additional
periods not exceeding 90 days each. The extension shall be required in writing
and justifiable cause demonstrated
(Ord. 5674 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.04.130   Section 105.5 Expiration.
   Section 105.5 of Chapter 1 of the California Building Code is amended to
read:
   105.5 Expiration. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work
on the site authorized by such permit is commenced within 12 months after its
issuance, or if the work authorized on the site by such permit is suspended or
abandoned for a period of 12 months after the time the work is commenced. For
the purpose of this section, failure to progress a project to the next level of
required inspection, as determined by the chief building official, shall be
deemed to be suspension of the work.
   The chief building official or designee is authorized to grant, in writing,
no more than three extensions and reactivations of permits that would otherwise
expire or reactivations of expired permits, for periods not more than 180 days
each and may require:
      1.   That construction documents be revised to partially or fully to
comply with current codes and ordinances; and
      2.   Payment of fees; and
      3.   Payment of a penalty pursuant to Chapter 16.62 of the Palo Alto
Municipal Code.
   Extensions and reactivations shall be requested in writing and justifiable
cause demonstrated. Additional extensions or reactivations beyond three may
only be granted with the approval of the City Council.
   105.5.1 Term limit for permits. All work associated with a building permit
must be completed, and final inspection issued, within 48 months of permit
issuance. Once a term limit has been exhausted without obtaining an approved
final inspection the permit will automatically become void. The chief building
official or designee is authorized to allow a new permit application to be
applied for the original scope of work and may require:
      1.   That construction documents be revised to partially or fully to
comply with current codes and ordinances; and
      2.   Payment of partial or all plan review and permit fees; and
      3.   Payment of a penalty pursuant to Chapter 16.62 of the Palo Alto
Municipal Code.
(Ord. 5674 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.04.140   Section 106.1 Live loads posted.
   Section 106.1 of the California Building Code is amended to read:
   106.1 Live Loads Posted. In commercial, institutional or industrial
buildings, for each floor or portion thereof designed for live loads exceeding
50 psf (2.40 kN/m2), such design live loads shall be conspicuously posted by
the owner or the owner's authorized agent in that part of each story in which
they apply, using durable signs. It shall be unlawful to remove or deface such
notices.
(Ord. 5674 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.04.150   Section 109.6 Refunds.
   Section 109.6 of Chapter 1 of the California Building Code is amended to
read:
   109.6 Refunds. The building official or designee may authorize the refund of
any fee paid hereunder which was erroneously paid or collected. The building
official or designee may authorize the refund of not more than 80% of the
permit fee paid when no work has occurred under a permit issued pursuant to
this chapter. The building official or designee may authorize the refund of not
more than 80% of the plan review fee paid when a permit application is
withdrawn or canceled before any plan review work has started.
(Ord. 5674 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.04.160   Section 109.7 Re-inspection fees.
   Section 109.7 of Chapter 1 of the California Building Code is added to read:
   109.7 Re-Inspection Fees.
   A re-inspection fee may be assessed/authorized by the building official or
designee for each occurrence as itemized below:
      1.   Inspection record card is not posted or otherwise available on the
work site; or
      2.   Approved plans are not readily available for the inspector at the
time of inspection; or
      3.   Inspector is unable to access the work at the time of inspection; or
      4.   When work has substantially deviated from the approved plans without
the prior approval of required revision; or
      5.   When work for which an inspection is requested is not ready for
inspection; or
      6.   When required corrections noted during prior inspections have not
been completed.
   When a re-inspection fee is assessed, additional inspection of the work will
not be performed until the fee has been paid.
(Ord. 5674 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.04.170   Section 110.2.1 Preliminary accessibility compliance inspection.
   Section 110.2.1 of Chapter 1 of the California Building Code is added to
read:
      110.2.1 Preliminary accessibility compliance inspection. Before issuing a
permit, the building official or designee is authorized to examine or cause to
be examined the pre-construction accessibility compliance conditions of the
buildings, structures, and sites for which an application has been filed.
(Ord. 5674 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.04.180   Section 110.3.3 Lowest floor elevation.
   Section 110.3.3 of Chapter 1 of the California Building Code is amended to
read:
      110.3.3 Lowest floor elevation. In flood hazard areas, upon placement of
the lowest floor, including the basement, and prior to further vertical
construction, the elevation certification shall be submitted to City Public
Works Engineering for inspection approval prior to foundation inspection by
City Building Inspection staff.
(Ord. 5674 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.04.190   Section 111.1 Use and occupancy.
   Section 111.1 of Chapter 1 of the California Building Code is amended to
read:
      111.1 Use and occupancy. A building or structure shall not be used or
occupied, and a change in the existing occupancy of a building or structure or
portion thereof shall not be made, until the chief building official has issued
a certificate of occupancy therefor as provided herein. Issuance of a
certificate of occupancy shall not be construed as an approval of a violation
of the provisions of this code or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction.
         Exception: Certificates of occupancy are not required or issued for:
         1.   Work exempted from permits under Section 105.2.
         2.   Group R - Division 3 and Group U occupancies located on a single-
family residential/agricultural lot.
         3.   Non-residential “core and shell” or similar construction
(exterior envelope and structural framework) without finalized tenant
improvements(s).
         4.   Site development without a building or buildings as defined in
Section 202.
      111.1.1 Change of occupancy or tenancy. 
      Each change of occupancy, official name or tenancy of any building,
structure, or portion thereof, shall require a new certificate of occupancy,
whether or not any alterations to the building are required by this code.
         Before any application for a new certificate of occupancy is accepted,
a fee shall be paid by the applicant to cover the cost of the inspection of the
building required by the change of occupancy or tenancy.
         When application is made for a new certificate of occupancy under this
section, the building official and fire chief shall cause an inspection of the
building to be made. The inspector(s) shall inform the applicant of those
alterations necessary, or if none are necessary, and shall submit a report of
compliance to the building official.
         If a portion of any building does not conform to the requirements of
this code for a proposed occupancy, that portion shall be made to conform. The
building official may issue a new certificate of occupancy without requiring
compliance with all such requirements if it is determined that the change in
occupancy or tenancy will result in no increased hazard to life or limb,
health, property, or public welfare.
(Ord. 5674 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.04.200   Section 111.3 Temporary occupancy.
   Section 111.3 of Chapter 1 of the California Building Code is amended to
read:
      111.3 Temporary occupancy.   The building official or designee is
authorized to issue a temporary certificate of occupancy before the completion
of the entire work covered by the permit, or as otherwise required, provided
that such portion or portions shall be occupied safely. The building official
or designee shall set a time period during which the temporary certificate of
occupancy is valid.
(Ord. 5674 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.04.210   Section 111.5 Posting.
   Section 111.5 of Chapter 1 of the California Building Code is added to read:
      111.5 Posting. The temporary certificate of occupancy or certificate of
occupancy shall be posted in a conspicuous, readily accessible place in the
building or portion of building to be occupied and shall not be removed except
when authorized by the building official.
(Ord. 5674 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.04.220   Section 113 Means of Appeals.
   Section 113 of Chapter 1 of the California Building Code is amended to read:
   SECTION 113
   MEANS OF APPEALS
      113.1 Appeals. A person requesting an order, decision, or determination
made by the building official relative to the California Building Code (as
amended) may appeal such order, decision or determination by completing a
request for hearing form and returning it to the city within 30 calendar days
from the date of the decision, together with all applicable fees authorized by
the City’s Municipal Fee Schedule. A request for hearing shall be based on a
claim that the true intent of the California Building Code (as amended) or the
rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the
provisions of this code do not fully apply or an equivalent or better form of
construction is proposed.
      (a)   The person requesting the hearing shall be notified of the time and
place set for the hearing at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing.
      (b)   If the building official submits an additional written report
concerning the decision to hearing officer for consideration at the hearing,
then a copy of this report shall also be served on the person requesting the
hearing at least five days prior to the date of the hearing.
      (c)   The appeal procedure set out in this Section 113.1 et seq. does not
apply to: (1) decisions by the building official or any other city official
related to administrative enforcement actions taken under Chapter 1.12 or
Chapter 1.16 of the Palo Alto Municipal Code; (2) decisions by the city to
enforce the California Building Code under any provision of criminal law; or
(3) any other action taken by the city that specifies its own appeal procedure.
      113.2 Hearing Officer. The building official shall designate a hearing
officer for the appeal hearing. The hearing officer may consist of one person
or a body of people. The hearing officer shall not be the building official or
any directly subordinate employees.
      (a)   The hearing officer does not have authority to waive requirements
of the California Building Code (as amended) or interpret the administration of
the Code.
      (b)   The hearing officer does not have authority to issue an order,
decision, or determination on his or her own authority. This includes the
issuance or amendment of building permits.
      (c)   The hearing officer shall be qualified by experience and training
to pass on matters pertaining to building construction.
      113.3 Hearing procedures.
      (a)   No appeal hearing before a hearing officer shall be noticed unless
the applicable fee(s) have been paid in advance in accordance with Section
113.1.
      (b)   A hearing before the hearing officer shall be set for a date that
is not less than 15 days and not more than 60 days from the date that the
request for hearing is filed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
The party requesting the hearing may request one continuance for any reason,
provided that the hearing officer is given the request for continuance at least
48 hours in advance of the scheduled hearing and that the deferred hearing
shall not be deferred more than 90 days after the request for hearing was made.
A request for continuance made less than 48 hours before the scheduled hearing
may be granted by the hearing officer based upon exigency only. The parties may
stipulate to an alternative hearing date schedule outside of these rules upon a
finding of good cause and approval from the hearing officer.
      (c)   At the hearing, the appellant shall be given the opportunity to
testify and to present evidence and cross-examine witnesses concerning the
appeal. The appellant may appear personally or through a representative.
Prehearing discovery is not authorized, but subpoena of witnesses and documents
shall be permitted as authorized by law. The hearing officer may conduct the
hearing informally, both as to rules of procedure and admission of evidence, in
any manner which will provide a fair hearing.
      (d)   The failure of the appellant to appear at the hearing or, in the
alternative, to present written or demonstrative evidence shall constitute the
dismissal of the appeal with prejudice.
      (e)   The administrative record and any additional report submitted by
the building official shall constitute presumptive evidence of the respective
facts contained in those documents. The building official shall have the same
rights as the appellant to testify, present evidence, and cross-examine
witnesses concerning the appeal.
      (f)   The hearing officer may continue the hearing and request additional
information from the building official or appellant prior to issuing a written
decision.
      113.4 Hearing Officer's decision.
      (a)   After considering all the testimony and evidence submitted at the
hearing, the hearing officer shall issue a written decision to uphold or amend
the building official’s order, decision or determination, and the reasons for
that decision. The decision of the hearing officer shall be issued within 30
days following completion of the hearing. The decision of the hearing officer
shall be final upon service on the appellant, subject only to judicial review
as allowed by law.
      (b)   The hearing officer shall consider any written or oral evidence
submitted at the hearing consistent with ascertainment of the facts regarding
the issues of the appeal.
      (c)   If the hearing officer determines that the building official’s
order, decision, or determination should not be upheld as originally given,
then the hearing officer shall direct the building official to make any
amendments or changes necessary to implement the hearing officer’s decision.
The hearing officer shall also give the building official a reasonable deadline
to complete such actions.
      (d)   The appellant shall be served with a copy of the hearing officer's
written decision within ten calendar days following its issuance.
(Ord. 5674 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.04.225   Section 114 Violations.
   Section 114 of Chapter 1 of the California Building Code is amended to read:
   SECTION 114
   VIOLATIONS
      114.1 Unlawful acts. It is unlawful for any person to violate any
provision or to fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter or
any permits, conditions, or variances granted under this chapter. Violators
shall be subject to any penalty or penalties authorized by law, including but
not limited to: administrative enforcement pursuant to Chapters
1.12,
1.16 and
16.62 of the Palo Alto Municipal Code; and criminal enforcement pursuant to
Chapter 1.08 of the Palo Alto Municipal Code. Each separate day or any portion
thereof during which any violation of this chapter occurs or continues shall be
deemed to constitute a separate offense.
         When the chief building official determines that a violation of this
chapter has occurred, the chief building official may, in his or her sole
discretion, record a notice of pendency of code violation with the Office of
the County Recorder stating the address and owner of the property involved.
When the violation has been corrected, the chief building official shall issue
and record a release of the notice of pendency of code violation.
         [...]
      114.5 Criminal enforcement authority. The employee positions designated
in this section are authorized to exercise the authority provided in California
Penal Code section 836.5 for violations of this chapter. The designated
employee positions are: (1) chief building official, (2) assistant chief
building official, (3) building inspection manager, (4) Building Inspector or
Building Inspector Specialist as designated by the chief building official and
(5) code enforcement officer.
(Ord. 5674 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.04.230   Section 115 Stop work order.
   Section 115 of Chapter 1 of the California Building Code is amended to read:
   SECTION 115
   STOP WORK ORDER
   115.1 Authority. Whenever the building official finds any work regulated by
this code being performed in a manner that is contrary to the provisions of
this code, without a permit, beyond the scope of the issued permit, in
violation of the Palo Alto Municipal Code or Zoning Ordinance, or dangerous or
unsafe, the building official is authorized to issue a stop work order.
   115.2 Issuance.   The stop work order shall be in writing and shall be
posted in a visible location near the location where the work is being
conducted. If the owner or owner’s agent is not on site at the time of posting,
a notice advising the reasons for the stop work order issuance shall be hand
delivered or mailed first-class to the owner of the property involved, or to
the owner’s agent, or to the person doing the work. Upon issuance of a stop
work order, the cited work shall immediately cease. The stop work order shall
state the reason for the order, the conditions under which the cited work will
be permitted to resume, and the name and contact information of the official or
agency issuing the order.
   115.3 Emergencies. Where an emergency exists, the building official shall
not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work.
   115.4 Unlawful continuance. Any person who continues to engage in any work
after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that
person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor.
   115.5 Removal of posted stop work order. Any person who removes a posted
stop work order without written consent of the Building Official shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor.
   115.6 Response required. Violators receiving a stop work order are required
to respond to Planning and Development Services within five business days of
the issued notice to receive instructions on how to rescind the order.
   115.7 Permit application required. A building permit application with
construction or demolition plans and supporting (structural calculations,
energy calculations, accessible access) documents must be submitted for
approval within 20 working days following response to Planning and Development
Services. Plans will be reviewed and correction letters issued or permit
application approved by Planning and Development Services. A response to any
correction letter must be submitted within 15 working days of the date of the
correction letter. Ten working days will be required to review this second
submission and a permit approved for issuance. Permits ready for issuance must
be issued within five working days thereafter. All construction must be
inspected as work progresses and signed off by all (affected) departments
within the permit term limits outlined in Section 105.5.1 or as determined by
the building official.
   115.8 Stop work order penalty. The Building Official may impose Stop Work
Order Penalties in accordance with Section 1.14.050 of this code and/or other
applicable law.
(Ord. 5674 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.04.235   Section 202 Definitions.
   Section 202 of Chapter 2 of the California Building Code is amended to read,
in part:
   [...]
   FLOOR AREA, GROSS. The floor area within the inside perimeter of the
exterior walls of the building under consideration, exclusive of vent shafts
and courts, without deduction for corridors, stairways, ramps, closets, the
thickness of interior walls, columns or other features. The floor area of a
building, or portion thereof, not provided with surrounding exterior walls
shall be the usable area under the horizontal projection of the roof or floor
above. The gross floor area shall not include shafts with no openings or
interior courts.  For the purposes of Title 18 (Zoning), the definition of
“gross floor area”in Section
18.04.030 shall apply.
   [...]
   FLOOR AREA, NET. The actual occupied area not including unoccupied accessory
areas such as corridors, stairways, ramps, toilet rooms, mechanical rooms and
closets.  For the purposes of Title 18 (Zoning), the definition of “net floor
area” in Section
18.04.030 shall apply.
   [...]
(Ord. 5674 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.04.240   Section 502.1 Address identification.
   Section 502.1 of Chapter 5 of the California Building Code is amended to
read:
      502.1 Address identification. New and existing buildings shall be
provided with approved address identification. The address identification shall
be legible and placed in a position that is visible from the street or road
fronting the property. Address identification characters shall contrast with
their background. Address numbers shall be Arabic numbers or alphabetical
letters. Numbers shall not be spelled out. Each character shall be not less
than 4 inches (102 mm) high with a minimum stroke width of one-half inch (12.7
mm) unless required to be larger by Section 502.1.2. When required by the fire
code official, address identification shall be provided in additional approved
locations to facilitate emergency response. Where access is by means of a
private road and the building address cannot be viewed from the public way, a
monument, pole or other approved sign or means shall be used to identify the
structure. Address numbers shall be maintained.
      502.1.1 Address illumination. Address identification required by Section
501.2 shall be illuminated.
      502.1.2 Address identification size. Address numbers and letters shall be
sized as follows:
         1.   When the structure is between thirty-six (36) and fifty (50) feet
from the road or other emergency means of access, a minimum of one-half inch
(0.5") stroke by six inches high (6") is required.
         2.   When the structure is fifty (50) or more feet from the road or
other emergency means of access, a minimum of one inch (1") stroke by nine
inches (9") high is required.
(Ord. 5674 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.04.250   Reserved.
16.04.260   Section 903.2 Automatic sprinkler systems, where required.
   Section 903.2 of Chapter 9 the California Building Code is amended to read:
   903.2 Automatic sprinkler systems, where required.
   Approved automatic sprinkler systems in new buildings and structures and in
existing modified buildings and structures, shall be provided in the locations
described in this section. Automatic fire sprinklers shall be installed per the
requirements set forth in Sections 903.2.1 through 903.2.18 and as follows,
whichever is the more restrictive:
   1.   An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all new
buildings and structures.
      Exception: New non-residential occupancies, buildings or structures that
do not exceed 350 square feet of building area and contain no plumbing
fixtures.
   2.   An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all existing
buildings when modifications are made that create conditions described in
Sections 903.2.1 through 903.2.18, or that create an increase in fire area to
more than 3,600 square feet or when the addition is equal or greater than 50%
of the existing building square footage whichever is more restrictive.
   3.   An automatic sprinkler system is required in basements when any of the
following occur:
      a.   New basements used for storage, utility, occupancy or habitable
space regardless of size.
      b.   Existing basements that are altered for the use of storage, utility,
occupancy, or habitable space regardless of size.
      c.   Existing basements that are expanded by more than 50%. If the
addition or alteration is only the basement, then only the basement is required
to be fire sprinkler protected.
   4.   An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout when either
the roof structure and/or exterior wall structure have been removed, altered,
and/or replaced by at least 50% of the existing structure.
   5.   An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout when any
change in use or occupancy creates a more hazardous fire/life-safety condition,
as determined by the fire code official.
   6.   All new trash enclosures regardless of size require installation of
fire sprinklers (nonresidential only).
      Exception: A fire extinguishing system will not apply when all of the
following conditions are met:
      a.   The trash enclosure including the door(s) and roof are constructed
of noncombustible materials.
      b.   The trash enclosure is a stand-alone structure, be a minimum of 20
feet away from adjacent buildings and 10-feet away from property line(s); and
      c.   The enclosure is used exclusively for waste garbage, recyclables,
and organize waste/composting contained within the approved trash bins/
containers. No outdoor storage is permitted within the trash enclosure.
   7.   Phone booths and pods when installed in a building equipped with a fire
sprinkler system (nonresidential only).
   8.   Fume hoods when installed in a building equipped with a fire sprinkler
system (nonresidential only).
      Exception: Spaces or areas in telecommunications buildings used
exclusively for telecommunications equipment, associated electrical power
distribution equipment, batteries and standby engines, provided that those
spaces or areas are equipped throughout with an automatic smoke detection
system in accordance with Section 907.2 and are separated from the remainder of
the building by not less than 1-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance
with Section 707 or not less than 2-hour horizontal assemblies constructed in
accordance with Section 711, or both.
(Ord. 5674 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.04.270   Section 903.3.1.1 NFPA 13 sprinkler systems.
   Section 903.3.1.1 of Chapter 9 of the California Building Code is amended to
read:
   903.3.1.1 NFPA 13 sprinkler systems. Where the provisions of this code
require that a building or portion thereof be equipped throughout with an
automatic sprinkler system in accordance with this section, sprinklers shall be
installed throughout in accordance with NFPA 13 and state and local
requirements except as provided in Section 903.3.1.1.
   1.   For new buildings having no designated use or tenant, the minimum
sprinkler design density shall be Ordinary Hazard Group II/1,500 square feet.
   2.   Where future use or tenant is determined to require a higher density,
the sprinkler system shall be augmented to meet the higher density.
   3.   Light hazard occupancy shall be hydraulically designed to a 1,500
square feet most remote area or as required by the fire code official.
   4.   Laboratory areas within buildings shall be hydraulically designed to
Ordinary Hazard II density.
   5.   Parking areas where mechanical vehicle storage equipment is used shall
be hydraulically designed to Extra Hazard II density.
   6.   In multi-residential apartments, townhomes, and condominiums.
   7.   In new commercial buildings that will have power micro mobility
devices, the fire sprinkler system shall be designed to Ordinary Hazard II.
   8.   Energy Storage Systems in nonresidential buildings shall comply with
one of the following:
      a.   ESS units with a maximum stored energy capacity of 50 kWh, as
described in Section 1207.5.1 shall be designed with a minimum density of 0.40
gpm/ft2 (1.14 L/min) based over the area of the room or 2,500 square-foot
design area, whichever is smaller.
      b.   ESS units (groups) exceeding 50 kWh shall use a density based on
large-scale fire testing complying with Section 1207.1.7.
(Ord. 5674 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.04.280   Section 903.3.1.2 NFPA 13R sprinkler systems.
   Section 903.3.1.2 of Chapter 9 of the California Building Code is amended to
read:
      903.3.1.2 NFPA 13R sprinkler systems. Where allowed in buildings of Group
R Occupancies, automatic sprinkler systems shall be installed throughout in
accordance with NFPA 13 and state and local standards.
(Ord. 5674 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.04.290   Section 903.3.1.3 NFPA 13D sprinkler systems.
   Section 903.3.1.3 of Chapter 9 of the California Building Code is amended to
read:
      903.3.1.3 NFPA 13D sprinkler systems. Where allowed, automatic sprinkler
systems installed in one- and two-family detached dwellings shall be installed
throughout in accordance with NFPA 13D and state and local standards. Fire
sprinkler protection is required under rear covered patios extending 4 feet
perpendicular from the exterior of the structure.
(Ord. 5674 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.04.300   Section 903.3.1.3.1 Increase in fire sprinkler design criteria.
   Section 903.3.1.3.1 of Chapter 9 of the California Building Code is added to
read:
      903.3.1.3.2 Increase in fire sprinkler design criteria. Structures
determined by the fire code official to have higher firefighting hazardous
conditions or located in the Wildland-Urban Interface Fire Area shall have an
increase in fire sprinkler design criteria as determined by the fire code
official.
(Ord. 5674 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.04.310   Section 903.4.4 Floor control valves.
   Section 903.4.4 of Chapter 9 of the California Building Code is amended to
read:
      903.4.4 Floor control valves. Automatic sprinkler systems serving
buildings two (2) or more stories in height shall have valves installed so as
to control the system independently on each floor including basements.
(Ord. 5674 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.04.320   Section 905.3.1 Height.
   Section 905.3.1 of the California Building Code is amended to read:
      905.3.1 Height. A Class I standpipe system shall be installed in
buildings where the roof edge/parapet is greater than 27 feet above the lowest
level of fire apparatus access roadway and in below grade levels.
(Ord. 5674 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.04.330   Section 907.2.11.2.4 Smoke alarms.
   Section 907.2.11.2.4 of the California Building Code is amended to read:
   907.2.11.2.4 Smoke alarms. Smoke alarms shall be tested and maintained in
accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. Smoke alarms that no longer
function or are 10 years or older from the date of installation shall be
replaced.
(Ord. 5674 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.04.340   Section 909.20.7 Smoke control systems schedule.
   Section 909.20.7 is added to the California Building Code to read as
follows:
      909.20.7 Smoke control systems schedule. A routine maintenance and
operational testing program shall be initiated immediately after the smoke
control system has passed the acceptance tests. A written schedule for routine
maintenance and operational testing shall be established and both shall occur
at least annually.
(Ord. 5674 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.04.345   Section 915.6 Maintenance.
   Section 915.6 of the California Building Code is amended to read:
      915.6 Maintenance. Carbon monoxide alarms and carbon monoxide detection
systems shall be maintained in accordance with NFPA 72. Carbon monoxide alarms
and carbon monoxide detectors that become inoperable or begin producing end-of-
life signals or are 10 years or older shall be replaced.
(Ord. 5674 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.04.350   Section 1008.3.3 Illumination required by an emergency electrical
system.
   Section 1008.3.3 of Chapter 10 of the California Building Code is amended to
read:
   1008.3.3 Illumination required by an emergency electrical system. In the
event of power supply failure, an emergency electrical system shall
automatically illuminate all of the following areas:
   1.   In rooms or spaces that require two or more exits or access to exits:
      1.1   Aisles.
      1.2   Corridors.
      1.3   Exit access stairways and ramps.
   2.   In buildings that require two or more exits or access to exits:
      2.1   Interior exit access stairways and ramps.
      2.2   Interior and exterior exit stairways and ramps.
      2.3   Exit passageways.
      2.4   Vestibules and areas on the level of discharge used for exit
discharge in accordance with Section 1028.2.
      2.5   Exterior landings as required by Section 1010.1.5 for exit doorways
that lead directly to the exit discharge.
      2.6   Group I-2 exit discharge stairways, ramps, aisles, walkways and
escalators leading to a public way or to a safe dispersal area in accordance
with Section 1028.5.
   3.   In other rooms and spaces:
      3.1.   Electrical equipment rooms.
      3.2.   Fire command centers.
      3.3.   Fire pump rooms.
      3.4.   Generator rooms.
      3.5.   Public restrooms.
(Ord. 5674 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.04.360   Section 1031.2 Where required.
   Section 1031.2 of Chapter 10 of the California Building Code is amended to
read:
   1031.2 Where required. In addition to the means of egress required by this
chapter, emergency escape and rescue openings shall be provided in Group R
occupancies.
   Basements and sleeping rooms below the fourth story above grade plane shall
have not fewer than one emergency escape and rescue opening in accordance with
this section. Where basements contain one or more sleeping rooms, an emergency
escape and rescue opening shall be required in each sleeping room but shall not
be required in adjoining areas of the basement. Such openings shall open
directly into a public way or to a yard or court that opens to a public way or
to an egress balcony that leads to a public way.
      Exceptions:
      1.   In Group R-1 and R-2 occupancies constructed of Type I, Type IIA,
Type IIIA or Type IV construction equipped throughout with an approved
automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.
      2.   Group R-2.1 occupancies meeting the requirements for delayed egress
in accordance with Section 1010.2.13 may have operable windows that are
breakable in sleeping rooms permanently restricted to a maximum of 4-inch open
position.
      3.   Emergency escape and rescue openings are not required from basements
or sleeping rooms that have an exit door or exit access door that opens
directly into a public way or to a yard, court or exterior egress balcony that
leads to a public way.
      4.   Storm shelters and basements used only to house mechanical equipment
not exceeding a total floor area of 200 square feet (18.58 m2)
(Ord. 5674 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.04.370   Reserved.
16.04.380   Section 1205.3.4 Roof guards at courts.
   Section 1205.3.4 of Chapter 12 of the California Building Code is added to
read:
   1205.3.4 Roof guards at courts. Roof openings into courts where not bounded
on all sides by walls shall be protected with guardrails. The top of the guards
shall not be less than 42 inches in height. Required guards shall not have
openings that allow passage of a sphere twelve inches (12) in diameter from the
walking surface to the required guard height.
      Exception: Where the roof opening is greater than 600 square feet in
area.
(Ord. 5674 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.04.390   Section 1208.6 Dwelling unit and congregate residence superficial
floor area.
   Section 1208.6 of Chapter 12 of the California Building Code is added to
read:
      1208.6 Dwelling unit and congregate residence superficial floor area.
      Every dwelling unit and congregate residence shall have at least one room
which shall have not less than 120 square feet of superficial floor area. Every
room which is used for both cooking and living or both living and sleeping
purposes shall have not less than 144 square feet of superficial floor area.
Every room used for sleeping purposes shall have not less than 70 square feet
of superficial floor area. When more than two persons occupy a room used for
sleeping purposes the required superficial floor area shall be increased at the
rate of 50 square feet for each occupant in excess of two. Guest rooms with
cooking shall contain the combined required superficial areas of a sleeping and
a kitchen, but not less than 144 square feet. Other habitable rooms shall be
not less than 70 square feet.
      Notwithstanding any provision of this section, children under the age of
six shall not be counted for purposes of determining whether a family with
minor children complies with the provisions of this Code.
      For the purposes of this section, "superficial floor area" means the net
floor area within the enclosing walls of the room in which the ceiling height
is not less than seven feet six inches, excluding built-in equipment such as
wardrobes, cabinets, kitchen units, or fixtures which are not readily
removable.
(Ord. 5674 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.04.400   Section 1503.2.1 Locations.
   Section 1503.2.1 of Chapter 15 of the California Building Code is amended to
read:
      1503.2.1 Locations. Flashing shall be installed at wall and roof
intersections, gutters, wherever there is a change in roof slope or direction,
and around roof openings. Where flashing is of metal, the metal shall be
corrosion resistant with a thickness of not less than 0.019 inches (0.483 mm)
(e.g. no. 26 galvanized sheet) and shall be primed and painted.
(Ord. 5674 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.04.410   Section 1612.1.1 Palo Alto Flood Hazard Regulations.
   Section 1612.1.1 of Chapter 16 of the California Building Code is added to
read:
      1612.1.1 Palo Alto Flood Hazard Regulations. Notwithstanding the
provisions of Section 1612.1, all construction or development within a flood
hazard area (areas depicted as a Special Flood Hazard Area on Flood Insurance
Rate Maps published by the Federal Emergency Management Agency) shall comply
with the City of Palo Alto Flood Hazard Regulations (Palo Alto Municipal Code
Chapter 16.52). Where discrepancies exist between the requirements of this code
and said regulations, the more stringent requirements shall apply.
(Ord. 5674 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.04.420   Section 1613.8 Suspended ceilings.
   Section 1613.8 of Chapter 16 of the California Building Code is added to
read:
   1613.8 Suspended ceilings. Minimum design and installation standards for
suspended ceilings shall be determined in accordance with the requirements of
Section 2506.2.1 of this Code and this section.
   1613.8.1 Scope. This part contains special requirements for suspended
ceilings and lighting systems. Provisions of Section 13.5.6 of ASCE 7 shall
apply except as modified herein.
   1613.8.2 General. The suspended ceilings and lighting systems shall be
limited to 6 feet (1,828 mm) below the structural deck unless the lateral
bracing is designed by a licensed engineer or architect.
   1613.8.3 Sprinkler heads.
   All sprinkler heads (drops) except fire-resistance-rated floor/ceiling or
roof/ceiling assemblies, shall be designed to allow for free movement of the
sprinkler pipes with oversize rings, sleeves, or adaptors through the ceiling
tile. Sprinkler heads and other penetrations shall have a 2-inch (50mm)
oversize ring, sleeve, or adapter through the ceiling tile to allow for free
movement of at least 1 inch (25mm) in all horizontal directions. Alternatively,
a swing joint that can accommodate 1 inch (25 mm) of ceiling movement in all
horizontal directions is permitted to be provided at the top of the sprinkler
head extension. Sprinkler heads penetrating fire-resistance-rated floor/ceiling
or roof/ceiling assemblies shall comply with Section 714 of this Code.
   1613.8.4 Special requirements for means of egress. Suspended ceiling
assemblies located along means of egress serving an occupant load of 30 or more
and at lobbies accessory to Group A Occupancies shall comply with the following
provisions.
   1613.8.4.1 General. Ceiling suspension systems shall be connected and braced
with vertical hangers attached directly to the structural deck along the means
of egress serving an occupant load of 30 or more and at lobbies accessory to
Group A Occupancies. Spacing of vertical hangers shall not exceed 2 feet (610
mm) on center along the entire length of the suspended ceiling assembly located
along the means of egress or at the lobby.
   1613.5.8.2 Assembly device. All lay-in panels shall be secured to the
suspension ceiling assembly with two hold-down clips minimum for each tile
within a 4-foot (1,219 mm) radius of the exit lights and exit signs.
   1613.8.4.3 Emergency systems. Independent supports and braces shall be
provided for light fixtures required for exit illumination. Power supply for
exit illumination shall comply with the requirements of Section 1008.3 of this
Code.
   1613.8.4.4 Supports for appendage.
   Separate support from the structural deck shall be provided for all
appendages such as light fixtures, air diffusers, exit signs, and similar
elements.
(Ord. 5674 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.04.430   Reserved.
16.04.440   Section 1705.3 Concrete construction.
   Section 1705.3 of Chapter 17 of the California Building Code is amended to
read:
   1705.3 Concrete construction. The special inspections and tests of concrete
construction shall be as required by this section and Table 1705.3.
      Exceptions: Special inspections and tests shall not be required for:
      1.   Isolated spread concrete footings of buildings three stories or less
above grade plane that are fully supported on earth or rock, where the
structural design of the footing is based on a specified compressive strength,
f’, no greater than 2,500 pound per square inch (psi) (17.2 MPa).
      2.   Continuous concrete footings supporting walls of buildings three
stories or less above grade plane that are fully supported on earth or rock
where:
         2.1.   The footings support walls of light-frame construction;
         2.2.   The footings are designed in accordance with Table 1809.7; or
         2.3.   The structural design of the footing is based on a specified
compressive strength, f’c, no greater than 2,500 pounds per square inch (psi)
(17.2 MPa), regardless of the compressive strength specified in the
construction documents or used in the footing construction.
      3.   Nonstructural concrete slabs supported directly on the ground,
including pre- stressed slabs on grade, where the effective pre-stress in the
concrete is less than 150 psi (1.03 MPa).
      4.   Concrete foundation walls constructed in accordance with Table
1807.1.6.2.
      5.   Concrete patios, driveways and sidewalks, on grade.
(Ord. 5674 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.04.450   Section 1803.2 Investigations required.
   Section 1803.2 of Chapter 18 of the California Building Code is amended as
to read:
      1803.2 Investigations required. Geotechnical investigations shall be
conducted in accordance with Sections 1803.3 through 1803.5
      Exceptions:
      1.   The building official or designee shall be permitted to waive the
requirement for a geotechnical investigation where satisfactory data from
adjacent areas is available that demonstrates an investigation is not necessary
for any of the conditions in Sections 1803.5.1 through 1803.5.6 and Sections
1803.5.10 and 1803.5.11.
      2.   Light-frame construction building utilizing the prescriptive
continuous footings per Table 1809.7 amended in Section 16.04.470. For
addition, the engineer of record shall certify in writing that the existing
foundation system matches the proposed foundation system.
      3.   Accessories and minor additions may be exempted by the Building
Official or designee.
(Ord. 5674 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.04.460   Section 1803.5.11 Seismic design categories C through F.
   Section 1803.5.11 of Chapter 18 of the California Building Code is amended
to read:
      Section 1803.5.11 Seismic design categories C through F. For structures
assigned to Seismic Design Category C, D, E or F, a geotechnical investigation
shall be conducted, and shall include an evaluation of all of the following
potential geologic and seismic hazards:
      1.   Slope instability.
      2.   Liquefaction.
      3.   Total and differential settlement.
      4.   Surface displacement due to faulting or seismically induced lateral
spreading or lateral flow.
         Exception: Refer to section 1803.2 exception.
(Ord. 5674 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.04.470   Section 1809.7 Prescriptive footings for light-frame construction.
   Section 1809.7 of Chapter 18 of the California Building Code is amended to
read:
   1809.7 Prescriptive footings for light-frame construction. Where a specific
design is not provided, concrete or masonry-unit footings supporting walls of
light-frame construction shall be permitted to be designed in accordance with
Table 1809.7.
               TABLE 1809.7
   Prescriptive Footings Supporting Walls of Light-Frame Constructionabcd
 
                                                               Depth of
Number of    Thickness of                                      Foundation Below
Floors       Foundation Wall Width of Footing Thickness of     Natural Surface
Supported by (inches)        (inches)         Footing (inches) of Ground or
the Footinge                                                   Finish Grade
                                                               (inches)
1 & 2        8               15               8                20
3            8               18               8                30
Group U      8               12               8                12
Occupancies
ADU          8               12               8                12
Conversionsf
 
a.   Ground under the floor shall be permitted to be excavated to elevation of
footing.
b.   Interior stud-bearing walls shall be permitted to be supported by isolated
footings. Footing width and length shall be twice the width shown in this
table, and footings shall be spaced not more than 6 feet on center.
c.   See Section 1905 for additional requirements for concrete footings of
structures assigned to Seismic Design Category C, D, E or F.
d.   All foundations as required in the above Table shall be continuous and
have a minimum of three #4 bars of reinforcing steel, except for one story,
detached accessory buildings of Group U occupancy where two bars are required.
e.   Footings shall be permitted to support a roof in addition to the
stipulated number of floors. Footings supporting roof only shall be as required
for supporting one floor.
f.   If existing detached accessory building is being converted to an Accessory
Dwelling Unit (ADU) and the existing foundation is being utilized, then a
designer, architect or engineer shall provide a letter that the existing
foundation complies with the conditions above and is deemed structurally sound.
(Ord. 5674 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.04.480   Section 1809.8 Plain concrete footings.
   Section 1809.8 of Chapter 18 of the California Building Code is deleted.
(Ord. 5674 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.04.490   Section 1901.2 Plain and reinforced concrete.
   Section 1901.2 of Chapter 19 of the California Building Code is amended to
read:
      1901.2 Plain and reinforced concrete. Structural concrete shall be
designed and constructed in accordance with the requirements of this chapter
and ACI 318 as amended in section 1905 of this code and PAMC 16.14.240. Except
for the provisions of Sections 1904 and 1907, the design and construction of
slabs on grade shall not be governed by this chapter unless they transmit
vertical loads or lateral forces from other parts of the structure to the soil.
(Ord. 5674 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.04.500   Section 1905.6.2 Seismic Design Categories C, D, E and F.
   Section 1905.6.2 of Chapter 19 of the California Building Code is amended to
read:
      1905.6.2 Seismic Design Categories C, D, E and F. Structures assigned to
Seismic Design Category C, D, E or F shall not have elements of structural
plain concrete, except as follows:
      1.   Left intentionally blank.
      2.   Isolated footings of plain concrete supporting pedestals or columns
are permitted, provided the projection of the footing beyond the face of the
supported member does not exceed the footing thickness.
      3.   Plain concrete footings supporting walls are permitted, provided the
footings have at least three continuous longitudinal reinforcing bars not
smaller than No. 4, with a total area of not less than 0.002 times the gross
cross-sectional area of the footing except for one story, detached accessory
buildings of Group U occupancy where two bars are required. A minimum of one
bar shall be provided at the top and bottom of the footing. Continuity of
reinforcement shall be provided at corners and intersections.   
(Ord. 5674 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.04.510   Section 1906 Footings for Light-frame Construction.
   Section 1906 of Chapter 19 of the California Building Code is deleted.
(Ord. 5674 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.04.520   Section 1906.1 Plain concrete footings.
   Section 1906.1 of Chapter 19 of the California Building Code is deleted.
(Ord. 5674 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.04.530   Section 1907.1 Structural slabs-on-ground.
   Section 1907.1 of Chapter 19 of the California Building Code is amended to
read:
   1907.1 Structural slabs-on-ground.
      Structural concrete slabs-on-ground shall comply with all applicable
provisions of this chapter. Slabs-on-ground shall be considered structural
concrete where required by ACI 318 or where designed to transmit either of the
following:
      1.   Vertical loads or lateral forces from other parts of the structure
to the soil.
      2.   Vertical loads or lateral forces from other parts of the structure
to foundations.
      3.   Structural slabs-on-ground shall have 6x6-10/10 wire mesh or equal
at mid-height.
(Ord. 5674 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.04.535   Section 1907.2 Nonstructural slabs-on-ground.
   Section 1907.2 of Chapter 19 of the California Building Code is amended to
read:
      1907.2 Nonstructural slabs-on-ground. Nonstructural slabs-on-ground shall
be required to comply with Sections 1904.2, 1907.3 and 1907.4. Portions of the
nonstructural slabs-on-ground used to resist uplift forces or overturning shall
be designed in accordance with accepted engineering practice throughout the
entire portion designated as dead load to resist uplift forces or overturning.
   Nonstructural slabs-on-ground shall have 6x6-10/10 wire mesh or equal at
mid-height.
(Ord. 5674 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.04.540   Reserved.
16.04.550   Reserved.
16.04.560   Section 2308.10.4 Braced wall panel construction.
   Section 2308.10.4 of Chapter 23 of the California Building Code is amended
to read:
      2308.10.4 Braced wall panel construction. For Methods DWB, WSP, SFB, PBS,
PCP and HPS, each panel must be not less than 48 inches (1,219 mm) in length,
covering three stud spaces where studs are spaced 16 inches (406 mm) on center
and covering two stud spaces where studs are spaced 24 inches (610 mm) on
center. Braced wall panels less than 48 inches (1,219 mm) in length shall not
contribute toward the amount of required bracing. Braced wall panels that are
longer than the required length shall be credited for their actual length.
   Vertical joints of panel sheathing shall occur over studs and adjacent panel
joints shall be nailed to common framing members. Horizontal joints shall occur
over blocking or other framing equal in size to the studs except where waived
by the installation requirements for the specific sheathing materials. Sole
plates shall be nailed to the floor framing in accordance with Section
2308.10.7 and top plates shall be connected to the framing above in accordance
with Section 2308.10.7.2. Where joists are perpendicular to braced wall lines
above, blocking shall be provided under and in line with the braced wall
panels.
(Ord. 5674 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.04.570   Section 2308.10.5 Alternative bracing.
   Section 2308.10.5 of Chapter 23 of the California Building Code is amended
to read:
      2308.10.5 Alternative bracing. An alternate braced wall (ABW) or a portal
frame with hold-downs (PFH) described in this section is permitted to
substitute for a 48-inch (1,219 mm) braced wall panel of Method DWB, WSP, SFB,
PCP or HPS.
(Ord. 5674 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.04.580   Table 2308.10.1 Wall bracing requirements.
   Footnote "b" of TABLE 2308.10.1 of Chapter 23 of the California Building
Code is amended to read:
      b.   See section 2308.10.3 for full description of bracing methods.
Method GB is prohibited in Seismic Design Categories D & E.
(Ord. 5674 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.04.590   Table 2308.10.3(1) Bracing methods.
   TABLE 2308.10.3(1) Bracing Methods of Chapter 23 of the California Building
Code is amended by adding footnote "b" and footnote "b" superscript to METHODS,
MATERIAL column title as follows:
         TABLE 2308.10.3(1) BRACING METHODS
 
METHODS, MATERIALb MINIMUM THICKNESS FIGURE CONNECTION CRITERIAa
                                            Fasteners Spacing
 
b.   Method GB is prohibited in Seismic Design Categories D & E.
(Ord. 5674 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.04.600   Section 2308.10.9 Attachment of sheathing.
   Section 2308.10.9 of Chapter 23 of the California Building Code is amended
to read:
      2308.10.9 Attachment of sheathing. Fastening of braced wall panel
sheathing shall not be less than that prescribed in Table 2308.10.1 or
2304.10.2. Wall sheathing shall not be attached to framing members by
adhesives. Staple fasteners in Table 2304.10.2 shall not be used to resist or
transfer seismic forces in structures assigned to Seismic Design Category D, E,
or F unless the allowable shear values are substantiated by cyclic testing and
approved by the Building Official or designee.
   All braced wall panels shall extend to the roof sheathing and shall be
attached to parallel roof rafters or blocking above with framing clips (18
gauge minimum) spaced at maximum 24 inches on center with four 8d nails per leg
(total eight-8d nails per clip). Braced wall panels shall be laterally braced
at each top corner and at maximum 24-inch intervals along the top plate of
discontinuous vertical framing.
(Ord. 5674 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.04.610   Section 2505 Shear wall construction.
   Section 2505 Chapter 25 of the California Building Code is deleted in its
entirety including its subsections.
(Ord. 5674 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.04.620   Reserved.
16.04.630   Chapter 31B Public pools.
   Chapter 31B of the California Building Code has been adopted in its
entirety.
(Ord. 5674 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.04.640   Section 3304.1 Excavation and fill.
   Section 3304.1 of Chapter 33 of the California Building Code is amended to
read:
      3304.1 Excavation and fill. Excavation and fill for buildings and
structures shall be constructed or protected so as not to endanger life or
property. Stumps and roots shall be removed from the soil to a depth of not
less than 12 inches (305mm) below the surface of the ground in the area to be
occupied by the building. Wood forms that have been used in placing concrete,
if within the ground or between foundation sills and the ground, shall be
removed before a building is occupied or used for any purpose. Wooden stakes
shall not be embedded in concrete. Before completion, loose or casual wood
shall be removed from direct contact with the ground under the building.
(Ord. 5674 § 1 (part), 2025)
Chapter 16.05
CALIFORNIA MECHANICAL CODE, CALIFORNIA CODE OF REGULATIONS, TITLE 24, PART 4*
Sections:
   
16.05.010   2025 California Mechanical Code, Title 24, Part 4 adopted and
amended.
   
16.05.020   Cross-references to California Mechanical Code.
   
16.05.030   Local amendments.
   
16.05.040   Administration & enforcement of 2025 California Mechanical Code.
   
16.05.045   Adoption of Chapter 1, Division II Administration.
   
16.05.050   Section 102.8 Appendices.
   
16.05.060   Section 104.2 Exempt from this code.
   
16.05.070   Section 510.7 Interior installations.
*   Editor’s Note: Prior ordinance history: Ordinance Nos. 5565 and 5666.
16.05.010   2025 California Mechanical Code, Title 24, Part 4 adopted and
amended.
   The California Mechanical Code, 2025 Edition, Title 24, Part 4 of the
California Code of Regulations together with those omissions, amendments,
exceptions and additions thereto, is adopted and hereby incorporated in this
chapter by reference and made a part hereof the same as if fully set forth
herein.
   Unless superseded and expressly repealed, references in City of Palo Alto
forms, documents and regulations to the chapters and sections of the former
editions of the California Code of Regulations, Title 24 shall be construed to
apply to the corresponding provisions contained within the California Code of
Regulations, Title 24, 2025. Ordinance No. 5565 of the City of Palo Alto and
all other ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby
suspended and expressly repealed.
   Wherever the phrases "California Mechanical Code" or "Mechanical Code" are
used in this code or any ordinance of the City, such phrases shall be deemed
and construed to refer and apply to the California Mechanical Code, 2025
Edition, Title 24, Part 4 of the California Code of Regulations, as adopted by
this chapter.
   One copy of the California Mechanical Code, 2025 Edition, has been filed for
use and examination of the public in the Office of the Building Official of the
City of Palo Alto.
(Ord. 5675 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.05.020   Cross-references to California Mechanical Code.
   The provisions of this chapter contain cross-references to the provisions of
the California Mechanical Code, 2025 Edition, in order to facilitate reference
and comparison to those provisions.
(Ord. 5675 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.05.030   Local amendments.
   The provisions of this chapter shall constitute local amendments to the
cross-referenced provisions of the California Mechanical Code, 2025 Edition,
and shall be deemed to replace the cross-referenced sections of said Code with
the respective provisions set forth in this chapter.
(Ord. 5675 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.05.040   Administration & enforcement of 2025 California Mechanical Code.
   Administration and enforcement of this code shall be governed by Chapter 1,
Division II of the 2025 California Building Code as amended by Palo Alto
Municipal Code
Chapter 16.04.
(Ord. 5675 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.05.045   Adoption of Chapter 1, Division II Administration.
   Chapter 1, Division II Administration of the 2025 California Mechanical Code
is adopted by the City of Palo Alto to supplement, to the extent it does not
conflict with, Chapter 1, Division II of the 2025 California Building Code, as
amended.
(Ord. 5675 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.05.050   Section 102.8 Appendices.
   The following Appendix Chapters of the California Mechanical Code, 2025
Edition, are adopted and hereby incorporated in this chapter by reference and
made a part hereof the same as if fully set forth herein:
      A.   Appendix B – Procedures to be followed to place gas equipment in
operation.
      B.   Appendix C – Installation and testing of oil (liquid) fuel-fired
equipment.
( Ord. 5675 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.05.060   Section 104.2 Exempt from this code.
   Subdivision (6) of Section 104.2 of Chapter 1 of the California Mechanical
Code is added to read:
      (6)   ADDITIONAL EXCEPTIONS: Reference Mechanical Section under PAMC
16.04.110 Section 105.2 Work exempt from permit.
(Ord. 5675 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.05.070   Section 510.7 Interior installations.
   Section 510.7 of Chapter 5 of the California Mechanical Code is amended to
read:
      Section 510.7 Interior installations. In all buildings, the ducts shall
be enclosed in a continuous enclosure extending from the lowest fire-rated
ceiling or floor above the hood, through any concealed spaces, to or through
the roof so as to maintain the integrity of the fire separations required by
the applicable building code provisions. The enclosure shall be sealed around
the duct at the point of penetration of the lowest fire-rated ceiling or floor
above the hood in order to maintain the fire resistance rating of the enclosure
and shall be vented to the exterior of the building through weather-protected
openings. [NFPA 96:7.7.1.2 – 7.7.1.4]
(Ord. 5675 § 1 (part), 2025)
Chapter 16.06
2025 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE,
CALIFORNIA CODE OF REGULATIONS, TITLE 24, PART 2.5*
Sections:
   
16.06.010   2025 California Residential Code adopted and amended.
   
16.06.015   Local amendments.
   
16.06.020   2025 California Residential Code Appendix Chapters adopted.
   
16.06.030   Cross-references to California Residential Code.
   
16.06.040   Administration of California Residential Code.
   
16.06.050   Section R202 Definitions.
   
16.06.060   Table 301.2 Climatic and Geographic Design Criteria.
   
16.06.070   Section R301.2.2.6 Irregular buildings.
   
16.06.075   Section R304.5 Dwelling unit and congregate residence superficial
floor area.
   
16.06.080   Section R319.1 Emergency escape and rescue openings.
   
16.06.090   Section R319.4.2.3 Window well fall protection.
   
16.06.100   Section R319.4.5 Security bars.
   
16.06.110   Section R309.1.1 Design and installation.
   
16.06.120   Section R309.2 One- and two-family dwellings automatic fire
sprinkler systems.
   
16.06.130   Section R309.2.1 Design and installation.
   
16.06.140   Section R309.2.2 NFPA 13D sprinkler systems increase in design
requirements.
   
16.06.150   Section R309.3 Dwelling unit fire sprinkler systems.
   
16.06.160   Section R310.1 Smoke detection and notification.
   
16.06.170   Section R310.1.3 Smoke alarms or detector end of life replacement.
   
16.06.180   Section R311.7.5 Carbon monoxide alarms.
   
16.06.190   Section R308 - Site address.
   
16.06.200   Section R306.1 General (Palo Alto Flood Hazard Regulations).
   
16.06.210   Reserved.
   
16.06.220   Section R401 General.
   
16.06.225   Section R402.2.1 Materials for concrete.
   
16.06.230   Section R403 Foundation.
   
16.06.240   Section R404.1.3 Concrete foundation walls.
   
16.06.250   Section R504.3.1 Projections exposed to weather.
   
16.06.260   Section R506.1 General
   
16.06.270   Section R602.10.4.5 Limits on methods GB and PCP.
   
16.06.280   Table R602.10.3(3) Bracing requirements based on seismic design
category.
   
16.06.290   Section R608.5 Materials.
   
16.06.300   Section R703.8.5.1 Locations.
   
16.06.310   Reserved.
   
16.06.320   Section R1003.9.2.1 Repairs, replacements, and alterations.
   
16.06.330   Section BO109 Preliminary meeting.
*   Editor’s Note: Prior ordinance history: Ordinance No. 5566.
16.06.010   2025 California Residential Code adopted and amended.
   The California Residential Code, 2025 Edition, Title 24, Part 2.5 of the
California Code of Regulations, together with those omissions, amendments,
exceptions and additions thereto, is adopted and hereby incorporated in this
chapter by reference and made a part hereof the same as if fully set forth
herein.
   Unless superseded and expressly repealed, references in City of Palo Alto
forms, documents and regulations to the chapters and sections of the former
California Code of Regulations, Title 24, 2019, shall be construed to apply to
the corresponding provisions contained within the California Code of
Regulations, Title 24, 2025. Ordinance No. 5566 of the City of Palo Alto and
all other ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby
suspended and expressly repealed.
   Wherever the phrases "California Residential Code" or "Residential Code" are
used in this code or any ordinance of the city, such phrases shall be deemed
and construed to refer and apply to the California Residential Code, 2025
Edition, Title 24, Part 2.5 of the California Code of Regulations, as adopted
by this chapter.
   One copy of the California Residential Code, 2025 Edition, has been filed
for use and examination of the public in the Office of the Building Official of
the City of Palo Alto.
(Ord. 5676 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.06.015   Local amendments.
   The provisions of this chapter shall constitute local amendments to the
cross-referenced provisions of the California Residential Code, 2025 Edition,
and shall be deemed to replace the cross-referenced sections of said Code with
the respective provisions set forth in this chapter. Where used in this Chapter
16.06, ellipses shall indicate text of the California Residential Code, 2025
Edition, that has been adopted without amendment but is omitted for brevity.
(Ord. 5676 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.06.020   2025 California Residential Code Appendix Chapters adopted.
   The following Appendix Chapters of the California Residential Code, 2025
Edition, are adopted and hereby incorporated in this chapter by reference and
made a part hereof the same as if fully set forth herein:
      A.   Appendix BF - Patio Covers
      B.   Appendix BO - Existing Building and Structures
      C.   Appendix BG - Sound Transmission
      D.   Appendix CI - Swimming Pool Safety Act
(Ord. 5676 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.06.030   Cross-references to California Residential Code.
   The provisions of this chapter contain cross-references to the provisions of
the California Residential Code, 2025 Edition, in order to facilitate reference
and comparison to those provisions.
(Ord. 5676 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.06.040    Administration of California Residential Code.
   Chapter 1, Division II of the 2025 California Residential Code is replaced
in its entirety by Chapter 1, Division II of the 2025 California Building Code
as amended by Palo Alto Municipal Code
Chapter 16.04.
(Ord. 5676 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.06.050   Section R202 Definitions.
   Section R202 of the California Residential Code is amended to include the
following definitions:
   SUPERFICIAL FLOOR AREA. "Superficial floor area" is the net floor area
within the enclosing walls of the room in which the ceiling height is not less
than seven feet six inches, excluding built-in equipment such as wardrobes,
cabinets, kitchen units, or fixtures which are not readily removable.
(Ord. 5676 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.06.060   Table 301.2 Climatic and Geographic Design Criteria.
   Table 301.2 of the California Residential Code is amended to read:
               TABLE R301.2
         CLIMATIC AND GEOGRAPHIC DESIGN CRITERIA
 
GROUND SNOW WIND DESIGN             SEISMIC   SUBJECT TO DAMAGE FROM
LOAD        Speed (mph) Topographic DESIGN    Weathering Frost line Termite
                        effects     CATEGORY             depth
0           92          No          D0 thru E Negligible 5"         Very High
 
 
WINTER DESIGN ICE BARRIER                  AIR FREEZING MEAN ANNUAL TEMP.
TEMP. (°F)   UNDERLAYMENT FLOOD HAZARDS   INDEX        (°F)
              REQUIRED
40            No           See Footnotes p 0            55
                           thru r
 
p   The of Palo Alto entered National Flood Insurance Program in 1979.
q   The effective date of the current Flood Insurance Study and Flood Insurance
Rate Map is May 18, 2009.
r   The panel numbers and dates of all currently effective FIRMs and FBFMs:
06085CIND0A, 06085C0010H, 06085C0015H through 06085C0019H, 06085C0030H,
06085C0036H, 06085C0038H, 06085C0180H, 06085C0185H (May 18, 2009 for all).
(Ord. 5676 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.06.070   Section R301.2.2.6 Irregular buildings.
   Section R301.2.2.6 of the California Residential Code is amended as follows:
   The seismic provisions of this code shall not be used for structures, or
portions thereof, located in Seismic Design Categories C, D0, D1 and D2 and
considered to be irregular in accordance with this section. A building or
portion of a building shall be considered to be irregular where one or more of
the conditions defined in Items 1 through 8 occur. Irregular structures, or
irregular portions of structures, shall be designed in accordance with accepted
engineering practice to the extent the irregular features affect the
performance of the remaining structural system. Where the forces associated
with the irregularity are resisted by a structural system designed in
accordance with accepted engineering practice, the remainder of the building
shall be permitted to be designed using the provisions of this code.
   1.   Shear wall or braced wall offsets out of plane. Conditions where
exterior shear wall lines or braced wall panels are not in one plane vertically
from the foundation to the uppermost story in which they are required.
   2.   Lateral Support of roofs and floors. Conditions where a section of
floor or roof is not laterally supported by shear walls or braced wall lines on
all edges.
      Exception: Portions of floors that do not support shear walls, braced
wall panels above, or roofs shall be permitted to extend not more than 6 feet
(1,829 mm) beyond a shear wall or braced wall line.
   3.   Shear wall or braced wall offsets in plane. Conditions where the end of
a braced wall panel occurs over an opening in the wall below.
   4.   Floor and roof opening. Conditions where an opening in a floor or roof
exceeds the lesser of 12 feet (3,658 mm) or 50% of the least floor or roof
dimension.
   5.   Floor level offset. Conditions where portions of a floor level are
vertically offset.
   6.   Perpendicular shear wall and wall bracing. Conditions where shear walls
and braced wall lines do not occur in two perpendicular directions.
   7.   Wall bracing in stories containing masonry or concrete construction.
Conditions where stories above grade plane are partially or completely braced
by wood wall framing in accordance with Section R602 or cold-formed steel wall
framing in accordance with Section R603 include masonry or concrete
construction. Where this irregularity applies, the entire story shall be
designed in accordance with accepted engineering practice.
      Exceptions: Fireplaces, chimneys and masonry veneer in accordance with
this code.
   8.   Hillside light-frame construction. Conditions in which all of the
following apply:
      8.1 The grade slope exceeds 1 unit vertical in 5 units horizontal where
averaged across the full length of any side of the dwelling.
      8.2 The tallest cripple wall clear height exceeds 7 feet (2,134 mm), or
where a post and beam system occurs at the dwelling perimeter, the post and
beam system tallest post clear height exceeds 7 feet (2,134 mm).
      8.3 Of the total plan area below the lowest framed floor, whether open or
enclosed, less than 50% is living space having interior wall finishes
conforming to Section R702.
   Where Item 8 is applicable, design in accordance with accepted engineering
practice shall be provided for the floor immediately above the cripple walls or
post and beam system and all structural elements and connections from this
diaphragm down to and including connections to the foundation and design of the
foundation to transfer lateral loads from the framing above.
      Exception: Light-frame construction in which the lowest framed floor is
supported directly on concrete or masonry walls over the full length of all
sides except the downhill side of the dwelling need not be considered an
irregular dwelling under Item 8.
(Ord. 5676 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.06.075   Section R304.5 Dwelling unit and congregate residence superficial
floor area.
   Section R304.5 of the California Residential Code is added to read:
      R304.5 Dwelling unit and congregate residence superficial floor area.
Every dwelling unit and congregate residence shall have at least one room which
shall have not less than 120 square feet of superficial floor area. Every room
which is used for both cooking and living or both living and sleeping purposes
shall have not less than 144 square feet of superficial floor area. Every room
used for sleeping purposes shall have not less than 70 square feet of
superficial floor area. When more than two persons occupy a room used for
sleeping purposes the required superficial floor area shall be increased at the
rate of 50 square feet for each occupant in excess of two. Guest rooms with
cooking shall contain the combined required superficial areas of a sleeping and
a kitchen, but not less than 144 square feet. Other habitable rooms shall be
not less than 70 square feet.
   Notwithstanding any provision of this section, children under the age of six
shall not be counted for purposes of determining whether a family with minor
children complies with the provisions of this Code.
   For the purposes of this section, "superficial floor area" means the net
floor area within the enclosing walls of the room in which the ceiling height
is not less than seven feet six inches, excluding built-in equipment such as
wardrobes, cabinets, kitchen units, or fixtures which are not readily
removable.
(Ord. 5676 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.06.080   Section R319.1 Emergency escape and rescue openings.
   Section R319.1 of the California Residential Code is amended to read:
      R319.1 Emergency escape and rescue opening required. Basements, habitable
attics and every sleeping room shall have not less than one operable emergency
escape and rescue opening. Where basements contain one or more sleeping rooms,
an emergency escape and rescue opening shall be required in each sleeping room.
Emergency escape and rescue openings shall open directly into a public way, or
to a yard or court that opens to a public way.
      Exceptions:
         1.   Storm shelters and basements used only to house mechanical
equipment not exceeding a total floor area of 200 square feet (18.58 m2)
(Ord. 5676 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.06.090   Section R319.4.2.3 Window well fall protection.
   Section R319.4.2.3 of the California Residential Code is added to read:
      R319.4.2.3 Window well fall protection. Window wells with a vertical
depth greater than 30 inches shall have guards on all sides. The guards shall
be provided in accordance with Section R321.1. Openings shall comply with
Section R321.1.3. Access ladder shall comply with Section R319.4.2.1 and shall
extend from the bottom of the well to the top of the guard. Grates or similar
barriers shall not be installed over the window well.
(Ord. 5676 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.06.100   Section R319.4.5 Security bars.
   Section R319.4.5 of the California Residential Code is added to read:
      R319.4.5 Security bars. Fire Department plan check review and approval of
all security bar submittals shall be required prior to the issuance of a
building permit.
(Ord. 5676 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.06.110   Section R309.1.1 Design and installation.
   Section 309.1.1 of the California Residential Code is amended to read:
      R309.1.1 Design and installation. Where allowed, automatic sprinkler
systems installed in townhouses shall be installed throughout in accordance
with NFPA 13 and state and local standards.
(Ord. 5676 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.06.120   Section R309.2 One and two-family dwellings automatic fire
sprinkler systems.
   Section R309.2 of the California Residential Code is amended to read:
      R309.2 One and two-family dwellings automatic fire sprinkler systems.
Approved automatic sprinkler systems in new buildings and structures and in
existing modified buildings and structures shall be provided in the locations
described in this section. Automatic fire sprinklers shall be installed per the
requirements set forth in Sections 903.2.1 through 903.2.18 of the California
Building Code and as follows, whichever is the more restrictive:
      1.   An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all new
buildings and structures.
         Exception: New residential occupancies, buildings or structures that
do not exceed 350 square feet of building area and contain no interior plumbing
fixtures.
      2.   An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all
existing buildings when modifications are made that create an increase in fire
area to more than 3,600 square feet or when the addition is equal to or greater
than 50% of the existing building square footage, whichever is more
restrictive.
      3   An automatic fire sprinkler system is required in basements when any
of the following occurs:
         a)   New basements used for storage, utility, occupancy, or habitable
space regardless of size.
         b)   Existing basements that are altered for the use of storage,
utility, occupancy, or habitable space regardless of size.
         c)   Existing basements expanded by 50% or more.
            If the addition or alteration is only the basement, then only the
basement is required to be protected by fire sprinklers.
      4.   An automatic fire sprinkler system is required when either the roof
structure, exterior walls, or combination of both has been removed, altered
and/or replaced in at least 50% of the existing structure.
      5.   An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout when any
change in use or occupancy creating a more hazardous fire/life safety
condition, as determined by the Fire Chief.
(Ord. 5676 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.06.130   Section R309.2.1 Design and installation.
   Section R309.2.1 of the California Residential Code is amended to read as
follows:
      R309.2.1 Design and installation. Where allowed, automatic sprinkler
systems installed in one- and two-family detached dwellings shall be installed
throughout in accordance with NFPA 13D and state and local standards. Fire
sprinkler protection is required under rear covered patios extending over four
feet perpendicular from the exterior of the structure.
(Ord. 5676 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.06.140   Section R309.2.2 NFPA 13D sprinkler systems increase in design
requirements.
   Section R309.2.2 of the California Residential Code is added to read as
follows:
      Section R309.2.2 NFPA 13D sprinkler systems increase in design
requirements. In a higher fire fighting hazardous conditions a four head fire
sprinkler calculation and coverage in all closets, bathrooms and attics will be
required in Residential and Group U Occupancies as determined by the Fire Code
Official in the following conditions:
      1.   Structures located in the High Hazardous Fire Areas.
      2.   Structures where the combined fire area is 3,600 sq ft or larger.
      3.   Structures located 150 ft or greater from the Fire Department access
roadways.
      4.   Basements and below grade structures.
(Ord. 5676 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.06.150   Section R309.3 Dwelling unit fire sprinkler systems.
   Section R309.3 of the California Residential Code is deleted in its entirety
and amended as follows:
      R309.3 Dwelling unit fire sprinkler systems. Fire sprinkler systems shall
be designed and installed in accordance with NFPA 13D, State and local
standards.
(Ord. 5676 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.06.160   Section R310.1 Smoke detection and notification.
   Section R310.1 of the California Residential Code is amended to read:
      R310.1 Smoke detection and notification. Listed single- and multiple-
station smoke alarms complying with UL 217 shall be installed in accordance
with the California Fire Code Sections 907.2.11.1 through 907.2.11.5 and
manufacturer’s installation and use instructions.
      Smoke alarms and smoke detectors shall be in compliance with this code or
subject to the provisions of the Health and Safety Code, they shall also be
listed and approved for rapid response to smoldering synthetic materials. All
smoke alarms or detectors shall be of the photoelectric type or shall have
equivalent detection capabilities in compliance with UL 217.
         Exception: A photoelectric smoke alarm or detector shall be installed
if located within 20 feet to a kitchen, fireplace or woodburning stove or
within five feet of a bathroom.
(Ord. 5676 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.06.170   Section R310.1.3 Smoke alarms or detector end of life replacement.
   Section R310.1.3 of the California Residential Code is added to read:
      R310.1.3 Smoke alarms or detector end of life replacement. Smoke alarms
or detectors shall be replaced every ten years or according to the manufacture
guidelines, whichever is more restrictive.
(Ord. 5676 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.06.180   Section R311.7.5 Carbon monoxide alarms.
   Section R311.7.5 of the California Residential Code is added to read:
      R311.7.5 Carbon Monoxide alarms or detectors end of life replacement.
Carbon monoxide alarms or detectors shall be replaced every ten years or
according to the manufacture guidelines, whichever is more restrictive.
(Ord. 5676 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.06.190   Section R308 - Site address.
   Section R308 of the California Residential Code is amended to read:
      R308.1 Address identification. Buildings shall be provided with approved
address identification. The address identification shall be legible and placed
in a position that is visible from the street or road fronting the property.
Address identification characters shall contrast with their background. Address
numbers shall be Arabic numbers or alphabetical letters. Numbers shall not be
spelled out. Each character shall be not less than four inches (102 mm) in
height with a stroke width of not less than 0.5 inch (12.7 mm). Where required
by the fire code official, address identification shall be provided in
additional approved locations to facilitate emergency response. Where access is
by means of a private road and the building address cannot be viewed from the
public way, a monument, pole or other sign or means shall be used to identify
the structure. Address identification shall be maintained.
      R308.1.1 Address illumination. Address identification required by Section
R308.1 shall be illuminated.
      R308.1.2 Address identification size. Address numbers and letters shall
be sized as follows:
         1.   When the structure is between thirty-six (36) and fifty (50) feet
from the road or other emergency means of access, a minimum of one-half inch
(0.5") stroke by six inches (6") high is required.
         2.   When the structure is fifty (50) or more feet from the road or
other emergency means of access, a minimum of one inch (1") stroke by nine
inches (9") high is required.
(Ord. 5676 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.06.200   Section R306.1 General (Palo Alto Floor Hazard Regulations).
   The following paragraph is added to Section R306.1 of the California
Residential Code:
      Palo Alto Flood Hazard Regulations. Notwithstanding the provisions of
this Section R306, all construction or development within a flood hazard area
(areas depicted as a Special Flood Hazard Area on Flood Insurance Rate Maps
published by the Federal Emergency Management Agency) shall comply with the
City of Palo Alto Flood Hazard Regulations (Palo Alto Municipal Code Chapter
16.52). Where discrepancies exist between the requirements of this code and
said regulations, the more stringent requirements shall apply.
(Ord. 5676 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.06.210   Reserved.
16.06.220   Section R401 General.
   Section 401 of the California Residential Code is amended to read:
      R401.1 - R401.3 {'{'}CRC text not modified{'}'}
      R401.4 Soils tests. Exception is added at end of the CRC text as follows:
      Exception: Refer to PAMC 16.04.450
      R401.4.1 Geotechnical evaluation. When permitted by the building official
or designee, in lieu of a complete geotechnical evaluation, the load bearing
values in T401.4.1(1) shall be assumed.
      T401.4.1(2), R401.4.1.1 - R401.4.2 {'{'}CRC text not modified{'}'}
(Ord. 5676 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.06.225   Section R402.2.1 Materials for concrete.
   Section 402.2.1 of the California Residential Code is amended to read:
      R402.2.1 Materials for concrete. Materials for concrete shall comply with
the requirements of Section R608.5.1, as amended by PAMC 16.14.240.
(Ord. 5676 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.06.230   Section R403 Foundation.
   Section R403 of the California Residential Code is amended as follows:
      R403.1 - R403.1.1 {'{'}CRC text not modified{'}'}
      R403.1.2 Continuous footing in Seismic Design Categories D0, D1, and D2.
Exterior walls of buildings located in Seismic Design Categories D0, D1 and D2
shall be supported by continuous solid or fully grouted masonry or concrete
footings. All required interior braced wall panels in buildings located in
Seismic Design Categories D0, D1 and D2 shall be supported on continuous
foundations.
      R403.1.3 Footing and stem wall reinforcing in Seismic Design Categories
D0, D1, and D2.Concrete footings located in Seismic Design Categories D0, D1
and D2, as established in Table R301.2(1), shall have not fewer than three No.
4 horizontal bars. One No. 4 horizontal bar shall be installed within 12 inches
(305 mm) of the top of the stem wall and two No. 4 horizontal bars shall be
located 3 to 4 inches (76 mm to 102 mm) from the bottom of the footing.
      R403.1.3.1 Concrete stem walls with concrete footings. In Seismic Design
Categories D0, D1 and D2 where a construction joint is created between a
concrete footing and a stem wall, not fewer than one No. 4 vertical bar shall
be installed at not more than four feet (1,219 mm) on center. The vertical bar
shall have a standard hook and extend to the bottom of the footing and shall
have support and cover as specified in Section R403.1.3.5.3 and extend not less
than 14 inches (357 mm) into the stem wall. Standard hooks shall comply with
Section R608.5.4.5. Not fewer than one No. 4 horizontal bar shall be installed
within 12 inches (305 mm) of the top of the stem wall and two No. 4 horizontal
bars shall be located three to four inches (76 mm to 102 mm) from the bottom of
the footing.
      R403.1.3.2 Masonry stem walls with concrete footings. In Seismic Design
Categories D0, D1 and D2 where a grouted masonry stem wall is supported on a
concrete footing, not fewer than one No. 4 vertical bar shall be installed at
not more than four feet (1,219 mm) on center. The vertical bar shall have a
standard hook and extend to the bottom of the footing and have support and
cover as specified in Section R403.1.3.5.3 and extend not less than 14 inches
(357 mm) into the stem wall. Standard hooks shall comply with Section
R608.5.4.5. Not fewer than one No. 4 horizontal bar shall be installed within
12 inches (305 mm) of the top of the wall and two No. 4 horizontal bars shall
be located three to four inches (76 mm to 102 mm) from the bottom of the
footing. Masonry stem walls shall be solid grouted.
      In Seismic Design Categories D0, D1 and D2 masonry stem walls without
solid grout and vertical reinforcing are not permitted.
      R403.1.3.3 - R403.1.7.4 {'{'}CRC text not modified{'}'}
      R403.1.8 Foundations on expansive soils. Foundations and floor slabs for
buildings located on expansive soils shall be designed in accordance with
Section 1808.6 or Table 1809.7 of the California Building Code as amended in
Municipal Code Section 16.04.470.
      R403.1.8.1 {'{'}CRC text not modified{'}'}
(Ord. 5676 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.06.240   Section R404.1.3 Concrete foundation walls.
   Section 404.1.3 of the California Residential Code is amended to read:
      R404.1.3 Concrete Foundation Walls. Concrete foundation walls that
support light-frame walls shall be designed and constructed in accordance with
the provisions of this section, ACI 318, ACI 332, or PCA 100, as amended by
PAMC Section 16.14.240. Concrete foundation walls that support above-grade
concrete walls that are within the applicability limits of Section R608.2 shall
be designed and constructed in accordance with the provisions of this section,
ACI 318, ACI 332, or PCA 100, as amended by PAMC Section 16.14.240. Concrete
foundation walls that support above-grade concrete walls that are not within
the applicability limits of Section R608.2 shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with the provisions of ACI 318, ACI 332, or PCA 100, as amended by
PAMC Section 16.14.240. When ACI 318, ACI 332, PCA 100 or the provisions of
this section, as amended by PAMC Section 16.14.240 are used to design concrete
foundation walls, project drawings, typical details and specifications are not
required to bear the seal of the architect or engineer responsible for design,
unless otherwise required by the state law of the jurisdiction having
authority.
(Ord. 5676 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.06.250   Section R504.3.1 Projections exposed to weather.
   Section R504.3.1 of the California Residential Code is added to read:
      R504.3.1 Projections exposed to weather. Floor projections exposed to the
weather and sealed underneath, including but not limited to balconies,
landings, decks, and stairs shall be constructed of naturally durable wood,
preservative-treated wood, corrosion-resistant (e.g. galvanized) steel, or
similar approved materials.
(Ord. 5676 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.06.260   Section R506.1 General.
   Section R506.1 of the California Residential Code is amended to read:
      R506.1 General. Concrete slab-on-ground floors shall be designed and
constructed in accordance with the provisions of this section of ACI 332, as
amended by PAMC Section 16.14.240. Floors shall be a minimum 3 1/2 inches (89
mm) thick (for expansive soils, see Section R403.1.8). The specified
compressive strength of concrete shall be as set forth in Section R402.2.
(Ord. 5676 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.06.270   Section R602.10.4.5 Limits on methods GB and PCP.
   Section R602.10.4.5 of the California Residential Code is added to read:
      R602.10.4.5 Limits on methods GB and PCP. In Seismic Design Categories
D0, D1, and D2, Method GB is not permitted for use as an intermittent braced
wall panels, but gypsum board is permitted to be installed when required by
this section to be placed on the opposite side of the studs form other types of
braced wall panel sheathing. In Seismic Design Categories D0, D1, and D2, the
use of Method PCP is limited to one-story single-family dwelling and accessory
structures.
(Ord. 5676 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.06.280   Table R602.10.3(3) Bracing requirements based on seismic design
category.
   Footnote e to Table R602.10.3(3) is amended to read as follows:
      e.   In Seismic Design Categories D0, D1 and D2, Method GB is not
permitted and PCP is limited to one-story dwellings and accessory structures.
(Ord. 5676 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.06.290   Section R608.5 Materials.
   Section R608.5 of the California Residential Code is amended to read:
      R608.5 Materials. Materials used in the construction of concrete walls
shall comply with this section, as amended by PAMC Chapter 16.14.240.
(Ord. 5676 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.06.300   Section R703.8.5.1 Locations.
   Section R703.8.5.1 of the California Residential Code is added to read:
      R703.8.5.1 Locations. Flashing shall be installed at wall and roof
intersections, gutters, wherever there is a change in roof slope or direction,
and around roof openings. Where flashing is of metal, the metal shall be
corrosion resistant with a thickness of not less than 0.019 inches (0.483 mm)
(e.g. no. 26 galvanized sheet) and shall be primed and painted.
(Ord. 5676 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.06.310   Reserved.
16.06.320   Section R1003.9.2.1 Repairs, replacements and alterations.
   Section R1003.9.2.1 is added to the California Residential Code to read:
      R1003.9.2.1 Repairs, replacements and alterations. When any repair,
replacement or alteration to the roof of an existing structure is performed, a
spark arrester shall be installed on the existing chimney in accordance with
Section R1003.9.2.
(Ord. 5676 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.06.330   Section BO109 Preliminary Meeting.
   Section BO109 of Appendix BO of the California Residential Code is added to
read:
      Section BO109.1 General. If a building permit is required at the request
of the prospective permit applicant, the building official or his or her
designee may meet with the prospective applicant to discuss plans for any
proposed work under these provisions prior to the application for the permit.
The purpose of this preliminary meeting is for the building official to gain an
understanding of the prospective applicant’s intentions for the proposed work,
and to determine, together with the prospective applicant, the specific
applicability of these provisions.
(Ord. 5676 § 1 (part), 2025)
Chapter 16.08
CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE, CALIFORNIA CODE OF REGULATIONS, TITLE 24, PART 5*
Sections:
   
16.08.010   2025 California Plumbing Code, Title 24, Part 5 adopted and
amended.
   
16.08.020   Cross-References to California Plumbing Code.
   
16.08.030   Local amendments.
   
16.08.040   Administration & enforcement of 2025 California Plumbing Code.
   
16.08.050   Adoption of Chapter 1, Division II Administration.
   
16.08.060   Section 102.8 Appendices.
   
16.08.070   Section 306.3 Palo Alto sewer use.
   
16.08.080   Section 701.2, (4) Drainage piping.
   
16.08.090   Section 719.7 Cleanouts.
   
16.08.100   Section 808.2 Single pass cooling water systems prohibited.
   
16.08.110   Section 1014.1 Grease interceptors - general.
   
16.08.120   Section 1101.4 Material use.
   
16.08.115   Section 1014.2.1.1 Grease capacity.
   
16.08.130   Section 1101.4.1 Copper and copper alloys.
   
16.08.140   Section 1101.4.2 Conductors.
   
16.08.150   Section 1101.4.3 Leaders.
   
16.08.160   Section 1102.1 Applications.
*   Editor’s Note: Prior ordinance history: Prior code §§ 34.201, 34.202,
34.203, and portions of Ordinance Nos. 2436, 3215, 3668, 3881, 3912, 4091,
4303, 4560, 4770, 4978, 5102, 5219, 5392, 5480, and 5567.
16.08.010   2025 California Plumbing Code, Title 24, Part 5 adopted and
amended.
   The California Plumbing Code, 2025 Edition, Title 24, Part 5 of the
California Code of Regulations together with those omissions, amendments,
exceptions and additions thereto, is adopted and hereby incorporated in this
chapter by reference and made a part hereof the same as if fully set forth
herein.
   Unless superseded and expressly repealed, references in City of Palo Alto
forms, documents and regulations to the chapters and sections of the former
editions of the California Code of Regulations, Title 24, shall be construed to
apply to the corresponding provisions contained within the California Code of
Regulations, Title 24, 2025. Ordinance No. 5567 of the City of Palo Alto and
all other ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby
suspended and expressly repealed.
   Wherever the phrases "California Plumbing Code" or "Plumbing Code" are used
in this code or any ordinance of the City, such phrases shall be deemed and
construed to refer and apply to the California Plumbing Code, 2025 Edition,
Title 24, Part 4 of the California Code of Regulations, as adopted by this
chapter.
   One copy of the California Plumbing Code, 2025 Edition, has been filed for
use and examination of the public in the Office of the Building Official of the
City of Palo Alto.
(Ord. 5677 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.08.020   Cross-references to California Plumbing Code.
   The provisions of this chapter contain cross-references to the provisions of
the California Plumbing Code, 2025 Edition, in order to facilitate reference
and comparison to those provisions.
(Ord. 5677 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.08.030   Local amendments.
   The provisions of this chapter shall constitute local amendments to the
cross-referenced provisions of the California Plumbing Code, 2025 Edition, and
shall be deemed to replace the cross-referenced sections of said Code with the
respective provisions set forth in this chapter. Where used in this
Chapter 16.08, ellipses shall indicate text of the California Plumbing Code,
2025 Edition, that has been adopted without amendment but is omitted for
brevity.
(Ord. 5677 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.08.040   Administration & enforcement of 2025 California Plumbing Code.
   Administration and enforcement of this code shall be governed by Chapter 1,
Division II of the 2025 California Building Code as amended by Palo Alto
Municipal Code
Chapter 16.04.
(Ord. 5677 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.08.050   Adoption of Chapter 1, Division II Administration.
   Chapter 1, Division II Administration of the 2025 California Plumbing Code
is adopted by the City of Palo Alto to supplement, to the extent it does not
conflict with, Chapter 1, Division II of the 2025 California Building Code as
amended.
(Ord. 5677 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.08.060   Section 102.8 Appendices.
   The following Appendix Chapters of the California Plumbing Code, 2025
Edition, are adopted and hereby incorporated in this chapter by reference and
made a part hereof the same as if fully set forth herein:
      A.   Appendix A - Recommended rules for sizing the water supply system
      B.   Appendix D - Sizing storm water drainage systems
(Ord. 5677 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.08.070   Section 306.3 Palo Alto sewer use.
   Section 306.3 of Chapter 3 of the California Plumbing Code is added to read:
      306.3 Palo Alto sewer use. ll non-domestic waste shall comply with the
City of Palo Alto Sewer Use Ordinance (Palo Alto Municipal Code Chapter 16.09).
Where discrepancies exist between the requirements of this code and said
ordinance, the provisions of said ordinance shall apply.
(Ord. 5677 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.08.080   Section 701.2, (4) Drainage piping.
   Subdivsion (4) of Section 701.2 of Chapter 7 of the California Plumbing Code
is amended to read:
      701.2 Drainage Piping
      Materials for drainage piping shall be in accordance with one of the
referenced standards in Table 701.2 except that:
      [. . .]
         (4)   Copper, copper alloys, lead and lead alloys, including brass,
shall not be used for building sanitary drainage lines, connectors or seals
coming in contact with sewage except for domestic waste sink traps and short
lengths of associated connecting pipes where alternate materials are
impracticable.
      Where permitted by the building official or their designee, copper tube
for drainage piping shall have a weight of not less than that of copper
drainage tube type DWV.
      [. . .]
(Ord. 5677 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.08.090   Section 719.7 Cleanouts.
   Section 719.7 of Chapter 7 of the California Plumbing Code is added to read:
      719.7 Cleanouts. A cleanout shall be provided at the point of connection
between the building sewer and the city lateral and an approved fitting shall
be used to bring the cleanout riser to grade. Where sewer cleanouts are to be
connected to existing city laterals, such connections shall be accomplished by
use of a City of Palo Alto Utility approved fitting.
(Ord. 5677 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.08.100   Section 808.2 Single pass cooling water systems prohibited.
   Section 808.2 of Chapter 8 of the California Plumbing Code is added to read:
      808.2 Single pass cooling water systems prohibited. Clean running water
used exclusively as a cooling medium in an appliance, device, or apparatus is
prohibited. Refer to PAMC 16.14.350 for additional CALGreen measures.
(Ord. 5677 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.08.110   Section 1014.1 Grease interceptors - general.
   Section 1014.1 of Chapter 10 of the California Plumbing Code is amended to
read as follows (additions to the 2025 California Plumbing code are underlined,
deletions are struck through):
   1014.1 General. Where it is determined by the Authority Having Jurisdiction
that waste pretreatment is required, an approved type of grease interceptor(s)
shall comply with ASME A112.14.3, ASME A112.14.4, CSA B481, ANSI/CAN/IAPMO
Z1001, PDI G-101, or PDI G-102, and sized in accordance with Sections 1014.2.1
and 1014.2.1.1 or Section 1014.3.6, shall be installed in accordance with the
manufacturer’s installation instructions to receive the drainage from fixtures
or equipment that produce grease-laden waste. Grease-laden waste fixtures shall
include, but not be limited to, sinks and drains, such as floor drains, floor
sinks, and other fixtures or equipment in serving establishments, such as
restaurants, cafes, lunch counters, cafeterias, bars and clubs, hotels,
hospitals, sanitariums, factory or school kitchens, or other establishments
where grease is introduced into the drainage or sewage system in quantities
that can effect line stoppage or hinder sewage treatment or private sewage
disposal systems. A combination of hydromechanical, gravity grease interceptors
and engineered systems shall be allowed to meet this code and other applicable
requirements of the Authority Having Jurisdiction where space or existing
physical constraints of existing buildings necessitate such installations. A
grease interceptor shall not be required for individual dwelling units or
private living quarters. Water closets, urinals, and other plumbing fixtures
conveying human waste shall not drain into or through the grease interceptor.
   […]
   1014.1.2 Maintenance. Grease interceptors shall be maintained in efficient
operating condition by periodic removal of the accumulated grease and latent
material. No such collected grease shall be introduced into drainage piping or
a public or private sewer. Where the Authority Having Jurisdiction determines
that a grease interceptor is not being properly cleaned or maintained, the
Authority Having Jurisdiction shall have the authority to mandate the
installation of additional equipment or devices. The Authority Having
Jurisdiction shall have the authority and to mandate a maintenance program for
grease interceptors.
   1014.1.3 Food waste disposers and dishwashers.
   Unless specifically required or permitted by the Authority Having
Jurisdiction, no No food waste disposer or dishwasher shall be connected to or
discharge into a grease interceptor. Commercial food waste disposers shall be
permitted to discharge directly into the building’s drainage system. Commercial
Food Waste Disposal Units are prohibited.
   Exception: Food waste disposers shall be permitted to discharge to grease
interceptors that are designed to receive the discharge of food waste.
   1014.1.4 Wastewater Discharge through Grease Interceptors. Wastewater
Discharge through grease interceptors shall be by means of gravity only. Unless
otherwise approved by the Authority Having Jurisdiction, mechanical pumping of
wastewater through a grease interceptor shall not be allowed. Pumps and/or
other mechanical pumping equipment to convey wastewater shall only be installed
to convey wastewater after the wastewater has passed through the grease
interceptor.
   1014.1.5 Two-Way Lateral Cleanouts. Two-way Lateral cleanouts shall be
installed on the inlet and outlet sides of grease interceptors for ease of
maintenance and flushing of the lateral line(s).
   1014.1.6 Acceptable Materials. Grease interceptors made of the following
materials shall not be installed in the City: materials susceptible to
corrosion in low pH environments, concrete, metal, and acid-resistant enamel or
epoxy (A.R.E.) coatings. Examples of acceptable materials of construction
include thermoplastic (low or high-density polyethylene) or similar non-
corrosive materials.
   1014.1.7 Sharing of Grease Interceptors Prohibited. Unless specifically
required or permitted by the Authority Having Jurisdiction, a grease
interceptor may be used by only one food facility. Sharing grease interceptors
between multiple food facilities is prohibited.
(Ord. 5677 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.08.115   Section 1014.2.1.1 Grease capacity.
   Section 1014.2.1.1 of Chapter 10 of the California Plumbing Code is added to
read:
      1014.2.1.1 Grease Capacity. In addition to the sizing criteria based on
flow rate specified in Section 1014.2.1, hydromechanical grease interceptors
shall meet the sizing criteria based on grease capacity outlined in the “Palo
Alto Regulations for Food Facilities Related to Water Pollution Prevention and
Management of Fats, Oils, and Grease.” The correctly sized grease interceptor
will have both the minimum flow rate determined according to Section 1014.2.1
and the minimum grease storage capacity determined.
(Ord. 5677 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.08.120   Section 1101.4 Material use.
   Section 1101.4 of Chapter 11 of the California Plumbing Code is amended to
read:
      1101.4 Material use. Pipe, tube, and fittings conveying rainwater shall
be of such materials and design as to perform their intended function to the
satisfaction of the Authority Having Jurisdiction. Conductors within a vent or
shaft shall be of cast-iron, galvanized steel, wrought iron, Schedule 40 ABS
DWV, Schedule 40 PVC DWV, stainless steel 304 or 316L [stainless steel 304 pipe
and fittings shall not be installed underground and shall be kept not less than
6 inches (152 mm) aboveground], or other approved materials, and changes in
direction shall be in accordance with the requirements of Section 706.0. ABS
and PVC DWV piping installations shall be installed in accordance with
applicable standards referenced in Chapter 17 and the firestop protection
requirements in the California Building Code. Except for individual single-
family dwelling units, materials exposed within ducts or plenums shall have a
flame-spread index of not more than 25 and a smoke-developed index of not more
than 50, where tested in accordance with ASTM E84 or UL 723. Plastic piping
installed in plenums shall be tested in accordance with all requirements of
ASTM E84 or UL 723. Mounting methods, supports and sample sizes of materials
for testing that are not specified in ASTM E84 or UL 723 shall be prohibited.
   [HCD 1 & HCD 2] ABS or PVC installations are limited to not more than two
stories of areas of residential accommodation.
   [OSHPD 1, 2, 3 & 4] ABS and PVC installations are not allowed.
(Ord. 5677 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.08.130   Section 1101.4.1 Copper and copper alloys.
   Section 1101.4.1 of Chapter 11 of the California Plumbing Code is amended to
read:
      1101.4.1 Copper and copper alloys. Joints and connections in copper and
copper alloy pipe and tube is prohibited.
(Ord. 5677 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.08.140   Section 1101.4.2 Conductors.
   Section 1101.4.2 of Chapter 11 of the California Plumbing Code is amended to
read:
      1101.4.2 Conductors. Conductors installed aboveground in buildings shall
comply with the applicable standards referenced in Table 701.2 for aboveground
drain, waste, and vent pipe. Conductors installed aboveground level shall be of
Schedule 40 copper pipe or Schedule 40 copper alloy pipe; service weight cast-
iron soil pipe or hubless cast-iron soil pipe; standard weight galvanized steel
pipe; stainless steel 304 or 316L [stainless steel 304 pipe and fittings shall
not be installed underground and shall be kept not less than 6 inches (152 mm)
aboveground], or Schedule 40 ABS or Schedule 40 PVC plastic pipe.
(Ord. 5677 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.08.150   Section 1101.4.3 Leaders.
   Section 1101.4.3 of Chapter 11 of the California Plumbing Code is amended to
read:
      1101.4.3 Leaders. Leaders installed outside shall be in accordance with
the applicable standards referenced in Table 701.2 for aboveground drain,
waste, and vent pipe; aluminum sheet metal; or galvanized steel sheet metal.
(Ord. 5677 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.08.160   Section 1102.1 Applications.
   Section 1102.1 of Chapter 11 of the California Plumbing Code is amended to
read:
      1102.1 Applications. Roof drains shall be constructed of aluminum, cast-
iron, stainless steel, ABS, PVC, polypropylene, polyethylene, or nylon and
shall comply with ASME A112.3.1 or ASME A112.6.4.
(Ord. 5677 § 1 (part), 2025)
Chapter 16.09
SEWER USE ORDINANCE*
*   Editor’s Note: Prior ordinance history: Ordinance Nos. 2726, 3170, 3315,
3889, 3988, 4070, 4252, 4287, 4642, 4760, 4820, and 5084.
Sections:
   
16.09.005   Purpose and applicability.
   
16.09.010   Abbreviations.
   
16.09.015   Definitions.
   
16.09.020   Responsibility of the Director.
   
16.09.025   Confidentiality.
   
16.09.030   Alternative means and methods.
   
16.09.035   Limitations on point of discharge.
   
16.09.040   Prohibited discharge standards.
   
16.09.045   National Categorical Pretreatment discharge standards.
   
16.09.050   Standards for other wastes.
   
16.09.055   Local limits.
   
16.09.060   City’s right of revision.
   
16.09.065   Dilution.
   
16.09.070   Unpolluted water.
   
16.09.075   Discharge permit required.
   
16.09.080   Discharge permit application procedure.
   
16.09.085   Discharge permit modification.
   
16.09.090   Inspection and sampling.
   
16.09.095   Self-monitoring.
   
16.09.100   Monitoring waiver.
   
16.09.105   Pretreatment facilities.
   
16.09.110   Personnel orientation.
   
16.09.115   Accidental discharge prevention.
   
16.09.120   Reporting and certification requirements for industrial users.
   
16.09.125   Reporting from unpermitted users.
   
16.09.130   Reports of changed conditions and final closure.
   
16.09.135   Reports of potential problems and accidental discharges.
   
16.09.140   Reports of noncompliance.
   
16.09.145   Falsification of information.
   
16.09.150   Date of receipt of reports.
   
16.09.155   Retention of records.
   
16.09.160   Requirements for sinks and drains.
   
16.09.165   Requirements for newly constructed, remodeled, improved, or
converted commercial and industrial facilities.
   
16.09.170   Requirements for newly constructed, remodeled, improved, or
converted multiple-family use residential properties.
   
16.09.175   Requirements for cooling systems, pools, spas, fountains, boilers,
and heat exchangers.
   
16.09.180   Requirements for exceptional waste.
   
16.09.185   Root and pest control chemical use.
   
16.09.190   Requirements for dental facilities.
   
16.09.195   Publication of users in significant noncompliance.
   
16.09.200   Enforcement and penalties.
   
16.09.205   Permit denial, modification, suspension, or revocation hearing.
   
16.09.210   Affirmative defenses to discharge violations: upset.
   
16.09.215   Affirmative defenses to discharge violations: prohibited discharge
standards.
   
16.09.220   Affirmative defenses to discharge violations: bypass.
   
16.09.225   Pretreatment charges and fees.
   
16.09.230   Obstruction, damage or impairment to POTW.
16.09.005   Purpose and applicability.
   This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for users of the Palo Alto
Regional Water Quality Control Plant, a Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW),
and enables the city and the POTW to comply with all applicable state and
federal laws, including the Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. section 1251 et seq.,
and the General Pretreatment Regulations (Title 40 of the Code of Federal
Regulations (CFR) Part 403), and the water quality requirements set by the San
Francisco Bay Regional Water Quality Control Board and/or the California State
Water Resources Control Board. The objectives of this chapter are:
   (a)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW that will
interfere with its operation;
   (b)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW that will pass
through the POTW, inadequately treated, into receiving waters, or otherwise be
incompatible with the POTW;
   (c)   To protect both POTW personnel who may be affected by wastewater and
sludge in the course of their employment and the general public;
   (d)   To promote reuse and recycling of wastewater and sludge from the POTW;
and
   (e)   To enable the POTW to comply with its National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES) permit conditions, sludge use and disposal
requirements, and any other federal or state laws to which the POTW is subject.
   It is the intent of the city to update and modify this chapter as needed to
continue to provide a program for protection of the POTW which is approved by
federal and state regulatory agencies. Therefore, this chapter is designed to
be no less stringent than the Clean Water Act and the Effluent Guidelines and
Standards published at Title 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N as applicable, and
as such regulations may be amended from time to time. If any provision of this
chapter conflicts with applicable federal or state requirements, as amended or
updated, the more stringent and environmentally protective provision shall
apply.
   This chapter shall apply to all users of the POTW, including but not limited
to, persons within the city and persons outside the city who are, by contract
with the city, users of the POTW. This chapter authorizes the issuance of
individual wastewater discharge permits and general discharge permits; provides
for monitoring, compliance and enforcement activities; establishes
administrative review procedures; and requires industrial user reporting.
(Ord. 5670 § 2 (part) 2025)
16.09.010   Abbreviations.
   The following abbreviations, when used in this chapter, shall have the
designated meanings:
   BOD – Biochemical oxygen demand.
   BMP – Best management practice.
   BMR – Baseline monitoring report.
   CFR – Code of Federal Regulations.
   CIU – Categorical industrial user.
   COD – Chemical oxygen demand.
   EPA – United States Environmental Protection Agency.
   gpd – gallons per day.
   gpm – gallons per minute.
   IU – Industrial user.
   mg/L – milligrams per liter.
   NPDES – National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.
   NSCIU – Non-significant categorical industrial user.
   PAMC – Palo Alto Municipal Code.
   POTW – Publicly Owned Treatment Works.
   PRCC – Periodic report of continued compliance.
   RCRA – Resource Conservation and Recovery Act.
   RWQCP – Palo Alto Regional Water Quality Control Plant.
   SIU – Significant industrial user.
   SNC – Significant noncompliance.
   STO – Single toxic organic.
   TDS – Total dissolved solids.
   TSS – Total suspended solids.
   TTO – Total toxic organics.
   U.S.C. – United States Code.
(Ord. 5670 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.09.015   Definitions.
   The following terms and phrases, whenever used in this chapter, shall be as
defined herein. Terms and phrases used in this chapter not otherwise defined
shall be as defined or interpreted or used in Title 40 of the CFR.
   “Amalgam process wastewater” means any wastewater generated and discharged
by a dental discharger through the practice of dentistry that may contain
dental amalgam.
   “Amalgam separator” is a device that employs filtration, settlement,
centrifugation, or ion exchange to remove amalgam and its metal constituents
from a dental office vacuum system before it discharges to the sanitary sewer
system; has been certified under the International Organization for
Standardization’s standard for amalgam separators as capable of removing a
minimum of 95% of dental amalgam at flow rates comparable to the flow rate of
the actual vacuum suction system in operation; and does not have any automatic
flow bypass.
   “Amalgam waste” means and includes non-contact amalgam (amalgam scrap that
has not been in contact with the patient); contact amalgam (including, but not
limited to, extracted teeth containing amalgam); amalgam sludge captured by
chair-side traps, vacuum pump filters, screens, and other amalgam trapping
devices; used amalgam capsules; and leaking or unusable amalgam capsules.
   “Annual average concentration” means the average concentration of a
substance measured over any 12-month period of time.
   “Authorized representative” means an authorized or duly authorized
representative of the industrial user as defined below:
      (A)   If the user is a corporation:
         (i)   The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of the
corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who
performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or
         (ii)   The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or
operating facilities, provided the manager is authorized to make management
decisions that govern the operation of the regulated facility including having
the explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment
recommendations, and initiate and direct other comprehensive measures to assure
long-term environmental compliance with environmental laws and regulations; can
ensure that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to gather
complete and accurate information for discharge permit requirements; and where
authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in
accordance with corporate procedures.
      (B)   If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general
partner or proprietor, respectively.
      (C)   If the user is a federal, state, or local governmental facility: a
director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation
and performance of the activities of the government facility, or their
designee.
      (D)   The individuals described in divisions (A) through (C), above, may
designate a duly authorized representative if the authorization is in writing,
the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the
overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having
overall responsibility for environmental matters for the organization, and the
written authorization is submitted to the Director.
   “Average daily blowdown” means the result of dividing the total cooling
system blowdown volume from May 1 through September 30 by the number of days of
operation for the same period.
   “Berm” means a ridge, lip, or other raised barrier to the flow of liquid
which is not rendered ineffective by the liquid and is sufficiently high to
contain anticipated fluid amounts, or which causes sufficient grade to prevent
migration of anticipated fluid amounts.
   “Sewer best management practices” or “BMPs” means schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management
practices to implement the prohibitions in this chapter. BMPs include treatment
requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff,
spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from materials
storage.
   “Biochemical oxygen demand” or “BOD” means the quantity of oxygen utilized
in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedures for five days at 20 degrees centigrade, usually expressed as a
concentration (e.g., mg/L).
   “Categorical industrial user” means an industrial user subject to a
categorical pretreatment standard.
   “Categorical pretreatment standard” means any regulation containing
pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA that apply to a specific category
of industrial users and that appear in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts
405-471.
   “City” means the City of Palo Alto located in the State of California.
   “Clean Water Act” means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known
as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. section 1251 et seq.
   “Collection system” means the pipelines, pump stations, junction boxes,
channels, and other conveyance apparatus used to move wastewater.
   “Composite sample” means a series of samples taken over a given period of
time that accurately represents the average pollutant concentration during said
period of time.
   “Cooling system blowdown” means water routinely discharged from a cooling
water system to maintain efficient operation of the system.
   “Cooling water” means water which is used to cool fluids or equipment in
commercial or industrial processes or air conditioning systems.
   “Cooling water system” means the pipes, heat exchangers, and other
appurtenances used to convey cooling water in cooling towers, direct contact
cooling systems, and similar fixed cooling systems. Multiple units of a cooling
water system serving a building or piece of equipment are considered as one
system if the cooling water distribution system units are physically connected.
   “Cycles of concentration” means the flow rate of water added to a cooling
tower water system divided by the flow rate of water discharged from the
cooling tower water system.
   “Dental amalgam” means an alloy of elemental mercury and other metal(s) that
is used in the practice of dentistry.
   “Dental discharger” means a facility where the practice of dentistry is
performed, including, but not limited to, institutions, permanent or temporary
offices, clinics, home offices, and facilities owned and operated by federal,
state or local governments, that discharges wastewater to the sanitary sewer
system.
   “Detection limit” means the minimum concentration of an analyte (substance)
that can be measured and reported with 99% confidence that the analyte
concentration is greater than zero as determined by the procedures set forth in
40 CFR Part 136, Appendix B.
   “Director” means the city’s Director of Public Works, his or her designee or
such other person as may be designated by the city manager.
   “Discharge” means the introduction of pollutants into the POTW from any
nondomestic source.
   “Discharge permit” or “wastewater discharge permit” means a legal document,
used as a control mechanism, which grants revocable permission and
authorization to discharge wastewater into the sanitary sewer system. Discharge
permits can be issued either to an individual industrial user or applied
broadly to a set of industrial users as a general discharge permit.
   "Discharger" means any person or entity who has the potential to or who
discharges, causes, or permits the discharge of any pollutant or of any
industrial or commercial process flows into the sanitary sewer system.
Discharger is inclusive of industrial user.
   “Environmental Protection Agency” or “EPA” means the United States
Environmental Protection Agency, or where appropriate, the Regional Water
Management Division Director, the Regional Administrator, or other duly
authorized official of said agency.
   “Existing source” means any source of discharge that is not a new source.
   “Fail-safe valve” means a gravity, spring loaded or electrically driven
valve that is normally closed. The valve can be opened by continuously applying
pressure or depressing a switch mechanism that automatically closes the valve
when not in use or depressed.
   “Fixer solution” means a solution containing silver used in the photographic
processing of dental x-rays, x-rays, and photographs.
   “Grab sample” means a sample that is taken from a wastestream on a one-time
basis with no regard to the flow of the wastestream, taken over a period not to
exceed 15 minutes.
   “Hazardous material” means any material so designated by Title 17 of this
code.
   “Hazardous waste” means a material designated as a hazardous waste by
federal, state, or local regulations.
   “Industrial user” means a discharger of industrial waste to the POTW.
   “Industrial waste,” “process wastewater,” or “process waste stream” means
the waste or wastewater from any production, manufacturing, research/
development, groundwater remediation, or processing operation of any nature
including institutional and commercial. Industrial waste shall not include
sewage.
   “Instantaneous limit” means the maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed
to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or
composited sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the
duration of the sampling event.
   “Interference” means a discharge that, alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its
treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and
therefore, is a cause of a violation of the city’s NPDES permit (including an
increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or of the prevention of
sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the following
statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued thereunder, or any more
stringent state or local regulations: Section 405 of the Clean Water Act; the
Solid Waste Disposal Act, including Title II commonly referred to as the
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); any state regulations contained
in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the
Solid Waste Disposal Act; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act;
and the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act.
   “Local limit” means specific discharge limits developed and enforced by the
city upon industrial or commercial facilities to implement the general and
specific discharge prohibitions listed in 40 CFR 403.5(a)(1) and (b).
   “Machine shop” means a fixed facility which cuts, grinds, polishes, deburrs,
or machines metal parts but does not conduct metal finishing as that term is
defined by the EPA in 40 CFR Part 433.
   “Multiple-family use” shall be as defined in Title 18 of this code.
   “New source” means any building, structure, facility, or installation from
which there is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which
commenced after the publication of proposed Pretreatment Standards under
section 307(c) of the Clean Water Act that will be applicable to such source if
such pretreatment standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that
section, provided that:
      (A)   The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed
at a site at which no other source is located; or
      (B)   The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces
the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at
an existing source; or
      (C)   The production or wastewater generating processes of the building,
structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of an
existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are
substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility
is integrated with the existing building, structure, facility, or installation,
and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of
activity as the existing source, should be considered.
   “Noncontact cooling water” means water used for cooling that does not come
into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product,
or finished product.
   “Oil-water separator” means a receptacle designed and constructed to
intercept, separate, and prevent the passage of oils and sediments into the
sanitary sewer system.
   “Once-through cooling system” means a cooling system through which water
passes only once before discharge to the sanitary sewer system, including
laboratory bench top cooling systems.
   “Organic solvent” means any solvent which contains carbon in its molecular
structure.
   “Pass through” means a discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the
United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction
with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of
any requirement or provision of the city's NPDES permit, including an increase
in the magnitude or duration of a violation.
   “Person” means any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental
entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents, or
assigns. This definition includes all federal, state, and local government
entities.
   “Pretreatment” means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such pollutants
into the POTW. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical,
chemical, or biological processes; by process changes; or by other means,
except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an
applicable pretreatment standard.
   “Pretreatment requirement” means any substantive or procedural requirement
related to pretreatment imposed on an industrial user other than a pretreatment
standard.
   “Pretreatment standards” means prohibited discharge standards, categorical
pretreatment standards, and local limits.
   “Pretreatment system” means a treatment system at an industrial or
commercial facility that is designed to reduce the amount of pollutants,
eliminate pollutants, or alter the nature of the pollutant properties in the
wastewater prior to discharge to the sanitary sewer system.
   “Publicly Owned Treatment Works” or “POTW” means a treatment works, as
defined by section 212 of the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. section 1292), which
is owned by the city. This definition includes any devices or systems used in
the collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage or
industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any conveyances, which convey
wastewater to a treatment plant.
   “Reasonable Control Measures” or “RCMs” means control technologies, BMPs,
source control practices, and waste minimization procedures which prevent or
reduce the introduction of pollutants to the sanitary sewer system, and are
determined by the Director to be cost effective for particular industry groups,
business types, or specific industrial and commercial processes.
   “Sampling location” means an access box, valve, spigot, or similar structure
from which samples representative of an industrial or commercial wastewater
discharge from a particular process or processes, piece of equipment, activity,
building, or facility may be collected.
   “Sanitary sewer system” means the collection system, all sewers, treatment
plants and other facilities owned or operated by the city for carrying,
collecting, storing, treating, reclaiming and disposing of sanitary sewage and
industrial wastes.
   “Sewage” means human excrement and gray water (household showers,
dishwashing operations, etc.).
   “Sewer” means a pipe or conduit for carrying wastewater.
   “Significant industrial user” means, except as provided in (C) and (D):
      (A)   An industrial user subject to categorical pretreatment standards;
or
      (B)   An industrial user that:
         (i)   Discharges an average of 25,000 gpd or more of process
wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling, and boiler
blowdown wastewater);
         (ii)   Contributes a process wastestream which makes up 5% or more of
the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment
plant; or
         (iii)   Is designated as such by the Director on the basis that it has
a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW’s operation or for
violating any pretreatment standard or requirement.
      (C)   The Director may determine that an industrial user subject to
categorical pretreatment standards is a non-significant categorical industrial
user rather than a significant industrial user on a finding that the industrial
user never discharges more than 100 gpd of total categorical wastewater
(excluding sanitary, non-contact cooling, and boiler blowdown wastewater,
unless specifically included in the pretreatment standard) and the following
conditions are met:
         (i)   The industrial user, prior to the Director’s finding, has
consistently complied with all applicable categorical pretreatment standards
and requirements;
         (ii)   The industrial user annually submits the certification
statement required in 40 CFR 403.12(q) together with any additional information
necessary to support the certification statement; and
         (iii)   The industrial user never discharges any untreated
concentrated wastewater.
      (D)   Upon a finding that an industrial user meeting the criteria in
subsection (B) of this part has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting
the POTW’s operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement,
the Director may at any time, on his or her own initiative or in response to a
petition received from an industrial user, determine that such industrial user
should not be considered a significant industrial user.
   “Simple payback period” means the number of years required to recover the
cost of an investment in water pollution control.
   “Single toxic organic” or “STO” shall mean the highest quantifiable value
for any individual toxic organic compound.
   “Slug discharge” means any discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature,
including but not limited to an accidental spill or a non-customary batch
discharge which has a reasonable potential to cause interference or pass
through, or in any other way violate the city’s discharge permit conditions,
local limits, or regulations.
   “Total toxic organics” or “TTO” means the summation of all quantifiable
toxic organic compound concentrations greater than 0.01 mg/L.
   “Toxic organic compound” means any organic pollutant listed in 40 CFR 433.11
(e) unless otherwise defined by an applicable categorical pretreatment
standard.
   “Treatment plant” means that portion of the POTW which is designed to
provide treatment of municipal sewage and industrial waste.
   “Vehicle” means a mode of transporting people or things. Vehicles include,
but are not limited to, airplanes, automobiles, boats, buses, forklifts,
motorcycles, recreational vehicles, tractors, and trucks.
   “Vehicle service facility” means a commercial or industrial facility that
conducts one or more of the following operations with respect to vehicles or
components of vehicles: vehicle repair, fuel dispensing, vehicle fluid
replacement, engine and parts cleaning, body repair, vehicle salvage and
wrecking, or vehicle washing.
   “Wastewater” means liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and sewage
from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing
facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are
contributed to the POTW.
   “Zinc-containing floor finishes” means floor finish solutions containing
greater than 0.01% zinc by weight;
(Ord. 5670 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.09.020   Responsibility of the Director.
   The Director shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this
chapter. The Director shall be responsible for promulgating such orders, rules,
and requirements as are necessary to accomplish the purpose of this chapter, in
accordance with the regulations that are or may be promulgated by the EPA, the
California State Water Resources Control Board, the San Francisco Bay Regional
Water Quality Control Board, the California Department of Public Health, or
other duly authorized boards or agencies. Any powers granted to or duties
imposed upon the Director may be delegated by the Director to a duly authorized
city employee.
(Ord. 5670 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.09.025   Confidentiality.
   (a)   Information and data on an industrial user obtained from reports,
surveys, wastewater discharge permit applications, individual wastewater
discharge permits, general discharge permits, and monitoring programs, and from
the Director’s inspection and sampling activities, shall be available to the
public without restriction, unless the industrial user specifically requests,
and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Director, that the
release of such information would divulge information, processes, or methods of
production entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable state law.
Any such request must be asserted at the time of submission of the information
or data by stamping the words “confidential business information” on each page
containing such information. When requested and demonstrated by the discharger
furnishing a report that such information should be held confidential, the
portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes
shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made
available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to
the NPDES program or pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings
involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and
characteristics and other effluent data, as defined at 40 CFR 2.302 shall not
be recognized as confidential information and shall be available to the public
without restriction.
   (b)   This section does not permit a discharger to refuse to disclose
information required pursuant to this chapter to the Director. A discharger may
be prohibited from discharging a substance unless its composition is made known
to the Director.
(Ord. 5670 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.09.030   Alternative means and methods.
   (a)   The Director is authorized to modify any of the provisions of this
chapter upon application in writing by the owner, a lessee or an authorized
representative of the discharger where there are practical difficulties in the
way of carrying out the provisions of this chapter, provided that the purpose
of this chapter, as set forth in Section
16.09.005, shall be complied with, and substantial justice done. The
particulars of any such modification and the decision of the Director shall be
entered upon the records of the POTW and a signed copy shall be furnished to
the applicant.
   (b)   The Director, upon application in writing by the owner, a lessee, or
an authorized representative of the discharger, and on notice to the Director,
is authorized to approve alternate materials or methods, provided that the
Director finds that the proposed design, use, or operation satisfactorily
complies with the intent of this chapter and that the material, method of work
performed, or operation is, for the purpose intended, at least equivalent to
that prescribed in this chapter in quality and effectiveness in meeting the
purposes of this chapter. Approvals under the authority herein contained shall
be subject to the approval of the Director whenever the alternate material or
method involves matters regulated by this chapter. The particulars of any such
approval made by the Director shall be entered upon the records of the POTW and
a signed copy shall be furnished to the applicant.
(Ord. 5670 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.09.035   Limitations on point of discharge.
   No person shall discharge any substances directly into a manhole or other
opening in a city sewer or storm drain system, other than through a city-
approved sewer connection or as authorized by an exceptional waste discharge
permit per Section
16.09.180 of this chapter.
(Ord. 5670 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.09.040   Prohibited discharge standards.
   (a)   General prohibitions. No discharger shall introduce or cause to be
introduced into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through
or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all dischargers to the
POTW whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or
any other national, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements.
   (b)   Specific prohibitions. No discharger shall introduce or cause to be
introduced into the POTW the following pollutants, substances, or wastewater:
      (1)   Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW,
including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed-cup flashpoint of
less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit (60 degrees Centigrade) using the test methods
specified in 40 CFR 261.21;
      (2)   Wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 or greater than 11.0, or
otherwise causing corrosive structural damage to the POTW or equipment;
      (3)   Solid or viscous substances in amounts which may cause obstruction
of the flow in the POTW but in no case solids greater than one-half inch in any
dimension;
      (4)   Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.),
released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which,
either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference
with the POTW;
      (5)   Wastewater which will inhibit the biological activity in the
treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater which
causes the temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed
104 degrees Fahrenheit (40 degrees Centigrade);
      (6)   Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral
oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through;
      (7)   Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or
fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and
safety problems;
      (8)   Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated
by the Director in accordance with Chapter 16.66 of this code;
      (9)   Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other wastewater
which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to
create a public nuisance or a hazard to life, or to prevent entry into the
sewers for maintenance or repair;
      (10)   Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the
treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable
tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the treatment plant’s
effluent, thereby violating the city’s NPDES permit;
      (11)   Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except in
compliance with applicable state or federal regulations;
      (12)   Sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of
industrial wastes;
      (13)   Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources,
the treatment plant’s effluent to fail a toxicity test;
      (14)   Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances which may
cause excessive foaming in the POTW;
      (15)   Any substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be considered
a hazardous waste;
      (16)   Any zinc-containing floor finish or a stripper solution that has
been used for the stripping of a zinc-containing floor finish, except when the
solutions have been treated in a pretreatment unit approved by the Director for
removal of zinc; or
      (17)   Fixer solution without prior pretreatment to meet all applicable
limits per Section
16.09.055 of this chapter.
   (c)   Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this section shall
not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to
the sanitary sewer system.
(Ord. 5670 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.09.045   National categorical pretreatment standards.
   (a)   Industrial users shall comply with the categorical pretreatment
standards found at 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471. In the event
of any apparent conflicts between this chapter and state or federal
regulations, the most stringent provisions shall apply.
   (b)   When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is
mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the Director shall
impose an alternate limit in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(e).
(Ord. 5670 § 2 (part), 2025)(Supp. No. 18 - 8/2010)   16-26
16.09.050   Standards for other wastes.
   The Director may establish standards for any wastes not specifically
referred to in this chapter. These standards shall be published and shall be
made available to any person upon request.
(Ord. 5670 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.09.055   Local limits.
   (a)   The Director is authorized to establish local limits pursuant to 40
CFR 403.5(c).
   (b)   The Director may develop best management practices (BMPs), by
promulgation of regulations, in individual wastewater discharge permits, or in
general discharge permits, to implement local limits and the requirements of
this chapter. The Director may require the implementation of BMPs and require
submission of information to evaluate the implementation and effectiveness of
BMPs.
   (c)   The following pollutant limits are established to protect against pass
through and interference. Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, no person
shall discharge wastewater containing in excess of the following:
   0.1 mg/L Arsenic
   5.0 mg/L Barium
   0.75 mg/L Beryllium
   1.0 mg/L Boron
   0.1 mg/L Cadmium
   1.0 mg/L Chromium, Hexavalent
   2.0 mg/L Chromium, Total
   1.0 mg/L Cobalt
   0.25 mg/L Copper
   0.5 mg/L Cyanide
   0.1 mg/L Dissolved Sulfides
   65 mg/L Fluoride
   5.0 mg/L Formaldehyde
   0.5 mg/L Lead
   1.0 mg/L Manganese
   0.1 mg/L Mercaptans
   0.01 mg/L Mercury
   0.75 mg/L Methyl Tertiary Butyl Ether (MTBE)
   0.5 mg/L Nickel
   20 mg/L Oil & Grease
   200 mg/L Oil & Grease, Total
   1.0 mg/L Phenols
   1.0 mg/L Selenium
   0.25 mg/L Silver
   5,000 mg/L Total Dissolved Solids (TDS) – composite
   10,000 mg/L Total Dissolved Solids (TDS) – grab
   0.75 mg/L Toxic Organic, Single (STO)
   1.0 mg/L Toxic Organics, Total (TTO)
   3,000 mg/L Total Suspended Solids (TSS) – composite
   6,000 mg/L Total Suspended Solids (TSS) – grab
   2.0 mg/L Zinc
   (d)   The limits established in subsection (c) of this section are
instantaneous limits, unless indicated otherwise, and shall apply to all
discharges to the POTW at appropriate sampling locations determined by the
Director. All concentrations for metallic substances are for total metal unless
indicated otherwise. The Director may impose mass limitations in addition to
the concentration-based limitations established in subsection (c) of this
section.
   (e)   The Director may verify compliance with the TTO limit established in
subsection (c) of this section by sampling and analyzing for only those toxic
organic compounds that the Director has determined may be reasonably expected
to be present in an industrial user’s discharge.
   (f)   For industrial users with average daily discharges greater than 50,000
gpd through any single sampling location, pollutant limits shall be one-half of
the limit established in subsection (c) of this section, with the exception of
copper, mercury, MTBE, nickel, and silver, for which the pollutant limits shall
remain 0.25 mg/L, 0.01 mg/L, 0.75 mg/L, 0.5 mg/L, and 0.25 mg/L, respectively,
regardless of flow.
   (g)   The limit for copper established in division (c) of this section shall
apply to all industrial users, except that:
      (1)   The maximum copper limit shall be 2.0 mg/L for discharges from
cooling systems with an average daily blowdown less than or equal to 2,000 gpd,
photographic materials processing, dental facilities, vehicle service
facilities, and machine shops.
         (A)   The copper limit for cooling systems with an average daily
blowdown greater than 2,000 gpd shall be 2.0 mg/L for the first twelve months
of operation. The copper limit shall be reduced to 0.25 mg/L after the first
twelve months of operation.
         (B)   The Director may impose a higher alternative copper limit for
cooling towers when the cycles of concentration routinely exceed ten. The
alternative requirement may consist of an alternative concentration limit, a
mass limit, a specified maintenance program, or a combination of these.
      (2)   Industrial users subject to regulation under 40 CFR Part 413 or 40
CFR Part 433 shall meet either subdivision (A) or (B) of this subsection. These
alternative copper limitations shall apply to discharges from process
operations involving copper solutions or materials prior to mixing with
wastewater not regulated by 40 CFR Part 413 or 40 CFR Part 433.
         (A)   The annual average concentration of copper discharged shall not
exceed 0.40 mg/L. In addition, all reasonable control measures established by
the Director shall be installed and implemented; or
         (B)   The annual average mass of copper discharged shall not exceed an
amount specified by the Director in an individual wastewater discharge permit,
which is based upon a waste minimization study conducted or approved by the
Director. The limitation shall be based upon implementation of those reasonable
control measures having a simple payback period of five years or less. The
annual average mass of copper discharged shall be calculated as a “rolling”
measurement, by multiplying the average daily copper mass for all samples taken
during any 12-month period by 365. The annual average copper mass limit may be
increased or decreased by the Director in proportion to increases or decreases
in production at the industrial user’s facility.
   (h)   The limit for zinc established in subsection (c) of this section shall
not apply to vehicle service facilities. The maximum zinc limit for vehicle
service facilities shall be 4.0 mg/L.
(Ord. 5670 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.09.060   City’s right of revision.
   The city reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in individual
wastewater discharge permits, or in general discharge permits, more stringent
standards or requirements on discharges to the POTW to carry out the purpose of
this chapter. No revision of standards or requirements hereunder shall subject
the city to civil liability or penalty for interference with a vested right of
any discharger.
(Ord. 5670 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.09.065   Dilution.
   Except where expressly authorized to do so by the Director or an applicable
pretreatment standard or requirement, no industrial user shall ever increase
the use of process water, or in any way, dilute or attempt to dilute a
discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve
compliance with a pretreatment standard or requirement or any other provision
of this chapter. The Director may impose mass limitations on industrial users
which are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or
requirements, or in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is
appropriate.
(Ord. 5670 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.09.070   Unpolluted water.
   Unpolluted water shall not be discharged through direct or indirect
connection to the sanitary sewer system unless specifically authorized in
writing by the Director. As used in this section, unpolluted water includes,
but is not limited to, stormwater, surface water, groundwater, artesian well
water, and subsurface drainage which meets all state, federal, and local
requirements for discharge to surface waters of the United States. The Director
may approve the discharge of such water to the sanitary sewer system only when
no reasonable alternative method of disposal is available.
(Ord. 5670 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.09.075   Discharge permit required.
   (a)   Significant industrial users must obtain an individual wastewater
discharge permit to discharge process wastewater into the POTW.
   (b)   The Director may require other industrial users to obtain individual
wastewater discharge permits or general discharge permits as necessary to carry
out the purpose of this chapter.
   (c)   Any violation of the terms and conditions of an individual wastewater
discharge permit or a general discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of
this chapter and subjects the permittee to the enforcement provisions set forth
in this chapter. Obtaining an individual wastewater discharge permit or a
general discharge permit does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to
comply with all federal and state pretreatment standards or requirements or
with any other requirements of federal, state, and local law, including those
that become effective during the term of the discharge permit.
   (d)   Any industrial user required to obtain an individual wastewater
discharge permit or a general discharge permit who proposes to begin or
recommence discharging into the POTW must obtain such permit prior to the
beginning or recommencing of such discharge. An application for an individual
wastewater discharge permit or general discharge permit, in accordance with
Section 16.09.080 of this chapter, must be filed at least 90 calendar days
prior to the date upon which any discharge will begin or recommence.
   (e)   The Director may use general discharge permits to control industrial
waste discharges to the sanitary sewer system if the following conditions are
met. All facilities to be covered by a general discharge permit must:
      (1)   Involve the same or substantially similar types of operations;
      (2)   Discharge the same types of wastes;
      (3)   Require the same effluent limitations;
      (4)   Require the same or similar monitoring; and
      (5)   In the opinion of the Director, are more appropriately controlled
under a general discharge permit than under individual wastewater discharge
permits.
   (f)   An individual wastewater discharge permit or general discharge permit
shall include such conditions as are deemed reasonably necessary by the
Director to prevent pass through or interference, protect the quality of the
water body receiving the treatment plant’s effluent, protect worker health and
safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal, ensure compliance with this
chapter and applicable state and federal law, and protect against damage to the
POTW. Individual wastewater discharge permits or general discharge permits may
include, but are not limited to the following conditions:
      (1)   An effective date and expiration date. The expiration date is not
to exceed five years from the effective date of the permit. An individual
wastewater discharge permit or general discharge permit may be issued for a
period less than five years from the effective date of the permit, at the
discretion of the Director;
      (2)   Requirements for the installation and maintenance of pretreatment
technology, pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment
devices, designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of
pollutants into the POTW and compliance schedules for meeting these
requirements;
      (3)   Effluent limitations, including BMPs, based upon applicable
pretreatment standards or requirements;
      (4)   Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and record
keeping requirements. These requirements shall include implementation
requirements for best management practices, identification of pollutants to be
monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type based on
federal, state, and local law;
      (5)   Prohibition of discharge of certain wastewater components;
      (6)   Installation and maintenance of inspection, sampling, and flow
measurement equipment and facilities;
      (7)   Limits on average and/or maximum rate of discharges, time of
discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization;
      (8)   Requirements to control slug discharge, if determined by the
Director to be necessary;
      (9)   Requiring payment of additional charges to defray increased costs
of the city created by the wastewater discharge;
      (10)   Implementation of BMPs, specific investigations, or studies to
determine methods of reducing pollutants in the discharge;
      (11)   The process for seeking a waiver from monitoring and any grant of
a monitoring waiver issued by the Director for a pollutant neither present nor
expected to be present in the Discharge in accordance with Section
16.09.100 of this chapter;
      (12)   Statement of non-transferability pursuant to subsection (g); and
      (13)   Statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation
of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance
schedule.
   (g)   No individual wastewater discharge permit or coverage under a general
discharge permit is transferable without prior written consent of the Director.
A change of ownership (including a transfer of the majority of shares in a
corporate discharger) of the waste generating facility requires submittal of a
new discharge permit application and payment of applicable fees.
(Ord. 5670 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.09.080   Discharge permit application procedure.
   (a)   An applicant for a discharge permit shall complete and submit a
discharge permit application form established by the Director. The Director may
require information in addition to that required on the discharge permit
application form as deemed reasonable or necessary to evaluate the discharge
permit application.
   (b)   All wastewater discharge permit applications and industrial user
reports must contain certification statements signed by an authorized
representative.
   (c)   Completed discharge permit applications shall be filed by the
discharger not less than 90 calendar days in advance of commencing or
recommencing discharge. The discharger shall not commence or recommence
discharge prior to obtaining a discharge permit without specific, interim
approval from the Director to discharge during the permitting process.
Discharge permit applications for exceptional waste and root and pest control,
as specified in Sections
16.09.180 and
16.09.185 of this chapter, are not subject to the ninety (90) calendar day
requirement of this subsection.
   (d)   Any industrial user with an expiring individual wastewater discharge
permit or general discharge permit shall apply for permit reissuance by
submitting a complete discharge permit application, in accordance with Section
16.09.080 of this chapter, not less than 90 calendar days prior to the
expiration of the industrial user’s existing individual wastewater discharge
permit or general discharge permit.
   (e)   The Director may deny any application for an individual wastewater
discharge permit or coverage under a general discharge permit for good cause,
including, but not limited to, the following reasons:
      (1)   The application contains false or misleading information;
      (2)   The issuance of the discharge permit would result in a discharge of
such quantity or strength that the public health, safety, or public or private
property are endangered;
      (3)   The issuance of the discharge permit would cause the POTW to
violate any NPDES permit conditions, or any federal, state, or local laws or
regulations;
      (4)   The applicant has not provided adequate information to establish
that its discharge will comply with all requirements of this chapter and with
such other terms and conditions as the Director may deem necessary to include
in the applicant's discharge permit;
      (5)   The applicant has not provided plans for sufficient protection from
accidental discharges to the land, storm drain system, or sanitary sewer
system; or
      (6)   The applicant has failed to pay or has outstanding fees, fines, or
penalties owed to the city.
   (f)   If the Director denies a permit application, application fees shall
not be returned to the applicant unless the Director has ascertained that a
permit is not required to discharge the wastewater for which the permit
application is made.
   (g)   Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed.
   (h)   The Director shall post applications for wastewater discharge permits
by significant industrial users on a city web page. Interested parties and
other members of the public may comment on the issuance of a permit within 45
days of issuance. The permit effective date shall not be postponed solely
because of the submittal of comments, however comments shall be considered by
the Director for incorporation into future permit modification(s).
(Ord. 5670 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.09.085   Discharge permit modification.
   (a)   The Director may modify any individual wastewater discharge permit or
general discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the
following reasons:
      (1)   To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local
pretreatment standards or requirements;
      (2)   To address significant alterations or additions to the discharger's
operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of the
wastewater discharge permit issuance;
      (3)   A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent
reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge;
      (4)   Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat
to the POTW, City personnel, or the receiving waters;
      (5)   Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge
permit;
      (6)   Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts
in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting;
      (7)   Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment
standards;
      (8)   To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater
discharge permit;
      (9)   To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a
new owner or operator where requested in accordance with Section 16.09.075(g)
of this chapter; or
      (10)   To implement programs or policies required or requested of the
City by appropriate federal, state, or local regulatory agencies.
(Ord. 5670 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.09.090   Inspection and sampling.
   (a)   The Director may conduct all inspection, surveillance, sampling,
records examination and copying, and monitoring necessary to assure compliance
with applicable federal, state, and local regulations.
   (b)   The Director shall have the right to enter, without unreasonable
delay, the premises of any discharger for the purposes of inspection,
surveillance, sampling, monitoring, records examination and copying, and for
performance of any additional duties to assure compliance with this chapter and
applicable federal, state, and local regulations. Unreasonable delays in
allowing the Director access to the discharger’s premises shall be a violation
of this chapter.
   (c)   If the Director has been refused access to a building, structure, or
property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to
believe that there may be a violation of this chapter, or that there is a need
to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program
of the city designed to verify compliance with this chapter or any permit or
order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, and
welfare of the community, the Director may seek issuance of a warrant from the
Superior Court of California.
   (d)   Where a discharger has security measures in force which require proper
identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the discharger
shall make necessary arrangements with its security personnel so that, upon
presentation of suitable identification, the Director shall be permitted to
enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities.
   (e)   The Director may require dischargers to provide and maintain one or
more sampling locations or volume and flow measuring points approved by the
Director which will allow the separate measuring and sampling of industrial
waste and sewage. Sampling locations shall be so located that they are safe and
accessible to the Director at any reasonable time during which discharge may
occur.
   (f)   The Director shall have the right to set up on the discharger’s
property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct
sampling and/or metering of the discharger’s operations.
(Ord. 5670 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.09.095   Self-monitoring.
   (a)   The Director may require a discharger to conduct a wastewater sampling
and analysis program of a frequency and type sufficient to demonstrate
compliance with the requirements of this chapter. The Director shall specify
the minimum frequency, type, and number of samples as well as flow monitoring,
measuring, and sample analyses to be conducted by the discharger in the
discharge permit. Monitoring not specified in a discharge permit may be
required by the Director as deemed reasonable or necessary to ensure compliance
with the provisions of this chapter. The Director may also require self-
monitoring for facilities for which a discharge permit has not been issued.
   (b)   Samples collected to satisfy reporting requirements must be based on
data obtained through appropriate sampling and analysis and must be
representative of the discharger’s discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow
measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained
in good working order at all times. The failure of an industrial user to keep
its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the
industrial user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its
discharge.
   (c)   Except as indicated in subsections (d) and (e) below, the industrial
user must collect wastewater samples using 24-hour flow-proportional composite
sampling techniques, unless time-proportional composite sampling or grab
sampling is authorized by the Director. Where time-proportional composite
sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the Director, the samples must be
representative of the discharge. Using protocols (including appropriate
preservation) specified in 40 CFR Part 136 and appropriate EPA guidance,
multiple grab samples collected during a 24-hour period may be composited prior
to the analysis as follows: for cyanide, total phenols, and sulfides the
samples may be composited in the laboratory or in the field; for volatile
organics and oil and grease, the samples may be composited in the laboratory.
Composite samples for other parameters unaffected by the compositing procedures
as documented in approved EPA methodologies may be authorized by the Director,
as appropriate.
   (d)   Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, total phenols,
sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection
techniques.
   (e)   For sampling required in support of baseline monitoring and 90-day
compliance reports, a minimum of four grab samples must be used for pH,
cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide, and volatile organic compounds
for facilities for which historical sampling data do not exist; for facilities
for which historical sampling data are available, the Director may authorize a
lower minimum. For PRCCs, the industrial user is required to collect the number
of grab samples necessary to assess and assure compliance with applicable
pretreatment standards and requirements.
   (f)   The Director may authorize an industrial user to sample for a subset
of toxic organic compounds to verify compliance with the TTO limit established
in Section
16.09.055 of this chapter based on what the Director has determined may be
reasonably expected to be present in an industrial user’s discharge.
   (g)   The Director may specify the type of sampling, pH, and flow monitoring
equipment that must be installed by the discharger and used for discharger
self-monitoring. Flow monitoring devices shall be calibrated at a frequency of
at least once per year or at an alternative frequency specified by the
Director. PH monitoring devices shall be calibrated at a frequency of at least
once every six months or more frequently if recommended by the manufacturer or
at an alternative frequency as specified by the Director.
   (h)   All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted
as part of a discharge permit application or report shall be performed in
accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136 and amendments
thereto, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment
standard. If 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques
for the pollutant in question, or where the EPA determines that the Part 136
sampling and analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in
question, sampling and analyses shall be performed by using validated
analytical methods or any other applicable sampling and analytical procedures
suggested by the Director or other parties approved by the EPA. Samples shall
be obtained and analyzed at the discharger’s expense. Samples shall be analyzed
by a laboratory accredited by the California State Water Resources Control
Board for the pollutant or pollutant properties being analyzed.
   (i)   The detection limit used by the discharger for those substances
reported as nondetectable shall be no greater than one-tenth the lowest
applicable pretreatment standard.
   (j)   Records of self-monitoring shall include the following:
      (1)   Sample collection information: date, location, method,
preservation, time, and the name of individual collecting the samples;
      (2)   Analytical information: dates, names of analysts, techniques or
methods used, and the results of such analyses.
   (k)   All records generated pursuant to this section shall be maintained and
made available for inspection and copying as described in Section
16.09.155 of this chapter.
(Ord. 5670 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.09.100   Monitoring waiver.
   (a)   The Director may authorize an industrial user subject to categorical
pretreatment standards to forego sampling of a pollutant regulated by a
categorical pretreatment standard if the industrial user has demonstrated
through sampling and other technical factors that the pollutant is neither
present nor expected to be present in the industrial user’s discharge, or is
present only at background levels from intake water and without any increase in
the pollutant due to activities of the industrial user. This authorization is
subject to the following conditions:
      (1)   The waiver may be authorized where a pollutant is determined to be
present solely due to sanitary wastewater discharged from the facility provided
that the sanitary wastewater is not regulated by an applicable categorical
pretreatment standard and otherwise includes no process wastewater.
      (2)   The monitoring waiver is valid only for the duration of the
effective period of the individual wastewater discharge permit, but in no case
longer than five years. The industrial user must submit a new request for the
waiver before the waiver can be granted for each subsequent individual
wastewater discharge permit.
      (3)   In making a demonstration that a pollutant is not present, the
industrial user must provide data from at least one sampling of the facility’s
process wastewater prior to any treatment present at the facility that is
representative of all wastewater from all processes.
      (4)   The request for a monitoring waiver must be signed by an authorized
representative of the industrial user and include the certification statement
in 40 CFR 403.6(a)(2)(ii).
      (5)   Non-detectable sample results may be used only as a demonstration
that a pollutant is not present if the EPA approved method from 40 CFR Part 136
with the lowest minimum detection level for that pollutant was used in the
analysis.
      (6)   Any grant of the monitoring waiver by the Director must be included
as a condition in the industrial user’s discharge permit. The reasons
supporting the waiver and any information submitted by the industrial user in
its request for the waiver shall be maintained by the Director for a period of
three years after expiration of the waiver.
      (7)   Upon approval of the monitoring waiver and revision of the
industrial user’
      (8)   In the event that a waived pollutant is found to be present or is
expected to be present because of changes that occur in the industrial user’s
operations, the industrial user shall immediately notify the Director and shall
monitor for the waived pollutant at least once during each PRCC reporting
period or more frequently if directed by the Director.
   (b)   This section does not supersede certification processes and
requirements established in categorical pretreatment standards, except as
otherwise specified in the categorical pretreatment standard.
(Ord. 5670 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.09.105   Pretreatment facilities.
   (a)   Industrial users shall provide wastewater pretreatment as necessary to
comply with this chapter and shall achieve compliance with all categorical
pretreatment standards, local limits, and the prohibitions contained in Section
16.09.040 of this chapter within the time limitations specified by EPA, the
state, or the Director, whichever is most stringent. Industrial users shall, at
all times, properly operate and maintain all facilities and systems of
treatment, disposal, monitoring, and control (and related appurtenances) which
are installed or used by the industrial user to achieve compliance with this
chapter and/or their wastewater discharge permit. Any facilities necessary for
compliance shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the industrial user’s
expense. All required facilities and systems of treatment and operations and
maintenance procedures shall be described in detailed plans, operations and
maintenance manuals, and standard operating procedures. Plans, operations and
maintenance manuals, and standard operating procedures shall be submitted to
the Director for review, and shall be acceptable to the Director before such
facilities and/or procedures are constructed and/or implemented. The review of
such plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the industrial user
from the responsibility of modifying such facilities and/or procedures as
necessary to produce a discharge acceptable to the city under the provisions of
this chapter. Industrial users shall keep in a state of readiness all systems
installed to achieve compliance with the provisions of this chapter and/or
their wastewater discharge permit. All systems, both those in service and
reserve, shall be inspected and maintained on a regular basis.
   (b)   Inspection and maintenance records for process and pollution control
and monitoring systems shall be maintained and made available for inspection
and copying as described in Section
16.09.155 of this chapter.
   (c)   It shall be unlawful to tamper with, divert flow from, or render
inaccurate any monitoring device or equipment installed or operated to comply
with pretreatment standards or requirements, this chapter, or a discharge
permit. Doing so constitutes falsification of information as described in
Section
16.09.145 of this chapter.
   (d)   Whenever deemed necessary, the Director may require industrial users
to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain
wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate
points of discharge, separate sewage wastestreams from industrial wastestreams,
and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW and determine
the industrial user’s compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
   (e)   The Director may require any person discharging into the POTW to
install and maintain, on their property and at their expense, a suitable
storage and flow-control facility to ensure equalization of flow. An individual
wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization.
   (f)   The Director may require any discharger to install settling chambers
or equivalent pretreatment systems where necessary to prevent the entry of
inert solids into the sanitary sewer system. For the purposes of this section,
“inert solids” shall mean solid substances including, but not limited to: sand,
rocks, dirt, glass, metal, wood, bone, or plastic.
   (g)   Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided by the discharger
when, in the opinion of the Director, they are necessary for the proper
handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease and oil, or sand;
except that such interceptors shall not be required for residential users. All
interception units shall be of a type and capacity approved by the Director and
shall be so located to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such
interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned, and repaired at the discharger’s
expense in accordance with guidelines established by the Director. This
subsection shall apply in addition to any applicable requirements of Chapter
16.13 of this Code.
(Ord. 5670 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.09.110   Personnel orientation.
   (a)   Dischargers shall take necessary steps to inform appropriate personnel
of the provisions of this chapter and specifically, any operations and
maintenance manuals and standard operating procedures required by this chapter.
Such personnel shall include, but not be limited to, workers, contractors,
supervisors, and managers whose duties or responsibilities pertain in any
manner to the production, treatment, or disposal of wastes regulated by this
chapter.
   (b)   Steps to inform such personnel shall include, but not be limited to:
      (1)   Orientation of newly employed or assigned personnel prior to
commencement of work and at least annually thereafter;
      (2)   Posting of signs at work areas indicating approved methods for
disposition of wastes and reporting requirements and instructions for
accidental spills and increased loadings; and
      (3)   Posting of signs visible from each drainage area (sink, cup sink,
floor drain, etc.) not connected to appropriate treatment indicating “NOTICE –
DO NOT DISPOSE OF CHEMICALS IN THIS DRAIN” or equivalent.
   (c)   All signs shall be translated into the primary language(s) of
personnel whose duties or responsibilities pertain in any manner to the
production, treatment or disposal of wastes regulated by this chapter, unless
the primary language of all personnel is English.
(Ord. 5670 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.09.115   Accidental discharge prevention.
   (a)   Industrial users shall provide adequate protection to prevent
accidental discharge of hazardous or prohibited materials, slugs, or other
wastes regulated by this chapter. Where directed by the Director the industrial
user shall install retention basins, dikes, storage tanks, or other facilities
in conformance with Title 17 of this code designed to eliminate, neutralize,
offset or otherwise negate the effects of prohibited materials or wastes which
may be accidentally discharged in violation of this chapter.
   (b)   Each industrial user shall notify the city immediately of any changes
at its facility affecting the potential for a slug discharge as required by
Section
16.09.135 of this chapter.
   (c)   The Director may require any industrial user to develop, submit, and
implement a slug control plan or take such other action that may be necessary
to control slug discharges. A slug control plan shall contain, at a minimum,
the following:
      (1)   Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch
discharges;
      (2)   Description of stored chemicals;
      (3)   Procedures for immediately notifying the Director of slug
discharges, as required by Section
16.09.135 of this chapter; and
      (4)   Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug
discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and
maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and
unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building
of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic
pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency
response.
(Ord. 5670 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.09.120   Reporting and certification requirements for industrial users.
   (a)   Industrial users are subject to the reporting and certification
requirements contained in Title 40 CFR Part 403.
   (b)   Industrial users shall submit PRCCs to the Director every six months,
on January 15 and July 15 of each calendar year. The Director may require more
frequent reporting for individual industrial users as deemed reasonable or
necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (c)   All PRCCs must be signed by an authorized representative and contain
appropriate certification statements. If the designation of an authorized
representative is no longer accurate because a different individual or position
has responsibility for the overall operation of the facility or overall
responsibility for environmental matters for the company, a new written
authorization satisfying the requirements of this section must be submitted to
the Director prior to or together with any reports to be signed by an
authorized representative.
   (d)   PRCCs shall be completed according to guidelines established by the
Director. In cases where a pretreatment standard requires compliance with a BMP
or pollution prevention alternative, the industrial user must submit
documentation required by the Director or the categorical pretreatment standard
necessary to determine the compliance status of the industrial user.
   (e)   The Director may require information on facility operations in
addition to that required on PRCC forms as deemed necessary to evaluate
industrial user compliance during the reporting period.
   (f)   If an industrial user subject to the reporting requirements in this
chapter monitors any regulated pollutant at an appropriate sampling location
more frequently than required and in accordance with the techniques prescribed
in 40 CFR Part 136 and amendments thereto, the results of this monitoring shall
be reported in the industrial user’s PRCC.
   (g)   A discharger determined to be a non-significant categorical industrial
user by the Director pursuant to subsection (C) of the definition of
significant industrial user in Section
16.09.015 must annually submit the signed certification in accordance with 40
CFR 403.3(v)(2) and an alternative PRCC required by the Director.
   (h)   The Director may establish an electronic submittal program for
submission of reports, documents, and data pursuant to 40 CFR Part 3.
   (i)   Industrial users that send electronic (digital) documents to the
Director to satisfy the requirements of this section must meet all federal,
state, and local electronic signature requirements. Electronic data shall be in
a format required by the Director. The Director may require reporting in both
digital and traditional format.
   (j)   Industrial users that send electronic documents to the Director to
satisfy the requirements of this section must register for the system online
and submit a signed subscriber agreement to the Director. An electronic
submission shall be deemed to have been properly received by the Director when
it is received by the electronic system, accessible by RWQCP staff and a
confirmation is sent to the signatory making the submission. When the sender
receives confirmation and can fully review the submitted materials, the report
and related data shall be considered received.
   (k)   Electronic submittal of reports, documents, and data by any person
under an electronic submittal program established by the Director is subject to
the following requirements:
      (1)   A person is subject to any appropriate civil or criminal penalties,
or other remedies under federal, state or local law for failure to comply with
a reporting requirement if the person does not comply with the applicable
provisions of the established electronic submittal program;
      (2)   In the event that any submittal under the established electronic
submittal program bears an electronic signature, the electronic signature has
the same effect under this section as if the submitting person had instead
submitted a paper document with a wet signature;
      (3)   Proof that a particular electronic signature device was used to
create an electronic signature included in reports, documents or data submitted
under the established electronic submittal program shall be sufficient to
establish that the individual uniquely entitled to use the electronic signature
device at the time of signature did so with the intent to sign the electronic
report, document or data and thereby validate and give effect to the electronic
submittal; and
      (4)   Nothing in the established electronic submittal program limits the
use of the electronically submitted reports, documents, or data or any
information contained therein as evidence in enforcement proceedings.
   (l)   Failure to submit required reports by the specified due date shall be
considered a violation of the provisions of this chapter. The Director may
allow submission of required reports on the following business day in instances
where the due date falls on a weekend or a holiday.
(Ord. 5670 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.09.125   Reports from unpermitted users.
   Dischargers not required to obtain an individual wastewater discharge permit
or coverage under a general discharge permit shall provide reports to the
Director as deemed reasonable or necessary by the Director.
(Ord. 5670 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.09.130   Reports of changed conditions and final closure.
   Each industrial user shall notify the Director of any significant changes to
the industrial user’s operations or system which might alter the nature,
quality, or volume of its wastewater, including but not limited to facility or
process closure, at least 30 calendar days before the change.
   (a)   The Director may require the industrial user to submit such
information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition,
including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under
Section
16.09.080 of this chapter.
   (b)   The Director may issue an individual wastewater discharge permit or a
general discharge permit under Section
16.09.075 of this chapter or modify an existing individual wastewater discharge
permit or a general discharge permit under Section
16.09.085 of this chapter in response to changed conditions or anticipated
changed conditions.
   (c)   For the purposes of this section, “final closure” means closure of an
industrial or commercial facility when an entire building is being vacated by
the current discharger, or when a discharger’s use of an entire building will
no longer include use of hazardous materials. Prior to final closure of any
industrial or commercial facility, the Director may require cleaning,
inspection, and/or testing of the facility’s sanitary sewer lines,
appurtenances, and/or devices at the discharger’s expense to ensure that the
integrity of the sewer lines has not been compromised and to determine the
quantity and pollutant content of sediments. Inspection and/or testing to
ensure the integrity of sewer lines may be required at the discharger’s expense
when the discharger’s discharge history at that facility includes pH
fluctuations, or when past discharges may have compromised or call into
question the integrity of the sewer lines. Inspection and/or testing to
determine the quantity and pollutant content of sediments may be required when
the discharger’s type of operations and pollutant content of discharges make
the presence of contaminated sediments likely. Inspection and testing may
include, but not be limited to, pressurized testing, smoke testing, video
camera inspection, and/or analytical testing of sediments for pollutants
regulated by the discharger’s discharge permit. Where contaminated sediments or
compromised sewer lines are identified, responses may include, but are not
limited to, requiring replacement of compromised sewer lines and requiring
removal of contaminated sediments from sewer lines at discharger’s expense. In
lieu of analytical testing, facilities may elect to remove sediments from sewer
lines in a manner approved by the Director.
(Ord. 5670 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.09.135   Reports of potential problems and accidental discharges.
   (a)   In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to,
accidental discharges, discharges of a non-routine, episodic nature, a non-
customary batch discharge, or a slug discharge that might cause problems for
the POTW, the discharger shall immediately telephone and notify the Director of
the incident at (650)-329-2122 or (650)-329-2598. If the discharger is unable
to reach a live person at the POTW, the industrial user shall immediately
notify the city by calling the City of Palo Alto 24-hour Dispatch Center at
(650)-329-2413. This notification shall include the location of the discharge,
type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken
by the discharger.
   (b)   The discharger shall immediately take action to stop, contain, and
cleanup unauthorized discharges or otherwise stop the noncompliance with this
chapter, and correct the problem.
   (c)   Unless directed otherwise by the Director, as soon as practicable and
throughout the incident, the discharger shall collect representative samples at
the point of release and at any impacted sampling location(s) and provide
analytical results to the Director.
   (d)   Within five business days following such discharge, the discharger
shall, unless waived by the Director, submit a detailed written report
describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the
discharger to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not
relieve the discharger of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which
might be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any
other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the
discharger of any fines, penalties, or other liability which may be imposed
pursuant to this chapter.
   (e)   A notice shall be permanently posted on the discharger’s bulletin
board or other prominent place advising employees who to call in the event of a
discharge described in subsection (a), above. Employers shall ensure that all
employees, who could cause such a discharge to occur, are advised of the
emergency notification procedure.
   (f)   Significant industrial users are required to notify the Director
immediately of any change at its facility affecting the potential for a slug
discharge.
(Ord. 5670 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.09.140   Reports of noncompliance.
   (a)   Noncompliance with the provisions of this chapter, or the provisions
of any discharge permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be reported to
the Director within 24 hours of becoming aware of the noncompliance. Reports of
noncompliance related to discharge that might cause potential problems for the
POTW are to be reported pursuant to Section
16.09.135 of this chapter. If the noncompliance is related to sampling
performed by an industrial user, the industrial user shall repeat the sampling
and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the Director
within 30 calendar days after becoming aware of the noncompliance. Resampling
by the industrial user is not required if the city performs sampling at the
industrial user’s facility at least once a month, or if the city performs
sampling at the industrial user’s facility between the time when the initial
sampling was conducted and the time when the industrial user or the city
receives the results of this sampling, or if the city has performed the
sampling and analysis in lieu of the industrial user.
   (b)   Such notification shall not relieve the discharger of any expense,
loss, damage, or other liability which might be incurred as a result of damage
to the POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to person or property; nor
shall such notification relieve the discharger of any fines, penalties, or
other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. 5670 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.09.145   Falsification of information.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to make any false statements,
representations, or certifications in any application, record, report, plan, or
other documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this
chapter, an individual wastewater discharge permit, general discharge permit,
or order issued hereunder, or who falsifies, tampers with, diverts flow from,
or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under
this chapter. A person who knowingly makes any such false statements,
representations, or certifications shall be subject to:
   (a)   The provisions of 18 U.S.C. Section 1001 relating to fraud and false
statements;
   (b)   The provisions of Section 309(c)(4) of the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C.
Section 1319(c)(4)) as amended, governing false statements, representations or
certification;
   (c)   The provisions of Section 309(c)(6) of the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C.
Section 1319(c)(6)) regarding responsible corporate officers; and
   (d)   Enforcement under Section 16.09.200 of this chapter.
(Ord. 5670 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.09.150   Date of receipt of reports.
   Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date
postmarked. For reports that are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail
facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of
the report shall govern.
(Ord. 5670 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.09.155   Retention of records.
   Industrial users subject to the reporting requirements of this chapter shall
retain, and make available for inspection and copying without unreasonable
delay, all records of information obtained pursuant to this chapter including,
but not limited to, any required monitoring activities, any additional records
of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the
industrial user independent of such requirements, hazardous waste manifests,
and documentation associated with BMPs. This includes electronic data and
information records maintained and/or submitted in accordance with Section
16.09.120 of this chapter. Records shall include the date, exact place, method,
and time of sampling, and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the
dates analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical
techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses. All records
required to be maintained by this chapter shall remain available for a period
of at least three years. This period shall be automatically extended for the
duration of any unresolved litigation concerning the industrial user or the
city, or where the industrial user has been specifically notified of a longer
retention period by the Director.
(Ord. 5670 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.09.160   Requirements for sinks and drains.
   (a)   Interior (indoor) floor drains may not be placed in areas where
hazardous materials, hazardous wastes, industrial wastes, industrial process
water, lubricating fluids, vehicle fluids, or vehicle equipment cleaning
wastewater are used or stored. The Director may allow an exception to this
requirement under the following circumstances:
      (1)   When the drain is connected to a wastewater treatment unit approved
by the Director;
      (2)   When the drain is protected from spills by a berm system;
      (3)   When secondary containment is provided for all such materials and
equipment;
      (4)   For safety showers: When the drain is installed with a temporary
plug which remains closed except when the shower is in use, or when the drain
is protected from spills by either a covered sump or berm system;
      (5)   For industrial process equipment: If the equipment does not contain
hazardous materials or hazardous waste and if all floor drains are equipped
with fail-safe valves which shall be kept closed during periods of operation.
   (b)   Exterior (outdoor) drains may be connected to the sanitary sewer
system only if the area in which the drain is located is covered and protected
from rainwater run-on by berms and/or grading, and appropriate wastewater
pretreatment approved by the Director is provided.
   (c)   Aspirators connected to laboratory sink faucets are prohibited.
Aspirators designed and used for transferring acids and bases from stationary,
permanent laboratory sinks to treatment facilities shall be allowed.
   (d)   No chemicals or hazardous material shall be stored above a sink that
is connected to the sanitary sewer system. Laboratory countertops and
laboratory sinks shall be separated by a berm which prevents hazardous
materials spilled on the countertop from draining to the sink.
   (e)   Sewer traps below laboratory sinks shall be made of glass or other
approved transparent materials to allow inspection and to determine frequency
of cleaning. Alternatively, a removable plug for cleaning the trap may be
provided, in which case a cleaning frequency shall be established by the
Director. The Director may grant an exception to this requirement for areas
where mercury or mercury-containing equipment will not be stored or used;
provided, that in the event such an exception is granted and mercury or
mercury-containing equipment is subsequently stored or used in the area, the
sink trap shall be retrofitted at the discharger’s expense to meet this
requirement prior to storage or use of mercury or mercury-containing equipment.
(Ord. 5670 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.09.165   Requirements for newly constructed, remodeled, improved, or
converted commercial and industrial facilities.
   (a)   The following requirements apply, where applicable or necessary to
effectuate the objectives of this chapter, to new construction, remodels,
improvement, or conversions of commercial and industrial facilities that
require a planning entitlement or building permit from the city:
      (1)   Dischargers of industrial waste shall be in full compliance with
the provisions of this chapter prior to commencement of discharge into the
sanitary sewer system;
      (2)   Upon request of the Director, dischargers shall complete a waste
minimization study in accordance with guidelines established by the Director;
      (3)   Industrial waste shall be separated from sewage by means of
separate plumbing prior to a point determined acceptable by the Director for
location of industrial waste pretreatment and/or monitoring equipment;
      (4)   Sinks as well as exterior and interior drains are subject to the
requirements of and shall be in compliance with Section
16.09.160 of this chapter;
      (5)   Copper, copper alloys, lead, and lead alloys, including brass,
shall not be used in sewer lines, connectors, or seals coming in contact with
sanitary sewage except for domestic waste sink traps and short lengths of
associated connecting pipes where alternate materials are not practical;
      (6)   Sacrificial zinc anodes are not permitted to be in contact with the
water supply in a water distribution system;
      (7)   Discharge drains for pools, spas, and fountains shall not be
connected directly to the storm drain system or to the sanitary sewer system;
      (8)   If installed, parking garage floor drains on interior levels shall
be connected to an oil-water separator prior to discharging to the sanitary
sewer system. The oil-water separator shall be cleaned at a frequency of at
least once every 12 months or more frequently if recommended by the
manufacturer or required by the Director. Installation, certification, and
maintenance records shall be maintained and made available for inspection and
copying as described in Section
16.09.155 of this chapter. Oil-water separators shall have a minimum capacity
of 100 gallons;
      (9)   Mercury switches shall not be installed in sewer or storm drain
sumps.
(Ord. 5670 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.09.170   Requirements for newly constructed, remodeled, improved, or
converted multi-family use residential properties.
   (a)   The following requirements apply, where applicable or necessary to
effectuate the objectives of this chapter, to newly constructed, remodeled,
improved, or converted multiple-family use residential properties that require
a planning entitlement or building permit from the city to the extent that the
portion of the property to be constructed, remodeled, or converted is related
to the subject of the requirement:
      (1)   Sinks as well as interior and exterior drains are subject to the
requirements of and shall be in compliance with Section 16.09.160 of this
chapter;
      (2)   Copper, copper alloys, lead, and lead alloys, including brass,
shall not be used in sewer lines, connectors, or seals coming in contact with
sanitary sewage except for domestic waste sink traps and short lengths of
associated connecting pipes where alternate materials are not practical;
      (3)   Sacrificial zinc anodes are not permitted to be in contact with the
water supply in a water distribution system;
      (4)   Discharge drains for pools, spas, and fountains shall not be
connected directly to the storm drain system or to the sanitary sewer system.
When draining is necessary the discharge to the sanitary sewer system will be
allowed pursuant to permitting requirements under Section
16.09.180;
      (5)   If installed, parking garage floor drains on interior levels shall
be connected to an oil-water separator prior to discharging into the sanitary
sewer system. The oil-water separator shall be cleaned at a frequency of at
least once every 12 months or more frequently if recommended by the
manufacturer or required by the Director. Installation, certification, and
maintenance records shall be maintained and made available for inspection and
copying as described in Section
16.09.155 of this chapter. Oil-water separators shall have a minimum capacity
of 100 gallons;
      (6)   Newly constructed, remodeled or converted multiple-family use
residential properties and residential development projects with 25 or more
units shall provide a covered area for occupants to wash their vehicles. A
drain shall be installed to capture all vehicle washwaters and shall be
connected to an oil-water separator prior to discharge to the sanitary sewer
system. The oil-water separator shall be cleaned at a frequency of at least
once every 12 months or more frequently if recommended by the manufacturer or
required by the Director. Oil-water separators shall have a minimum capacity of
100 gallons. The area shall be graded or bermed in such a manner as to prevent
the discharge of stormwater to the sanitary sewer system. This requirement can
be exempted if no washing is allowed on-site via rental/lease agreement, any
hose bibs are to be fitted with lock-outs or other connection controls, and
signage is posted indicating that car washing is not allowed;
      (7)   Mercury switches shall not be installed in sewer or storm drain
sumps.
(Ord. 5670 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.09.175   Requirements for cooling systems, pools, spas, fountains, boilers,
and heat exchangers.
   (a)   Once-through cooling water from systems using potable water as a
coolant shall not be discharged to the sanitary sewer system except in the
following instances:
      (1)   Emergency;
      (2)   For once-through cooling water used for bench top reflux or
distillation or other similarly sized activity; or
      (3)   For short term use only, upon the determination that the use is for
a research activity for which another source of cooling is not readily
available.
   (b)   No person shall add to cooling systems, pools, spas, fountains,
boilers, or heat exchangers, any substance that contains any of the following:
      (1)   Chromium in excess of 2.0 mg/L;
      (2)   Copper in excess of 2.0 mg/L;
      (3)   Zinc in excess of 2.0 mg/L;
      (4)   Tributyltin in excess of 0.1 mg/L; or
       (5)   Molybdenum in excess of 2.0 mg/L.
   The above limits shall apply to any of the above-listed substances prior to
dilution in the cooling system, pool, spa, fountain, boiler, or heat exchanger.
   (c)   Cooling towers shall be equipped with flow monitoring equipment for
the measurement of makeup water and blowdown.
   (d)   Devices using electricity to dissolve copper or silver into water
distribution systems, cooling systems, pools, spas, or fountains must be
authorized by the Director in writing.
(Ord. 5670 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.09.180   Requirements for exceptional waste.
   (a)   A discharger may submit a discharge permit application form
established by the Director to request to discharge prohibited wastes not in
conformance with this chapter or wastes containing concentrations of substances
or characteristics in excess of those permitted by this chapter. Discharge
originating within the city of such wastes shall not be allowed without first
obtaining a discharge permit from the Director.
   (b)   Exceptional wastes, as used in this section, are aqueous wastes that
may include, but are not limited to:
      (1)   Construction site dewatering wastewater where soil or groundwater
contamination is or may be present;
      (2)   Groundwater contaminated with organic solvents generated as a
result of pump tests in preparation for a groundwater cleanup and wastewater
generated during sampling activities;
      (3)   Aqueous wastes generated by either permanent or mobile hazardous
waste treatment units used to treat hazardous wastes at the generator’s site;
      (4)   Aqueous wastes generated as a result of site cleanup activities;
      (5)   Pool drainage greater than 20,000 gallons. Pools that are 20,000
gallons or less may be drained with a hose or other temporary system or a fixed
pipe with an air gap and receiving sink to a discharger’s sanitary sewer
cleanout pursuant to Section
16.09.170 without an exceptional waste discharge permit if done so during dry
weather and at a rate of 30 gpm or less; or
      (6)   Fire sprinkler system flush, test, or drain water discharged at a
rate greater than 30 gpm. Fire sprinkler system flush, test, or drain water
discharged at a rate less than 30 gpm may be drained to a discharger’s sanitary
sewer cleanout without an exceptional waste discharge permit.
   (c)   The maximum allowable limit for copper for exceptional wastes to the
sanitary sewer system shall be 2.0 mg/L.
(Ord. 5670 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.09.185   Root and pest control chemical use.
   (a)   No person shall discharge, dispose of or add to the sanitary sewer
system any substance intended to control roots or pests without first obtaining
a discharge permit from the Director. Applicants for a discharge permit shall
submit a completed discharge permit application form established by the
Director.
   (b)   The Director may impose terms and conditions in the discharge permit
which the Director deems reasonable or necessary to carry out the purpose of
this chapter.
   (c)   No person shall discharge, dispose of, or add to the sanitary sewer
system any substance containing greater than 5% copper by weight, or copper
sulfate in any amount, to control roots.
   (d)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to discharges from
residential properties.
(Ord. 5670 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.09.190   Requirements for dental facilities.
   (a)   Except as provided in subsection (b) below, no person shall discharge,
cause, allow, or permit any discharge to the sanitary sewer system from a
dental vacuum system, unless such discharge has first been processed through an
amalgam separator as defined by Section
16.09.015 of this chapter.
   (b)   A dental vacuum system may be operated without an amalgam separator
provided that the system is not used in connection with the removal or
placement of fillings that contain dental amalgam except in limited emergency
or unplanned, unanticipated circumstances, and the system is used exclusively
by the following types of dental practices:
      (1)   Oral pathology;
      (2)   Oral and maxillofacial radiology;
      (3)   Oral and maxillofacial surgery;
      (4)   Orthodontics;
      (5)   Periodontics; or
      (6)   Prosthodontics.
   (c)   Dental dischargers shall submit reports for each facility in
accordance with guidelines established by the Director.
   (d)   Dental dischargers that remove or place dental amalgam shall comply
with the following BMPs:
      (1)   Amalgam separators shall be maintained in accordance with
manufacturer recommendations. Installation, certification, and maintenance
records shall be maintained and made available for inspection and copying as
described in Section
16.09.155 of this chapter;
      (2)   Amalgam separator(s) shall be inspected in accordance with the
manufacturer’s operating manual to ensure proper operation and maintenance of
the separator(s) and to confirm that all amalgam process wastewater is flowing
through the amalgam retaining portion of the amalgam separator(s). In the event
that an amalgam separator is not functioning properly, the amalgam separator
must be repaired consistent with manufacturer instructions or replaced with a
compliant unit within ten business days after the malfunction is discovered by
the dental discharger;
      (3)   Amalgam retaining units shall be replaced in accordance with the
manufacturer’s schedule as specified in the manufacturer’s operating manual or
when the amalgam retaining unit has reached the maximum level, as specified by
the manufacturer in the operating manual, at which the amalgam separator can
perform to the specified efficiency, whichever comes sooner;
      (4)   Dental office personnel who handle amalgam and amalgam waste shall
be trained in the proper handling, management, and disposal of mercury-
containing materials. Training records shall be maintained and made available
for inspection and copying in accordance with Section
16.09.155 of this chapter;
      (5)   Amalgam waste including, but not limited to dental amalgam from
chairside traps, screens, vacuum pump filters, dental tools, cuspidors, or
collection devices shall not be discharged to the sanitary sewer system.
Amalgam waste shall be stored, managed and disposed in accordance with
applicable federal, state, and local regulations including the following:
         (A)   Store and dispose of used chair-side traps, vacuum pump filters,
screens, and their contents with amalgam waste.
         (B)   Store amalgam waste in airtight, structurally sound, and
appropriately labeled containers.
      (6)   Oxidizing or acidic cleaners, including but not limited to bleach,
chlorine, iodine, and peroxide, that have a pH lower than six or greater than
eight shall not be used to disinfect dental unit water lines, chair-side traps,
and vacuum lines that discharge amalgam process wastewater to the sanitary
sewer system; and
      (7)   The use of bulk mercury is prohibited. Only pre-capsulated dental
amalgam is permitted.
   (e)   Records required to be kept pursuant to this section shall be
maintained and made available for inspection and copying as described in
Section 16.09.155 of this chapter.
(Ord. 5670 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.09.195   Publication of users in significant noncompliance.
   The Director shall publish at least annually, in a newspaper of general
circulation that provides meaningful public notice within the jurisdictions
served by the POTW, a list of the industrial users which, at any time during
the previous 12 months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable
pretreatment standards and requirements. For the purposes of this section, a
significant industrial user (or any industrial user that violates subsections
(c), (d), or (h) of this section) is in significant noncompliance if its
violation meets one or more of the following criteria:
   (a)   Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as
those in which 66% or more of all of the measurements taken for the same
pollutant parameter during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) a
numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits,
as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(l);
   (b)   Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in
which 33% or more of all of the measurements taken for the same pollutant
parameter during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the numeric
pretreatment standard or requirement including instantaneous limits, as defined
by 40 CFR 403.3(l) multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC=1.4 for BOD, TSS,
fats, oil, and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH);
   (c)   Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement as
defined by 40 CFR 403.3(l) (daily maximum, long-term average, instantaneous
limit, or narrative standard) that the Director determines has caused, alone or
in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through (including
endangering the health of city personnel or the general public);
   (d)   Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to
human health, welfare, or to the environment or has resulted in the POTW’s
exercise of its emergency authority under 40 CFR 403.8(f)(1)(vi)(B) to halt or
prevent such a discharge;
   (e)   Failure to meet, within 90 days after the scheduled date, a compliance
schedule milestone contained in an individual wastewater discharge permit or a
general discharge permit or enforcement order for starting construction,
completing construction, or attaining final compliance;
   (f)   Failure to provide, within 45 days after the due date, required
reports such as baseline monitoring reports, 90-day compliance reports,
periodic self-monitoring reports (PRCC), and reports on compliance with
compliance schedules;
   (g)   Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
   (h)   Any other violations or group of violations, which may include a
violation of BMPs, which the Director determines will adversely affect the
operation or implementation of the pretreatment program.
(Ord. 5670 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.09.200   Enforcement and penalties.
   (a)   Warning. When the Director finds that a discharger has violated, or
continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, an individual wastewater
discharge permit, a general discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any
other pretreatment standard or requirement, the Director may issue verbal or
written warnings in response to minor violations of this chapter. Compliance
with warnings does not limit further enforcement action by the city. Warnings
shall not be a prerequisite to any other enforcement action, including permit
suspension or revocation as described in subsection (c) below.
   (b)   Notice of violation. When the Director finds that a discharger has
violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, an individual
wastewater discharge permit, a general discharge permit, or order issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the Director may
serve upon that discharger a written notice of violation (NOV). The NOV may
include a deadline to correct such violation(s), or to respond with an
explanation of the violation(s) and a plan for the satisfactory correction and
prevention thereof. Submission of such a plan in no way relieves the discharger
of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the NOV.
Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the Director to take any
action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without
first issuing a notice of violation.
   (c)   Permit revocation or suspension. Subject to the procedural
requirements of Section
16.09.205 of this chapter, the Director may revoke or suspend an individual
wastewater discharge permit or coverage under a general discharge permit for
good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons:
      (1)   Failure to notify the Director of significant changes to the
wastewater prior to the changed discharge;
      (2)   Failure to provide prior notification to the Director of changed
conditions pursuant to Section 16.09.130 of this chapter;
      (3)   Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts
in the discharge permit application;
      (4)   Falsifying self-monitoring reports and certification statements;
      (5)   Tampering with monitoring equipment;
      (6)   Refusing to allow the Director timely access to the facility
premises and records;
      (7)   Failure to meet effluent limitations;
      (8)   Failure to pay fees, fines, sewer charges, or penalties;
      (9)   Failure to meet compliance schedules;
      (10)   Failure to complete a discharge permit application;
      (11)   Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business
ownership of a permitted facility; or
      (12)   Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, term of the
individual wastewater discharge permit, general discharge permit, or provision
of this chapter.
   (d)   Required installation of capture system. The Director may order that a
discharger install, at the expense of the discharger, a temporary system for
the capture, treatment, testing, and release (or off-haul) of wastewater,
subject to the following:
      (1)   This requirement will apply to facilities that have produced
multiple violations for the same parameter at the same sampling point or repeat
violation of permit provisions, when the Director determines that appropriate
corrective measures have proved difficult to identify or implement;
      (2)   This requirement will apply only to those specific areas of a
facility from which the Director determines that the discharge or noncompliance
may be originating, rather than to the entire flow from the facility, unless
there is no reasonable way to determine where the discharge may be originating
or to segregate said flows;
      (3)   If the Director determines that a capture system is impractical,
the Director may require an alternative compliance measure of equivalent
effectiveness; and
      (4)   This requirement will be terminated following a demonstration of
compliance as determined by the Director. The sampling required to demonstrate
compliance for violations of pollutant limits shall be set by the Director and
may be up to 21 consecutive business days of violation-free self-monitoring by
the discharger followed by up to ten days of violation-free sampling by the
Director.
   (e)   Cease and desist orders. When the Director finds that a discharger has
violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, an individual
wastewater discharge permit, a general discharge permit or order issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the
discharger’s past violations are likely to recur, the Director may issue an
order to the discharger directing it to cease and desist all such violations
and directing the discharger to:
      (1)   Immediately comply with all pretreatment requirements and
pretreatment standards contained in this chapter; and
      (2)   Take such appropriate remedial or preventative action as may be
needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including
halting operations and/or terminating the discharge. Issuance of a cease and
desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any
other action against the discharger.
   (f)   Administrative compliance order. When the Director finds that a
discharger has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this
chapter, an individual wastewater discharge permit, a general discharge permit,
or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement,
the Director may issue a compliance order to the discharger in accordance with
Chapter 1.16 of this code. If the discharger does not come into compliance
within the time provided, sewer service may be discontinued unless adequate
treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are installed and
properly operated, in addition to any other relief allowed by Chapter 1.16 or
any other law. Compliance orders also may contain other requirements to address
the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring and management
practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the
sewer. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance
established for a pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a compliance
order relieve the discharger of liability for any violation, including any
continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar
against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the discharger.
   (g)   Administrative citation. When the Director finds that a discharger has
violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, an individual
wastewater discharge permit, a general discharge permit, or order issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the Director may
issue an administrative citation in accordance with
Chapter 1.12 of this code. Issuance of an administrative citation shall not be
a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the
person.
   (h)   Emergency suspension. The Director may immediately order a discharger
to suspend any discharge, after informal notice, whenever such suspension is
necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge, which reasonably appears
to present, or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or
welfare of persons. The Director may also immediately order a discharger to
suspend any discharge, after notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens
to interfere with the operation of the POTW, or which presents, or may present,
an endangerment to the environment. Any discharger notified of a suspension
shall immediately stop or eliminate its discharge. In the event of a
discharger’s failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension
order, the Director may take such steps as deemed necessary, including
immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to
the POTW, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any persons. Such suspension
shall be effective immediately, but shall be reviewable pursuant to the hearing
process provided in Section
16.09.205 of this chapter. The Director may allow the discharger to recommence
its discharge when the discharger has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the
Director that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the emergency
termination or permit revocation proceedings in Section
16.09.200 of this chapter are initiated against the discharger.
   (i)   Emergency termination of discharge. The city reserves the right to
revoke any permit issued pursuant to this chapter and/or terminate or cause to
be terminated sewer service to any premises for noncompliance with the
provisions of this chapter, an individual wastewater discharge permit, a
general discharge permit, which reasonably appear to present an imminent
endangerment to the health, safety, and welfare of persons. The discharger
shall immediately cease any noncompliant discharge, upon verbal and/or written
notice of the Director. Such termination shall be effective immediately, but
shall be reviewable pursuant to the hearing process provided in Section
16.09.205 of this chapter.
   (j)   Injunctive relief. When the Director finds that a discharger has
violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, an individual
wastewater discharge permit, a general discharge permit, or order issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the Director may
petition the Superior Court of California through the City Attorney for the
issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which
restrains or compels the specific performance of the individual wastewater
discharge permit, the general discharge permit, order, or other requirement
imposed by this chapter on activities of the discharger. The Director may also
seek such other action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief,
including a requirement for the discharger to conduct environmental
remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against a discharger.
   (k)   Civil penalties.
      (1)   Any person who has violated, or continues to violate any provision
of this chapter, an individual wastewater discharge permit, a general discharge
permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement shall be liable to the city for a maximum civil penalty of up to
$25,000 per day for each day in which such violation occurs. In the case of a
monthly or other long-term average discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for
each day during the period of the violation.
      (2)   The city may petition the Superior Court of California pursuant to
Government Code Section 54740 to recover the sums in subsection (k)(1) of this
section as well as reasonable attorneys’ fees, court costs, and other expenses
associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring
expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the city.
      (3)   Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against a discharger.
   (l)   Criminal penalties. As provided in
Chapter 1.08 of this code, violations of the provisions of this chapter shall
be subject to criminal penalties. The following employee positions are
authorized to exercise the authority provided in California Penal Code section
836.5 for violations of this Chapter: manager watershed protection, senior
engineer, manager environmental control program, associate engineer, senior
industrial waste investigator, industrial waste investigator, industrial waste
inspector.
   (m)   Remedies nonexclusive. The remedies provided for in this chapter are
cumulative and not exclusive, and shall be in addition to the provisions of
Chapters
1.08,
1.12, and
1.16 of this code, and all other remedies available to the city under federal,
state, or local law. The Director may take any, all, or any combination of
these actions against a noncompliant discharger. Enforcement actions may be
taken concurrently.
(Ord. 5670 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.09.205   Permit denial, modification, suspension, or revocation hearing.
   (a)   An applicant or permit holder shall have at its request, a hearing
before the city manager, or their designee, before the applicant’s discharge
permit application is denied, or before modification, subjugation to additional
terms and conditions, reissuance, suspension, or revocation of a discharger’s
discharge permit.
   (b)   The Director, or their designee, shall give the applicant or permit
holder ten calendar days written notice of intent to deny the applicant’s
discharge permit application or to modify, make subject to additional terms,
suspend, or revoke a discharge permit. Permit modifications that are requested
by the discharger, that solely entail a permit term extension, or result from
facility final closure are not subject to this notification requirement. The
notice shall set forth specifically the grounds for the Director’s intention to
deny the applicant’s discharge permit application, or to modify, make subject
to additional terms, suspend, or revoke a discharge permit and shall inform the
applicant or permit holder that they have ten calendar days from the date of
receipt of the notice to file a written request for a hearing. The application
shall be denied or the permit shall be revoked, modified, or suspended if a
hearing request is not received within the ten-day period.
   (c)   If the applicant or permit holder file(s) a timely hearing request,
the city manager, or their designee, shall within ten calendar days from the
receipt of the request, set a time and place for the hearing. All parties
involved shall have the right to offer testimonial, documentary, and tangible
evidence bearing on the issues and to be represented by counsel. The decision
of the city manager, or designee, whether to deny the discharge permit
application or to modify, make subject to additional terms, suspend, or revoke
the discharge permit shall be final.
   (d)   Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the Director to
take any emergency enforcement actions as specified in Section 16.09.200 of
this chapter.
(Ord. 5670 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.09.210   Affirmative Defenses to discharge violations: upset.
   (a)   For the purposes of this section “upset” means an exceptional incident
in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical
pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the
industrial user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused
by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate
treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper
operation.
   (b)   An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought
for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the requirements
of subsection (c), below, are met.
   (c)   An industrial user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of
upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating
logs, or other relevant evidence that:
      (1)   An upset occurred and the industrial user can identify the cause(s)
of the upset;
      (2)   The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and
workman-like manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance
procedures and discharge permit conditions; and
      (3)   The industrial user has submitted the following information to the
Director within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset (if this information is
provided orally, a written submission must be provided within five calendar
days):
         (A)   A description of the indirect discharge and cause of
noncompliance;
         (B)   The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or,
if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to
continue; and
         (C)   Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and
prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.
   (d)   In any enforcement proceeding, the industrial user seeking to
establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.
   (e)   Industrial users shall have the opportunity for a judicial
determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for
noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards.
   (f)   Industrial users shall control production of all discharges to the
extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards
upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility
is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement
applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power
of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails.
(Ord. 5670 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.09.215   Affirmative defenses to discharge violations: prohibited discharge
standards.
   (a)   An industrial user shall have an affirmative defense in any action
brought against it for noncompliance with the general prohibitions established
in Section
16.09.040 of this chapter and the specific prohibitions established in
subsections (b)(3) through (b)(7) and (b)(9) through (b)(17) of Section
16.09.040 of this chapter if it can prove that it did not know, or have reason
to know, that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other
sources, would cause pass through or interference and that either:
      (1)   A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the
industrial user was in compliance with each limit directly prior to, and
during, the pass through or interference; or
      (2)   No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change
substantially in nature or constituents from the industrial user’s prior
discharge when the city was regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit, and
in the case of interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or
disposal requirements.
(Ord. 5670 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.09.220   Affirmative defenses to discharge violations: bypass.
   (a)   For the purposes of this section the following terms and phrases shall
be as defined herein:
      (1)   “Bypass” means the intentional diversion of wastestreams from any
portion of an industrial user’s treatment facility; and
      (2)   “Severe property damage” means substantial physical damage to
property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become
inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can
reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property
damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production.
   (b)   An industrial user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause
pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if the bypass
is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation or there are no
feasible alternatives to the bypass. These bypasses are not subject to the
provision of subsections (d) through (f) of this section.
   (c)   If an industrial user knows in advance of the need for bypass, it
shall submit prior notice to the Director at least ten calendar days before the
date of the bypass, or if the need for bypass becomes known less than ten
calendar days in advance, as soon as possible prior to the bypass.
   (d)   An industrial user shall submit oral notice to the Director of an
unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within 24
hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass per Section
16.09.135 of this chapter. A written submission shall also be provided to the
Director within five calendar days of the time the industrial user becomes
aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the
bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and
times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is
expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and
prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The Director may waive the written report
on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within 24 hours.
   (e)   Bypass is prohibited, and the Director may take enforcement action
against an industrial user for a bypass, unless:
      (1)   Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or
severe property damage;
      (2)   There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use
of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or
maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not
satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the
exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred
during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventative maintenance; and
      (3)   The industrial user submitted notices as required under subsections
(c) or (d) of this section.
   (f)   The Director may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its
adverse effects, if the Director determines that it will meet the three
conditions listed in subsection (e) of this section.
(Ord. 5670 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.09.225   Pretreatment charges and fees.
   The city may adopt reasonable fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up
and operating the city’s pretreatment program, which may include:
   (a)   Fees for discharge permit applications including the cost of
processing such applications;
   (b)   Fees for monitoring, inspection, and surveillance procedures including
the cost of collection and analyzing a discharger’s discharge, and reviewing
monitoring reports and certification statements submitted by dischargers;
   (c)   Fees for filing appeals;
   (d)   Fees to recover administrative and legal costs (not included in
subsection (b) of this section) associated with the enforcement activity taken
by the Director to address discharger noncompliance; and
   (e)   Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the
requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 5670 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.09.230   Obstruction, damage, or impairment to POTW.
   Dischargers shall be responsible for and liable to the city for any
discharge that causes an obstruction, damage, or any other impairment to the
POTW. When a discharge causes an obstruction, damage, or any other impairment
to the POTW, the city may assess a charge against the discharger to reimburse
the city for costs incurred to clean or repair said obstruction, damage, or
impairment.
(Ord. 5670 § 2 (part), 2025)
Chapter 16.10
PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS
Sections:
   
16.10.010   Purpose - Powers of city.
   
16.10.020   Construction of private sewage systems - Conditions prohibited.
   
16.10.030   Private sewage systems - Conditions - Standards.
   
16.10.040   Temporary sewage disposal system.
   
16.10.050   Plans submitted - Permit.
   
16.10.060   Approval of health officer.
   
16.10.070   Enforcement.
   
16.10.080   Liability for damage.
   
16.10.090   Removal of private system.
16.10.010   Purpose - Powers of city.
   It shall be unlawful to maintain, or use, any residence, place of business
or other building or place where persons reside, congregate, or are employed
which is not provided with means for the disposal of sewage, either by
connection to a public sanitary sewerage system, or when it is judged
permissible by the city and the health officer, a private sewage disposal
system which meets the requirements of construction and maintenance hereinafter
described. It shall be unlawful to use or maintain a pit or vault privy
excepting that no requirement herein shall prohibit the lawful use of portable
chemical toilets on a temporary basis.
   The objective of this chapter shall be provision of public sanitary sewerage
facilities for every residence, place of business, or other building where
persons reside, congregate, or are employed except where provision of such
public sewerage facilities is not feasible. To this end, the city shall have
the right to prohibit the installation of private sewage disposal systems in
subdivisions except where, in the opinion of the city, installation of public
sanitary sewerage facilities is clearly not feasible. The city shall also have
the right to require a subdivider to deposit with the city a cash sum equal to
the estimated total cost of construction of a sanitary sewer system to serve a
proposed subdivision which is to be served initially by individual sewage
disposal facilities, or require subdivider to construct an approved sanitary
sewer system in addition to provision of individual sewage disposal facilities.
(Ord. 1927 (part), 1960: prior code § 30.01)
16.10.020   Construction of private sewage systems - Conditions prohibited.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or maintain any cesspool,
septic tank, sewage treatment works, sewer pipes or conduits, or other pipes or
conduits for the treatment or discharge of sewage or impure waters or any
matter or substance offensive, injurious or dangerous to health, whereby they
shall do any of the following:
   (a)   Overflow any lands whatever.
   (b)   Empty, flow, seep, drain into or affect any springs, streams, rivers,
lakes or other surface waters.
   (c)   Allow free access of insects, rodents, or other vermin to sewage or
other waste matter.
   (d)   Produce an odor condition which, in the opinion of the city or the
health officer, constitutes a public nuisance.
(Ord. 1927 (part), 1960: prior code § 30.02)
16.10.030   Private sewage systems - Conditions - Standards.
   Every residence, place of residence, or other building or place where
persons congregate, reside, or are employed, and which cannot reasonably, in
the opinion of the city, be provided with a connection to a public sanitary
sewerage system, shall be provided with a private water flush toilet and sewage
disposal system by the owner or agent or occupant of the premises; said water
flush-toilet system to be built or rebuilt, constructed, altered or
reconstructed, and maintained in such manner as to meet the requirements of
construction and maintenance herein described.
   At any residence, place of business or other building where there is
installed a water flush system or sewage disposal system which is not connected
to a public sewer system, and where the customary population equivalent does
not exceed fifteen in number, there shall be established or installed a private
sewage disposal system, located entirely within the parcel of property to be
served by such system, which shall be so constructed as to meet the
requirements of construction and maintenance herein described.
   (a)   Septic Tanks. Septic tanks shall be of type, construction and location
as recommended by the health officer. If it is necessary to install the tank
above ground surface, it must be made airtight and odor-tight. The septic tank
distribution box, if used, and all inlets and outlets thereto, shall be
watertight.
   Capacity shall be specified by the health officer. It shall be constructed
of concrete, heart grade redwood, or some other material of equal durable and
waterproof qualities approved by the health officer.
   Effluent from tanks must discharge into an approved absorption field. The
construction shall be such that the sewage shall at no time flow over the top
of the ground. The absorption field shall be laid at a grade of not more than
two inches in one hundred feet. The effluent lines shall be laid in a trench at
least twenty-four inches wide, which has a layer of one to two-inch loose rock
on the bottom at least twelve inches deep and at least four inches over the top
of said effluent lines. Minimum length of the effluent leaching lines shall be
two hundred feet. Additional length of effluent line may be required by the
health officer if unusual conditions are encountered. In any case where the
topography or area of any lot, piece or parcel of land upon which a septic tank
is erected, maintained, constructed, or is proposed to be erected, maintained
or constructed, is such that the minimum requirements for the length of
effluent leaching lines cannot be complied with, the health officer may grant a
special permit for the erection, construction or maintenance of shorter
effluent leaching lines, or other means of effluent disposal, if in his
judgment such other means or shorter effluent lines are sufficient to provide
for the efficient disposal of the effluent without endangering public health or
safety.
   (b)   Cesspools. It shall be unlawful to use a cesspool for the disposal of
sewage without a special permit from the health officer.
   (c)   Sewer Wells. All sewer wells are hereby declared to be a public
nuisance. It shall be unlawful to drill, construct, maintain or operate a sewer
well.
   (d)   Other. Other types of private sewage disposal systems, utilizing
either aerobic or anaerobic treatment processes, may be used with the approval
of the health officer. The burden of proof regarding the efficacy and safety of
a proposed disposal system will be upon the person who proposes such use.
   At any residence, a place of business, or other building where there is
installed a water flush system of sewage disposal, which is not connected to a
public sewer system, and where the customary users exceed an equivalent
population of fifteen in number, city may require that sewage disposal be
governed by terms of a special agreement with the city. Construction,
operation, and maintenance of such systems shall also be governed by
requirements of a permit issued by the health officer.
   Upon application for permit to install and use any private sewage disposal
system not operated under terms of a special agreement with the city, applicant
shall agree to maintain such system in accordance with requirements of Section
16.10.020. Further, applicant shall agree to provide the premises with a
connection to a public sanitary sewerage system within a period of time, to be
established by the city, following availability of such sewerage system.
   The period of time to be allowed for connection to the public sewerage
system shall be specified by the city at the time public sewerage facilities
are made available. In no case shall the time allowed for connection exceed
five years from the time sewerage facilities become available.
(Ord. 4642 § 24, 2000: Ord. 1927 (part), 1960: prior code § 30.03)
16.10.040   Temporary sewage disposal system.
   In locations where it is estimated by the city that public sewerage
facilities will be made available within two years of the time of application
for construction and use of a private sewage disposal system, the health
officer may permit construction and use of a temporary sewage disposal system
not conforming to the construction requirements of Section
16.10.030. By accepting a permit for a temporary sewage disposal system,
applicant agrees that he will:
   (a)   Construct such temporary system in accordance with requirements of the
health officer.
   (b)   Maintain the system in accordance with the requirements of Section
16.10.020.
   (c)   Abandon the temporary system and construct an approved permanent type
private sewage disposal system if public sanitary sewerage facilities are not
made available within six months of the estimated date given on the temporary
permit. A time extension may be granted at the discretion of the city.
   (d)   Abandon the temporary system and connect to a public sanitary sewerage
system within sixty days of the availability of such public system.
   (e)   If required by city, deposit with city a cash sum equivalent to the
estimated total cost for providing sanitary sewerage service to the premises
involved.
   If public sewerage facilities are not made available within the estimated
period, all funds deposited with the city will be returned to the applicant.
Return of deposited funds will, however, be contingent on performance of
requirement (c).
(Ord. 1927 (part), 1960: prior code § 30.04)
16.10.050   Plans submitted - Permit.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to construct,
build, or rebuild any residence, place of residence, or other building or place
where persons congregate, reside or are employed which is not to be connected
to a public sanitary sewer without first submitting plans of the means of
sewage disposal to the health officer, and obtaining a permit therefor as
herein provided. Such plans shall include the plot plan of the premises with
sufficient elevations, the size and type of septic tank, and a plan of the
absorption field, giving all dimensions and other pertinent information. Every
applicant for a permit shall pay to the health officer for each permit issued
at the time of issuance such permit and investigation fees for each sewage
disposal system as have been established by the health officer. In the
investigation of a septic tank application, the health officer is empowered to
require, at the expense of the applicant, such test holes, percolation tests,
and other soil exploratory tests as he may deem necessary to ascertain the
proper capacity and design of the septic tank and absorption field system.
(Ord. 1927 (part), 1960: prior code § 30.05)
16.10.060   Approval of health officer.
   No building permit shall be issued for any building which is not to be
connected to an approved public sanitary sewer, without the written approval of
the health officer of the plan of the means of sewage disposal for said
building.
(Ord. 1927 (part), 1960: prior code § 30.06)
16.10.070   Enforcement.
   It shall be the duty of the health officer to enforce the provisions of this
chapter, and in the performance of this duty the health officer or his duly
authorized agent is hereby authorized to enter at any reasonable hour any
premises as may be necessary in the enforcement of this chapter.
(Ord. 1927 (part), 1960: prior code § 30.07)
16.10.080   Liability for damage.
   This chapter shall not be construed as imposing upon the county of Santa
Clara or the city of Palo Alto any liability or responsibility for damage
resulting from the defective construction of any sanitary disposal system as
herein provided, nor shall the county of Santa Clara, city of Palo Alto, or any
official or employee thereof be held as assuming any such liability or
responsibility by reason of the inspection authorized thereunder.
(Ord. 1927 (part), 1960: prior code § 30.08)
16.10.090   Removal of private system.
   Every septic tank, cesspool, privy, or other sewage containing structure
which has been discontinued from use shall have all sewage and other waste
matter removed therefrom by a registered septic tank pumper and shall be
completely filled with earth, sand, gravel, or other inorganic fill material.
The entire top or cover of each structure shall be removed before backfilling
and shall not be replaced. Backfilling of such structures shall be completed
within thirty days of the time of abandonment and at no time shall an open
excavation or access opening be left unattended without suitable and adequate
barricades and protective devices.
(Ord. 1927 (part), 1960: prior code § 30.09)
Chapter 16.11
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION*
Sections:
Part 1 - Purpose and Intent; Definitions
   
16.11.010   Purposes and intent.
   
16.11.020   Definitions.
Part 2 - General Provisions
   
16.11.030   Administration.
   
16.11.040   General obligation.
   
16.11.050   Conflicts with other laws.
   
16.11.060   Alternate means and methods.
   
16.11.070   Prohibited discharges.
   
16.11.080   Discharge exemptions.
   
16.11.090   Conditionally exempt discharges.
   
16.11.100   Prohibition of illicit connections.
   
16.11.110   Authority to inspect.
   
16.11.120   Enforcement and penalties.
   
16.11.130   Fees and charges.
   
16.11.140   Obstruction, damage, or impairment to city storm drain system and
rights-of-way.
Part 3 - Development Projects
   
16.11.150   Regulated projects.
   
16.11.160   Source control measures for regulated projects.
   
16.11.170   Site design measures for regulated projects.
   
16.11.180   Stormwater treatment measures for regulated projects.
   
16.11.190   Certification of compliance for regulated projects.
   
16.11.200   Green infrastructure design and construction requirements.
   
16.11.210   Required hydromodification management measures for regulated
projects.
   
16.11.220   Operation and maintenance of stormwater treatment measures and
hydromodification management measures.
   
16.11.230   Low impact development source control and site design measures for
projects other than “regulated projects” under Section 16.11.150.
   
16.11.240   Requirements for all development projects.
   
16.11.250   Requirements for loading docks.
   
16.11.260   Drainage design standards for development projects.
   
16.11.270   Requirements for construction sites and activities.
Part 4 - Required Best Management Practices for All Dischargers
   
16.11.280   Minimum best management practices for all dischargers.
Part 5 - Illicit Discharge Detection and Elimination and Mobile Sources
   
16.11.290   Spill containment and notification of non-stormwater discharges.
   
16.11.300   Mobile businesses.
Part 6 - Pesticides Toxicity Control
   
16.11.310   Pesticides toxicity control.
Part 7 - Trash Load Reductions
   
16.11.320   Trash load reductions.
Part 8 - Mercury Controls
   
16.11.330   Mercury controls.
Part 9 - Polychlorinated Biphenyls (PCBs) Controls
   
16.11.340   Polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) controls.
   
16.11.350   Management of PCBs during building demolition activities.
Part 10 - Copper Controls
   
16.11.360   Copper controls.
*   Editor’s Note: Prior ordinance history: Ordinance Nos. 4799, 4878, 4909,
5108, 5112, 5466
Part 1 - Purpose and Intent; Definitions
16.11.010   Purposes and intent.
   The purpose of this chapter is to control and limit stormwater runoff
pollution by preventing pollutants from entering the City of Palo Alto storm
drain system and receiving waters, including the San Francisco Bay (bay) and
local creeks, marshes, wetlands and other natural habitats, as well as to
protect human health and the environment. This chapter is enacted and shall be
implemented in a manner consistent with the Porter-Cologne Water Quality
Control Act (Water Code Section 13000 et seq.) and the Federal Clean Water Act
(33 U.S.C. Section 1251 et seq.) (CWA), and the requirements of the Municipal
Regional Stormwater Permit (MRP) issued by the California Regional Water
Quality Control Board, San Francisco Bay-Region 2 (Regional Water Board), as
amended from time to time. This chapter is intended to be no less stringent
than the MRP and in some respects may be more stringent than regional, state or
federal regulations, rules, orders and policies. The city intends to update and
modify this chapter as needed to continue to meet Regional Water Board
requirements and provide a program for protection of the bay and other
receiving waters. If any provision of this chapter conflicts with the MRP, as
amended or updated, the more stringent and environmentally protective provision
shall apply.
(Ord. 5671 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.11.020   Definitions.
   The following words and phrases, whenever used in this chapter, shall be as
defined herein. Words and phrases used in this chapter not otherwise defined in
this section shall be as defined, interpreted or used in the MRP in effect or,
if not used in the MRP, so as to give this chapter its most reasonable
application.
   “Applicant” means any person that submits an application for a planning and
land use entitlement or building permit from the City of Palo Alto.
   “Best management practices” or “BMPs” mean a combination of general good
housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and educational practices,
operations and maintenance procedures, and other practices and requirements to
prevent or reduce to the maximum extent practicable non-stormwater discharges
directly or indirectly to the storm drain system or receiving waters. Sources
of industry-standard BMPs include but are not limited to the Santa Clara Valley
Urban Runoff Pollution Prevention Program, the California Stormwater Quality
Association Stormwater Best Management Practice Handbook, the California
Department of Transportation Construction Site Best Management Practices
Manual, and the MRP. Unless otherwise stated, reference to BMPs generally means
non-structural BMPs as described in this definition.
   “Building” means any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering
any use or occupancy.
   “Building permit” means the authorization provided by the city to build/
construct one or more buildings.
   “CASQA” means California Stormwater Quality Association, a professional
member association dedicated to the advancement of stormwater quality
management through collaboration, education, implementation guidance,
regulatory review, and scientific assessment.
   “City” or “The City” means City of Palo Alto, California.
   “Construction activity” means any earth- or soil-disturbing activity,
including, but not limited to, clearing, grading, paving, landscaping,
excavation, stockpiling, material storage, and disturbances to land or ground
such as building of a structure, and demolition or removal of structures or
paved surfaces.
   “Construction site” means any site where construction activity occurs.
   “Contamination” shall have the same meaning as defined in California Water
Code Section 13050, as amended from time to time.
   “Contiguous” means touching or sharing a border and includes project areas
interrupted by cross streets or intersections.
   “Detached single-family home project” means the building of one single new
house or the addition and/or replacement of impervious surface to one single
existing house, which is not part of a larger plan of development.
   “Development project” means new construction or redevelopment of any public
or private project involving construction activity and within the planning and
building authority of the city.
   “Director” means the Director of Public Works of the City of Palo Alto and
his or her duly authorized designees.
   “Discharge” when used as a verb, means to allow a stormwater or non-
stormwater substance to enter the storm drain system or a receiving water from
any activity or operation. When used as a noun, “discharge” means the
stormwater or non-stormwater discharge that is released or conveyed.
   “Discharger” means any person who causes or permits a discharge.
   “EPA” or “U.S. EPA” means the Environmental Protection Agency of the United
States of America.
   “Full trash capture device or system” means a treatment control, or series
of treatment controls, that traps all particles that are five mm or greater and
has a design treatment capacity that is either: a) of not less than the peak
flow rate, Q, resulting from a one-year, one-hour storm in the subdrainage
area, or b) appropriately sized to, and designed to carry at least the same
flows as, the corresponding storm drain. The device(s) shall also have a trash
reservoir large enough to contain a reasonable amount of trash safely without
overflowing trash into the overflow outlet between maintenance events.
   “Green stormwater infrastructure” or “GSI” means infrastructure that uses
vegetation, soils, and natural processes to manage stormwater runoff. At the
scale of a city or county, GSI refers to the patchwork of natural areas that
provides habitat and manages smaller storms, cleaner air, and cleaner water and
eliminates street ponding. At the scale of a neighborhood or project site, GSI
refers to stormwater management systems that mimic the natural hydrologic cycle
by soaking up and storing water.
   “Hazardous material” means any material designated as hazardous by Title 17
of this Code.
   “Hazardous waste” means any material designated as a hazardous waste by
applicable federal, state or local regulations.
   “Illicit connection” means any device, artifice, method or connection that
conveys non-stormwater to the storm drain system. Examples may include
connections from interior floor drains, HVAC systems, industrial processes,
sinks, and toilets. An illicit connection does not include methods of
conveyance of groundwater during construction activities in compliance with
this code and as approved by the Director.
   “Illicit discharge” means any discharge that is prohibited under local,
state, or federal statutes, ordinances, codes, or regulations and this chapter.
Illicit discharges do not include discharges that are exempt or conditionally
exempt under the MRP, regulated by a NPDES permit other than the MRP, or
authorized by the Executive Officer of the Regional Water Board or the
Director.
   “Impervious surface” means land that has been modified to reduce or remove
the land's natural ability to absorb and infiltrate rainfall. Impervious
surfaces include, but are not limited to, rooftops, pavement, sidewalks,
walkways, patios, driveways, and parking lots where such surfaces are not
constructed with pervious materials and/or
are not designed to infiltrate stormwater.
   “Joint stormwater treatment facility” is a stormwater treatment facility
built to treat the combined runoff from two or more regulated projects located
adjacent to each other.
   “Loading dock” means a raised or lowered area of a facility designed to
accommodate a truck, trailer or other large delivery vehicle for the loading
and unloading of equipment or materials. A loading dock does not include such
an area where the deliveries are limited solely to furniture and non-electronic
office supplies.
   “Low impact development” or “LID” is a land planning and engineering design
approach with a goal of reducing stormwater runoff and mimicking a site’s
predevelopment hydrology by minimizing disturbed areas and impervious cover and
infiltrating, storing, detaining, evapotranspiring, and/or biotreating
stormwater runoff close to its source, or onsite.
   “Mobile business” means a business whose operations may produce or result in
the production of pollutants and that does not operate from a permanent
structure but instead provides mobile services during particular time periods
or upon request at temporary locations. Types of services include cleaning or
power washing of vehicles, structures, windows, or parking lots; engine or
equipment degreasing; acid cleaning of unpainted trucks or containers; steam
cleaning; carpet cleaning; dental and medical care; vehicle repair, servicing,
fueling and cleaning; and pet services (including grooming, veterinary care and
other miscellaneous services).
   “Municipal Code” means the ordinances and laws adopted and enforced by the
City of Palo Alto.
   “Municipal regional stormwater permit” or “MRP” means the most recently
adopted San Francisco Bay Area municipal regional stormwater permit, a multi-
countywide municipal stormwater NPDES permit issued by the California Regional
Water Quality Control Board, San Francisco Bay Region-Region 2 (Regional Water
Board) to regulate discharges from municipalities and local agencies in
Alameda, Contra Costa, San Mateo, and Santa Clara counties, and the cities of
Fairfield, Suisun City, and Vallejo.
   “Non-stormwater discharge” means any discharge that is not entirely composed
of stormwater. Non-stormwater discharges include, but are not limited to,
polluted groundwater, any pollutant, discharges allowed under an NPDES permit,
or an illicit discharge.
   “NPDES” means National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System, which is a
national program for issuing, modifying, revoking and reissuing, terminating,
monitoring and enforcing permits, and imposing and enforcing pretreatment
requirements, under Sections 307, 402, 318, and 405 of the Federal Clean Water
Act.
   “PCB screening assessment” means a report prepared by an applicant for a
demolition permit containing any information and data (investigations, reports,
soil samples, laboratory results, construction site controls, etc.) reasonably
required by the Director regarding the presence of polychlorinated biphenyls
(PCBs).
   “Permit” means any authorization issued by the city to carry out an action
or activity according to the city’s Municipal Code, rules, and regulations.
   “Person” means any individual, partnership, firm, company, corporation,
association, joint venture, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental
entity, or any other legal entity; or their representatives, agents, or
designees.
   “Pervious” means capable of allowing water to infiltrate below the surface.
Pervious materials may include, but are not limited to, permeable interlocking
concrete pavers, permeable pavers, pervious concrete and porous asphalt.
   “Planning and land use entitlement” means approval provided by the city to
develop a building (or buildings) or a piece of land for a specific use
according to the city’s development standards, rules, and regulations.
   "Pollutants” or “pollutant” means those substances associated with
stormwater runoff that may cause or contribute to the degradation of water
quality of receiving waters and are harmful to aquatic life, human health and
the environment. Pollutants commonly associated with stormwater runoff include,
but are not limited to, total suspended solids; sediment; pathogens (e.g.,
bacteria, viruses, protozoa); heavy metals (e.g., copper, lead, zinc, and
cadmium); petroleum products and polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons; synthetic
organics (e.g., pesticides, herbicides, and PCBs); nutrients (e.g., nitrogen
and phosphorus fertilizers); oxygen-demanding substances (e.g., decaying
vegetation and animal waste); litter and trash.
   "Pollution" means the presence, introduction or discharge into a receiving
water of a pollutant that has harmful or poisonous effects on aquatic life,
ecological habitat, natural processes of creeks and waterbodies, public health
and the environment.
   “Receiving water” means waters of the state, as defined by the Porter-
Cologne Water Quality Control Act. Receiving waters include but are not limited
to creeks, marshes, wetlands, shorelines, estuaries, and bays.
   “Redevelopment” means any land-disturbing activity that results in the
creation, addition, or replacement of exterior impervious surface area on a
site on which some past development has occurred. This category includes
projects on public or private land that fall under the planning and building
authority of the city.
   "Refuse" means and includes compostable materials, recyclable materials, and
solid waste. Solid waste means solid and semisolid wastes, generated in or
upon, related to the occupancy of, remaining in or emanating from residential
premises or commercial premises including but not limited to garbage, trash,
rubbish, ashes, and industrial wastes.
   “Refuse management and containment area” means an area such as a room
located inside a building or an enclosed structure located outdoors to keep,
manage and contain compostable, recyclable and solid waste.
   “Regional Water Board” or “Water Board” means the California Regional Water
Quality Control Board, San Francisco Bay-Region 2.
   “Regulated project” means a project described in Chapter 16.11.150,
“Regulated Projects.”
   “Remodel” is an extension or modification of an existing structure. This may
include a one or second-story addition that increases the footprint of the
structure or an interior reconfiguration.
   “Responsible party” means any person who owns, operates, or manages a
property, business, facility, or site, or who is otherwise responsible for the
activities thereon or the person whose action or omission causes or results in
the violation of this chapter.
   “Sanitary sewer system” means the collection system, all sewers, treatment
plants and other facilities owned or operated by the city for carrying,
collecting, storing, treating, reclaiming and disposing of sanitary sewage and
industrial wastes (as defined in Section 16.09.015).
   “SCVURPPP” or “Santa Clara Valley Urban Runoff Pollution Prevention Program”
means an association of 15 agencies in Santa Clara Valley that share a common
NPDES MRP to discharge to south San Francisco Bay. Member agencies (also
referred to as co-permittees) include the cities or towns of Campbell,
Cupertino, Los Altos, Los Altos Hills, Los Gatos, Milpitas, Monte Sereno,
Mountain View, Palo Alto, San Jose, Santa Clara, Saratoga, and Sunnyvale, Santa
Clara County, and the Santa Clara Valley Water District (Valley Water).
   “Sewage” means the wastewater of the community derived from residential,
agricultural, commercial, or industrial sources, including domestic sewage, and
industrial wastewater, which is required to be conveyed to the sanitary sewer
system.
   “Site design measure” means a site planning technique to conserve natural
spaces and/or limit the amount of impervious surface at development and
redevelopment projects in order to minimize runoff and the transport of
pollutants in stormwater runoff.
   “Source control measure” means any BMP that aims to prevent runoff pollution
by reducing the potential for contact with rainfall runoff at the source of
pollution. Source control BMPs minimize contact between pollutants and
stormwater runoff.
   “Special projects” are a type of regulated project that meets criteria based
on size, land use type, and density per the MRP. These projects are typically
located in high density areas and are centered around transit-oriented
development. If criteria determined by the MRP are met, projects are entitled
to incentive LID treatment reduction credits approved by the Water Board.
   “Storm drain system” means the storm drain facilities owned, managed, or
operated by the city by which stormwater is collected and/or conveyed to
receiving waters, including but not limited to streets and roads, gutters,
curbs, inlets, piped storm drains, parking lots, pumping facilities, retention
and detention basins, natural and human-made or altered drainage channels,
reservoirs, and other drainage structures which are within the city’s
jurisdiction. The storm drain system also includes pipes, underground and
surface conveyances, and other components on private property and other
property within the city’s limits not owned by the city that connect and/or
route stormwater and stormwater runoff to the city’s storm drain system.
   “Stormwater” means any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting
entirely of water that originates from precipitation events.
   “Stormwater runoff” means flow that is created when precipitation falls on
impervious surfaces or compacted pervious surfaces that do not allow water to
infiltrate into the ground.
   “Stormwater run-on” means flow that runs across impervious surfaces or
compacted pervious surfaces from one property to another or from one use on a
property to another.
   “Stormwater treatment measure” means any engineered, non-mechanical or
constructed system designed to remove pollutants from stormwater runoff by
simple gravity settling of particulate pollutants, filtration, infiltration,
biological uptake, media adsorption or any other physical, biological, or
chemical process.
   “Structural retrofit best management practices” or “structural retrofit
BMPs” means a retrofit to a structure, fixed feature, or property to prevent or
minimize the potential of a non-stormwater discharge to the storm drain system
or receiving waters, in association with an enforcement action due to
noncompliance with this
chapter.
(Ord. 5671 § 2 (part), 2025
Part 2 - General Provisions
16.11.030   Administration.
   The Director shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of
the provisions of this chapter and has the authority to promulgate such orders,
regulations, rules, conditions of approval, and requirements as are necessary
to accomplish the purposes of this chapter. The primary regulatory document
implementing this chapter is Palo Alto regulations for stormwater pollution
prevention.
(Ord. 5671 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.11.040   General obligation.
   All dischargers of non-stormwater and persons that engage in activities with
the potential to cause a non-stormwater discharge to the storm drain system and
receiving waters shall comply with the provisions of this chapter. Violations
of regulations implementing this chapter shall be considered violations of this
chapter.
(Ord. 5671 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.11.050   Conflicts with other laws.
   In the event of any conflict between this chapter and any federal or state
law, regulation, order, or permit, the requirement that establishes the higher
standard for public health or safety shall govern. Nothing in this chapter
shall preclude enforcement of any other applicable law, regulation, order, or
permit. Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to infringe any vested
property right.
(Ord. 5671 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.11.060   Alternate means and methods.
   The Director, upon application in writing by the owner, a lessee, or an
authorized representative of the discharger, and on notice to the Director, is
authorized to approve alternate means or methods of compliance with this
chapter, provided that the Director finds that the proposed design, use, or
operation satisfactorily complies with the intent of this chapter and that the
material, method of work performed, or operation is, for the purpose intended,
at least equivalent to that prescribed in this chapter in quality and
effectiveness in meeting the purposes of this chapter. As required by the
Director, an applicant must show that compliance with the strict requirements
of this chapter is infeasible, and that the proposed alternate means and
methods will meet all applicable regional, state, and federal requirements. The
particulars of any such approval made by the Director shall be in writing and a
signed copy shall be furnished to the applicant.
(Ord. 5671 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.11.070   Prohibited discharges.
   General prohibition. No person shall cause, allow, or permit any non-
stormwater discharge or the conditions under which there is a substantial
probability for such a discharge to occur unless such discharge is exempt under
Section
16.11.080 or conditionally exempt under Section
16.11.090.
(Ord. 5671 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.11.080   Discharge exemptions.
   Unless determined by the Director or the Regional Water Board to be sources
of pollutants to receiving waters, the following discharges are exempt from
discharge prohibitions established by this chapter and are allowed to flow into
the storm drain system and receiving waters:
   (a)   Flows from riparian habitats or wetlands;
   (b)   Diverted stream flows;
   (c)   Flows from natural springs;
   (d)   Uncontaminated rising groundwater due to natural processes;
   (e)   Uncontaminated and unpolluted groundwater infiltration;
   (f)   Pumped groundwater from crawl space pumps and foundation and footing
drains of single-family homes. Discharges larger than 2,500 gallons per day
shall be treated as conditionally exempt discharges and must meet the
requirements of the MRP and city regulations;
   (g)   Pumped groundwater from drinking water aquifers (excluding well
development);
   (h)   Discharges permitted under a NPDES permit issued to the discharger and
administered by the State of California pursuant to Division 7, Chapter 5.5 of
the California Water Code, provided that the discharger is in compliance with
all requirements of the permit and all other applicable laws and regulations;
and
   (i)   Any other discharge exempt from the general prohibition on discharges
to the storm drain system under the MRP or permitted under another NPDES
permit.
   If any of the above are identified by the Director or the Regional Water
Board as sources of pollutants to receiving waters, such categories or sources
shall be treated as conditionally exempt discharges in accordance with Section
16.11.090.
(Ord. 5671 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.11.090   Conditionally exempt discharges.
   The following discharges are conditionally exempt, subject to control
measures and BMPs set forth in the MRP and city regulations:
   (a)   Pumped groundwater, foundation drains, and water from crawl space
pumps and footing drains not from single-family homes;
   (b)   Air conditioning condensate shall be reused or directed to landscaped
areas. If neither is feasible, discharging to the storm drain system shall be
allowed per the director’s approval;
   (c)   Discharges associated with water and foam generated from emergency
response and/or firefighting activities. BMPs shall be implemented to the
maximum extent practicable to minimize potential adverse water quality impacts
from water, foam, and other pollutants discharged during emergency response and
firefighting activities. Such implementation shall not interfere with immediate
emergency response operations or impact public health and safety;
   (d)   Discharges from individual residential car washing;
   (e)   Irrigation water, landscape irrigation, and discharges from lawn or
garden watering; and
   (f)   Any discharge that the Director, the local health officer, the
Regional Water Quality Control Board or state or federal agency determines in
writing is necessary for the protection of the public health and safety, as
allowed under applicable law.
(Ord. 5671 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.11.100   Prohibition of illicit connections.
   (a)   No person shall construct, use, maintain, or permit or suffer the
construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of an illicit connection.
   (b)   Illicit connections shall be immediately removed, permanently plugged,
or re-plumbed to a connection point approved by the Director.
   (c)   The provisions of this section shall apply to, without limitation,
illicit connections established in the past, regardless of whether the
connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at
the time of connection.
(Ord. 5671 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.11.110   Authority to inspect.
   (a)   The Director shall have the authority to inspect private and public
facilities, sites, structures, drainage systems, and mobile businesses, whether
existing or under construction, whenever necessary to ensure and confirm
compliance with this chapter, applicable city or state regulations, or the MRP.
   (b)   The Director shall be authorized to enter, without unreasonable delay,
and upon reasonable notice, any premises subject to the requirements of this
chapter to conduct inspections and monitoring to assure compliance with this
chapter, applicable city or state regulations, or the MRP. An inspection fee
shall be charged for each inspection at the amount listed in the city’s adopted
municipal fee schedule. Records related to compliance with this chapter,
including but not limited to operations and maintenance records and agreements,
shall be available to city staff for inspection and copying.
   (c)   In the event the owner or occupant of the premises refuses entry after
a request to enter and inspect the premises has been made, the city is hereby
empowered to seek authorization from any court of competent jurisdiction for
such entry.
(Ord. 5671 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.11.120   Enforcement and penalties.
   (a)   Violations of this chapter may be enforced as allowed by Title 1 of
the Palo Alto Municipal Code. The Director is authorized to exercise the
authority provided in the California Penal Code Section 836.5.
   (b)   The Director may require any person deemed to have violated this
chapter to take any of the following actions:
      (1)   Ensure that the discharge be remediated and the affected private
and city property and infrastructure, as relevant, be restored within a
specified time. The responsible party shall also be responsible for cleanup or
reimbursement of cleanup costs incurred by the city for cleanup activities
associated with any discharges that violate this chapter.
      (2)   Implement applicable BMPs; for example, to address pollutant
sources associated with outdoor process and manufacturing areas; outdoor
material storage areas; outdoor waste storage and disposal areas; outdoor
vehicle and equipment storage and maintenance areas; outdoor parking areas and
access roads; outdoor areas used by customers and employees; outdoor wash
areas; outdoor drainage from indoor areas; rooftop equipment; contaminated and
erodible surface areas; and other sources that have a reasonable potential to
contribute to pollution of stormwater runoff.
      (3)   Install structural retrofit BMPs to address noncompliance of this
chapter. Structural retrofit BMPs may require review and approval by the city’s
Planning and Building Divisions.
   (c)   The Director shall implement a stormwater enforcement response plan to
facilitate timely and effective compliance with the requirements of this
chapter. The enforcement response plan shall contain, at a minimum, the
following:
      (1)   Enforcement procedures;
      (2)   Enforcement tools and scenarios;
      (3)   Procedures for timely correction of potential and actual
discharges; and
      (4)   Procedures for referral and coordination with other agencies.
   (d)   The remedies established in this section are not exclusive. In
addition to any other remedies allowed under the Palo Alto Municipal Code,
violations may be subject to penalties established by resolution of the Council
or any other enforcement mechanism allowed by law.
(Ord. 5671 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.11.130   Fees and charges.
   The city may adopt reasonable fees and charges for reimbursement of costs of
administering and enforcing this chapter.
(Ord. 5671 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.11.140   Obstruction, damage, or impairment to city storm drain system and
rights-of-way.
   Dischargers shall be responsible for and liable to the city for any
obstruction, damage, or impairment to the storm drain system and other rights-
of-way associated with a discharge that causes an obstruction, damage, or any
other impairment to the storm drain system. The city may assess a charge
against the discharger to reimburse the city for costs incurred to clean or
repair said obstruction, damage or impairment.
(Ord. 5671 § 2 (part), 2025)
Part 3 - Development Projects
16.11.150   Regulated projects.
   All projects fitting the category descriptions below (hereinafter called
“regulated projects”) must implement low impact development source control,
site design, and stormwater treatment measures. The categories of regulated
projects are:
   (a)   New development projects or redevelopment projects.
   New development or redevelopment projects that create and/or replace 5,000
square feet or more of impervious surface (collectively over the entire project
site). This category includes commercial, industrial, residential housing
subdivisions (i.e., detached single-family home projects), multi-family
attached subdivisions (i.e., town homes, condominiums, and apartments), mixed-
use, new and reconstructed private roads and private trails, and public
projects (other than public road and trail projects), including sidewalks and
any other portions of the public right-of-way that are developed or redeveloped
as part of the projects.
   Specific exclusions that apply to this category are listed in subsection (e)
below. Public works projects that are additionally excluded from this category
– unless they create and/or replace 5,000 contiguous square feet or more of
impervious surface – include the following examples: sidewalk gap closures,
sidewalk section replacement, and Americans with Disabilities Act-compliant
curb ramps.
   Where a redevelopment project results in an alteration of 50% or more of the
impervious surface of a previously existing development that was not subject to
this part, stormwater treatment measures shall be designed and sized to treat
stormwater runoff from the entire redevelopment project. Where a redevelopment
project results in an alteration of less than 50% of the impervious surface of
a previously existing development that was not subject to this part, stormwater
treatment measures must be designed and sized to treat stormwater runoff from
the new and/or replaced impervious surface of the project.
   The calculations in this subsection shall include portions of the public
right-of-way that are developed or redeveloped as part of the regulated
project.
   (b)   New or widening road projects.
   Any of the following types of road projects (including both public and
private road projects) that create 5,000 square feet or more of newly
constructed contiguous impervious surface, and that fall under the planning and
building authority of the city:
      (1)   Construction of new streets or roads, including sidewalks and
bicycle lanes built as part of the new streets or roads.
      (2)   Widening of existing streets or roads with additional traffic
lanes. Where the addition of traffic lanes results in an alteration of 50% or
more of the impervious surface of an existing street or road within the project
that was not subject to this part, stormwater treatment measures must be
designed and sized to treat stormwater runoff from the entire street or road
that had additional traffic lanes added. Where the addition of traffic lanes
results in an alteration of less than 50% of the impervious surface of an
existing street or road within the project that was not subject to this part,
stormwater treatment measures shall be designed and sized to treat stormwater
runoff from only the new traffic lanes. However, if the stormwater runoff from
the existing traffic lanes and the added traffic lanes cannot be separated, any
onsite treatment system shall be designed and sized to treat stormwater runoff
from the entire street or road. If an offsite treatment system is installed or
in-lieu fees paid in accordance with MRP Provision C.3.e or Section
16.11.180(c), the offsite treatment system or in-lieu fees must address only
the stormwater runoff from the added traffic lanes.
      (3)   Construction of impervious trails that are greater than or equal to
ten feet wide or are creek-side (within 50 feet of the top of bank).
      (4)   Specific exclusions to this subsection include the following:
         (i)   Sidewalks built as part of new streets or roads and built to
direct stormwater runoff to adjacent vegetated areas;
         (ii)   Bicycle lanes built as part of new streets or roads, but that
are not hydraulically connected to the new streets or roads and that direct
stormwater runoff to adjacent vegetated areas;
         (iii)   Impervious trails that direct stormwater runoff to adjacent
vegetated areas, or other non-erodible permeable areas, preferably away from
creeks or towards the outboard side of levees, where those areas are at least
half as large as the contributing impervious surface area;
         (iv)   Sidewalks, bicycle lanes, or trails constructed as pervious
pavement systems; and
         (v)   Caltrans highway projects and associated facilities.
   (c)   Road reconstruction and utility trenching projects.
   Road projects that involve the reconstruction of existing streets or roads,
which create and/or replace at least one contiguous acre of impervious surface
and that are public road projects and/or fall under the planning and building
authority of the city, including sidewalks and bicycle lanes that are built or
rebuilt as part of the existing streets or roads. This regulated project
category includes utility trenching projects which are, on average, over the
entire length of the project, greater than or equal to eight feet wide. It also
includes public pavement maintenance practices listed in subsection (e)(3) if
they are part of a project that otherwise meets the requirements of this
section.
   Where the reconstruction project results in an alteration of greater than or
equal to 50% of the impervious surface of an existing street or road within the
project that was not subject to this part, stormwater treatment measures must
be designed and sized to treat stormwater runoff from the entire street or road
that was reconstructed. Where the reconstruction project results in an
alteration of less than 50% of the impervious surface of an existing street or
road within the project that was not subject to this part, stormwater treatment
measures shall be designed and sized to treat stormwater runoff from only the
new and/or replaced impervious surface within the project footprint. However,
if the stormwater runoff from the existing impervious surface and the added
impervious surface cannot be separated, any onsite treatment system shall be
designed and sized to treat stormwater runoff from the entire street or road.
If an offsite treatment system is installed or in-lieu fees paid in accordance
with MRP Provision C.3.e or Section
16.11.180(c), the offsite treatment system or in-lieu fees must address only
the stormwater runoff from the added impervious surface.
   (d)   Large detached single-family home projects.
   Detached single-family home projects that create and/or replace 10,000
square feet or more of impervious surface (collectively over the entire project
site) and are not part of a larger development or redevelopment plan regulated
under “new development projects or redevelopment projects” – see subsection (a)
above. This regulated project category includes the addition of an accessory
dwelling unit (ADU) on an existing parcel with one single-family home that is
not part of a subdivision or plan.
   Where a single-family home project results in an alteration of 50% or more
of the impervious surface of a previously existing project that was not subject
to this part, stormwater treatment measures shall be designed and sized to
treat stormwater runoff from the entire project. Where a single-family home
project results in an alteration of less than 50% of the impervious surface of
a previously existing project that was not subject to this part, stormwater
treatment measures shall be designed and sized to treat stormwater runoff from
the new and/or replaced impervious surface of the project. The calculations in
this subsection shall include portions of the public right-of-way that are
developed or redeveloped as part of the regulated project.
   (e)   Exemptions: For redevelopment projects and road reconstruction
projects:
      (1)   The following interior and exterior practices are excluded:
         (i)   Interior remodels; and
         (ii)   Routine maintenance or repair such as roof or exterior wall
surface replacement.
      (2)   The following pavement maintenance practices are excluded:
         (i)   Pothole and square cut patching;
         (ii)   Overlaying existing asphalt or concrete pavement with asphalt
or concrete without expanding the area of coverage;
         (iii)   Shoulder grading;
         (iv)    Reshaping/regrading drainage systems;
         (v)   Crack sealing;
         (vi)   Pavement preservation activities that do not expand the road
prism;
         (vii)   Upgrading from a bituminous surface treatment (e.g., chip
seal) with an overlay of asphalt or concrete, without expanding the area of
coverage;
         (viii)   Applying a bituminous surface treatment to existing asphalt
or concrete pavement, without expanding the area of coverage;
         (ix)   Vegetation maintenance; and
         (x)   Layering gravel over an existing gravel road, without expanding
the area of coverage.
      (3)   The following pavement maintenance practices are not excluded.
         (i)   Removing and replacing asphalt or concrete pavement to the top
of the base course or lower, or repairing the pavement base (including repair
of the pavement base in preparation for bituminous surface treatment, such as
chip seal), as these are considered replaced impervious surfaces;
         (ii)   Extending the pavement edge without increasing the size of the
road prism, or paving graveled shoulders, as these are considered new
impervious surfaces; and
         (iii)   Resurfacing by upgrading from dirt to gravel, to a bituminous
surface treatment (e.g., chip seal), to asphalt, or to concrete; or upgrading
from gravel to a bituminous surface treatment, to asphalt, or to concrete, as
these are considered new impervious surfaces.
      (4)   For a project consisting of a combination of exempted pavement
maintenance practices and non-exempted pavement maintenance and/or practices
that fall under any other regulated project category, the parts of the project
that are not exempt shall be evaluated as a regulated project.
(Ord. 5671 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.11.160   Source control measures for regulated projects.
   All regulated projects shall implement source control measures onsite that,
at a minimum, comply with city regulations and the requirements of the MRP.
(Ord. 5671 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.11.170   Site design measures for regulated projects.
   All regulated projects must implement low impact development site design
measures that, at a minimum, comply with city regulations and the requirements
of the MRP.
(Ord. 5671 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.11.180   Stormwater treatment measures for regulated projects.
   All regulated projects shall implement stormwater treatment measures onsite
that, at a minimum, comply with city regulations and the requirements of the
MRP. Stormwater treatment measures shall not be altered without permission from
the Director.
   (a)   All regulated projects shall design, construct, maintain, and operate
stormwater treatment measures for the entire duration that the project is in
use in accordance with the MRP and city regulations. All regulated projects,
except special projects, shall treat 100% of the amount of stormwater runoff
identified in accordance with MRP Provision C.3.c requirements for the
regulated project’s drainage area onsite or at a Joint Stormwater Treatment
Facility per MRP Provision C.3.c, Chapter 16.11.180, and SCVURPPP and city
specifications. LID stormwater treatment measures include harvesting and use,
infiltration, evapotranspiration, and biotreatment. Stormwater treatment
systems must be sized using one of the hydraulic sizing design criteria
approved in MRP C.3.d.i. Any regulated project that does not comply with this
requirement must meet the requirements for alternative compliance established
in accordance with subsection (c) below.
   (b)   Special projects designed in a manner that meets the criteria of the
MRP and city regulations shall be allowed to apply for incentive LID treatment
reduction credits per the Water Board’s process outlined in the MRP.
   (c)   If a development project cannot install stormwater treatment measures
in conformance with the requirements of the MRP and this chapter, the Director
may approve alternative compliance and allow in-lieu measures and/or fees if
made necessary by individual site conditions and in accordance with the MRP and
city regulations. Projects shall still meet all regulated project requirements
but may be allowed to do so partially onsite or fully off-site or through
payment of in-lieu fees. This approval shall occur prior to issuance of
Planning and Land Use Entitlement under Title 18 of this Code, or a building
permit if no entitlement is required, unless the Director allows an exception.
(Ord. 5671 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.11.190   Certification of compliance for regulated projects.
   (a)   Prior to the issuance of a planning and land use entitlement under
Title 18 of this Code, or a building permit if no entitlement is required, for
a regulated project, the applicant or designee of a regulated project shall
submit a certification by a qualified third-party reviewer acceptable to the
Director that the design of the project complies with the requirements of this
chapter, city regulations, the MRP, and any plan review comments provided by
the Director. After the project is constructed, the applicant or a designee
shall submit a written certification by a qualified third-party reviewer
acceptable to the Director that a regulated project was constructed or
installed in accordance with the city-approved plans and drawings and per city
regulations and the MRP.
   (b)   The third-party reviewer shall be an independent civil engineer,
licensed architect, or landscape architect registered in the State of
California, shall have current training in stormwater treatment measure design
and construction, and meet other requirements set forth by the city
regulations. The third-party reviewer shall not be any consultant or contractor
hired to design and/or construct a stormwater treatment measure for the
regulated project.
   (c)   Certifications and documentation required by this section shall be in
the form prescribed by the Director.
   (d)   Applicant is responsible for ensuring that the stormwater treatment
measure is constructed according to the design approved by the Director.
(Ord. 5671 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.11.200   Green infrastructure design and construction requirements.
   Regulated projects shall comply with applicable design and construction
guidelines and standard specifications included in the city’s Green Stormwater
Infrastructure Plan and related documents, including design guidelines,
standard specifications, and other requirements as established by the Director.
(Ord. 5671 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.11.210   Required hydromodification management measures for regulated
projects.
   (a)   Applicability. All regulated projects that result in the creation and/
or replacement of one acre (43,560 square feet) or more of impervious surface
and result in a net increase in impervious surface over the pre-project
condition shall implement hydromodification management measures.
   (b)   Exemption. Projects located in areas designated as exempt from
hydromodification management measure requirements on the Hydromodification
Applicability Map contained in the MRP are exempt from this requirement.
   (c)   Hydromodification management measures shall be designed and
implemented in accordance with city regulations, MRP requirements, and other
applicable regulations and policies.
   (d)   All hydromodification management measures are subject to inspection
and approval by the Director.
(Ord. 5671 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.11.220   Operation and maintenance of stormwater treatment measures and
hydromodification management measures.
   All regulated projects shall comply with the following:
   (a)   The property owner(s), its administrators, successors, and any other
persons responsible for the management of the property, including any
homeowner's association, shall take all necessary actions to ensure that the
stormwater treatment and hydromodification management measures are properly
maintained so that all measures continue to operate as originally designed and
approved for the life of the project. These measures shall not be removed,
replaced, or amended without the Director’s approval.
   (b)   Before a building permit is issued, a maintenance agreement shall be
submitted to the Director describing all required stormwater treatment and
hydromodification management measures, including all information and
documentation required by the Director. This agreement shall be approved by the
Director, signed by the City Attorney or designee and property owner(s), and
recorded with Santa Clara County. If property changes ownership at any time,
the new property owner(s) shall take on responsibility for maintenance of any
stormwater treatment and hydromodification management measures located on that
property and shall adhere to the operations and maintenance agreement.
   (c)   The operation and maintenance of the measures shall at all times be
conducted in accordance with the terms and conditions of the approved
maintenance agreement.
   (d)   Any stormwater treatment measure and/or hydromodification management
measure constructed through an alternative compliance option (allowed by the
Director per Section 16.11.180(c)) shall also have a maintenance agreement that
complies with this section.
(Ord. 5671 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.11.230   Low impact development source control and site design measures for
projects other than “regulated projects” under Section
16.11.150.
   Development and redevelopment projects that require a planning and land use
entitlement or building permit from the city but are not regulated projects
shall implement LID Source Control and site design measures as required by city
regulations and the MRP. The design and implementation of the measures shall be
in accordance with the guidelines and technical specifications established by
the Director, city regulations, and the MRP. LID features shall not be altered
without permission from the Director.
(Ord. 5671 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.11.240   Requirements for all development projects.
   (a)   Applicability. This section shall apply to any development project
that requires a planning and land use entitlement review or building permit,
except for minor projects such as those limited to signs, fences, and parking
restriping that have no or minimal potential to create non-stormwater
discharges.
   (b)   Development projects shall meet all applicable requirements of the
Palo Alto regulations for stormwater pollution prevention and must be designed
to accommodate best management practices described in Section
16.11.290 and city regulations, as applicable.
(Ord. 5671 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.11.250   Requirements for loading docks.
   (a)   Applicability. This section shall apply to any project that includes
the construction of a loading dock.
   (b)   The following requirements shall be met for all loading docks where
applicable:
      (1)   The loading dock and surrounding area shall consist of impervious
paving appropriate for the material(s) that will be loaded/unloaded to avoid
leaching into or degradation of paving.
      (2)   The loading dock shall be covered and protected from precipitation,
stormwater runoff and stormwater run-on to minimize potential non-stormwater
discharges.
      (3)   The loading dock shall be designed to drain to the sanitary sewer
system. Drains may be required to be equipped with a fail-safe shut-off valve,
normally closed, or equivalent device according to the type of materials or
substances being transferred. Valve shall be immediately shut off if a spill of
any size occurs and shall not be opened until the spill is completely
remediated.
(Ord. 5671 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.11.260   Drainage designs standards for development projects.
   (a)   All new development projects shall meet the requirements of the Public
Works Drainage Design Standards and the Santa Clara County Drainage Manual in
effect at the time of submission of a complete planning application, or if no
planning application is required for the development project, at the time of
submission of a complete application for a building permit or excavation and
grading permit, whichever occurs first.
   (b)   All redevelopment projects and remodels requiring a building permit or
excavation and grading permit shall meet the requirements of the Public Works
Drainage Design Standards provided by the Public Works Director for the portion
of the site or facility being constructed, remodeled, or improved.
   (c)   Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section, a project
shall not be subject to the requirements of this section if the project does
not include new drainage patterns or alter existing drainage patterns of the
site.
(Ord. 5671 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.11.270   Requirements for construction sites and activities.
   (a)   All workers, contractors, subcontractors, and superintendents of
construction sites of any size shall follow and implement all applicable
provisions of stormwater management, pollution prevention, and erosion and
sediment control plans and ensure that BMPs are in place to prevent potential
pollutants from being tracked, mobilized, carried, transported, or discharged
into the on-site storm drain inlet(s), city’s right-of-way, storm drain system,
and receiving waters, as required by city regulations.
   (b)   Projects covered under the State of California Construction General
Permit (CGP) shall also meet the requirements of this section. Project
applicants shall provide to the city a copy of the notice of intent and notice
of termination required under the CGP.
   (c)   Construction BMPs shall be in place until exterior impervious
surfaces, the building shell, landscaping, and stormwater treatment measures
are in place. In addition to BMPs generally applicable to construction sites
year-round, all construction sites shall implement site-specific, seasonally
and phase-appropriate BMPs as required by the Director.
   (d)   The Director is authorized to oversee, inspect, and require expedient
compliance with the requirements of this section at all construction sites
year-round. Inspections shall occur at a regular frequency established by the
Director.
   (e)   Contractor/subcontractor requirements. The applicant shall be
responsible for ensuring that its contractors and subcontractors comply with
this section.
(Ord. 5671 § 2 (part), 2025)
Part 4 - Required Best Management Practices for All Dischargers
16.11.280   Minimum best management practices for all dischargers.
   (a)   Any person engaged in activities or operations that will or may result
in a non-stormwater discharge, or who owns or manages a facility or property
where such activities or operations occur, shall implement and consistently
comply with applicable BMPs outlined in the city regulations.
   (b)   The Director may require compliance with additional requirements,
including structural retrofit BMPs, if necessary, to achieve the purposes of
this chapter.
(Ord. 5671 § 2 (part), 2025)
Part 5 - Illicit Discharge Detection and Elimination and Mobile Sources
16.11.290   Spill containment and notification of non-stormwater discharges.
   (a)   Any responsible party who has knowledge or information of any known or
suspected release of materials, which has resulted in or may result in a non-
stormwater discharge other than that permitted by this chapter shall
immediately report to the city and take all necessary steps to immediately
cease, contain, and clean up the spill using dry clean-up methods. If a person
cannot identify the spilled material, the person shall not attempt to clean it
up in a manner that may result in a discharge or harm to human health. The
responsible party shall adhere to the city regulations and any other direction
from the Director or other city representative.
   (b)   If a spill occurs on private property, the responsible party shall be
responsible for cleaning the private property and any private sanitary or storm
drain components located on said property. The responsible party shall seek
guidance from city staff before cleaning the private sanitary or storm drain
components.
   (c)   The responsible party or representative shall not clean any city
infrastructure, including any components of the city’s storm drain or sanitary
sewer systems, without permission from the Director.
   (d)   The Director shall conduct an investigation and enforcement per the
Enforcement Response Plan until the issue is deemed corrected.
   (e)   The responsible party and their agents shall adhere to the
requirements of Title 17 of this Code with respect to hazardous materials and
wastes, and all applicable requirements of the County of Santa Clara and the
State of California.
(Ord. 5671 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.11.300   Mobile businesses.
   (a)   Non-stormwater discharges from mobile businesses. Mobile businesses
whose activities involve the potential non-stormwater discharge shall not allow
wash water or any other non-stormwater discharge to discharge into a storm
drain inlet or other component of the storm drain system, onto the street,
sidewalk, or other paved surface, or directly into a water body. Instead, all
wash water and pollutants shall be disposed of in a cleanout that is connected
to the sanitary sewer system according to the requirements of the City of Palo
Alto Pretreatment Program.
   (b)   Mobile businesses shall employ BMPs to prevent pollutants from
discharging to the storm drain system or the sanitary sewer systems without
pretreatment, as required by city regulations or otherwise required by the
Director.
(Ord. 5671 § 2 (part), 2025)
Part 6 - Pesticides Toxicity Control
16.11.310   Pesticides toxicity control.
   (a)   The Director shall develop, maintain, and implement an Integrated Pest
Management Policy and procedures for the use of pesticides.
   (b)   All city employees and contractors shall comply with the Integrated
Pest Management Policy and procedures in city operations and on city property.
(Ord. 5671 § 2 (part), 2025)
Part 7 - Trash Load Reductions
16.11.320   Trash load reductions.
   (a)   Requirements for existing businesses. By July 1, 2025, private
properties that generate moderate, high, or very high trash loads, as defined
in city regulations, and that discharge into private storm drain inlets, shall
be equipped with full trash capture systems or be managed with trash discharge
control actions equivalent to or better than full trash capture systems.
Property owners must install and maintain trash capture systems in compliance
with city regulations and the requirements of the MRP. Property owners shall be
responsible for documenting maintenance records per requirements of the city
regulations. Maintenance records shall be made available to the Director upon
request.
   (b)   Requirements for development projects. All development projects that
have operable private storm drain inlets on their property that directly
discharge to the city’s storm drain system, any creek, or the San Francisco Bay
shall install and maintain full trash capture devices or systems in compliance
with city regulations and requirements of the State Water Resources Control
Board.
   (c)   Full trash capture device or system maintenance requirements. Full
trash capture devices or systems shall be maintained by the property owner to
ensure that they are operating appropriately and have sufficient operating
capacity to capture trash consistent with the MRP and city regulations. The
inspection and maintenance of each full capture device shall be at a frequency
sufficient to prevent overflow or bypassing of trash and plugging or clogging
of screen and device's trash reservoir. Full trash capture devices will be
inspected by city staff to ensure compliance.
   (d)   The private property owner shall be responsible for documenting
maintenance records per requirements of the city regulations. Maintenance
records shall be made available to the Director upon request.
(Ord. 5671 § 2 (part), 2025)
Part 8 - Mercury Controls
16.11.330   Mercury controls.
   (a)   The Director shall implement a mercury control program consisting of
load reduction assessment, pollution prevention, source control measures,
treatment control measures, green stormwater infrastructure, and measures to
reduce risk to consumers of Bay fish.
   (b)   Source property identification and abatement. The Director shall
investigate and identify properties and land areas that likely contribute
mercury to the storm drain system and take action to abate or cause abatement
of the mercury sources or refer the identified properties to the Regional Water
Board for follow-up measures. Source properties referred to the Water Board
shall implement interim enhanced operation and maintenance measures as required
by the Director.
   (c)   Designated properties. Properties in industrial areas and in other
zones designated in city regulations shall implement treatment control
measures, GSI measures, or other control measures to treat stormwater per the
MRP, regional guidance and city regulations.
(Ord. 5671 § 2 (part), 2025)
Part 9 - Polychlorinated Biphenyls (PCBs) Controls
16.11.340   Polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) controls.
   (a)   The Director shall implement a polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs)
control program consisting of an assessment methodology and data collection
program to identify and quantify reductions of PCB loads in stormwater through
implementation of pollution prevention, source control, and treatment control,
green stormwater infrastructure, and other measures.
   (b)   Source property identification and abatement. The Director shall
investigate and identify properties and land areas that likely contribute PCBs
to the storm drain system and take action to abate or cause abatement of the
PCB sources and/or refer the identified properties to the Regional Water Board
for follow-up measures. Source properties referred to the Water Board shall
implement interim enhanced operation and maintenance measures as required by
the Director.
   (c)   Designated properties. Properties in industrial areas and in other
zones designated in city regulations or properties otherwise designated by the
Director shall implement treatment control measures, GSI measures, or other
control measures to treat stormwater according to the requirements of the MRP,
regional guidance, and city regulations.
(Ord. 5671 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.11.350   Management of PCBs during building demolition activities.
   (a)   Applicability. This section shall apply to projects that require a
demolition permit. Demolitions of single-family residences or any wood-framed
structures are exempted from this requirement.
   (b)   PCB screening assessment. Any person undertaking a project that
involves the demolition of an entire building constructed or remodeled between
January 1, 1950 and December 31, 1980, inclusive, shall perform a PCB screening
assessment to determine the presence of PCBs and other hazardous substances at
the demolition site and to follow applicable disposal requirements. The PCB
screening assessment shall be submitted prior to issuance of any demolition
permit, in a form and substance prescribed by the Director. The Director may
require the PCB screening assessment to include any information reasonably
necessary to determine the concentration of PCBs in any primary building
materials.
   (c)   For demolition of buildings containing materials with PCBs
concentrations of 50 ppm or greater approved on and after July 1, 2023
identified per required sampling procedures of this PCBs Program, demolition
contractors shall notify the city at least two weeks before any demolition is
to occur. Applicant shall determine if additional agency notification or
approvals, or additional sampling for and abatement of PCBs, is required under
other applicable laws. Applicant shall comply with all federal and state laws
and regulations, including but not limited to health, safety, and environmental
laws and regulations, that relate to management and cleanup of any and all
PCBs, including but not limited to PCBs in priority building materials, other
PCBs-contaminated materials, PCBs-contaminated liquids, and PCBs waste. The
requirements of this section do not replace or supplant the requirements of
state or federal law, including but not limited to the Toxic Substances Control
Act, 40 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 761, and California Code of
Regulations (CCR) Title 22. The demolition contractors shall provide
notification to the city if it is determined that advance approval from the
U.S. EPA is required. If advance approval to U.S. EPA is not required, then the
demolition contractors shall submit a hazardous waste manifest for the disposal
of the PCBs materials to the city within one week of it becoming available. The
demolition contractors shall notify the city that the demolition is complete
within five business days of completion.
   (d)   Applicants shall submit written notifications documenting any changes
in the information submitted in compliance with this section to the Director
when changes in project conditions affect the information submitted with the
permit application.
   (e)   Applicants shall conduct onsite PCB control measures described in city
regulations and as prescribed by the Director.
   (f)   The Director shall inspect construction sites during demolition to
verify adequate implementation of construction site controls and proper
disposal of PCB-containing materials.
   (g)   Recordkeeping. Applicants shall maintain documentation of the results
of the priority building materials screening assessment for a minimum of five
years after submittal to the city.
   (h)   Liability. Applicant is responsible for safely and legally complying
with the requirements of this section. Neither the issuance of a permit under
the requirements of the Director or building department, nor the compliance
with the requirements of this section or with any condition imposed by the
city, shall relieve any person from responsibility for damage to persons or
property resulting therefrom, or as otherwise imposed by law, nor impose any
liability upon the city for damages to persons or property.
(Ord. 5671 § 2 (part), 2025)
Part 10 - Copper Controls
16.11.360   Copper controls.
   (a)   Pools, spas, and fountains. Discharges from pools, spas, and fountains
that contain copper-based chemicals are prohibited from entering the storm
drain system. Owners of pools, spas, and fountains shall either install a
connection to a private sanitary sewer, including a connection for filter
backwash, or divert the discharge for use in landscaping. Discharge diverted
for use in landscaping shall not overflow the landscaped area.
   (b)   Sources. Each industrial source in the city shall have BMPs in place
to minimize discharge of copper to the storm drain system, including
consideration of roof runoff that might accumulate copper deposits from
ventilation systems on site.
   (c)   Roofing materials. Copper metal roofing, copper granule containing
asphalt shingles, and copper gutters shall not be permitted for use on any
residential, commercial, or industrial building for which a building permit is
required. Copper flashing for use under tiles or slates and small copper
ornaments are exempt from this prohibition. Replacement roofing and gutters on
historic structures are exempt, provided that the roofing material used shall
be pre-patinated at the factory. For the purposes of this exemption, the
definition of "historic" shall be limited to structures designated as Category
1 or Category 2 Buildings in the current edition of the Palo Alto Historical
and Architectural Resources Report and Inventory.
   (d)   Sites requiring copper controls shall comply with all applicable BMPs
described in city regulations and otherwise prescribed by the Director.
(Ord. 5671 § 2 (part), 2025)
Chapter 16.12
RECYCLED WATER
Sections:
   
16.12.010    Definitions.
   
16.12.015    Compliance with state and local regulations.
   
16.12.020   Converting existing potable water users to recycled water for
irrigation.
   
16.12.025   Converting existing potable water users (with existing dual
plumbing) to recycled water for toilet and urinal flushing and floor trap
priming.
   
16.12.030   New construction; recycled water use for irrigation.
   
16.12.035   New construction; recycled water use for toilet and urinal flushing
and floor trap priming.
   
16.12.040   Recycled water permit required.
   
16.12.045   Recycled water permit conditions; verification of compliance.
   
16.12.050   Exemptions and adjustments.
   
16.12.055   Appeals.
   
16.12.060   Failure to comply with this chapter.
   
16.12.065   Monitoring.
   
16.12.070   Severability.
16.12.010   Definitions.
   (a)   "Dual plumbing" means a system of two sets of water pipes, one for
recycled water for toilets and urinals and one for potable water for other
interior uses.
   (b)   "Floortrap priming" means the practice of adding water to traps
beneath floor drains to ensure a barrier from sewer gas.
   (c)   "Identified customers" are entities purchasing water from the city who
are adjacent to a recycled water pipeline shown in a Final Palo Alto Recycled
Water Project Plan. Identified customers do not include single family
residences.    (d)   "Recycled water" means wastewater treated by the Regional
Water Quality Control Plant that meets state requirements for reuse.
   (e)   "Recycled water permit" means a permit issued by the city manager or
his/her designee to allow a customer to use recycled water at its facility.
   (f)   "Recycled water project area" means a geographical area of the city
designated by resolution of city council as an area where recycled water will
be served.
(Ord. 5002 § 2, 2008)
16.12.015   Compliance with state and local regulations.
   All users of recycled water shall comply with the California Department of
Public Health regulations contained in Title 17 and Title 22 of the California
Code of Regulations, and with the Palo Alto Water Reuse Rules and Regulations
for the use of recycled water.
   Additional opportunities and/or requirements for adding recycled water
infrastructure or nonresidential and multifamily new construction and major
renovation projects are described in Chapter
16.14 (California Green Building Code).
(Ord. 5108 § 4, 2010: Ord. 5002 § 2, 2008)
16.12.020   Converting existing potable water users to recycled water for
irrigation.
   Within the boundaries of any recycled water project area, identified
customers who are notified by mail by the city shall use recycled water for
irrigation when available. Any such notification shall include the conditions
of use, pricing, and construction schedule for the city's recycled water
pipeline and the connections to it.
(Ord. 5002 § 2, 2008)
16.12.025   Converting existing potable water users (with existing dual
plumbing) to recycled water for toilet and urinal flushing and floor trap
priming.
   For facilities with existing dual plumbing within the boundaries of any
recycled water project area, identified customers shall use recycled water when
it is available following notification by mail by the city that a conversion to
recycled water for toilet and urinal flushing and floor trap priming purposes
is required. Any such notification shall include the conditions of use,
pricing, and construction schedule for the city's pipeline and the connections
to it.
(Ord. 5002 § 2, 2008)
16.12.030   New construction; recycled water use for irrigation.
   (a)   All applications for land use permits, building permits and other
discretionary actions for projects other than single family homes, within the
boundaries of any recycled water project area, filed after the adoption of this
chapter, shall include the following:
   (1)   Plans demonstrating that recycled water will be used, when available,
for all irrigation.
   (2)   Consideration of plants suitable for irrigation with recycled water.
   (3)   The installation of the on-site infrastructure necessary to connect
the irrigation system to the city's recycled water supply when it becomes
available.
   (b)   All applications for land use permits, building permits and other
discretionary actions for projects other than single family homes, in
geographic areas not within the boundaries of a recycled water project area,
where the total landscape area exceeds 1,500 square feet, filed after the
adoption of this chapter, shall include the following:
   (1)   Plans demonstrating that recycled water will be used, when available,
for all irrigation.
   (2)   Consideration of plants suitable for irrigation with recycled water.
   (3)   The installation of on-site infrastructure necessary to connect the
site's irrigation system to the city's recycled water supply when it becomes
available.
(Ord. 5002 § 2, 2008)
16.12.035   New construction; recycled water use for toilet and urinal flushing
and floor trap priming.
   (a)   All applications for building permits for new or remodeled buildings
or groups of buildings within the boundaries of a recycled water project area,
filed after the adoption of this chapter, where the building square footage
total, including both the original square footage and any addition, is greater
than 10,000 square feet or where installation of twenty-five or more toilets
and urinals is proposed, shall incorporate dual plumbing in the design of the
facility to allow the use of recycled water, when it becomes available, for
flushing toilets and urinals and priming floor traps. Dual plumbing
requirements shall not apply to single family homes.
   (b)   All applications for building permits for new or remodeled buildings
or groups of buildings in geographic areas not within the boundaries of a
recycled water project area, filed after the adoption of this chapter, where
the building square footage total, including both the original square footage
and any addition, is greater than 50,000 square feet or where installation of
50 or more toilets and urinals is proposed, shall incorporate dual plumbing in
the design of the facility to allow the use of recycled water, when it becomes
available, for flushing toilets and urinals and priming floor traps. Dual
plumbing requirements shall not apply to single family homes.
   (c)   When dual plumbing requirements are triggered by remodeling, only
those restroom facilities located within the remodel project area shall be
required to incorporate dual plumbing.
(Ord. 5510 § 3, 2020: Ord. 5481 § 3, 2019: Ord. 5002 § 2, 2008)
16.12.040   Recycled water permit required.
   Upon written notification pursuant to §§
16.12.020 and
16.12.025 that recycled water is available and must be used, the recycled water
customer shall obtain a recycled water permit by submitting a recycled water
permit application, which shall include plans detailing the recycled and
potable water distribution systems at the facility. A city representative shall
review the plans and conduct a field inspection before the recycled water
permit is issued. The applicant must make any required changes as directed by
the city before a recycled water permit may be issued.
(Ord. 5002 § 2, 2008)
16.12.045   Recycled water permit conditions; verification of compliance.
   The recycled water permit shall specify the requirements for the applicant's
use of recycled water based on the water reuse rules and regulations adopted
pursuant to §
16.12.015, and shall require compliance with the California Department of
Public Health regulations contained in Title 17 and Title 22 of the California
Code of Regulations and with any additional requirements specified by the state
water resources control board. Recycled water shall not be supplied to a
facility until inspection by a city representative determines that the
applicant is in compliance with the permit conditions.
(Ord. 5002 § 2, 2008)
16.12.050   Exemptions and adjustments.
   An application for an exemption or an adjustment to the requirements of this
chapter shall be made to the director of public works or his/her designee.
Requests for an exemption or adjustment may be made consistent with state law
and shall be based on the finding by the director of public works that the use
of recycled water demonstrates an adverse effect to the applicant's landscaping
installed prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified herein. The
director of public works may also consider any additional factors, including
any special costs or hardships which may be created by the use of recycled
water. A written determination will be made on all requests for exemptions or
adjustments within ten business days and mailed to the applicant. If the
exemption or adjustment is not granted, the applicant must fully comply with
the requirements of this section.
(Ord. 5002 § 2, 2008)
16.12.055   Appeals.
   Denial of any application for an exemption and/or adjustment to the
provisions of recycled water use may be appealed to the city manager or his/her
designee, whose decision shall be final. An application for appeal shall be
filed with the city clerk in writing within ten business days after the
director of public works' decision and shall state the specific grounds for the
appeal. The city manager or his/her designee shall hear the appeal within sixty
calendar days after the appeal has been filed with the city clerk and shall
issue a written decision within thirty days.
(Ord. 5002 § 2, 2008)
16.12.060   Failure to comply with this chapter.
   In addition to existing penalties in state and local law for violation of
the provisions of this chapter, the city manager or his/her designee may assess
the following penalties, subject to the appeal provisions set forth above:
   (a)   A water service surcharge of fifty percent of the general water
service rate, as set forth in utility rate schedule, for each billing period
during which potable water is used for irrigation.
   (b)   Continued use of potable water for irrigation, after a written warning
by the city manager or his/her designee, may result in the discontinuation of
water service supplied for irrigation by the city following a noticed hearing.
A charge as set forth in the city's administrative fee schedule shall be paid
prior to the reactivation or restoration of water service.
   (c)   Any use of recycled water in a manner contrary to the provisions of
this chapter, is hereby declared to be a nuisance and may be abated in the
manner provided for the abatement of nuisances in
Chapter 9.56 of the Palo Alto Municipal Code.
(Ord. 5002 § 2, 2008)
16.12.065   Monitoring.
   Representatives of the city and the San Francisco Bay Regional Water Quality
Control Board shall be authorized to enter the premises of any recycled water
user to carry out inspections and monitoring to assure compliance with this
chapter and applicable state of California regulations.
(Ord. 5002 § 2, 2008)
16.12.070   Severability.
   If any provision or clause of this chapter is held to be unconstitutional or
otherwise invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall
not affect other provisions of this chapter, and clauses of this chapter are
declared to be severable.
(Ord. 5002 § 2, 2008)
Chapter 16.13
REQUIREMENTS FOR FOOD FACILITIES RELATED TO WATER POLLUTION
PREVENTION AND MANAGEMENT OF FATS, OILS, AND GREASE
Sections:
Part 1 - Purpose and Intent; Definitions
   
16.13.010   Purpose and intent.
   
16.13.020   Definitions.
Part 2 - General Provisions
   
16.13.030   Administration.
   
16.13.040   Applicability.
   
16.13.050   Conflicts with other laws.
   
16.13.060   Alternate means and methods.
   
16.13.070   Retention of records.
   
16.13.080   Obstruction, damage, or impairment to storm drain and sanitary
sewer systems and rights-of-way.
Part 3 - Authority to Inspect and Enforce
   
16.13.090   Authority to inspect.
   
16.13.100   Authority to require corrective actions.
   
16.13.110   Fees and charges.
Part 4 - Prohibited Discharges, Devices, and Connections
   
16.13.120   Prohibited discharges.
   
16.13.130   Prohibited devices, equipment, and connections.
Part 5 - Grease Control Device Requirements
   
16.13.140   Requirements for installing or replacing existing grease control
devices.
   
16.13.150   Grease control device maintenance requirements.
Part 6 - Rooftop Grease Containment System Requirements
   
16.13.160   Requirements for installing or replacing existing rooftop grease
containment systems.
Part 7 - Waste Oil Management Requirements
   
16.13.170   Waste oil storage requirements for food facilities.
   
16.13.180   Waste oil management and maintenance requirements for food
facilities.
Part 8 - Spill Response Requirements
   
16.13.190   Requirements for fats, oils, and grease spill response activities
conducted at and associated with food facilities.
Part 9 - Best Management Practices for Existing Facilities
   
16.13.200   Required best management practices for existing facilities.
Part 10 - Mobile Food Facilities
   
16.13.210   Mobile food facilities.
Part 11 - Food Facility Closure or Ownership Change
   
16.13.220   Food facility closure or change of ownership.
Part 1 - Purpose and Intent; Definitions
16.13.010   Purpose and intent.
   The purpose of this chapter is to control and limit impacts from fats, oils,
and grease (FOG) generated by food facilities to the City of Palo Alto (city)
storm drain system, sanitary sewer system, right-of-way, and receiving waters,
including the San Francisco Bay (bay) and local creeks, marshes, wetlands and
other natural habitats, as well as to protect human health and the environment.
This chapter is enacted and shall be implemented in a manner consistent with
the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency "General Pretreatment Regulations for
Existing and New Sources of Pollution" published at Title 40 of the Code of
Federal Regulations, Part 403, the Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act
(Water Code Section 13000 et seq.), and the Federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C.
Section 1251 et seq.) (CWA), as amended from time to time. This chapter is
designed to be no less stringent than regional, state or federal regulations,
rules, orders, and policies but in some respects is more stringent. The city
intends to update and modify this chapter as needed to continue to meet state
and regional requirements and provide a program for protection of the San
Francisco Bay and other receiving waters. If any provision of this chapter
conflicts with state or regional requirements, as amended or updated, the more
stringent and environmentally protective provision shall apply.       This
chapter supplements the provisions of Chapters
16.09 and
16.11 of the Palo Alto Municipal Code, which apply to uses and activities in
the city more broadly, as well as food facilities. This chapter is intended to
complement, rather than supersede, the provisions of city building codes and
regulations applicable to the installation and operation of grease capturing
equipment.
(Ord. 5672 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.13.020   Definitions.
   The following terms shall be as defined herein. For purposes of this
chapter, terms defined in Chapter 16.11 shall have the same meaning in this
Chapter, 16.13, except to the extent expressly modified in this section.
   “Best management practices” or “BMPs” means a combination of general good
housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and educational practices,
operations and maintenance procedures, and other practices to prevent or reduce
to the maximum extent practicable non-stormwater discharges directly or
indirectly to the storm drain system, sanitary sewer system, right-of-way, or
receiving waters.
   “Building” means any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering
any use or occupancy.
   “City” or “The City” means City of Palo Alto, California.
   “Community food producer” means a producer of agricultural products on land
that is not zoned for agricultural use but is otherwise in compliance with
applicable local land use and zoning restrictions, including but not limited to
restrictions governing personal gardens, community gardens, school gardens, and
culinary gardens.
   “Director” means the Director of Public Works of the City of Palo Alto and
their duly authorized designees.
   “Discharge” means the introduction of a pollutant to the storm drain system,
sanitary sewer system, or a receiving water from any activity or operation
associated with a food facility or mobile food facility.
   “Discharger” means any person who causes or permits a discharge.
   “Enforcement Response Plan” or “ERP” means a reference document for
inspection staff and management to ensure a consistent and transparent
enforcement process for meeting city, regional, and state requirements.
   “Fats, oils, and grease” or “FOG” means any substance, such as a vegetable
or animal product, that is used in, or is a byproduct of, the cooking or food
preparation process, and that turns or may turn viscous or solidifies with a
change in temperature or other conditions. FOG does not include any products
associated with petroleum.
   “Food facility” means a permanent establishment or mobile business operating
for the purpose of preparing, packaging, serving, or providing food (including
only prepackaged) and/or drinks for consumption by that establishment’s
members, customers, employees, or the general public. “Food facility” does not
include the following:
      (i)   Locations where food is stored temporarily but not prepared or
served;
      (ii)   Private home kitchens, also known as cottage food operations, as
defined by the California Department of Public Health;
      (iii)   Community food producers;
      (iv)   Farmers’ markets and produce stands, except where food is prepared
and served at the market;
      (v)   Kitchen facilities principally for individual use by employees
ancillary to another primary use (i.e., office break rooms); and
      (vi)   Public events at temporary locations without connections to the
sanitary sewer system and storm drain system.
   “Food facility development project” means new construction or replacement of
a structure built to serve solely as a food facility or a structure that
includes a food facility and requires a planning entitlement or building permit
from the city.
   “Food waste disposer” means a device installed under a sink drain used to
shred and/or grind food waste into smaller particles in order for it to drain
to the sanitary sewer system.
   “Grease control device” means a device designed to collect and prevent
passage of food waste and FOG into the sanitary sewer system. Grease control
devices addressed in this chapter include gravity grease interceptors, grease
removal device(s), and hydromechanical grease interceptors.
   “Lateral” means the drainage piping and appurtenances that constitute a
building’s connection to the sanitary sewer system.
   “Maximum extent practicable” or “MEP” means utilizing all reasonably
feasible means, including implementation of BMPs, control techniques, and
system, design and engineering methods.
   “Mobile food facility” means any vehicle used in conjunction with a
commissary or other permanent food facility upon which food is sold or
distributed at retail. This does not include a “transporter” used to transport
packaged food from a food facility, or other approved source to the consumer.
   “Municipal regional permit” or “MRP” means the most recently adopted San
Francisco Bay Area municipal regional stormwater permit, a multi-countywide
municipal stormwater NPDES permit issued by the California Regional Water
Quality Control Board, San Francisco Bay Region-Region 2 (Regional Water
Board), to regulate discharges from municipalities and local agencies in
Alameda, Contra Costa, San Mateo, and Santa Clara Counties, and the cities of
Fairfield, Suisun City, and Vallejo to the San Francisco Bay.
   “Non-stormwater discharge” means any discharge that is not entirely composed
of stormwater. Non-stormwater discharges include but are not limited to
polluted groundwater, any pollutant, discharges allowed under an NPDES permit,
or an illicit discharge.
   “NPDES” means National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System, which is a
national program for issuing, modifying, revoking and reissuing, terminating,
monitoring and enforcing permits, and imposing and enforcing pretreatment
requirements, under Sections 307, 402, 318, and 405 of the Federal Clean Water
Act.
   “Person” means any individual, partnership, firm, company, corporation,
association, joint venture, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental
entity, or any other legal entity; or their representatives, agents, or
designees.
   “Pervious” refers to a material or surface (such as landscaping or natural
landscape) that allows water to infiltrate below the surface. Pervious
materials may include, but are not limited to, permeable interlocking concrete
pavers, permeable pavers, Pervious concrete and porous asphalt.
   “Planning entitlement” means approval provided by the city to develop a
building (or buildings) or a piece of land for a specific use according to the
city’s development standards, rules, and regulations.
   "Pollutants” or “pollutant” means those substances that may cause or
contribute to the degradation of water quality of receiving waters and are
harmful to aquatic life, human health and the environment. Pollutants
associated with food facilities include cleaning agents, food waste, trash, and
fats, oils, and grease.
   "Pollution" means the presence, introduction or discharge into a receiving
water of a pollutant that has harmful or poisonous effects on aquatic life,
ecological habitat, natural processes of creeks and waterbodies, public health
and the environment.
   “Receiving water” means waters of the state, as defined by the Porter-
Cologne Water Quality Control Act. Receiving waters include but are not limited
to creeks, marshes, wetlands, shorelines, estuaries, and bays.
   "Refuse" means and includes compostable materials, recyclable materials, and
solid waste. Solid waste means solid and semisolid wastes, generated in or
upon, related to the occupancy of, remaining in or emanating from residential
premises or commercial premises including but not limited to garbage, trash,
rubbish, ashes, and industrial wastes.
   “Refuse management area” means an area located outdoors used to store refuse
bins and/or dumpsters, inside or outside of an enclosure.
   “Responsible party” means any person who owns, operates, or manages a
property, business, facility, or site, or who is otherwise responsible for the
activities thereon or the person whose action or omission causes or results in
a violation of this chapter.
   “Rooftop grease containment systems” means the filters applied to rooftop
terminations at food facilities. They are applied to rooftop fans on exhaust
systems to capture the aerosol form of FOG from food being cooked in the
kitchen.
   “San Francisco Bay Regional Water Quality Control Board” or “Regional Water
Board” means the regional agency whose mission is to preserve, enhance, and
restore the quality of the San Francisco Bay’s water resources for the
protection of the environment, public health, and all beneficial uses. This
agency oversees compliance of the MRP.
   “Sanitary sewer overflow” means any overflow, spill, release, discharge, or
diversion of untreated or partially treated wastewater from a sanitary sewer
system.
   “Sanitary sewer system” means the collection system, all sewers, treatment
plants and other facilities owned or operated by the city for carrying,
collecting, storing, treating, reclaiming, and disposing of sanitary sewage and
industrial wastes (as defined in Section
16.09.015).
   “Storm drain system” means the storm drain facilities owned, managed, or
operated by the city by which stormwater is collected and/or conveyed to
receiving waters, including but not limited to streets and roads, gutters,
curbs, inlets, piped storm drains, parking lots, pumping facilities, retention
and detention basins, natural and human-made or altered drainage channels,
reservoirs, and other drainage structures which are within the city’s
jurisdiction. The storm drain system also includes pipes, underground and
surface conveyances, and other components on private property and other
property within the city’s limits not owned by the city that connect and/or
route stormwater and stormwater runoff to the city’s storm drain system.
   “Stormwater” means any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting
entirely of water that originates from precipitation events.
   “Stormwater runoff” means flow that is created when precipitation falls on
impervious surfaces or compacted pervious surfaces that do not allow water to
infiltrate into the ground.
   “Structural retrofit best management practices” or “structural retrofit
BMPs” means a retrofit to a structure, fixed feature, or property to prevent or
minimize the potential of a discharge to the storm drain system, sanitary sewer
system, or receiving waters.
   “United States Environmental Protection Agency” or “U.S. EPA” or “EPA” means
the Environmental Protection Agency of the United States of America, a federal
agency, whose mission is to protect human health and the environment and
oversees compliance with environmental regulations.
   “Waste oil” means FOG generated by cooking or food facility equipment that
is not plumbed to the sanitary sewer system but is collected, stored, and
hauled off-site. Waste oil is also known as cooking oil, yellow oil, or tallow.
   “Waste oil container” means any container used to store waste oil.
(Ord. 5672 § 2 (part), 2025)
Part 2 - General Provisions
16.13.030   Administration.
   The Director shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of
the provisions of this chapter and for promulgating such orders, rules,
conditions of approval, and requirements as are necessary to accomplish the
purposes of this chapter. The primary regulatory document implementing this
chapter is Palo Alto Regulations for Food Facilities Related to Water Pollution
Prevention and Management of Fats, Oils, and Grease.
(Ord. 5672 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.13.040   Applicability.
   This chapter shall apply to all food facilities and mobile food facilities
as defined in this chapter. Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to
infringe on any vested property right.
(Ord. 5672 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.13.050   Conflicts with other laws.
   In the event of any conflict between this chapter and any federal or state
law, regulation, order, or permit, the requirement that establishes the higher
standard for public health or safety shall govern. Nothing in this chapter
shall preclude enforcement of any other applicable law, regulation, order, or
permit.
(Ord. 5672 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.13.060   Alternate means and methods.
   If compliance with any section of these regulations is infeasible, the
Director, upon application in writing by the owner, a lessee, or an authorized
representative of the food facility, is authorized to approve alternate means
or methods of compliance with this chapter. The food facility shall
demonstrate, as required by the Director, that the proposed alternative is at
least equivalent in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance,
durability, and safety. The particulars of any such approval made by the
Director shall be in writing and a signed copy shall be furnished to the
applicant.
(Ord. 5672 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.13.070   Retention of records.
   Food facilities shall comply with the records retention requirements in the
Palo Alto Regulations for Food Facilities.
(Ord. 5672 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.13.080   Obstruction, damage, or impairment to storm drain and sanitary
sewer systems and rights-of-way.
   Dischargers shall be responsible for and liable to the city for any
obstruction, damage, or impairment to the storm drain system, sanitary sewer
system, and other rights-of-way associated with a discharge that causes an
obstruction, damage, or any other impairment to the storm drain system and
sanitary sewer system. The city may assess a charge against the discharger to
reimburse the city for costs incurred to clean or repair said obstruction,
damage or impairment
(Ord. 5672 § 2 (part), 2025)
Part 3 - Authority to Inspect and Enforce
16.13.090   Authority to inspect.
   (a)   The Director shall have the authority to inspect inside and outside of
private and public food facilities, sites, property, structures, equipment, and
drainage systems associated with food facilities, whether existing or under
construction, whenever necessary to ensure and confirm compliance with this
chapter and applicable state, regional, and city regulations.
   (b)   The Director shall be authorized to enter, without unreasonable delay,
any premises subject to the requirements of this chapter to conduct inspections
and monitoring to assure compliance with this chapter and applicable state,
regional, and city regulations. An inspection fee shall be charged for each
inspection at the amount listed in the city’s adopted municipal fee schedule.
   (c)   In the event the owner or occupant of the premises refuses entry after
a request to enter and inspect the premises has been made, the city is hereby
empowered to seek assistance from any court of competent jurisdiction in
obtaining such entry.
(Ord. 5672 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.13.100   Authority to require corrective actions.
   (a)   Enforcement. The Director shall have primary responsibility for
enforcement of this chapter. The Director is authorized to take all actions
reasonable and necessary to enforce this chapter and any regulations developed
as required hereunder. Violations of this chapter may be enforced as allowed by
Title 1 of the Palo Alto Municipal Code. The Director is authorized to exercise
the authority provided in the California Penal Code Section 836.5.
   (b)   The Director may require any food facility or person deemed to have
violated this chapter to take any or all of the following actions:
      (1)   Ensure that the pollution be remediated and the affected private
and city property and infrastructure, as relevant, be restored within a
specified time. The responsible party shall also be responsible for cleanup or
reimbursement of cleanup costs incurred by the city for cleanup activities
associated with any discharges that have entered the city’s right-of-way, storm
drain and/or sanitary sewer systems.
      (2)   Implement applicable BMPs to protect the storm drain system,
sanitary sewer system, and receiving waters to address pollutant sources,
including but not limited to, outdoor waste oil storage and disposal areas;
outdoor refuse management areas; outdoor parking areas and access roads;
outdoor areas used by customers and employees; outdoor wash areas; outdoor
drainage from indoor areas; rooftop equipment; grease control devices and
associated plumbing connections; private laterals; and other sources that have
a reasonable potential to contribute to pollution.
      (3)   Install structural retrofit BMPs to address noncompliance of this
chapter. These projects shall be approved by the Director and may require a
planning entitlement or building permit approval from the city.
   (c)   The Director shall implement a Stormwater Enforcement Response Plan to
facilitate timely and effective compliance with the requirements of this
chapter. The Enforcement Response Plan shall contain, at a minimum, the
following:
      (1)   Enforcement procedures;
      (2)   Enforcement tools and scenarios;
      (3)   Procedures for timely correction of potential and actual
discharges; and
      (4)   Procedures for referral and coordination with other agencies.
   (d)   The remedies established in this section are not exclusive. In
addition to any other remedies allowed under the Palo Alto Municipal Code,
violations may be subject to penalties established by resolution of the Council
or any other enforcement mechanism allowed by law.
(Ord. 5672 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.13.110   Fees and charges.
   The city may adopt reasonable fees and charges for reimbursement of costs of
administering and enforcing this chapter.
(Ord. 5672 § 2 (part), 2025)
Part 4 - Prohibited Discharges, Devices, and Connections
16.13.120   Prohibited discharges.
   No person shall cause, allow, or permit any threatened or actual discharge
or allow any of the following to flow or spill to any pervious area, street, or
city right-of-way. Prohibited discharges include, but are not limited to, the
following:
   (a)   Fats, oils, and grease (FOG), including any liquid or other wastes
containing FOG;
   (b)   Grease control device contents;
   (c)   Waste oil container contents;
   (d)   Drippings or spills from outdoor refuse management areas;
   (e)   Refuse, liquids, and other waste from indoor and outdoor storage and
wash areas and public or employee areas associated with a food facility; and
   (f)   FOG accumulations on rooftops of food facilities from rooftop
terminations.
(Ord. 5672 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.13.130   Prohibited devices, equipment, and connections.
   (a)   Plumbing lines and drainage fixtures located in bathrooms shall not be
connected to a grease control device.
   (b)   No dishwashers shall be connected to a grease control device.
   (c)   No food facility shall install, maintain, or use a food waste disposer
(as required in Section 16.08.110).
   (d)   Unless otherwise approved by the Director, no food facility shall
install, maintain, or use any food waste liquefiers, aerobic or anaerobic food
waste digesters, food composters, or similar devices designed or intended to
digest biodegradable kitchen waste to be drained to the sanitary sewer system.
   (e)   A food facility shall not connect any fixture or outdoor drainage to
the city’s storm drain system except with permission from the Director.
(Ord. 5672 § 2 (part), 2025)
Part 5 - Grease Control Device Requirements
16.13.140   Requirements for installing or replacing existing grease control
devices.
   Food facilities shall install and operate a grease control device and with
required connected fixtures in compliance with the Palo Alto Regulations for
Food Facilities.
(Ord. 5672 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.13.150   Grease control device maintenance requirements.
   Grease control devices shall be maintained in accordance with the Palo Alto
Regulations for Food Facilities.
(Ord. 5672 § 2 (part), 2025)
Part 6 - Rooftop Grease Containment System Requirements
16.13.160   Requirements for installing or replacing existing rooftop grease
containment systems.
   Food facilities shall install and maintain rooftop containment systems in
accordance with the Palo Alto Regulations for Food Facilities.
(Ord. 5672 § 2 (part), 2025)
Part 7 - Waste Oil Management Requirements
16.13.170   Waste oil storage requirements for food facilities.
   Food facilities shall comply with the waste oil storage requirements in the
Palo Alto Regulations for Food Facilities.
(Ord. 5672 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.13.180   Waste oil management and maintenance requirements for food
facilities.
   All food facilities that use and store waste oil containers shall comply
with the requirements in the Palo Alto Regulations for Food Facilities.
(Ord. 5672 § 2 (part), 2025)
Part 8 - Spill Response Requirements
16.13.190   Requirements for fats, oils, and grease spill response activities
conducted at and associated with food facilities.
   Fats, oils, and grease spill response activities conducted at and associated
with food facilities shall comply with the Palo Alto Regulations for Food
Facilities.
(Ord. 5672 § 2 (part), 2025)
Part 9 - Best Management Practices for Existing Facilities
16.13.200   Required best management practices for existing facilities.
   In addition to the best management practices required by Chapter 16.11, food
facilities shall implement BMPs in accordance with the Palo Alto Regulations
for Food Facilities.
(Ord. 5672 § 2 (part), 2025)
Part 10 - Mobile Food Facilities
16.13.210   Mobile food facilities.
   Mobile food facilities shall comply with requirements of the Santa Clara
County Department of Environmental Health and applicable sections of the Palo
Alto Regulations for Food Facilities.
(Ord. 5672 § 2 (part), 2025)
Part 11 - Food Facility Closure or Ownership Change
16.13.220   Food facility closure or change of ownership.
   (a)   Food facilities shall be responsible for a final cleanout and shutting
down of operations of their grease control device(s) upon closure of their
business and shall adhere to the Palo Alto Regulations for Food Facilities.
   (b)   GCDs shall be cleaned in accordance with the Palo Alto Regulations for
Food Facilities at the time of food facility business closure, closure of the
building in which the food facility is located, or a change in ownership of the
food facility.
   (c)   A GCD that has been abandoned in place or has been otherwise
discontinued from further use shall have the contents removed therefrom, and
the bottom perforated and be completely filled with crushed rock, sand,
controlled low strength material, concrete, or other material as approved by
the Director. Subsequent food facilities shall be made aware of the abandoned
GCD and install a separate GCD that meets current requirements.
   (d)   Building owners that occupy a space or building with a grease control
device that is deemed out of compliance or was not adequately shut down when
the previous food facility closed shall take responsibility for that device.
Owners shall adhere to the Palo Alto Regulations for Food Facilities.
(Ord. 5672 § 2 (part), 2025)
Chapter 16.14
CALIFORNIA GREEN BUILDING STANDARDS CODE,
CALIFORNIA CODE OF REGULATIONS, TITLE 24, PART 11 *
Sections
Part 1 - General
   
16.14.010   2025 California Green Building Standards Code, Title 24, Part 11
adopted and amended.
   
16.14.020   Cross-references to California Green Building Standards Code.
   
16.14.030   Local amendments.
Part 2 - Local Modifications to
CHAPTER 1 - ADMINISTRATION
   
16.14.040   Administration & enforcement of 2025 California Green Building
Standards Code.
   
16.14.050   Adoption of Chapter 1 Administration.
   
16.14.060   Section 101.4 Appendices.
Part 3 - Local Modifications to
CHAPTER 2 - DEFINITIONS
   
16.14.070   Section 202 Definitions.
Part 4 - Local Modifications to
CHAPTER 3 - GREEN BUILDING
   
16.14.080   Section 301 - Voluntary tiers added.
Part 5 - Local Modifications to
CHAPTER 4 - RESIDENTIAL
MANDATORY MEASURES
   
16.14.090   Section 4.106.5 Full electrification.
   
16.14.100   Section 4.306 Swimming pool and spa covers.
   
16.14.110   Reserved.
Part 6 - Local Modifications to
CHAPTER 7 - INSTALLER AND SPECIAL
INSPECTOR QUALIFICATIONS
   
16.14.120   Section 702.2 Special inspection.
Part 7 - Local Modifications to
APPENDIX A4 - RESIDENTIAL
VOLUNTARY MEASURES
   
16.14.130   Residential projects. Appendix A4 Preface: Green Building Measures
for Project Type and Scope.
   
16.14.140   Section A4.104 Site preservation.
   
16.14.150   Section A4.105 Deconstruction and reuse of existing materials.
   
16.14.160   Section A4.106.8 Electric vehicle (EV) charging for new
construction.
   
16.14.170   Section A4.106.9 Bicycle parking.
   
16.14.180   Section A4.106.10 Light pollution reduction.
   
16.14.190   Section A4.203.1 Performance approach for newly constructed
buildings.
   
16.14.200   Section A4.304.3 Irrigation metering device.
   
16.14.210   Section A4.305 Water reuse systems.
   
16.14.220   Section A4.305.4 Additions and alterations.
   
16.14.230   Section A4.403.1 Frost protection foundation systems.
   
16.14.240   Section A4.403.2 Reduction in cement use.
   
16.14.250   Section A4.408.1 Enhanced construction waste reduction.
   
16.14.260   Section A4.504.1 Compliance with formaldehyde limits.
   
16.14.270   Section A4.504.3 Thermal insulation.
Part 8 - Local Modifications to
CHAPTER 5 - NONRESIDENTIAL
MANDATORY MEASURES
   
16.14.280   Non-residential projects: Chapter 5 Preface Green Building
Requirements for Project Type and Scope.
   
16.14.285   Section 5.105.1 Scoping.
   
16.14.290   Section 5.106.1.1 Local ordinance.
   
16.14.295   Section 5.106.8 Light pollution reduction.
   
16.14.300   Section 5.106 Full electrification.
   
16.14.310   Reserved.
   
16.14.320   Reserved.
   
16.14.330   Section 5.304.2 Invasive species prohibited.
   
16.14.340   Section 5.306 Non-residential enhanced water budget.
   
16.14.350   Section 5.307 Cooling tower water use.
   
16.14.355   Section 5.409 Life cycle assessment.
   
16.14.360   Section 5.410.4.6 Energy STAR portfolio manager.
   
16.14.370   Section 5.410.4.7 Performance reviews - energy.
   
16.14.380   Section 5.410.4.8 Performance reviews - water.
   
16.14.390   Section 5.506 Indoor air quality.
Part 9 - Local Modifications to
APPENDIX A5 - NONRESIDENTIAL VOLUNTARY MEASURES
   
16.14.400   Section A5.106.5.3 Electric vehicle (EV) charging for new
construction.
   
16.14.410   Section A5.203.1 Performance approach for newly constructed
buildings.
   
16.14.420   Section A5.405.5 Cement and concrete.
   
16.14.430   Section A5.408 Construction waste reduction, disposal and
recycling.
 
Notes
* *   Editor’s Note: Prior ordinance history: Ordinance No. 5626
Part 1 - General
16.14.010   2025 California Green Building Standards Code, Title 24, Part 11
adopted and amended.
   The California Green Building Standards Code, 2025 Edition, Title 24, Part
11 of the California Code of Regulations, together with those omissions,
amendments, exceptions and additions thereto, is adopted and hereby
incorporated in this chapter by reference and made a part hereof the same as if
fully set forth herein.
   Unless superseded and expressly repealed, references in City of Palo Alto
forms, documents and regulations to the chapters and sections of the former
California Code of Regulations, Title 24, shall be construed to apply to the
corresponding provisions contained within the California Code of Regulations,
Title 24, 2025. Ordinance No. 5626 of the City of Palo Alto and all other
ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby suspended and
expressly repealed.
   Wherever the phrases “California Green Building Standards Code” or
“CALGreen” are used in this code or any ordinance of the city, such phrases
shall be deemed and construed to refer and apply to the California Green
Building Standards Code, 2025 Edition, as adopted and amended by this chapter.
   One copy of the California Green Building Standards Code, 2025 Edition, has
been filed for use and examination of the public in the Office of the Chief
Building Official of the City of Palo Alto.
(Ord. 5678 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.14.020   Cross-references to California Green Building Standards Code.
   The provisions of this chapter contain cross-references to the provisions of
the California Green Building Code, 2025 Edition, in order to facilitate
reference and comparison to those provisions.
(Ord. 5678 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.14.030   Local amendments.
   The provisions of this chapter shall constitute local amendments to the
cross-referenced provisions of the California Green Building Standards Code,
2025 Edition, and shall be deemed to replace the cross-referenced sections of
said Code with the respective provisions set forth in this chapter.
(Ord. 5678 § 2 (part), 2025)
Part 2 - Local Modifications to
CHAPTER 1 - ADMINISTRATION
16.14.040   Administration & enforcement of 2025 California Green Building
Standards Code.
   Administration and enforcement of this code shall be governed by Chapter 1,
Division II of the 2025 California Building Code as amended by Palo Alto
Municipal Code
Chapter 16.04.
(Ord. 5678 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.14.050   Adoption of Chapter 1 Administration.
   Chapter 1 Administration of the 2025 California Green Building Code is
adopted by the City of Palo Alto to supplement, to the extent it does not
conflict with, Chapter 1, Division II of the 2025 California Building Code, as
amended.
(Ord. 5678 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.14.060   Section 101.4 Appendices.
   The following Appendix Chapters of the California Green Building Standards
Code, 2025 Edition, are adopted and hereby incorporated in this chapter by
reference and made a part hereof the same as if fully set forth herein:
      A.   Appendix A4 - Residential Voluntary Measures (Tier 1 and Tier 2)
      B.   Appendix A5 - Non-residential Voluntary Measures (Tier 1 and Tier 2)
(Ord. 5678 § 2 (part), 2025)
Part 3 - Local Modifications to
CHAPTER 2 - DEFINITIONS
16.14.070   Section 202 Definitions.
   Section 202 of Chapter 2 of the California Green Building Standards Code is
amended to include the following definitions:
   ALL-ELECTRIC BUILDING / SITE. A building or parcel of land whose sole source
of energy is electricity and contains no combustion equipment or plumbing for
combustion equipment.
   CPAU. City of Palo Alto Utilities Department.
   CALGREEN INSPECTOR. A person certified as a CALGreen Inspector/Plans
Examiner through the International Code Council (ICC), demonstrating knowledge
and application of Green Building concepts during plan review and inspection.
For projects that require a CALGreen Inspector/Plans Examiner verification, the
Inspector must be contracted directly with the owner and may not be a
contractor or employee of the design or construction firm.
   CERTIFIED ENERGY ANALYST. A person registered as a Certified Energy Analyst
with the California Association of Building Energy Consultants as of the date
of submission of a Certificate of Compliance as required under Section 10-103
of Building Energy Efficiency Standards for residential and non-residential
buildings.
   GREEN BUSINESS CERTIFICATION INC. (GBCI™). Green Business Certification Inc.
(GBCI™) is an independent third party organization that provides certification,
credentialing, and verification services for green building and sustainability
programs, including serving as the official certification body for LEED
projects and professional credentials.
   LEADERSHIP IN ENERGY AND ENVIRONMENTAL DESIGN (LEED®). The Leadership in
Energy and Environmental Design (LEED®) is a green building certification
program developed by the U.S. Green Building Council that provides a framework
for green buildings through a point based rating system that evaluates building
performance across multiple sustainability categories. Projects shall follow
the U.S. Green Building Council’s standards for selecting the appropriate LEED®
rating system.
   LEED AP WITH SPECIALTY. An advanced professional credential signifying
expertise in green building and a LEED rating system. To earn a LEED AP with
specialty, candidates must first pass the LEED Green Associate exam. The exams
measure knowledge about green building, a specific LEED rating system and the
certification process and are ideal for individuals who are actively working on
green building and LEED projects.
   MODEL WATER EFFICIENT LAND-SCAPE ORDINANCE. The California Department of
Water Resources Model Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance.
   SALVAGE. Salvage means the controlled removal of items and material from a
building, construction, or demolition site for the purpose of on or off site
reuse, or storage for later reuse. Examples include air conditioning and
heating systems, columns, balustrades, fountains, gazebos, molding, mantels,
pavers, planters, quoins, stair treads, trim, wall caps, bath tubs, bricks,
cabinetry, carpet, doors, ceiling fans, lighting fixtures, electrical panel
boxes, fencing, fireplaces, flooring materials of wood, marble, stone or tile,
furnaces, plate glass, wall mirrors, door knobs, door brackets, door hinges,
marble, iron work, metal balconies, structural steel, plumbing fixtures,
refrigerators, rock, roofing materials, siding materials, sinks, stairs, stone,
stoves, toilets, windows, wood fencing, lumber and plywood.
   SUBSTANTIAL REMODEL (AKA 50-50-50 RULE). Any project that affects the
removal or replacement of 50% or more of the linear length of the existing
exterior walls of the building, 50% or more of the linear length of the
existing exterior wall where the plate height is raised, or 50% or more of the
existing roof framing area is removed or replaced, over a 3-year period is
considered a substantial remodel. (Refer to Section 301.1.2.)
   SQUARE FOOTAGE. For application of green building requirements, “square
footage” refers to all new or altered square footage, including basement areas
(7 feet or greater in height), as calculated based on outer boundary of
proposed construction area, including exterior walls.
   U.S. GREEN BUILDING COUNCIL (USGBC). The U.S. Green Building Council (USGBC)
is a nonprofit organization that promotes sustainability in building design,
construction, and operation through market transformation initiatives and the
development of green building standards, most notably the Leadership in Energy
and Environmental Design (LEED®) certification program.
(Ord. 5678 § 2 (part), 2025)
Part 4 - Local Modifications to
CHAPTER 3 - GREEN BUILDING
16.14.080   Section 301 - Voluntary tiers added.
   Section 301 of Chapter 3 of the California Green Building Standards Code is
amended to read:
   SECTION 301 GENERAL
   301.1 Scope. Buildings shall be designed to include the green building
measures specified as mandatory in the application checklists contained in this
code and any applicable local amendments. In addition, the city requires the
use of Voluntary Tiers, as provided in Appendices A4 and A5, for certain
residential and non-residential new construction, additions, and alterations.
   Projects that only trigger mandatory measures are not required to fulfill
Tier 1 or Tier 2 measures in Appendix A4 and A5.
   To achieve Tier 1 status, a project must comply with measures identified in
Appendix A4, Division A4.6, Section A4.601.4 for residential projects and
Appendix A5, Division A5.6, Section A5.601.2 for non-residential projects.
Projects subject to Tier 1 must fulfill all mandatory measures, all Tier 1
prerequisite measures and a defined number of Tier 1 elective measures.
   To achieve Tier 2 status, a project must comply with requirements identified
in Appendix A4, Division A4.6, Section A4.601.5 for residential projects and
Appendix A5, Division A5.6, Section A5.601.3 for non-residential projects.
Projects subject to Tier 2 must fulfill all mandatory measures, all Tier 2
prerequisite measures and a defined number of Tier 2 elective measures.
   301.1.1 Residential additions and alterations. [HCD]
   The Mandatory provisions of Chapter 4 shall be applied to additions and/or
alterations of existing residential buildings where the addition and/or
alteration increases the building's conditioned area, volume, or size. The
requirements shall apply only to and/or within the specific area of the
addition or alteration.
   Tier 1 adopted (Residential). All residential building additions and/or
alterations exceeding 1,000 square feet must meet CALGreen Mandatory plus the
Tier 1 measures, as amended by this chapter and as applicable to the scope of
work.
      For Tier 1 projects, the area of alterations will include any
construction or renovation to an existing structure other than repair or
addition. Alterations include raising the plate height, historic restoration,
changes or rearrangements of the structural parts or elements, and changes or
rearrangement of bearing walls and full height partitions.
      Normal maintenance, reroofing, painting or wall papering, floor finishes,
replacement in kind of mechanical, plumbing and electrical systems, or
replacing or adding new kitchen counter and similar furniture, plumbing fixture
to the building are excluded for the purposes of establishing scope of Tier 1
projects.
      The area of alteration should be limited to the footprint of element(s)
being altered.
      This does not exclude mandatory CALGreen measures. The sum of the
footprint of the elements being altered with respect to Tier 1, shall be
calculated using the following methodology:
      1.   Raising the plate height: The calculation with respect to raising of
the plate height will be based on the area of the footprint in which the plate
height is being increased. Plate height means the vertical distance measured
from the top of the finished floor to the top of the plates.
      2.   Historic restoration: The calculation with respect to historic
restoration will be based on the area of work covered in the California
Historical Building Code (Title 24, Part 8).
      3.   Structural parts or elements: The calculation with respect to
changes or rearrangements of the structural parts or elements will be based on
the sum of the individual footprints of each structural change or
rearrangement. The footprint shall be calculated based on the proposed design
and inclusive of any demolished structural parts or elements.
      4.   Bearing walls and full height partition: The calculation with
respect to changes or rearrangement of walls and full height partitions will be
based on the footprint of any demolished wall or full height partition and any
new wall or new full height partition.
      Exception: Attached and detached Accessory Dwelling Units, ADU
conversions of existing structures shall meet the California Green Building
Standards Code Mandatory measures only.
   301.1.2 Substantial remodel (50-50-50 rule). Any project that affects the
removal or replacement of 50% or more linear length of the existing exterior
walls of the building, 50% or more linear length of the existing exterior wall
where the plate height is raised, or 50% or more of the existing roof framing
area is removed or replaced, over a 3-year period is considered a substantial
remodel.
      Any permit(s) applied for will trigger a review of a 3-year history of
the project. This review will result in determining if a substantial remodel
has occurred.
      The Chief Building Official or designee shall make the final
determination regarding the application if a conflict occurs.
   [...]
   301.2   Low-rise and high-rise residential buildings. [HCD] The provisions
of individual sections of CALGreen may apply to either low-rise residential
buildings, high-rise residential buildings, or both. Individual sections will
be designated by banners to indicate where the section applies specifically to
low-rise only (LR) or high-rise only (HR). When the section applies to both
low-rise and high-rise buildings, no banner will be used.
   301.2.1 Low-Rise residential new construction - Tier 2 adopted. All new
constructed or substantial remodel projects must meet CALGreen Mandatory plus
Tier 2 measures, as amended by this chapter and as applicable to the scope of
work.
   301.3 Non-residential additions and alterations. [BSC-CG]
   The provisions of individual sections of Chapter 5 apply to building non-
residential additions of 1,000 square feet or greater, and/or building
alterations with a permit valuation of $200,000 or above (for occupancies
within the authority of California Building Standards Commission). Code
sections relevant to additions and alterations shall only apply to the portions
of the building being added or altered within the scope of the permitted work.
      A code section will be designated by a banner to indicate where the code
section only applies to newly constructed buildings [N] or to additions and
alterations [A]. When the code section applies to both, no banner will be used.
      Tier 1 adopted. Non-residential alterations (including tenant
improvements or renovations) of 5,000 square feet that include replacement of
at least two of the following: HVAC system, building envelope, hot water
system, or lighting system, must comply with CALGreen Mandatory plus Tier 1
measures, as amended by this chapter and as applicable to the scope of work.
         Tier 1 alternative compliance path. Non-residential alterations
projects that would otherwise be subject to CALGreen Mandatory plus Tier 1
measures may elect an alternative compliance pathway by achieving LEED® Silver
certification or higher from the U.S. Green Building Council. The Green
Business Certification Inc. (GBCI™) shall serve as the independent third party
certification body responsible for reviewing project documentation, conducting
compliance verification, and issuing official LEED® certification. Projects
electing this pathway are exempt from all individual Tier 1 CALGreen
prerequisite and elective requirements with exception of the following:
         PAMC 16.14.430 Section A5.408 Construction Waste Reduction, Disposal
and Recycling.
         Projects must maintain compliance with all applicable base CALGreen
mandatory measures and building code requirements.
      Tier 2 adopted. Non-residential additions of 1,000 square feet or greater
must comply with CALGreen Mandatory plus Tier 2 measures, as amended by this
chapter and as applicable to the scope of work.
         Tier 2 alternative compliance path. Non-residential additions of 1,000
square feet or greater that would otherwise be subject to CALGreen Mandatory
plus Tier 2 measures may elect an alternative compliance pathway by achieving
LEED® Gold certification or higher from the U.S. Green Building Council. The
Green Business Certification Inc. (GBCI™) shall serve as the independent third
party certification body responsible for reviewing project documentation,
conducting compliance verification, and issuing official LEED® certification.
Projects electing this pathway are exempt from all individual Tier 2 CALGreen
prerequisite and elective requirements with exception of the following:
         PAMC 16.14.430 Section A5.408 Construction Waste Reduction, Disposal
and Recycling.
         Projects must maintain compliance with all applicable base CALGreen
mandatory measures and building code requirements.
   301.3.1 - 301.3.2 Unmodified.
   301.3.3 Non-residential new construction - Tier 2 adopted. All new non-
residential construction must meet CALGreen Mandatory plus Tier 2 measures
(including initial occupancy tenant improvements), as amended by this chapter
and as applicable to the scope of work.
      Tier 2 alternative compliance path. All new non-residential construction
that would otherwise be subject to CALGreen Mandatory plus Tier 2 measures may
elect an alternative compliance pathway by achieving LEED® Gold certification
or higher from the U.S. Green Building Council. The Green Business
Certification Inc. (GBCI™) shall serve as the independent third party
certification body responsible for reviewing project documentation, conducting
compliance verification, and issuing official LEED® certification. Projects
electing this pathway are exempt from all individual Tier 2 CALGreen
prerequisite and elective requirements with exception of the following:
      PAMC 16.14.430 Section A5.408 Construction Waste Reduction, Disposal and
Recycling.
      PAMC 16.14.400 Section A5.106.5.3 Electric Vehicle (EV) Charging for New
Construction.
      Projects must maintain compliance with all applicable base CALGreen
mandatory measures and building code requirements.
   301.6 Special inspector requirements. Residential and non-residential
project owners subject to CALGreen Mandatory, CALGreen Mandatory plus Tier 1,
or CALGreen Mandatory plus Tier 2 measures shall contract a city-approved Green
Special Inspector (GBSI) in accordance with Section 702.2 of CALGreen, as
amended.
      A city-approved GBSI is required to verify compliance with CALGreen
mandatory measures when the project elects to use the alternative LEED
compliance pathway per Section 301.3 and 301.3.3 of this chapter. A LEED
Accredited Professional with applicable specialty (LEED AP) shall certify that
the project has been designed to meet the requirements for LEED Silver or LEED
Gold certification, as applicable. The LEED AP shall provide two letters to
certify the alternative compliance pathway:
      1.   At building permit application – A letter confirming that said
project has been registered with the U.S. Green Building Council (USGBC) and is
anticipated to achieve the required number of points for the specified
certification level.
      2.   Prior to any approved occupancy - A letter based on the actual
construction confirming that the project has been built in accordance with the
approved plans and is expected to be eligible for certification at the approved
LEED level. This letter must also state whether, and when, the final submittal
certification documents will be submitted to the USGBC.
      Provide proof of LEED Silver/Gold Certification to the Building
Department within two years of initial occupancy as part of the project record.
   301.7 Low-carbon concrete requirements for Tier 1 and Tier 2 projects. Plain
and reinforced concrete installed as part of any project subject to the
application of this code shall demonstrate compliance with the requirements of
PAMC 16.14.240.
(Ord. 5678 § 2 (part), 2025)
Part 5 - Local Modifications to
CHAPTER 4 - RESIDENTIAL MANDATORY MEASURES
Division 4.1 - PLANNING AND DESIGN
16.14.090   Section 4.106.5 Full electrification.
   Section 4.106 of Chapter 4 of the California Green Building Standards Code
is amended to add new subsection, 4.106.5 as follows:
   4.106.5 Full electrification. Full electrification is recommended for new
buildings, substantial remodels, and new outdoor appliances/equipment such as
fireplaces, firepits, heaters for swimming pool/spa, and similar equipment.
Full electrification is required for outdoor grills, stoves, and barbecues.
This subsection does not prohibit freestanding and/or portable grills, stoves,
or barbecues whose sole source of energy is self-contained fuel canisters.
(Ord. 5678 § 2 (part), 2025)
Division 4.3 - WATER EFFICIENCY AND CONSERVATION
16.14.100   Section 4.306 Swimming pool and spa covers.
   Section 4.306 of Chapter 4 of the California Green Building Standards Code
is added to read:
      4.306 Swimming Pool and Spa Covers. Swimming pools and spas shall be
provided with a vapor retardant cover.
(Ord. 5678 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.14.110   Reserved.
Part 6 - Local Modifications to
CHAPTER 7 - INSTALLER AND SPECIAL INSPECTOR QUALIFICATIONS
16.14.120   Section 702.2 Special inspection.
   Section 702.2 of Chapter 7 of the California Green Building Standards Code
is amended to read:
   702.2 Green building special inspection. When required by the enforcing
agency, the owner or responsible entity acting as the owner’s agent shall
employ one or more Green Building Special Inspectors to provide inspection or
other duties necessary to substantiate compliance with this code. Green
Building Special Inspectors shall demonstrate competence to the satisfaction of
the enforcing agency for the particular type of inspection or task to be
performed. In addition to other certifications or qualifications acceptable to
the enforcing agency, the following certifications or education may be
considered by the enforcing agency when evaluating the qualifications of a
Special Inspector. The City shall maintain a list of pre-approved Special
Inspectors in accordance with this section. The owner shall contract a Special
Inspector from the pre-approved list meeting one of the following:
      1.   Certification by a national or regional green building program:
            ICC Certified CALGreen Inspector/Plans Examiner
      2.   Other programs acceptable to the enforcing agency.
   Note: Special Inspectors shall be independent entities with no financial
interest in the materials or the project they are inspecting for compliance
with this code.
(Ord. 5678 § 2 (part), 2025)
Part 7 - Local Modifications to
APPENDIX A4 - RESIDENTIAL VOLUNTARY MEASURES
Division A4.1 - PLANNING AND DESIGN
16.14.130   Residential projects. Appendix A4 Preface: Green Building Measures
for Project Type and Scope.
   A preface is added to Chapter A4 of the California Green Building Standards
Code to read:
      Preface - Green Building Requirements for Project Type and Scope.
   For design and construction of residential projects, the City of Palo Alto
requires compliance with the mandatory measures of Chapter 4, in addition to
use of Tier 1 and Tier 2 as specified in Palo Alto Municipal Code Chapter
16.14. See Section 202 for definitions on CALGreen Mandatory, Tier 1
Prerequisites and Electives, and Tier 2 Prerequisites and Electives. All
elective measures are adopted as written under Appendix A4 unless otherwise
indicated in this Section.
(Ord. 5678 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.14.140   Section A4.104 Site preservation.
   Section A4.104.1 of Appendix A4 of the California Green Building Standards
Code is adopted as a Tier 1 and Tier 2 elective measure and is amended to read:
      A4.104.1 Supervision and Education by a Special Inspector. Individuals
with oversight authority on the project, as defined in Section 16.14.120 of
this code, who have been trained in areas related to environmentally friendly
development, shall teach green concepts to other members of the builder’s staff
and ensure training and written instruction has been provided to all parties
associated with the development of the project. Prior to the beginning of the
construction activities, the builder shall receive a written guideline and
instruction specifying the green goals of the project.
   Note:   Lack of adequate supervision and dissemination of the project goals
can result in negative effects on green building projects. If the theme of
green building is not carried through the project, the overall benefit can be
substantially reduced by the lack of knowledge and information provided to the
various entities involved with the construction of the project.
(Ord. 5678 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.14.150   Section A4.105 Deconstruction and reuse of existing materials.
   Section A4.105 of Appendix A4 of the California Green Building Standards
Code is not adopted as an elective measure and is amended to read:
   Section A4.105.1 Chapter 5.24 of Title 5 of the Municipal Code. See
Chapter 5.24 of the Municipal Code for the local deconstruction requirements.
   Section A4.105.2 is adopted as a Tier 1 and Tier 2 elective measure.
      A4.105.2 Reuse of materials. Nonhazardous materials which can be easily
reused include but are not limited to the following:
         1.   Light fixtures
         2.   Plumbing fixtures
         3.   Doors and trim
         4.   Masonry
         5.   Electrical devices
         6.   Appliances
         7.   Foundations or portions of foundations
      Note: Reused material must be installed to comply the appropriate Title
24 provisions.
(Ord. 5678 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.14.160   Section A4.106.8 Electric vehicle (EV) charging for new
construction.
   Sections A4.106.8 – A4.106.8.2.2 of the California Green Building Standards
Code are deleted in their entirety, adopted as mandatory measures and are
amended to read:
      A4.106.8 Electric vehicle (EV) charging for residential structures. Newly
constructed single-family and multi-family residential structures, including
residential structures constructed as part of a mixed-use development, shall
comply with the following requirements for electric vehicle supply equipment
(EVSE). All parking space calculations under this section shall be rounded up
to the next full space. The requirements stated in this section are in addition
to those contained in Section 4.106.4 of the California Green Building
Standards Code. In the event of a conflict between this section and Section
4.106.4 of the California Green Building Standards Code, the more robust EV
Charging requirements shall prevail.
      A4.106.8.1 New single-family, duplex and townhouse dwellings. The
following standards apply to newly constructed detached and attached single-
family, duplex and townhouse residences.
         (a)   In general. The property owner shall provide one Level 2
electrical vehicle supply equipment (EVSE) or one EV ready space for each
residence (except for accessory dwelling unit (ADU)).
         (b)   Location. The proposed location of a charging station may be
internal or external to the dwelling and shall be in close proximity to an on-
site parking space consistent with city regulations.
      A4.106.8.2 New multi-family dwellings. In addition to the applicable
standards in the 2025 California Green Building Standards Code, the following
standards apply to newly constructed residences in a multi-family residential
structure.
         (a)   Resident parking. The property owner shall provide at least one
Level 2 electrical vehicle supply equipment (EVSE) or one Level 2 EV Ready
space for each residential unit in the structure.
         (b)   Location. The EVSE, receptacles, and/or raceway required by this
section shall be placed in locations allowing convenient installation of and
access to EVSE. In addition, if parking is deed-restricted to individual
residential units, the EVSE or receptacles required by subsection (a) shall be
located such that each unit has access to its own EVSE or receptacle. Location
of EVSE or receptacles shall be consistent with all city regulations.
      A4.106.8.3 New hotels and motels. The following standards apply to newly
constructed hotels.
         (a)   In general. The property owner shall comply with Section
4.106.4.2.6 of the California Green Building Standards Code.
         (b)   Location. The EVSE and/or receptacles, required by this section
shall be placed in locations allowing convenient installation of and access to
EVSE. Location of EVSE or receptacles shall be consistent with all city
guidelines, rules, and regulations.
(Ord. 5678 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.14.170   Section A4.106.9 Bicycle parking.
   Section A4.106.9 of Appendix A4 of the California Green Building Standards
Code is not adopted as a Tier 1 and Tier 2 elective measure. Projects must
comply with the bicycle parking requirements in the Palo Alto Municipal Code.
(Ord. 5678 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.14.180   Section A4.106.10 Light pollution reduction.
   Section A4.106.10 is added and adopted as a Tier 1 and Tier 2 elective
measure for all covered projects and is amended to read:
   A4.106.10 Light pollution reduction. Outdoor lighting systems shall be
designed and installed to comply with the following:
      1.   The minimum requirements in the California Energy Code for Lighting
Zones 1-4 as defined in Chapter 10 of the California Administrative Code; and
      2.   Backlight, Uplight and Glare (BUG) ratings as defined in IES TM-15-
11; and
      3.   Allowable BUG ratings not exceeding those shown in TABLE 5.106.8
[N]; or
      4.   Comply with a local ordinance lawfully enacted pursuant to Section
101.7 of this code, whichever is more stringent.
   Projects may use an approved equal reference standard for light fixtures
where BUG ratings are unavailable.
      Exceptions:
      1.   Luminaires that qualify as exceptions to the California Energy Code.
      2.   Emergency lighting.
      3.   One- and two-family dwellings.
      Note: The International Dark Sky Association (IDA) and the Illuminating
Engineering Society of North America (IESNA) have developed a Model Lighting
Ordinance (MLO). The MLO was designed to help municipalities develop outdoor
lighting standards that reduce glare, light trespass, and skyglow. The model
ordinance and user guides for the ordinance may be accessed at the
International Dark Sky Association web site.
(Ord. 5678 § 2 (part), 2025)
Division A4.2 - ENERGY EFFICIENCY
16.14.190   Section A4.203.1 Performance approach for newly constructed
buildings.
   Section A4.203.1 of Appendix A4 of the California Green Building Standards
Code is not adopted as a Tier 1 and Tier 2 elective measure. Projects shall
comply with
Chapter 16.17 of the Palo Alto Municipal Code (California Energy Code).
(Ord. 5678 § 2 (part), 2025)
Division A4.3 - WATER EFFICIENCY AND CONSERVATION
16.14.200   Section A4.304.3 Irrigation metering device.
   Section A4.304.3 of Appendix A4 of the California Green Building Standards
Code is adopted as a Tier 1 and Tier 2 elective measure and is amended to read:
      A4.304.3 Irrigation Metering Device. Dedicated irrigation meters from
CPAU are to be installed in all new construction and rehabilitated landscapes
when the landscape is greater than 1,000 square feet.
(Ord. 5678 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.14.210   Section A4.305 Water reuse systems.
   Sections A4.305.1, A4.305.2, and A4.305.3 of Appendix A4 of the California
Green Building Standards Code are adopted as Tier 1 and Tier 2 elective
measures and are amended to read:
      A4.305.1 Graywater. Alternative plumbing piping is installed to permit
the discharge from the clothes washer and other fixtures (except toilets and
kitchen sinks) to be used for an irrigation system in compliance with the
California Plumbing Code. In the event that the whole house graywater system is
installed in compliance with the California Plumbing Code, then this measure
shall count as 3 electives.
      A4.305.2 Recycled Water Piping. Based on projected availability, dual
water piping is installed for future use of recycled water at the following
locations:
         1.   Interior piping for the use of recycled water is installed to
serve all water closets, urinals, and floor drains.
         2.   Exterior piping is installed to transport recycled water from the
point of connection to the structure. Recycled water systems shall be designed
and installed in accordance with the California Plumbing Code.
      A4.305.3 Recycled water for landscape irrigation. Recycled water piping
is used for landscape irrigation.
(Ord. 5678 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.14.220   A4.305.4 Additions and alterations.
   Section A4.305.4 is added as Tier 1 and Tier 2 prerequisite and amended to
read:
      A4.305.4 Additions and alterations. All multi-family residential
additions and alterations must install recycled water infrastructure for
irrigation when the landscape area exceeds 1,000 square feet.
(Ord. 5678 § 2 (part), 2025)
Division A4.4 - MATERIAL CONSERVATION AND RESOURCE EFFICIENCY
16.14.230   Section A4.403.1 Frost protection foundation systems.
   Sections A4.403.1 is not adopted as a Tier 1 and Tier 2 elective measure.
(Ord. 5678 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.14.240   Section A4.403.2 Reduction in cement use.
   Section A4.403.2 of Appendix A4 of the California Green Building Standards
Code is adopted as a Mandatory measure for all Tier 1 and Tier 2 projects and
is amended to read:
      A4.403.2 Low Carbon Concrete Requirements. 
      A4.403.2.1 Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to provide practical
standards and requirements for the composition of concrete, as defined herein,
that maintains adequate strength and durability for the intended application
and at the same time reduces greenhouse gas emissions associated with concrete
composition. This code includes pathways for compliance with either reduced
cement levels or lower emission supplementary cementitious materials.
      A4.403.2.2 Definitions. For the application of this section the following
definitions shall apply:
      Concrete. Concrete is any approved combination of mineral aggregates
bound together into a hardened conglomerate in accordance with the requirements
of this code.
      Environmental product declaration (EPD). EPDs present quantified
environmental information on the life cycle of a product to enable comparisons
between products fulfilling the same function. EPDs must conform to ISO 14025,
and EN 15804 or ISO 21930, and have at least a "cradle to gate" scope (which
covers product life cycle from resource extraction to the factory).
      Upfront embodied carbon (embodied carbon). The greenhouse gasses emitted
in material extraction, transportation and manufacturing of a material
corresponding to life cycle stages A1 (extraction and upstream production), A2
(transportation), and A3 (manufacturing). Definition is as noted in ISO 21930
and as defined in V2.3 Product Category Rule for Concrete by NSF dated November
2023. https://d2evkimvhatqav.cloudfront.net/documents/PCR Product Category
Rules/PCRConcrete 2023deviation.pdf https://d2evkimvhatqav.cloudfront.net/
documents/PCRProductCategoryRules/PCRConcrete2023deviation.pdf?v=1701797590
      A4.403.2.3. Compliance. Compliance with the requirements of this chapter
shall be demonstrated through any of the compliance options in Sections
A4.403.2.3.2 through A4.403.2.3.5:
   Table A4.403.2.3 Cement and Embodied Carbon Limit Pathways
                                                   Cement limits Embodied
                                                   for use with  Carbon limits
                                                   any           for use with
                                                   compliance    any compliance
                                                   method        method
                                                   A4.403.2.3.2  A4.403.2.3.2
                                                   to            to
                                                   A4.403.2.3.5  A4.403.2.3.5
                                                   Maximum       Maximum
                                                   ordinary      embodied
Minimum specified compressive strength f’c, psi  Portland      carbon kg
(1)                                                cement        CO2e/m3, per
                                                   content, lbs/ EPD
                                                   yd3 (2)
                                                   Cement limits Embodied
                                                   for use with  Carbon limits
                                                   any           for use with
                                                   compliance    any compliance
                                                   method        method
                                                   A4.403.2.3.2  A4.403.2.3.2
                                                   to            to
                                                   A4.403.2.3.5  A4.403.2.3.5
                                                   Maximum       Maximum
                                                   ordinary      embodied
Minimum specified compressive strength f’c, psi  Portland      carbon kg
(1)                                                cement        CO2e/m3, per
                                                   content, lbs/ EPD
                                                   yd3 (2)
up to 2500                                         362           260
3000                                               410           289
4000                                               456           313
5000                                               503           338
6000                                               531           356
7000                                               594           394
7001 and higher                                    657           433
up to 3000 light weight                            512           578
4000 light weight                                  571           626
5000 light weight                                  629           675
 
 
Notes
(1)   For concrete strengths between the stated values, use linear
interpretation to determine cement and/or embodied carbon limits.
(2)   Portland cement of any type per ASTM C150.
 
      A4.403.2.3.1 Allowable Increases.
      (1)   Cement and Embodied Carbon Limit Allowances. Cement or Embodied
Carbon limits shown in Table A4.403.2.3 can be increased by 30% for concretes
demonstrated to the Building Official as requiring high early strength. Such
concretes could include, but are not limited to, precast, prestressed concrete;
beams and slabs above grade; and shotcrete.
      (2)   Approved Cements. The maximum cement content may be increased
proportionately above the tabulated value when using an approved cement, or
blended cement, demonstrated by approved EPD to have a plant specific EPD lower
than 1,040 kg CO2e/metric ton. The increase in allowable cement content would
be (1,040/plant=specific EPD) %.
      A4.403.2.3.2 Cement Limit Method - Mix. Cement content of a concrete mix
using this method shall not exceed the value shown in the Table A4.403.2.3. Use
of this method is limited to concrete with specified compressive strength not
exceeding 5,000 psi.
      A4.403.2.3.3 Cement Limit Method - Project. Total cement content shall be
based on total cement usage of all concrete mix designs within the same
project. Total cement content for a project shall not exceed the value
calculated according to Equation A4.403.2.3.3.
      Equation A4.403.2.3.3:
         Cem proj < Cem allowed
         where
         Cem proj = Cem n v n and Cem allowed = Cem lim v n
         and
         n = the total number of concrete mixtures for the project
         Cem n = the cement content for mixture n, kg/m3 or lb/yd3
         Cem lim = the maximum cement content for mixture n per Table
A4.403.2.3, kg/m3 or lb/yd3
         v n = the volume of mixture n concrete to be placed, yd3 or m3
         Applicant can use yd3 or m3 for calculation, but must keep same units
throughout
      A4.403.2.3.4. Embodied Carbon Method - Mix. Embodied carbon of a concrete
mix, based on an approved environmental product declaration (EPD), shall not
exceed the value given in Table A4.403.2.3.
      A4.403.2.3.5. Embodied Carbon Method - Project. Total embodied carbon (EC
proj) of all concrete mix designs within the same project shall not exceed the
project limit (EC allowed) determined using Table A4.403.2.3 and Equation
A4.403.2.3.5.
      Equation A4.403.2.3.5:
         EC proj < EC allowed
         where
         EC proj = EC n v n and EC allowed = EC lim v n
         and
         n = the total number of concrete mixtures for the project
         EC n = the embodied carbon potential for mixture n per mixture EPD,
kg/m3 
         EC lim = the embodied carbon potential limit for mixture n per Table
A4.403.2.3, kg/m3 
         v n = the volume of mixture n concrete to be placed, yd3 or m3 
         Applicant can use yd3 or m3 for calculation, but must keep same units
throughout.
      A4.403.2.3.6. Enforcement.
      As a condition prior to the issuance of every building permit involving
placement of concrete, the permit applicant shall be required to submit a
completed low carbon concrete compliance form or other acceptable methods that
shall be provided by and reviewed for compliance by the building department
prior to issuing the permit.
      As a condition of such building permits, and prior to approving
construction inspections following placement of concrete, the permit applicant
shall be required to submit batch certificates and/or EPDs provided by the
concrete provider that demonstrate compliance with the low carbon concrete
compliance form on file with the building permit. The batch certificates and/or
EPDs shall be reviewed for compliance by the building department prior to
approving any further inspections.
      When deviations from compliance with this section occur, the chief
building official or his designee is authorized to require evidence of
equivalent carbon reductions from the portions of remaining construction of the
project to demonstrate alternative compliance with the intent of this chapter.
      For projects involving placement of concrete by, or on behalf of, a
public works, parks, or similar department the director of such department, or
his/her assignee, shall maintain accurate records of the total volume (in cubic
yards) of all concrete placed, as well as the total compliant volume (in cubic
yards) of all concrete placed, and shall report this data annually to the
governing body in a form expressing an annual compliance percentage derived
from the quotient of total compliant concrete volume placed divided by total
concrete volume placed.
      A4.403.2.3.7. Exemptions.
      (a)   Hardship or infeasibility exemption. If an applicant for a project
subject to this chapter believes that circumstances exist that make it a
hardship or infeasible to meet the requirements of this chapter, the applicant
may request an exemption as set forth below. In applying for an exemption, the
burden is on the applicant to show hardship or infeasibility. The applicant
shall identify in writing the specific requirements of the standards for
compliance that the project is unable to achieve and the circumstances that
make it a hardship or infeasible for the project to comply with this chapter.
Circumstances that constitute hardship or infeasibility may include, but are
not limited to the following:
      (1)   There is a lack of commercially available material necessary to
comply with this chapter;
      (2)   The cost of achieving compliance is disproportionate to the overall
cost of the project;
      (3)   Compliance with certain requirements would impair the historic
integrity of buildings listed on a local, state or federal list or register of
historic structures as regulated by the California Historic Building Code
(Title 24, Part 8).
      (b)   Granting of exemption. If the chief building official determines
that it is a hardship or infeasible for the applicant to fully meet the
requirements of this chapter and that granting the requested exemption will not
cause the building to fail to comply with the California Building Standards
Code, the chief building official shall determine the maximum feasible
threshold of compliance reasonably achievable for the project. In making this
determination, the chief building official shall consider whether alternate,
practical means of achieving the objectives of this chapter can be satisfied.
If an exemption is granted, the applicant shall be required to comply with this
chapter in all other respects and shall be required to achieve the threshold of
compliance determined to be achievable by the chief building official.
      (c)   Denial of exception. If the chief building official determines that
it is reasonably possible for the applicant to fully meet the requirements of
this chapter, the request shall be denied and the applicant shall be notified
of the decision in writing. The project and compliance documentation shall be
modified to comply with the standards for compliance.
(Ord. 5678 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.14.250   Section A4.408.1 Enhanced construction waste reduction.
   Section A4.408.1 of Appendix A4 of the California Green Building Standards
Code is adopted as a mandatory measure and is amended to read:
      A4.408.1 Enhanced Construction Waste Reduction. Nonhazardous construction
and demolition debris generated at the site is diverted to recycle or salvage
in compliance with the following:
      Projects with a given valuation of $25,000 or more must have at least an
80% reduction. Any mixed recyclables that are sent to mixed-waste recycling
facilities shall include a qualified third party verified facility average
diversion rate. Verification of diversion rates shall meet minimum
certification eligibility guidelines, acceptable to the local enforcing agency.
         Exceptions:
         1.   Residential stand-alone mechanical, electrical or plumbing
permits.
         2.   Commercial stand-alone mechanical, electrical or plumbing
permits.
      A4.408.1.1 Documentation. Documentation shall be provided to the
enforcing agency which demonstrates compliance with all construction and
demolition waste reduction requirements.
(Ord. 5678 § 2 (part), 2025)
Division A4.5 - ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY
16.14.260   Section A4.504.1 Compliance with formaldehyde limits.
   Section A4.504.1 of Appendix A5 of the California Green Building Standards
Code is adopted as a Tier 1 and Tier 2 elective measure.
(Ord. 5678 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.14.270   Section A4.504.3 Thermal insulation.
   Section A4.504.3 of Appendix A5 of the California Green Building Standards
Code is not adopted as a Tier 1 and Tier 2 prerequisite. Section A4.504.3 is
adopted as a Tier 1 and Tier 2 elective measure.
(Ord. 5678 § 2 (part), 2025)
Part 8 - Local Modifications to
CHAPTER 5 - NONRESIDENTIAL MANDATORY MEASURES
Division 5.1 - PLANNING AND DESIGN
16.14.280   Non-residential projects: Chapter 5 Preface Green Building
Requirements for Project Type and Scope.
   A Preface is added to Chapter 5 of the California Green Building Standards
Code to read:
      Preface - Green Building Requirements for Project Type and Scope. For
design and construction of non-residential projects, the city requires
compliance with the mandatory measures of Chapter 5, in addition to use of Tier
1 and Tier 2 as specified in Palo Alto Municipal Code Chapter 16.14. See
Section 202 for definitions on CALGreen MANDATORY, Tier 1 prerequisites and
electives, and Tier 2 prerequisites and electives. All elective measures are
adopted as written under Appendix A5 unless otherwise indicated in this
section.
(Ord. 5678 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.14.285   Section 5.105.1 Scoping.
   Section 5.105.1 of Chapter 5 of the California Green Building Standards Code
is amended to read:
      5.105.1 Scope. [BSC-CG] Effective July 1, 2024, alteration(s) to existing
building(s) where the combined altered floor area is 100,000 square feet or
greater shall comply with either Section 5.105.2, 5.409.2, or 5.409.3. Addition
(s) to existing building(s) where the total floor area combined with the
existing building(s) is 100,000 square feet or greater shall comply with either
Section 5.105.2, Section 5.409.2, or Section 5.409.3. Effective January 1,
2026, the combined floor area shall be 25,000 square feet or greater.
   Exception [BSC CG, DSA SS]: Combined addition(s) to existing building(s) of
two times the area or more of the existing building(s) is not eligible to meet
compliance with Section 5.105.2.
(Ord. 5678 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.14.290   Section 5.106.1.1 Local ordinance.
   Section 5.106.1.1 of Chapter 5 of the California Green Building Standards
Code is amended to read:
      5.106.1.1 Local ordinance. Newly constructed projects and additions shall
comply with additional City of Palo Alto stormwater runoff management and
pollution prevention measures as applicable, and as may be amended from time to
time.
(Ord. 5678 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.14.295   Section 5.106.8 Light pollution reduction.
   Section 5.106.8 of Chapter 5 of the California Green Building Standards Code
is amended to read:
   5.106.8   Light pollution reduction. Outdoor lighting systems shall be
designed and installed to comply with the following:
      1.   The minimum requirements in the California Energy Code for Lighting
Zones 0-4 as defined in Chapter 10, Section 10-114 of the California
Administrative Code; and
      2.   Backlight (B) ratings as defined in IES TM-15-11 (shown in Table A1
in Chapter 8);
      3.   Uplight and Glare ratings as defined in California Energy Code
(shown in Tables 130.2-A and 130.2-B in Chapter 8); and
      4.   Allowable BUG ratings not exceeding those shown in Table 5.106.8
[N]; or
      5.   Comply with a local ordinance lawfully enacted pursuant to Section
101.7, whichever is more stringent.
   Projects may use an approved equal reference standard for light fixtures
where BUG ratings are unavailable.
   Exceptions:
      1.   Luminaires that qualify as exceptions in Section 103.2(b) and 140.7
of the California Energy Code.
      2.   Emergency lighting.
      3.   Building facade meeting the requirements in Table 140.7-B of the
California Energy Code, Part 6.
      4.   Custom lighting features as allowed by the local enforcing agency,
as permitted by Section 101.8 Alternate materials, designs and methods of
construction.
      5.   Luminaires with less than 6,200 initial luminiaire lumens.
(Ord. 5678 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.14.300   Section 5.106.13  Full electrification.
   Section 5.106 of Chapter 4 of the California Green Building Standards Code
is amended to add new subsection, 5.106.13 as follows:
      5.106.13 Full electrification. Full electrification is recommended for
new buildings, substantial remodels, and new outdoor appliances/equipment such
as fireplaces, firepits, heaters for swimming pool/spa, and similar equipment.
Full electrification is required for outdoor grills, stoves, and barbecues.
This subsection does not prohibit freestanding and/or portable grills, stoves,
and barbecues whose source of energy is self-contained fuel canisters.
(Ord. 5678 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.14.310   Reserved.
16.14.320   Reserved.
Division 5.3 - WATER EFFICIENCY AND CONSERVATION
16.14.330   Section 5.304.2 Invasive species prohibited.
   Section 5.304.2 of Chapter 5 of the California Green Building Standards Code
is added as mandatory measure to read:
      5.304.2 Invasive species prohibited. All non-residential new
construction, additions, and alterations shall not install invasive species in
a landscape area of any size.
(Ord. 5678 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.14.340   Section 5.306 Non-residential enhanced water budget.
   Section 5.306 of Chapter 5 of the California Green Building Standards Code
is added as mandatory measure to read:
      5.306 Non-residential enhanced water budget. Non-residential buildings
anticipated to use more than 1,000 gallons of water a day shall complete an
Enhanced Water Budget Calculator as established by the Chief Building Official
or designee.
(Ord. 5678 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.14.350   Section 5.307 Cooling tower water use.
   Section 5.307 Cooling Tower Water Use is added as mandatory to read:
      5.307 COOLING TOWER WATER USE
      5.307.1. Cooling Tower Water Use in High-rise Residential or Non-
Residential Buildings.  
      Cooling tower water use must meet the conditions as follows and as
outlined in Palo Alto Municipal Code Section 16.08.100. Projects are required
to perform a potable water analysis at the site to meet the maximum
concentration of parameters noted in Table 5.307.1.
   Table 5.307.1
 
Ca (as CaCO3)    600 ppm
Total alkalinity 500 ppm
SiO2             150 ppm
Cr               300 ppm
Conductivity     3300 Us/cm
 
      Calculate maximum number of cycles that can be achieved with these levels
of concentration shall be included in the plumbing design plans.
(Ord. 5678 § 2 (part), 2025)
Division 5.4 - MATERIAL CONSERVATION AND RESOURCE EFFICIENCY
16.14.355   Section 5.409 Life cycle assessment.
   Section 5.409 of Chapter 5 of the California Green Building Standards Code
is amended to read:
      5.409.1 Scope. [BSC-CG] Effective July 1, 2024, non-residential projects
consisting of newly constructed building(s) with a combined floor area of
100,000 square feet or greater shall comply with either Section 5.409.2 or
Section 5.409.3. Alteration(s) to existing building(s) where the combined
altered floor area is 100,000 square feet or greater shall comply with either
Section 5.105.2, 5.409.2, or 5.409.3. Addition(s) to existing building(s) where
the total floor area combined with the existing building(s) is 100,000 square
feet or greater shall comply with either Section 5.105.2, Section 5.409.2, or
Section 5.409.3. Effective January 1, 2026, the combined floor area shall be
25,000 square feet or greater.
(Ord. 5678 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.14.360   Section 5.410.4.6 Energy STAR portfolio manager.
   Section 5.410.4.6 of Chapter 5 of the California Green Building Standards is
added as mandatory measure to read:
      5.410.4.6 Energy STAR portfolio manager. All non-residential projects
exceeding $100,000 valuation must provide evidence of an Energy STAR Portfolio
Manager project profile for both water and energy use prior to Permit Issuance,
acquire an Energy STAR Portfolio Manager Rating, and submit the rating to the
City of Palo Alto once the project has been occupied after 12 months.
(Ord. 5678 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.14.370   Section 5.410.4.7 Performance reviews - energy.
   Section 5.410.4.7 of Chapter 5 of the California Green Building Standards is
added to read:
      5.410.4.7 Performance reviews - energy. All projects over 10,000 square
feet. The city reserves the right to conduct a performance review, no more
frequently than once every five years unless a project fails review, to
evaluate the building's energy use to ensure that resources used at the
building and/or site do not exceed the maximum allowance set forth in the
rehabilitation or new construction design. Following the findings and
recommendations of the review, the city may require adjustments to the energy
usage or energy using equipment or systems if the building is no longer
compliant with the original design. Renovation or rehabilitation resulting from
such audit activity shall be considered a project and shall be subject to
applicable documentation submittal requirements of the city. This section is
effective only for those projects for which a building permit was issued after
January 1, 2009.
(Ord. 5678 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.14.380   Section 5.410.4.8 Performance reviews - water.
   Section 5.410.4.8 of Chapter 5 of the California Green Building Standards is
added to read:
      5.410.4.8 Performance reviews - water. All sites greater than one acre:
The city reserves the right to conduct performance reviews, no more frequently
than once every five years unless a project fails review, to evaluate water use
to ensure that resources used at the building and/or site do not exceed a
maximum allowance set forth in the rehabilitation or new construction design.
Water use reviews may be initiated by CPAU, or as a coordinated effort between
the CPAU and the Santa Clara Valley Water District (SCVWD), or as part of
SCVWD's established water conservation programs. Following the findings and
recommendations of the review, the city may require adjustments to irrigation
usage, irrigation hardware, and/or landscape materials to reduce consumption
and improve efficiency. Renovation or rehabilitation resulting from such audit
activity shall be considered a project and shall be subject to applicable
documentation submittal requirements of the city.
(Ord. 5678 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.14.390   Section 5.506 Indoor air quality.
   Section 5.506.4 of Chapter 5 of the California Green Building Standards is
added as mandatory measure to read:
      Section 5.506.4 Indoor Air Quality Management Plan. All commercial and
multi-family projects must submit an Indoor Air Quality Management Plan (IAQ)
with building permit application in accordance with the Sheet Metal and Air
Conditioning Contractors National Association (SMACNA IAQ) Guidelines for
Occupied Buildings Under Construction, 2nd edition ANSI/SMACNA 008-2008.
(Ord. 5678 § 2 (part), 2025)
Part 9 - Local Modifications to
APPENDIX A5 - NONRESIDENTIAL VOLUNTARY MEASURES
Division A5.1 - PLANNING AND DESIGN
16.14.400   Section A5.106.5.3 Electric vehicle (EV) charging for new
construction.
   Section A5.106.5.3 - A5.106.5.3.4 of the California Green Building Standards
Code are adopted as mandatory measures and amended to read:
      A5.106.5.3 Electric vehicle (EV) charging for nonresidential structures.
New non-residential structures shall comply with the following requirements for
electric vehicle supply equipment (EVSE). All parking space calculations under
this section shall be rounded up to the next full space. The requirements
stated in this section are in addition to those contained in Section 5.106.5.3
of the California Green Building Standards Code.
      A5.106.5.3.1 Nonresidential structures other than hotels. The following
standards apply to newly constructed non-residential structures other than
hotels.
         Comply with Section 5.106.5.3.1 EV capable spaces, Section 5.106.5.3.2
Electric vehicle charging stations and associated Table A5.106.5.3.3, or
Section A5.106.5.3.4 Electric vehicle charging stations (EVCS)—power allocation
method and associated Table A5.106.5.3.4.
         Refer to Section 5.106.5.3.2 for the permitted use of Level 2 or
Direct Current Fast Charger (DCFC) to create EVCS. Refer to Section 5.106.3.2.1
for the allowed use of DCFC to comply with both EV capable spaces and Level 2
EVSE. Refer to Section 5.106.5.3.3 for the allowed use of Automatic Load
Management System (ALMS).
   Table A5.106.5.3.3 - Tier 2 EV Capable Spaces and EVCS
Total Number of Number of Required EV Other than Office and Office and Retail
Actual Parking  Capable Spaces        Retail Number of      Number of Required
Spaces                                Required EVCS2,3     EVCS2,3
Total Number of Number of Required EV Other than Office and Office and Retail
Actual Parking  Capable Spaces        Retail Number of      Number of Required
Spaces                                Required EVCS2,3     EVCS2,3
1-9             3                     2                     2
10-25           8                     4                     6
26-50           17                    9                     13
51-75           28                    14                    21
76-100          40                    20                    30
101-150         57                    29                    43
151-200         79                    40                    59
201 and over    45% of actual parking 50% of EV capable     75% of EV capable
                spaces1               spaces1               spaces1
1.   Calculation for spaces shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number.
2.   Each EVCS shall reduce the number of required EV capable spaces by the
same number.
3.   At least one Level 2 EVSE shall be provided.   
 
   Table A5.106.5.3.4 - Tier 2 EVCS - Power Allocation Method
                                     Other than Office    Office and Retail
                                     and Retail Total kVA Total kVA Required in
Total Number of Minimum Total kVA at Required in any      any Combination of EV
Actual Parking  6.6. kVA             Combination of EV    Capable3,4, Low Power
Spaces                               Capable3,4, Low      Level 2, Level 21,2,
                                     Power Level 2, Level or DCFC
                                     21,2, or DCFC
                                     Other than Office    Office and Retail
                                     and Retail Total kVA Total kVA Required in
Total Number of Minimum Total kVA at Required in any      any Combination of EV
Actual Parking  6.6. kVA             Combination of EV    Capable3,4, Low Power
Spaces                               Capable3,4, Low      Level 2, Level 21,2,
                                     Power Level 2, Level or DCFC
                                     21,2, or DCFC
1-9             19.8                 19.8                 19.8
10-25           52.8                 52.8                 52.8
26-50           112.2                112.2                112.2
51-75           184.4                184.4                184.4
76-100          264                  264                  264
101-150         376.2                376.2                376.2
151-200         521.4                521.4                521.4
                                     Total required kVA = Total required kVA =
201 and over    45% of actual        P x .45 x 6.6        P x .45 x 6.6
                parking spaces x 6.6 Where P = Parking    Where P = Parking
                                     spaces in facility   spaces in facility
1.   Level 2 EVSE at 6.6 kVA minimum.
2.   At least one Level 2 EVSE shall be provided.
3.   Maximum allowed kVA to be utilized for EV capable spaces is 75%.
4.   If EV capable spaces are utilized, they shall meet the requirements of
Section 5.106.5.3.1 EV capable spaces.
5.   For office and retail buildings the maximum allowed kVA to be utilized for
EV capable spaces is 25%.
 
   Location. The EVSE, receptacles, and/or raceway required by this section
shall be placed in locations allowing convenient installation of and access to
EVSE. Location of EVSE or receptacles shall be consistent with all city
regulations.
(Ord. 5678 § 2 (part), 2025)
Division A5.4 - ENERGY EFFICIENCY
16.14.410   Section A5.203.1 Performance Approach for Newly Constructed
Buildings.
   Section A5.203.1 of Appendix A5 of the California Green Building Standards
Code is not adopted as a Tier 1 and Tier 2 elective measure. Projects shall
comply with Chapter 16.17 of the Palo Alto Municipal Code (California Energy
Code).
(Ord. 5678 § 2 (part), 2025)
Division A5.4 - MATERIAL CONSERVATION AND RESOURCE EFFICIENCY
16.14.420   Section A5.405.5 Cement and Concrete.
   Section A5.405.5 of Appendix A5 of the California Green Building Standards
Code is adopted as a Mandatory measure for Tier 1 and Tier 2 projects and is
amended to read:
      A5.405.5 Cement and concrete. Use cement and concrete made with recycled
products and complying with the following sections and requirements per PAMC
Chapter 16.14.240.
(Ord. 5678 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.14.430   Section A5.408 Construction Waste Reduction, Disposal and
Recycling.
   Section A5.408 of Appendix A5 of the California Green Building Standards
Code is adopted as a Mandatory measure for Tier 2 projects and is amended to
read:
      A5.408.3.1 Waste enhanced construction waste reduction. (80% construction
waste reduction) as a mandatory requirement for all non-residential
construction, including new construction, additions, and alterations, as long
as the construction has a valuation of $25,000 or more. Non-residential
projects with a lower valuation shall remain subject to California Green
Building Standards Code Chapter 5 mandatory measures.
      Exceptions:
         1.   Residential stand-alone mechanical, electrical or plumbing
permits.
         2.   Commercial stand-alone mechanical, electrical or plumbing
permits.
      A5.408.3.1.1 - Deleted.
      A5.408.3.1.2 Documentation. Documentation shall be provided to the
enforcing agency which demonstrates compliance with all construction and
demolition waste reduction requirements.
(Ord. 5678 § 2 (part), 2025)
Chapter 16.15
ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATIONS
Sections:
   
16.15.010   Expedited permitting process for electric vehicle charging stations
16.15.010   Expedited permitting process for electric vehicle charging
stations.
   (a)   Definitions.
      (1)   “Electric vehicle charging station” or “charging station” means any
level of electric vehicle supply equipment station that is designed and built
in compliance with Article 625 of the California Electrical Code, as it reads
on the effective date of this chapter, and delivers electricity from a source
outside an electric vehicle into a plug-in electric vehicle.
      (2)   “Specific, adverse impact” means a significant, quantifiable,
direct, and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified, and written
public health or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on
the date the application was deemed complete.
      (3)   “Electronic submittal” means the utilization of one or more of the
following:
         i.   Electronic mail or email.
         ii.   The internet.
         iii.   Facsimile.
   (b)   Expedited permitting process. Consistent with Government Code Section
65850.7, the Chief Building Official shall implement an expedited, streamlined
permitting process for electric vehicle charging stations, and adopt a
checklist of all requirements with which electric vehicle charging stations
shall comply with in order to be eligible for expedited review. The expedited,
streamlined permitting process and checklist may refer to the recommendations
contained in the most current version of the “Electric Vehicle Charging Station
Permitting Guidebook” published by the Governor’s Office of Business and
Economic Development. The city’s adopted checklist shall be published on the
city’s website.
   (c)   Permit application processing.
      (1)   Prior to submitting an application for processing, the applicant
shall verify that the installation of an electric vehicle charging station will
not have specific, adverse impact to public health and safety and building
occupants. Verification by the applicant includes but is not limited to:
electrical system capacity and loads; electrical system wiring, bonding and
overcurrent protection; building infrastructure affected by charging station
equipment and associated conduits; areas of charging station equipment and
vehicle parking.
      (2)   A permit application that satisfies the information requirements in
the city’s adopted checklist shall be deemed complete and be promptly
processed. Upon confirmation by the Chief Building Official or designee that
the permit application and supporting documents meets the requirements of the
city adopted checklist, and is consistent with all applicable laws and health
and safety standards, the Chief Building Official or designee shall, consistent
with Government Code Section 65850.7, approve the application and issue all
necessary permits. Such approval does not authorize an applicant to energize or
utilize the electric vehicle charging station until approval is granted by the
city. If the Chief Building Official or designee determines that the permit
application is incomplete, he or she shall issue a written correction notice to
the applicant, detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional
information required to be eligible for expedited permit issuance.
      (3)   The Chief Building Official or designee shall not condition the
approval for any electric vehicle charging station permit on the approval of
such a system by an association, as that term is defined by Civil Code Section
4080.
      (4)   Permit applications under this section may be submitted
electronically, including electronic signatures on all forms, applications, and
other documentation.
   (d)   Technical review. It is the intent of this section to encourage the
installation of electric vehicle charging stations by removing obstacles to
permitting for charging stations so long as the action does not supersede the
Chief Building Official’s authority to address higher priority life-safety
situations. If the Chief Building Official or designee makes a finding based on
substantial evidence that the electric vehicle charging station could have a
specific adverse impact upon the public health or safety, as defined in this
section, the city may require the applicant to apply for a use permit.
(Ord. 5661 § 2, 2025)
Chapter 16.16
CALIFORNIA ELECTRICAL CODE, CALIFORNIA CODE OF REGULATIONS, TITLE 24, PART 3*
Sections:
   
16.16.010   2025 California Electrical Code, Cal. Code of Regs., Title 24, Part
3 adopted and amended.
   
16.16.020   Cross-references to California Electrical Code.
   
16.16.030   Local amendments.
   
16.16.040   Adoption of Section 89.101 General.
   
16.16.050   Article 89.101.3.3 Exempted from this Code.
   
16.16.060   Article 89.101.4 2025 California Electrical Code Annexes adopted.
   
16.16.070   Administration & enforcement of 2025 California Electrical Code.
   
16.16.080   Article 110.13 Mounting and cooling of equipment.
*   Editor’s Note: Prior ordinance history: Prior code §§ 34.301, 34.302, and
Ordinance Nos. 2436, 2600, 2611, 2811, 2960, 2998, 3184, 3332, 3669, 3881,
3913, 4034, 4306, 4561, 4771, 4979, 5103, 5221, 5394 and 5482.
16.16.010   2025 California Electrical Code, Cal. Code of Regs., Title 24, Part
3 adopted and amended.
   The California Electrical Code, 2025 Edition, Title 24, Part 3 of the
California Code of Regulations together with those omissions, amendments,
exceptions and additions thereto, is adopted and hereby incorporated in this
chapter by reference and made a part hereof the same as if fully set forth
herein.
   Unless superseded and expressly repealed, references in City of Palo Alto
forms, documents and regulations to the chapters and sections of the former
California Code of Regulations, Title 24, 2022, shall be construed to apply to
the corresponding provisions contained within the California Code of
Regulations, Title 24, 2025. Ordinance No. 5568 of the City of Palo Alto and
all other ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby
suspended and expressly repealed.
   Wherever the phrases "California Electrical Code" or "Electrical Code" are
used in this code or any ordinance of the City, such phrases shall be deemed
and construed to refer and apply to the California Electrical Code, 2025
Edition, as adopted by this chapter.
   One copy of the California Electrical Code, 2025 Edition, has been filed for
use and examination of the public in the Office of the Chief Building Official
of the City of Palo Alto.
(Ord. 5679 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.16.020   Cross-references to California Electrical Code.
   The provisions of this chapter contain cross-references to the provisions of
the California Electrical Code, 2025 Edition, in order to facilitate reference
and comparison to those provisions.
(Ord. 5679 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.16.030   Local amendments.
   The provisions of this chapter shall constitute local amendments to the
cross-referenced provisions of the California Electrical Code, 2025 Edition,
and shall be deemed to replace the cross-referenced sections of said Code with
the respective provisions set forth in this chapter.
(Ord. 5679 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.16.040   Adoption of Section 89.101 General.
   Section 89.101 General of the 2025 California Electrical Code is adopted by
the City of Palo Alto as amended herein.
(Ord. 5679 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.16.050   Article 89.101.3.3 Exempted from this Code.
   Section 89.101.3.3 is amended as follows (additions underlined; sections
omitted without change noted by [. . .]):
      89.101.3.3 Exempted from This Code.
      This code does not cover:
         1.   Installations in ships, watercraft other than floating dwelling
units, railway rolling stock, aircraft, automotive vehicles, commercial
coaches, mobilehomes, and recreational vehicles.
         [. . .]
         7.   Additional exemptions: Electrical work that is exempt from
permits pursuant to Palo Alto Municipal Code Section
16.04.110, Section 105.2 Work exempt from permit.
(Ord. 5679 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.16.060   Article 89.101.4 2025 California Electrical Code Annexes adopted.
   The following Annexes of the California Electrical Code, 2025 Edition, are
adopted and hereby incorporated in this chapter by reference and made a part
hereof the same as if fully set forth herein:
      A.   Annex B - Application Information for Ampacity Calculations
      B.   Annex C - Conduit, Tubing, and Cable Tray Fill Tables for Conductors
and Fixture Wires of the Same Size
      C.   Annex I - Unit Recommended Tightening Torque Tables from UL Standard
486A - 486B
(Ord. 5679 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.16.070   Administration & enforcement of 2025 California Electrical Code.
   Administration and enforcement of this code shall be governed by Chapter 1,
Division II of the 2025 California Building Code as amended by Palo Alto
Municipal Code
Chapter 16.04.
(Ord. 5679 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.16.080   Article 110.13 Mounting and cooling of equipment.
   Article 110.13 (A) (1) of Article 110 of the California Electrical Code is
added to read:
   110.13 (A) (1) Concrete Slab Supporting Electrical Equipment. When
electrical equipment is to be placed on a concrete substrate, a 4-inch concrete
housekeeping pad shall be installed to elevate and protect the equipment.
(Ord. 5679 § 1 (part), 2025)
Chapter 16.17
CALIFORNIA ENERGY CODE, CALIFORNIA CODE OF REGULATIONS, TITLE 24, PART 6*
Sections:
   
16.17.010   2025 California Energy Code, Title 24, Part 6 adopted.
   
16.17.020   Cross-references to California Energy Code.
   
16.17.030   Local amendments.
   
16.17.040   Administration & enforcement of 2025 California Energy Code.
   
16.17.050   Violations - Penalties.
   
16.17.060   Subchapter 1 All Occupancies - General Provisions.
   
16.17.070   Section 110.10 Mandatory requirements for solar ready buildings.
   
16.17.080   Subchapter 3 Nonresidential, hotel/motel occupancies, and covered
processes - mandatory requirements.
   
16.17.090   Section 120.6(I) Electric readiness requirements for systems using
gas or propane.
   
16.17.100   Reserved.
   
16.17.110   Reserved.
   
16.17.120   Subchapter 7 Single-family residential building - mandatory
features and devices.
   
16.17.130   Reserved.
   
16.17.140   Subchapter 9 single-family residential buildings - additions and
alterations to existing residential buildings.
   
16.17.150   Section 160.9 Mandatory requirements for electric ready buildings.
   
16.17.160   Reserved.
   
16.17.170   Infeasibility exemption.
   
16.17.180   Appeal.
*   Editor’s Note: Prior ordinance history: Ordinance 4980, 5064, 5222, 5326,
5345, 5383, 5485, 5571, and 5627.
16.17.010   2025 California Energy Code, Title 24, Part 6 adopted.
   The California Energy Code, 2025 Edition, Title 24, Part 6 of the California
Code of Regulations together with those omissions, amendments, exceptions and
additions thereto, is adopted and hereby incorporated in this chapter by
reference and made a part hereof the same as if fully set forth herein. Except
as amended herein, all requirements of the California Energy Code, 2025
Edition, Title 24, Part 6 of the California Code of Regulations shall apply.
   Unless superseded and expressly repealed, references in City of Palo Alto
forms, documents and regulations to the chapters and sections of the former
editions of the California Code of Regulations, Title 24, shall be construed to
apply to the corresponding provisions contained within the California Code of
Regulations, Title 24, 2025. Ordinance No. 5627 of the City of Palo Alto and
all other ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby
suspended and expressly repealed.
   One copy of the California Energy Code, 2025 Edition, has been filed for use
and examination of the public in the Office of the Chief Building Official of
the City of Palo Alto.
(Ord. 5665 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.17.020   Cross-references to California Energy Code.
   The provisions of this chapter contain cross-references to the provisions of
the California Energy Code, 2025 Edition, in order to facilitate reference and
comparison to those provisions.
(Ord. 5665 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.17.030   Local Amendments.
   The provisions of this chapter shall constitute local amendments to the
cross-referenced provisions of the California Energy Code, 2025 Edition, and
shall be deemed to replace the cross-referenced sections of said Code with the
respective provisions set forth in this chapter.
(Ord. 5665 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.17.040   Administration & enforcement of 2025 California Energy Code.
   Administration and enforcement of this code shall be governed by Chapter 1,
Division II of the 2025 California Building Code as amended by Palo Alto
Municipal Code
Chapter 16.04.
(Ord. 5665 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.17.050   Violations - Penalties.
   It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision or to fail to comply
with any of the requirements of this chapter or any permits, conditions, or
variances granted under this chapter. Violators shall be subject to any penalty
or penalties authorized by law, including but not limited to: administrative
enforcement pursuant to Chapters
1.12 and
1.16 of the Palo Alto Municipal Code; and criminal enforcement pursuant to
Chapter 1.08 of the Palo Alto Municipal Code. Each separate day or any portion
thereof during which any violation of this chapter occurs or continues shall be
deemed to constitute a separate offense.
   When the chief building official determines that a violation of this chapter
has occurred, the chief building official may record a notice of pendency of
code violation with the Office of the County Recorder stating the address and
owner of the property involved. When the violation has been corrected, the
chief building official shall issue and record a release of the notice of
pendency of code violation.
(Ord. 5665 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.17.060   Subchapter 1 All Occupancies - General Provisions.
   Section 100.0 - SCOPE is amended to add new subsections (i) and (j) as
follows:
   (i)   Single Family Building Remodel Energy Reach Code - Purpose and Intent.
    In addition to all requirements of the California Energy Code applicable to
single-family building additions and alterations, the energy efficiency,
renewable energy, and electric readiness measures specified in Sections 150.0
(w) and 150.0(x) shall be required for certain single-family additions and
alterations.
   (j)   Substantial Remodel (or “50-50-50” Rule). Any project that affects the
removal or replacement of 50% or more linear length of the existing exterior
walls of the building, 50% or more linear length of the existing exterior wall
where the plate height is raised, or 50% or more of the existing roof framing
area is removed or replaced, over a 3-year period is considered a substantial
remodel.
      a.   Any permit(s) applied for will trigger a review of a 3-year history
of the project. This review will result in determining if a substantial remodel
has occurred.
      b.   The Chief Building Official or designee shall make the final
determination regarding the application if a conflict occurs.
   Section 100.1(b) of Subchapter 1 of the California Energy Code is amended by
adding the following definitions:
   COVERED SINGLE-FAMILY PROJECT shall mean any project in a single-family
residential building originally permitted for construction before 2011 that
meets any of the following criteria:
      1.   All residential building additions and/or alterations exceeding
1,000 square feet, as amended by this chapter and as applicable to the scope of
work.
         For covered single-family projects, the area of alterations will
include any construction or renovation to an existing structure other than
repair or addition. Alterations include raising the plate height, historic
restoration, changes or rearrangements of the structural parts or elements, and
changes or rearrangement of bearing walls and full height partitions.    
         Normal maintenance, reroofing, painting or wall papering, floor
finishes, replacement-in-kind of mechanical, plumbing and electrical systems,
or replacing or adding new kitchen counter and similar furniture, plumbing
fixture to the building are excluded for the purposes of establishing scope of
covered single-family projects.
         The area of alteration should be limited to the footprint of element
(s) being altered.
         The sum of the footprint of the elements being altered with respect to
Covered Single Family Projects, shall be calculated using the following
methodology:
         1.   Raising the plate height: The calculation with respect to raising
of the plate height will be based on the area of the footprint in which the
plate height is being increased. Plate height means the vertical distance
measured from the top of the finished floor to the top of the plates.
         2.   Historic restoration: The calculation with respect to historic
restoration will be based on the area of work covered in the California
Historical Building Code (Title 24, Part 8).
         3.   Structural parts or elements: The calculation with respect to
changes or rearrangements of the structural parts or elements will be based on
the sum of the individual footprints of each structural change or
rearrangement. The footprint shall be calculated based on the proposed design
and inclusive of any demolished structural parts or elements.
         4.   Bearing walls and full height partition: The calculation with
respect to changes or rearrangement of walls and full height partitions will be
based on the footprint of any demolished wall or full height partition and any
new wall or new full height partition.
      Exception: Attached and detached Accessory Dwelling Units, ADU
conversions of existing structures shall meet the California Energy Code
Mandatory measures only.
   CERTIFIED ENERGY ANALYST is a person registered as a Certified Energy
Analyst with the California Association of Building Energy Consultants as of
the date of submission of a Certificate of Compliance as required under Section
10-103 of Building Energy Efficiency Standards for residential and
nonresidential buildings.
   ELECTRIC EQUIPMENT OR APPLIANCE means one or more devices that use electric
energy to serve the needs for heating and cooling, water heating, cooking, and
electric vehicle charging. In addition, ancillary equipment such as an electric
panel, photovoltaic equipment, and energy storage systems that are deployed to
support such devices shall be considered Electric Equipment or Appliance.
   ELECTRIC HEATING APPLIANCE is a device that produces heat energy to create a
warm environment by the application of electric power to resistance elements,
refrigerant compressors, or dissimilar material junctions, as defined in the
California Mechanical Code.
   SUBSTANTIAL REMODEL (or “50-50-50”RULE). Any project that affects the
removal or replacement of 50% or more linear length of the existing exterior
walls of the building, 50% or more linear length of the existing exterior wall
where the plate height is raised, or 50% or more of the existing roof framing
area is removed or replaced, over a 3-year period is considered a substantial
remodel. (Refer to Section 100.0(j)).
(Ord. 5665 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.17.070   Section 110.10 Mandatory requirements for solar ready buildings.
   Section 110.10 of Subchapter 2 of the California Energy Code is amended by
adding Section 110.10 (f) to read:
   (f)   Existing tree canopies. In the event of a conflict between the
provisions of this Code, the Solar Shade Act of 2009, and the Palo Alto Tree
Ordinance (Chapter 8.10), the most protective of existing tree canopies shall
prevail.
(Ord. 5681 § 2, 2025)
16.17.080   Subchapter 3 Nonresidential and hotel/motel occupancies, and
covered processes - mandatory requirements.
SECTION 120.0 NONRESIDENTIAL, HOTEL/MOTEL OCCUPANCIES, AND COVERED PROCESSES -
MANDATORY REQUIREMENTS - GENERAL.
   Section 120.0 of Subchapter 3 of the California Energy Code is amended to
read:
   Sections 120.1 through 120.10 establish requirements for the design and
installation of building envelopes, ventilation, space-conditioning and service
water-heating systems and equipment in nonresidential and hotel/motel buildings
as well as covered processes that are within the scope of Section 100.0(a).
   Note: The requirements of Sections 120.1 through 120.10 apply to newly
constructed buildings. Section 141.0 specifies which requirements of Sections
120.1 through 120.10 also apply to additions or alterations to existing
buildings. The electric readiness requirements specified in Section 120.6 (k)
and Section 120.6(l) apply to substantial remodels.
(Ord. 5681 § 3, 2025)
16.17.090   Section 120.6(I) Electric readiness requirements for systems using
gas or propane.
   Subchapter 3 of the California Energy Code is amended to add Section 120.6
(I) to be numbered, entitled, and to read:
   120.6(I) ELECTRIC READINESS REQUIREMENTS FOR SYSTEMS USING GAS OR PROPANE.
Where nonresidential systems using gas or propane are installed, the
construction drawings shall indicate electrical infrastructure and physical
space accommodating the future installation of an electric appliance in the
following ways, as certified by a registered design professional or licensed
electrical contractor.
      a)   Branch circuit wiring, electrically isolated and designed to serve
all electric heating appliances in accordance with manufacturer requirements
and the California Electrical Code, including the appropriate voltage, phase,
minimum amperage, and an electrical receptacle or junction box within five feet
of the appliance that is accessible with no obstructions. Appropriately sized
conduit may be installed in lieu of conductors; and
      b)   Labeling of both ends of the unused conductors or conduit shall be
with “For Future Electrical Appliance”; and
      c)   Reserved circuit breakers in the electrical panel for each branch
circuit, appropriately labeled (e.g. “Reserved for Future Electrical
Appliance”), and positioned on the opposite end of the panel supply conductor
connection; and
      d)   Connected subpanels, panelboards, switchboards, busbars, and
transformers shall be sized to serve the future electric heating appliances.
The electrical capacity requirements shall be adjusted for demand factors in
accordance with the California Electrical Code; and
      e)   Physical space for future electric appliances, including equipment
footprint, and if needed a pathway reserved for routing of ductwork to heat
pump evaporator(s), shall be depicted on the construction drawings. The
footprint necessary for future electric appliances may overlap with
nonstructural partitions and with the location of currently designed combustion
equipment.
(Ord. 5681 § 4, 2025)
16.17.100   Reserved.
16.17.110   Reserved.
16.17.120   Subchapter 7 Single-family residential building - mandatory
features and devices.
   Section 150.0 MANDATORY FEATURES AND DEVICES
      Section 150.0 of Subchapter 7 of the California Energy Code is amended to
read as follows (additions underlined, deletions, struck through):
   Single-family residential buildings shall comply with the applicable
requirements of Sections 150(a) through 150.0(vx).
   NOTE: The requirements of Sections 150.0 (a) through (v) apply to newly
constructed buildings and substantial remodels. Sections 150.2(a) and 150.2(b)
specify which requirements of Sections 150.0(a) through 150.0(rv) also apply to
additions or alterations. The electric readiness requirements of Sections 150.0
(n), (t), (u) and (v) apply to residential remodels or additions when the
applicable system is included in the remodel. In addition, covered single-
family projects shall also be required to comply with Section 150.0(w) and
certain additions and alterations shall also be required to comply with Section
150.0(x).
      Subsections 150.0 (a) - (s) are adopted without modification.
         (t)   Heat pump space heater ready. Systems using gas or propane
furnace to serve individual dwelling units shall include the following:
         1.   A dedicated 240 volt branch circuit wiring shall be installed
within three feet from the furnace and accessible to the furnace with no
obstructions. The branch circuit conductors shall be rated at 30 amps minimum.
The blank cover shall be identified as "240V ready." All electrical components
shall be installed in accordance with the California Electrical Code.
         2.   The main electrical service panel shall have a reserved space to
allow for the installation of a double pole circuit breaker for a future heat
pump space heater installation. The reserved space shall be permanently marked
as "For Future 240V use."
         3.   A designated exterior location for a future heat pump compressor
unit.
      Subsections 150.0 (u) - (v) are adopted without modification.
      A new Subsection, (w), is added to Section 150.0 as follows:
         (w)   A covered single-family project shall install a set of measures
based on the building vintage from the Measure Menu Table, Table 150.0-J, to
achieve a total measure point score that is equal to or greater than the target
score in Table 150.0-I. In addition, all mandatory measures listed in Table
150.0-J shall be installed. Measure verification shall be explicitly included
as an addendum to the Certificate of Compliance to be filed pursuant to 2025
Title 24, Part 6, Section 10-103.
         Installed measures shall meet the specifications in Table 150.0-K.
Building vintage is the year in which the original construction permit for the
building was submitted, as documented by building department records, or the
permit issue date of an addition or alteration that satisfied the Performance
Standards (California Energy Code, Title 24, Part 6, Section 150.1(b)) that
were in effect at that time. Unless otherwise specified, the requirements shall
apply to the entire dwelling unit, not just the additional or altered portion.
Measures from the Measure Menu table that are to be installed to satisfy
requirements under the California Energy Code, Title 24, Part 6, may not count
towards compliance with these requirements. Where these requirements conflict
with other California Energy Code requirements, the stricter requirements shall
prevail.
         Exception 1 to Section 150.0(w): Creation of a new accessory dwelling
unit or junior accessory dwelling unit that is within the existing space of a
single-family dwelling or accessory structure and include an expansion of not
more than 150 square feet beyond the same physical dimensions as the existing
accessory structure. An expansion beyond the physical dimensions of the
existing accessory structure shall be limited to accommodating ingress and
egress. Or, if the project would not otherwise be a covered single-family
project were it not for the inclusion of an accessory dwelling unit or junior
accessory dwelling unit that meets the criteria above.
         Exception 2 to Section 150.0(w): Mobile homes, manufactured housing,
or factory-built housing as defined in Division 13 of the California Health and
Safety 12 Code (commencing with Section 17000 of the Health and Safety Code).
         Exception 3 to Section 150.0(w): Emergency Housing pursuant to
Appendix P of the California Building Code.
         Exception 4 to Section 150.0(w): An alteration that consists solely of
roof and/or fenestration projects.
         Exception 5 to Section 150.0(w): If the project includes circumstances
which constitute hardship or infeasibility, the applicant may request an
exemption. In applying for an exemption, the burden is on the applicant to show
hardship or infeasibility. Circumstances that constitute hardship or
infeasibility shall include one or more of the following: 
            (a)   That the cost of achieving compliance exceeds 20% of the
valuation of cost of the project;
            (b)   That it is technically infeasible to achieve compliance
through all packages due to conditions specific to the project;
            (c)   That strict compliance with these standards would create or
maintain a hazardous condition(s) and present a life safety risk to the
occupants.
         Applicants shall follow the Infeasibility procedures in PAMC
16.17.170.
         Exception 6 to Section 150.0(w): If the applicant demonstrates, using
Commission-certified compliance software as specified by Section 10-109(c) and
Section 10-116, that the energy budget of the proposed building design would be
less than or equal to the energy budget of the building under the project if it
included any set of measures that would achieve compliance under this Section
150.0(w).
         Certificate of Compliance. The Certificate of Compliance shall be
prepared and signed by a Certified Energy Analyst and the energy budget for the
proposed design shall be no greater than the standard design building.
         Exception 7 to Section 150.0(w): If the dwelling unit has previously
installed measures from the Measure Menu, Table 150.0-J, and compliance can be
demonstrated to the building official, then these measures shall not be
required to be newly installed, and appropriate credit shall be included in the
applicable compliance calculations.
         Exception 8 to Section 150.0(w): A measure that is necessary for
compliance is prohibited because of a covenant or other deed restriction on the
property, such as a homeowners association covenant.
         Exception 9 to Section 150.0(w): A covered single-family project,
other than an addition, that would not otherwise be subject to this Section
150.0(w) but for installation of solar PV, solar water heating, EV charging,
electrical upgrades for solar PV or EV charging, or energy storage.
         Exception 10 to Section 150.0(w): The project is solely related to a
repair, as defined by Title 24 Part 2 Section 202.
         Exception 11 to Section 150.0(w) and 150.0(x): A covered single-family
project that consists solely of medically necessary improvements or solely of
seismic safety improvements.
TABLE 150.0-I: TARGET SCORES.
 
Building Vintage Pre-1978 1978-1991 1992-2010
Climate Zone 4   12       12        12
 
TABLE 150.0-J: MEASURE MENU, CLIMATE ZONE 4
ID     Measures                               Building Vintage
                                            Pre- 1978 1978- 1991 199 2- 2010
E1     Lighting Measures                      Mandatory
E1     Water Heating Package                  1         1          1
E3     Air Sealing                            2         1          1
E4.A   R-38 Attic Insulation                  7         3          1
E4.B   R-49 Attic Insulation                  7         3          1
E5     Duct Sealing                           6         4          1
E6.A   New Ducts, R-6 Insulation + Duct       10        7          2
       Sealing
E6.B   New Ducts, R-8 Insulation + Duct       11        8          3
       Sealing
E7     Windows                                6         5          3
E8     R-15 Wall Insulation                   6         --         --
E10. A R-19 Raised floor insulation           8         8          --
E10. B R-30 Raised floor insulation           9         9          --
E11    Radiant Barrier Under Roof (when re-   3         2          1
       roofing)
FS1    Heat Pump Water Heater Replacing Gas   12        12         12
FS2    High Eff. Heat Pump Water Heater       13        13         13
       Replacing Gas
FS3    Heat Pump Water Heater Replacing       4         4          4
       Electric
FS4    High Eff. Heat Pump Water Heater       5         5          5
       Replacing Electric
FS5    Heat Pump Space Conditioning System    21        16         13
FS6    High Eff. Heat Pump Space Conditioning 23        18         15
       System
FS7    Dual Fuel Heat Pump Space Conditioning 15        11         10
       System
FS8    Heat Pump Clothes Dryer                1         1          1
FS9    Induction Cooktop                      1         1          1
PV     Solar PV                               17        17         15
 
TABLE 150.0-K: MEASURE SPECIFICATIONS
ID   Measure Specification
Energy Efficiency Measures
     Lighting Measures: Install lighting with an efficiency of 45 lumens per watt or
     greater in all interior and exterior screw-in fixtures. Install photocell,
E1   occupancy sensor or energy management system controls that meet the requirements of
     150.0(k)3 in all outdoor lighting permanently mounted to a residential building or
     to other buildings on the same lot.
     Water Heating Package: Insulate all accessible hot water pipes with pipe insulation
     a minimum of three-fourths inch thick. This includes insulating the supply pipe
     leaving the water heater, piping to faucets underneath sinks, and accessible pipes
     in attic spaces or crawlspaces. Upgrade fittings in sinks and showers to meet
E2   current California Green Building Standards Code (Title 24, Part 11) Section 4.303
     water efficiency requirements.
     Exception: Upgraded fixtures are not required if existing fixtures have rated or
     measured flow rates of no more than 10% greater than 2025 California Green Building
     Standards Code (Title 24, Part
     11) Section 4.303 water efficiency requirements.
     Air Sealing: Seal all accessible cracks, holes, and gaps in the building envelope
     at walls, floors, and ceilings. Pay special attention to penetrations including
     plumbing, electrical, and mechanical vents, recessed can light luminaires, and
     windows. Weather-strip doors if not already present. Verification shall be
     conducted following a prescriptive checklist that outlines which building aspects
     need to be addressed by the permit applicant and verified by an inspector.
     Compliance can also be demonstrated with blower door testing conducted by a
E3   certified ECC Rater no more than three years prior to the permit application date
     that either: a) shows at least a 30% reduction from pre-retrofit conditions; or b)
     shows that the number of air changes per hour at 50 Pascals pressure difference
     (ACH50) does not exceed ten for Pre-1978 vintage buildings, seven for 1978 to 1991
     vintage buildings and five for 1992-2010 vintage buildings. If combustion
     appliances are located within the pressure boundary of the building, conduct a
     combustion safety test by a certified ECC Rater or a professional certified by the
     Building Performance Institute, in accordance with the BPI Technical Standards for
     the Building Analyst Professional.
     R-38 Attic Insulation: Attic insulation shall be installed to achieve a weighted
     assembly U-factor of 0.025 or insulation installed at the ceiling level shall have
     a thermal resistance of R-38 or greater for the insulation alone. Recessed
     downlight luminaires in the ceiling shall be covered with insulation to the same
E4.A depth as the rest of the ceiling. Luminaires not rated for insulation contact must
     be replaced or fitted with a fire-proof cover that allows for insulation to be
     installed directly over the cover.
     Exception: In buildings where existing R-30 is present and existing recessed
     downlight luminaires are not rated for insulation contact, insulation is not
     required to be installed over the luminaires.
     R-49 Attic Insulation: Attic insulation shall be installed to achieve a weighted
     assembly U-factor of 0.020 or insulation installed at the ceiling level shall have
     a thermal resistance of R-49 or greater for the insulation alone. Recessed
     downlight luminaires in the ceiling shall be covered with insulation to the same
E4.B depth as the rest of the ceiling. Luminaires not rated for insulation contact must
     be replaced or fitted with a fire-proof cover that allows for insulation to be
     installed directly over the cover.
     Exception: In buildings where existing R-30 is present and existing recessed
     downlight luminaires are not rated for insulation contact, insulation is not
     required to be installed over the luminaires.
     Duct Sealing: Air seal all space conditioning ductwork to meet the requirements of
     the 2025 Title 24, Part 6, Section 150.2(b)1E. The duct system must be tested by a
     ECC Rater no more than three years prior to the covered single-family project
E5   permit application date to verify the duct sealing and confirm that the
     requirements have been met. This measure may not be combined with the New Ducts and
     Duct Sealing measure in this Table.
     Exception: Buildings without ductwork or where the ducts are in conditioned space.
     New Ducts, R-6 Insulation + Duct Sealing: Replace existing space conditioning
     ductwork with new R-6 ducts that meet the requirements of 2025 Title 24 Section
E6.A 150.0(m)11. This measure may not be combined with the Duct Sealing measure in this
     Table. To qualify, a preexisting measure must have been installed no more than
     three years before the covered single-family project permit application date.
     New Ducts, R-8 insulation + Duct Sealing: Replace existing space conditioning
     ductwork with new R-8 ducts that meet the requirements of 2025 Title 24 Section
E6.B 150.0(m)11. This measure may not be combined with the Duct Sealing measure in this
     Table. To qualify, a preexisting measure must have been installed no more than
     three years before the covered single-family project permit application date.
E7   Windows: Replace at least 50% of existing windows with high performance windows
     with an area-weighted average U-factor no greater than 0.27 in Climate Zones 4.
     R-15 Wall Insulation: Install wall insulation in all exterior walls to achieve a
E8   weighted U-factor of 0.095 or install wall insulation in all exterior wall cavities
     that shall result in an installed thermal resistance of R-15 or greater for the
     insulation alone.
E9   Reserved for future use
     R-19 Floor Insulation: Raised-floors shall be insulated such that the floor
E10. assembly has an assembly U-factor equal to or less than U-0.037 or shall be
A    insulated between wood framing with insulation having an R-value equal to or
     greater than R-19.
     R-30 Floor Insulation: Raised-floors shall be insulated such that the floor
E10. assembly has an assembly U-factor equal to or less than U-0.028 or shall be
B    insulated between wood framing with insulation having an R-value equal to or
     greater than R-30.
E11  Radiant Barrier: A radiant barrier that meets the requirements of Section 150.1(c)2
     shall be installed under at least 50% of the roof surface.
Fuel Substitution and Solar PV Measures
     Heat Pump Water Heater (HPWH) Replacing Gas: Replace existing natural gas water
FS1  heater with a heat pump water heater that meets the requirements of Sections 110.3
     and 150.2(b)1.H.iii.b.
     High Efficiency Heat Pump Water Heater (HPWH) Replacing Gas: Replace existing
FS2  natural gas water heater with heat pump water heater with a Northwest Energy
     Efficiency Alliance (NEEA) Tier 3 or higher rating that also meets the requirements
     of Sections 110.3 and 150.2(b)1.H.iii.c.
     Heat Pump Water Heater (HPWH) Replacing Electric: Replace existing electric
FS3  resistance water heater with a heat pump water heater that meets the requirements
     of Sections 110.3 and 150.2(b)1.H.iii.b.
     High Efficiency Heat Pump Water Heater (HPWH) Replacing Electric: Replace existing
FS4  electric resistance water heater with heat pump water heater with a Northwest
     Energy Efficiency Alliance (NEEA) Tier 3 or higher rating that also meets the
     requirements of Sections 110.3 and 150.2(b)1.H.iii.c.
     Heat Pump Space Conditioning System: Replace all existing gas and electric
FS5  resistance primary space heating systems with a heat pump system that meets the
     requirements of Sections 110.3, 150.2(b)1.C, 150.2(b)1.E, 150.2(b)1.F, and 150.2
     (b)1.G.
     High Efficiency Heat Pump Space Conditioning System: Replace all existing gas and
     electric resistance primary space heating systems with an electric-only heat pump
     system that meets the requirements of Sections 110.3 and 150.2(b)1.C, 150.2(b)1.E,
FS6  150.2(b)1.F, and 150.2(b)1.G and one of the following:
        A.   A ducted heat pump system with a SEER2 rating of 16.5 or greater, an EER2
     rating of 12.48 or greater and an HSPF2 rating of 9.5 or greater; or
        B.   A ductless mini-split heat pump system with a SEER2 rating of 14.3 or
     greater, an EER2 rating of 11.7 or greater and an HSPF2 rating of 7.5 or greater.
     Dual Fuel Heat Pump Space Conditioning System: Install a heat pump space
     conditioning system that meets the requirements of Sections 110.3 and 150.2(b)1.C,
     150.2(b)1.E, 150.2(b)1.F, and 150.2(b)1.G and either:
FS7     A.   Replaces all existing gas and electric resistance primary heating systems
     with a hybrid gas and electric heat pump system; or
        B.   Is an electric-heat pump system in tandem with a gas furnace and controls
     to use the gas furnace for backup heat only.
FS8  Heat Pump Clothes Dryer: Replace existing electric resistance or gas clothes dryer
     with heat pump dryer with no resistance element and cap gas line.
FS9  Induction Cooktop: Replace all existing gas and electric resistance stove tops with
     inductive stove top and cap the gas line.
PV.  Solar PV: Install a solar PV system that meets the requirements of Section 150.1
A    (c)14.
 
      A new Subsection, (x), is added to Section 150.0 as follows:
         (x)   Electric Readiness for Alterations.
         1.   Electric range. Where branch circuits or receptacles are added or
altered in a kitchen and the work requires a building permit, install
electrical components in accordance with the California Electrical Code. The
electrical components shall include either of the following:
            A.   A 125 volt, 20 amp electrical receptacle that is connected to
the electric panel with a 120/240 volt 3 conductor branch circuit rated at 50
amps minimum, within three feet from the appliance and accessible to the
appliance with no obstructions. Both ends of the unused conductor shall be
labeled with the word “
            B.   A pathway for a future 240 volt 50 amp minimum branch circuit
that shall consist of either conductors or raceway from the main electrical
service panel. The main electric panel shall have space reserved to allow for
the installation of a double pole circuit breaker for a future electric range
installation. The reserved space shall be permanently marked as “For Future
240V use.” The raceway or conductors shall terminate at a junction box within
three feet of the appliance. The blank cover shall be identified as “240V
ready.”
         2.   Electric dryer. Where a branch circuit is added or altered within
three feet of a gas or propane clothes dryer and the work requires a building
permit, install electrical components in accordance with the California
Electrical Code. The electrical components shall include either of the
following:
            A.   A dedicated 125 volt, 20 amp electrical receptacle that is
connected to the electric panel with a 120/240 volt 3 conductor branch circuit
rated at 30 amps minimum, within three feet from the appliance and accessible
to the appliance with no obstructions. Both ends of the unused conductor shall
be labeled with the word “spare” and be electrically isolated. Space shall be
reserved for a single pole circuit breaker in the electrical panel adjacent to
the circuit breaker for the branch circuit and labeled with the words “Future
Use;” or
            B.   A pathway for a future 240 volt 30 amp minimum branch circuit
that shall consist of either conductors or raceway from the main electrical
service panel. The main electric panel shall have space reserved to allow for
the installation of a double pole circuit breaker for a future heat pump dryer
installation. The reserved space shall be permanently marked as “For Future
240V use.” The raceway or conductors shall terminate at a junction box within
three feet of the appliance. The blank cover shall be identified as “240V
ready.”
         3.   Heat pump water heater.
            A.   If wall framing is removed or replaced within three feet of a
gas or propane water heating appliance, space suitable for the future
installation of a heat pump water heater (HPWH) shall be provided. The space
shall be at least two and one-half feet by two and one-half feet wide and seven
feet tall and shall include a condensate drain that is no more than two inches
higher than the base of an installed water heater and allows natural draining
without pump assistance or installed piping or tubing within three feet of the
water heater location to a condensate drain or exterior location. If pump
assistance is needed, a receptacle on a 120 volt, minimum 15 amp branch circuit
for a condensate pump must be available within three feet of the water heater
location.
            B.   Where branch circuits are altered or added within three feet
of an existing gas or propane water heater or within ten feet of the designated
future location of a heat pump water heater as required under Section 150.0
(x)3.A, and the work requires a building permit, install electrical components
in accordance with the California Electrical Code. The electrical components
shall include either of the following:
               i.   A dedicated 125 volt, 20 amp electrical receptacle that is
connected to the electric panel with a 120/240 volt 3 conductor, 10 AWG copper
branch circuit rated at 30 amps minimum, within three feet from the water
heater and accessible to the water heater with no obstructions. Both ends of
the unused conductor shall be labeled with the word “spare” and be electrically
isolated. Space shall be reserved for a single pole circuit breaker space in
the electrical panel adjacent to the circuit breaker for the branch circuit and
labeled with the words “Future 240V Use;” or
               ii.   A pathway for a future 240 volt 30 amp minimum branch
circuit that shall consist of either conductors or raceway from the main
electrical service panel. The main electric panel shall have space reserved to
allow for the installation of a double pole circuit breaker for a future HPWH
installation. The reserved space shall be permanently marked as “For Future
240V use.” The pathway shall terminate at a junction box within three feet of
the appliance. The blank cover shall be identified as “240V ready”.
         Exception 1 to Section 150.0(x): The project is the result of a repair
as defined by Title 24 Part 2 Section 202.
         Exception 2 to Section 150.0(x): If a building permit, is not
otherwise required for the project other than compliance with this section.
         -
         Exception 4 to Section 150.0(x): The project is the result of a safety
improvement to remove a known hazard.
         Exception 5 to Section 150.0(x): Mobile homes, manufactured housing,
or factory-built housing as defined in Division 13 of the California Health and
Safety 12 Code (commencing with Section 17000 of the Health and Safety Code).
         Exception 6 to Section 150.0(x): Emergency housing pursuant to
Appendix P of the California Building Code.
         Exception 7 to Section 150.0(x): Creation of a new accessory dwelling
unit or junior accessory dwelling unit that is within the existing space of a
single family dwelling or accessory structure and includes an expansion of not
more than 150 square feet beyond the same physical dimensions as the existing
accessory structure. An expansion beyond the physical dimensions of the
existing accessory structure shall be limited to accommodating ingress and
egress. Or, if the project would not otherwise be a covered single-family
project were it not for the inclusion of an accessory dwelling unit or junior
accessory dwelling unit that meets the criteria above.
(Ord. 5665 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.17.130   Reserved.
16.17.140   Subchapter 9 Single-family residential buildings - additions and
alterations to existing residential buildings.
   The requirements of PAMC 16.17.140 shall apply to building permit
applications submitted to the city on or after January 1, 2027 and shall apply
to all building permit applications submitted to the city on or after that
date.
   Section 150.2 – Energy Efficiency Standards for Additions and Alterations to
Existing Single-Family Residential Buildings – of Subchapter 9 of the 2025
California Energy Code is adopted without amendment, except as follows
(additions underlined, deletions struck through):
   Section 150.2(b)1C is hereby amended to read:
   C.   Entirely new or complete replacement space conditioning systems
installed as part of an alteration, shall include all the system heating or
cooling equipment, including but not limited to: condensing unit cooling or
heating coil, and air handler for split systems; or complete replacement of a
packaged unit; plus entirely new or replacement duct system (Section 150.2
(b)1D.ii.a). Entirely new or complete replacement space-conditioning systems
shall meet the requirements of Sections 150.0(h), 150.0(i), 150.0(j)1, 150.0
(j)2, 150.0(m)1 through 150.0(m)10; 150.0(m)12; 150.0(m)13, 150.1(c)7, 150.2
(b)1F.ii, 150.2(b)1G, and TABLE 150.2-A. Additionally, where an entirely new or
complete replacement space conditioning system includes a new or replacement
air-cooled air conditioner in Climate Zones 1 through 14 and 16, it shall meet
the applicable requirements of Section 150.2(b)1Fiv. Where an entirely new or
complete replacement space conditioning system includes a new or replacement
heat pump, it shall meet the applicable requirements of Section 150.2(b)1.F.v.
   Section 150.2(b)1.F. is hereby amended to read:
   F.   Altered space conditioning system - mechanical cooling. Alterations
which install new or replacement air-cooled air conditioners shall meet the
applicable requirements of subsections i and iv. Alterations which install new
or replacement heat pumps shall meet the applicable requirements of subsections
i, ii, iii, and v. All other alterations to refrigerant containing components
such as the compressor, condensing coil, evaporator coil, refrigerant metering
device, or refrigerant piping, shall meet the applicable requirements of
subsections i, ii, and iii. When a space-conditioning system is an air
conditioner or heat pump that is altered by the installation or replacement of
refrigerant-containing system components such as the compressor, condensing
coil, evaporator coil, refrigerant metering device or refrigerant piping, the
altered system shall comply with the following requirements:
      i.   All thermostats associated with the system shall be replaced with
setback thermostats meeting the requirements of Section 110.2(c).
      ii.   Air-cooled air conditioners in Climate Zones 2 and 8 through 15 and
airsource heat pumps in all climate zones, including but not limited to ducted
split systems, ducted package systems, small duct high velocity air systems,
and mini-split systems, shall comply with subsections a and b, unless the
system is of a type that cannot be verified using the specified procedures.
Systems that cannot comply with the requirements of 150.2(b)1.F.ii shall comply
with Section 150.2(b)1.F.iii.
         Exception to Section 150.2(b)1.F.ii: Entirely new or complete
replacement packaged systems for which the manufacturer has verified correct
system refrigerant charge prior to shipment from the factory are not required
to have refrigerant charge confirmed through field verification and diagnostic
testing. The installer of these packaged systems shall certify on the
Certificate of Installation that the packaged system was pre-charged at the
factory and has not been altered in a way that would affect the charge. Ducted
systems shall comply with minimum system airflow rate requirement in Section
150.2(b)1.F.ii.a, provided that the system is of a type that can be verified
using the procedure specified in RA3.3 or an approved alternative in RA1.
         a.   Minimum system airflow rate shall comply with the applicable
subsection I or II below as confirmed through field verification and diagnostic
testing in accordance with the procedures specified in Reference Residential
Appendix Section RA3.3 or an approved alternative procedure as specified in
Section RA1.
            I.   Small duct high velocity systems shall demonstrate a minimum
system airflow rate greater than or equal to 250 cfm per ton of nominal cooling
capacity; or
            II.   All other air-cooled air conditioner or air-source heat pump
systems shall demonstrate a minimum system airflow rate greater than or equal
to 300 cfm per ton of nominal cooling capacity.
            Exception 1 to Section 150.2(b)1.F.ii.a: Systems unable to comply
with the minimum airflow rate requirement shall demonstrate compliance using
the procedures in Section RA3.3.3.1.5; and the system's thermostat shall
conform to the specifications in Section 110.12.
            Exception 2 to Section 150.2(b)1.F.ii.a: Entirely new or complete
replacement space conditioning systems, as specified by Section 150.2(b)1C,
without zoning dampers may comply with the minimum airflow rate by meeting the
applicable requirements in Tables-150.0-B or 150.0-C as confirmed by field
verification and diagnostic testing in accordance with the procedures in
Reference Residential Appendix Section RA3.1.4.4 and RA3.1.4.5. The design
clean-filter pressure drop requirements of Section 150.0(m)12C for the system
air filter device(s) shall conform to the requirements given in Tables150.0-
B and 150.0-C.
         b.   The installer shall charge the system according to manufacturer’s
specifications. Refrigerant charge shall be verified according to one of the
following options, as applicable.
            I.   The installer and rater shall perform the standard charge
verification procedure as specified in Reference Residential Appendix Section
RA3.2.2, or an approved alternative procedure as specified in Section RA1; or
            II.   The installer shall perform the weigh-in charging procedure
as specified by Reference Residential Appendix Section RA3.2.3.1 provided the
system is of a type that can be verified using the RA3.2.2 standard charge
verification procedure and RA3.3 airflow rate verification procedure or
approved alternatives in RA1. The ECC-Rater shall verify the charge using
RA3.2.2 and RA3.3 or approved alternatives in RA1.
            Exception 1 to Section 150.2(b)1.F.ii.b: When the outdoor
temperature is less than 55°F and the installer utilizes the weigh-in charging
procedure in Reference Residential Appendix Section RA3.2.3.1 to demonstrate
compliance, the installer may elect to utilize the verification procedure in
Reference Residential Appendix Section RA3.2.3.2. If the verification procedure
in Section RA3.2.3.2 is used for compliance, the system's thermostat shall
conform to the specifications in Section 110.12. Ducted systems shall comply
with the minimum system airflow rate requirements in Section 150.2(b)1.F.ii.a.
      iii.   Air-cooled air conditioners in Climate Zones 2 and 8 through 15
and air-source heat pumps in all climate zones, including but not limited to
ducted split systems, ducted package systems, small duct high velocity, and
mini-split systems, which are of a type that cannot comply with the
requirements of 150.2(b)1.F.ii.b shall comply with subsections a and b, as
applicable.
         a.   The installer shall confirm the refrigerant charge using the
weigh-in charging procedure specified in Reference Residential Appendix Section
RA3.2.3.1, as verified by an ECC-Rater according to the procedures specified in
Reference Residential Appendix RA3.2.3.2; and
         b.   Systems that utilize forced air ducts shall comply with the
minimum system airflow rate requirement in Section 150.2(b)1.F.ii.a provided
the system is of a type that can be verified using the procedures in Section
RA3.3 or an approved alternative procedure in Section RA1.
            Exception to Section 150.2(b)1.F.iii: Entirely new or complete
replacement packaged systems for which the manufacturer has verified correct
system refrigerant charge prior to shipment from the factory are not required
to have refrigerant charge confirmed through field verification and diagnostic
testing. The installer of these packaged systems shall certify on the
Certificate of Installation that the packaged system was pre-charged at the
factory and has not been altered in a way that would affect the charge. Ducted
systems shall comply with minimum system airflow rate requirement in Section
150.2(b)1.F.iii.b, provided that the system is of a type that can be verified
using the procedure specified in Section RA3.3 or an approved alternative in
Section RA1.
      iv.   New or replacement air-cooled air conditioners in Climate Zones 1
through 14 and 16 shall meet the requirements of Section 150.2(b)1Fiva or 150.2
(b)1Fivb. 
         a.   Systems with existing duct distribution systems shall meet the
following requirements:
            I.   In all climate zones, meet the airflow and fan efficacy
requirements of Section 150.0(m)13B, 150.0(m)13C, or 150.0(m)13D;
               Exception 1 to Section 150.2(b)1F.iv.a.I: Single zone central
forced air systems and zonally controlled central forced air systems may
demonstrate compliance with an airflow greater than or equal to 300 CFM per ton
of nominal cooling capacity.
            II.   In all climate zones, meet the refrigerant charge
verification requirements of Section 150.2(b)1.F.ii; and
            III.   In all climate zones, vented attics shall have insulation
installed to achieve a U-factor of 0.020 or insulation installed at the ceiling
level shall result in an insulated thermal resistance of R-49 or greater for
the insulation alone; luminaires not rated for insulation contact must be
replaced or retrofitted with a fireproof cover that allows for insulation to be
installed directly over the cover; and
               Exception 1 to Section 150.2(b)1F.iv.a.III: Dwelling units with
at least R-38 existing insulation installed at the ceiling level.
               Exception 2 to Section 150.2(b)1.F.iv.a.III: Dwelling units
where the alteration would directly cause the disturbance of asbestos unless
the alteration is made in conjunction with asbestos abatement.
               Exception 3 to Section 150.2(b)1.F.iv.a.III: Dwelling units with
knob and tube wiring located in the vented attic.
               Exception 4 to Section 150.2(b)1F.iv.a.III: Where the accessible
space in the attic is not large enough to accommodate the required R-value, the
entire accessible space shall be filled with insulation provided such
installation does not violate Section 806.3 of Title 24, Part 2.5.
               Exception 5 to Section 150.2(b)1F.iv.a.III: Where the attic
space above the altered dwelling unit is shared with other dwelling units and
the requirements of Section 150.2(b)1.F.iv.a.III are not triggered for the
other dwelling units.
            IV.   In all climate zones, air seal all accessible areas of the
ceiling plane between the attic and the conditioned space in accordance with
Section 110.7.
               Exception 1 to Section 150.2(b)1.F.iv.a.IV: Dwelling units with
at least R-38 existing insulation installed at the ceiling level.
               Exception 2 to Section 150.2(b)1.F.iv.a.IV: Dwelling units where
the alteration would directly cause the disturbance of asbestos unless the
alteration is made in conjunction with asbestos abatement.
               Exception 3 to Section 150.2(b)1.F.iv.a.IV: Dwelling units with
atmospherically vented space heating or water heating combustion appliances
located inside the pressure boundary of the dwelling unit.
         b.   Systems with entirely new or complete replacement duct systems
shall meet the following:
            I.   R-8 duct insulation shall be installed for all new ducts
located in unconditioned space.
            II.   In all climate zones, meet the airflow requirements of
Section 150.0(m)13B, 150.0(m)13C, or 150.0(m)13D and demonstrate an air-
handling unit fan efficacy of less than or equal to 0.35 W/CFM.
            III.   In all climate zones, meet the refrigerant charge
verification requirements of Section 150.2(b)1.F.ii.
            Exception 1 to Section 150.2(b)1.F.iv: Where the capacity of the
existing main electrical service panel is insufficient to supply the electrical
capacity of a heat pump and where the existing main electrical service panel is
sufficient to supply a new or replacement air conditioner, as calculated
according to the requirements of California Electrical Code Article 220.83 or
Article 220.87, systems shall comply with the applicable requirements of
Sections 150.2(b)1.F.i, 150.2(b)1.F.ii, and 150.2(b)1.F.iii. Documentation of
electrical load calculations in accordance with Article 220 must be submitted
to the enforcement agency prior to permitting for both the heat pump and
proposed air conditioner.
            Exception 2 to Section 150.2(b)1.F.iv: Where the required capacity
of a heat pump to meet the system selection requirements of Section 150.0(h)5
is greater than or equal to 12,000 Btu/h more than the greater of the required
capacity of an air conditioner to meet the design cooling load or the capacity
of the existing air conditioner, systems shall comply with the applicable
requirements of Sections 150.2(b)1.F.i, 150.2(b)1.F.ii, and 150.2(b)1.F.iii.
Documentation of heating and cooling load calculations in accordance with 150.0
(h) must be submitted to the enforcement agency prior to permitting for both
the heat pump and proposed air conditioner.
      v.   In all climate zones, heat pumps with supplementary heat, including,
but not limited to, electric resistance heaters or gas furnace supplementary
heating, shall comply with Section 150.0(h)7 and shall lock out supplementary
heating above an outdoor air temperature of no greater than 35°F.
   Section 150.2(b)2 is hereby amended to read:
      2.   Performance approach.
         The energy budget for alterations is expressed in terms of Long-term
System Cost (LSC), and the altered component(s) and any newly installed
equipment serving the alteration shall meet the applicable requirements of
subsections A, B, and C below.
         A.   The altered components shall meet the applicable requirements of
Sections 110.0 through 110.9, Sections 150.0(a) through (l), Sections 150.0(m)1
through 150.0 (m)10, and Sections 150.0(p) through (q). Entirely new or
complete replacement mechanical ventilation systems as these terms are used in
Section 150.2(b)1L, shall comply with the requirements in Section 150.2(b)1L.
Altered mechanical ventilation systems shall comply with the requirements of
Section 150.2(b)1M. Entirely new or complete replacement space-conditioning
systems, and entirely new or complete replacement duct systems, as these terms
are used in Sections 150.2(b)1C and 150.2(b)1D.ii.a, shall comply with the
requirements of Sections 150.0(m)12 and 150.0(m)13. New or replacement air-
cooled air conditioners in Climate Zones 1 through 14 and 16 shall meet the
applicable requirements of Section 150.2(b)1Fiv.
         B.   The standard design for an altered component shall be the higher
efficiency of existing conditions or the requirements stated in Table 150.2-G.
For components not being altered, the standard design shall be based on the
existing conditions. When the third party verification option is specified as a
requirement, all components proposed for alteration for which the additional
credit is taken, must be verified by a certified ECC-rater.
   Table 150.2-G is hereby amended to read:
      Table 150.2-G Standard Design for an Altered Component
                          Standard Design Without    Standard Design With Third
Altered Component         Third Party Verification   Party Verification of
                          of Existing Conditions     Existing Conditions Shall
                          Shall be Based On          be Based On
                          The requirements of
                          Sections 150.0(a), (c),
                          and (d).
                          The requirements of
                          Section 150.2(b)1J for
                          altered ceilings and for
Ceiling Insulation, Wall  entirely new or complete
Insulation, and Raised-   replacement duct systems   The existing insulation R-
floor Insulation          where the air handler and  value
                          ducts are located within a
                          vented attic.
                          The requirements of
                          Section 150.2(b)1.F.iv for
                          alterations which include
                          new or replacement air-
                          cooled air conditioners.
                          The requirements of        The existing fenestration
Fenestration              Section 150.1(c)3A.        U-factor and SHGC values
                                                     as verified
                                                     The existing fenestration
Window Film               The requirements of        in the alteration shall be
                          Section 150.1(c)3A.        based on Table 110.6-A and
                                                     Table 110.6-B.
                                                     If the proposed U-factor
                                                     is <0.20,
                                                     the standard design shall
                          The U-factor of 0.20. The  be based on the existing
                          door area shall be the     U-factor value as
Doors                     door area of the existing  verified. Otherwise, the
                          building.                  standard design shall be
                                                     based on the U-factor of
                                                     0.20. The door area shall
                                                     be the door area of the
                                                     existing building.
                          Table 150.1-A for
                          equipment efficiency
                          requirements;
                          Section 150.2(b)1C for
                          entirely new or complete
Space-Heating and Space-  replacement systems;       The existing efficiency
Cooling Equipment         Section 150.2(b)1F for     levels.
                          refrigerant change
                          verification, airflow, and
                          fan efficacy requirements.
                          Section 150.2(b)1Fiv for
                          new or replacement air-
                          cooled air conditioners
Air Distribution System - The requirements of        The requirements of
Duct Sealing              Sections 150.2(b)1D and    Sections 150.2(b)1D and
                          150.2(b)1E.                150.2(b)1E.
                          The proposed efficiency
                          levels.
                          The requirements of
Air Distribution System - Sections 150.2(b)1D, and   The existing efficiency
Duct Insulation           for new or replacement     levels.
                          air-cooled air
                          conditioners, Section
                          150.2(b)1F.iv.
Water Heating Systems     The requirements of        The existing efficiency
                          Section 150.2(b)1.H.ii.    levels.
Roofing Products          The requirements of        The requirements of
                          Section 150.2(b)1.I.       Section 150.2(b)1.I.
All Other Measures        The proposed efficiency    The existing efficiency
                          levels.                    levels.
 
         C.   The proposed design shall be based on the actual values of the
altered components.
(Ord. 5665 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.17.150   Section 160.9 Mandatory requirements for electric ready buildings.
   Section 160.9 of Subchapter 10 of the California Energy Code is amended to
read:
   Mandatory requirements for electric-ready buildings apply to newly
constructed buildings and substantial remodels.
   Section 160.9 Sections (a) - (f) are adopted without amendments.
(Ord. 5681 § 5, 2025)
16.17.160   Reserved.
16.17.170   Infeasibility exemption.
   (a)   Exemption. If an applicant for a covered project believes that
circumstances exist that makes it infeasible to meet the requirements of this
chapter, the applicant may request an exemption as set forth below. In applying
for an exemption, the burden is on the applicant to show infeasibility.
   (b)   Application. If an applicant for a covered project believes such
circumstances exist, the applicant may apply for an exemption at the time of
application submittal in accordance with the Planning and Development Services
administrative guidelines. The applicant shall indicate the maximum threshold
of compliance the energy compliance design professional believes is feasible
for the covered project and the circumstances that make it infeasible to fully
comply with this chapter. Circumstances that constitute infeasibility include,
but are not limited to the following:
      (1)   There is conflict with the compatibility of the currently adopted
California Building Standards Code;
      (2)   There is a lack of commercially available materials and
technologies to comply with the requirements of this chapter;
      (3)   Applying the requirements of this chapter would effectuate an
unconstitutional taking of property or otherwise have an unconstitutional
application to the property.
   (c)   Granting of Exemption. If the Director of Planning and Development
Services, or designee, determines that it is infeasible for the applicant to
fully meet the requirements of this chapter based on the information provided,
the Director, or designee, shall determine the maximum feasible threshold of
compliance reasonably achievable for the project. The decision of the Director,
or designee, shall be provided to the applicant in writing. If an exemption is
granted, the applicant shall be required to comply with this chapter in all
other respects and shall be required to achieve, in accordance with this
chapter, the threshold of compliance determined to be achievable by the
Director or designee.
   (d)   Denial of Exemption. If the Director of Planning and Development
Services or designee determines that it is reasonably possible for the
applicant to fully meet the requirements of this chapter, the request shall be
denied, and the Director or designee shall so notify the applicant in writing.
The project and compliance documentation shall be modified to comply with this
chapter prior to further review of any pending planning or building
application.
   (e)   Council Review of Exemption. For any covered project that requires
review and action by the City Council, the Council shall act to grant or deny
the exemption, based on the criteria outlined above, after recommendation by
the Director of Planning and Development Services.
(Ord. 5665 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.17.180   Appeal.
   (a)   Any aggrieved applicant may appeal the determination of the Director
of Planning and Development Services or designee regarding the granting or
denial of an exemption pursuant to Section
16.17.170.
   (b)   Any appeal must be filed in writing with the Planning and Development
Services Department not later than 14 days after the date of the determination
by the Director. The appeal shall state the alleged error or reason for the
appeal.
   (c)   The appeal shall be processed and considered by the City Council in
accordance with the provisions of Section
18.77.070(f) of the City of Palo Alto Municipal Code.
(Ord. 5665 § 2 (part), 2025)
Chapter 16.18
2024 INTERNATIONAL SWIMMING POOL AND SPA CODE (ISPSC)*
Sections:
   
16.18.010   2024 International Swimming Pool and Spa Code (ISPSC) adopted in
part and amended.
   
16.18.020   Violations - Penalties.
   
16.18.030   Enforcement - Criminal enforcement authority.
   
16.18.040   References to California Building Codes.
   
16.18.050   Precedence of California Building Codes.
   
16.18.060   Administration & enforcement of 2024 International Swimming Pool
and Spa Code (ISPSC)
   
16.18.070   Section 101.1 Title.
   
16.08.080   Section 105.1.1 Agreements to build; notice of provisions.
   
16.18.090   Section 111.17 Final approval.
   
16.18.100   Section 301.1.2 Conflicts.
   
16.18.110   Section 303.3.1 Operating time.
   
16.18.120   Section 303.1.3 Covers.
   
16.18.130   Section 305.2 Outdoor swimming pools and spas.
   
16.18.140   Section 305.9 Private swimming pools.
   
16.18.150   Section 305.10 Enclosure.
   
16.18.160   Section 311.2 Construction requirements for building a pool or spa.
   
16.18.170   Section 317.2.1 Certification and installation.
   
16.18.180   Section 504.1 Emergency shutoff switch.
   
16.18.190   Section 903 to 908.
*   Editor’s Note: Prior ordinance history: Ordinance No. 5569
16.18.010   2024 International Swimming Pool and Spa Code (ISPSC) adopted in
part and amended.
   Chapters 1 through 3 and Chapters 7 through 11 of the International Swimming
Pool and Spa Code, 2024 Edition, are adopted and hereby incorporated into this
chapter by reference and made a part hereof as if fully set forth herein. The
provisions of this chapter shall constitute local amendments to the referenced
provisions of the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, 2024 Edition.
   One copy of the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, 2024 Edition, has
been filed for use and examination by the public in the Office of the Chief
Building Official of the City of Palo Alto.
(Ord. 5680 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.18.020   Violations - Penalties.
   It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision or to fail to comply
with any of the requirements of this chapter or any permits, conditions, or
variances granted under this chapter. Violators shall be subject to any penalty
or penalties authorized by law, including but not limited to: administrative
enforcement pursuant to Chapters
1.12 and
1.16 of the Palo Alto Municipal Code; and criminal enforcement pursuant to
Chapter 1.08 of the Palo Alto Municipal Code. Each separate day or any portion
thereof during which any violation of this chapter occurs or continues shall be
deemed to constitute a separate offense.
   When the chief building official determines that a violation of this chapter
has occurred, the chief building official may record a notice of pendency of
code violation with the Office of the County Recorder stating the address and
owner of the property involved. When the violation has been corrected, the
chief building official shall issue and record a release of the notice of
pendency of code violation.
(Ord. 5680 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.18.030   Enforcement - Criminal enforcement authority.
   The employee positions designated in this section are authorized to exercise
the authority provided in California Penal Code Section 836.5 for violations of
this chapter. The designated employee positions are: (1) chief building
official, (2) assistant chief building official, (3) building inspection
manager, and (4) code enforcement officer.
(Ord. 5680 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.18.040   References to California Building Codes.
   The International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, 2024 Edition, is hereby
amended to refer to those building regulations adopted by the California
Building Standards Commission in Title 24 of the California Code of
Regulations, as follows:
      1.   Where the term "International Building Code" is used it shall be
replaced with the term "California Building Code (CBC)."
      2.   Where the term "International Residential Code" is used it shall be
replaced with the term "California Residential Code."
      3.   Where the term "International Plumbing Code" is used it shall be
replaced with the term "California Plumbing Code."
      4.   Where the term "International Energy Conservation Code" is used it
shall be replaced with the term "California Energy Code."
      5.   Where the term "International Fire Code" is used it shall be
replaced with the term "California Fire Code."
      6.   Where the term "International Fuel Gas Code" is used it shall be
replaced with the term "California Plumbing Code."
      7.   Where the term "International Mechanical Code" is used it shall be
replaced with the term "California Mechanical Code."
      8.   Where the term "NFPA 70" is used it shall be replaced with the term
"California Electrical Code."
(Ord. 5680 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.18.050   Precedence of California Building Codes.
   In the event of any conflict between this Chapter and provisions of the
California Health and Safety Code or the building regulations adopted by the
California Building Standards Commission in Title 24 of the California Code of
Regulations, the provisions of the Health and Safety Code and Title 24 shall
prevail.
(Ord. 5680 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.18.060   Administration & enforcement of 2024 International Swimming Pool
and Spa Code (ISPSC).
   Administration and enforcement of this code shall be governed by Chapter 1,
Division II of the 2025 California Building Code as amended by Palo Alto
Municipal Code
Chapter 16.04, and any sections of the 2024 International Swimming Pool and Spa
Code that are adopted by the City of Palo Alto in this
Chapter 16.18.
(Ord. 5680 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.08.070   Section 101.1 Title.
   Section 101.1 of the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code is hereby
amended to read:
      101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the International
Swimming Pool and Spa Code of the City of Palo Alto, hereinafter referred to as
"this code."
(Ord. 5680 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.18.080   Section 105.1.1 Agreements to build; notice of provisions.
   Section 105.1.1 of the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code is hereby
added to read:
   105.1.1 Agreements to build; notice of provisions. Any person entering into
an agreement to build a swimming pool or spa, or to engage in permitted work on
a pool or spa covered by this article, shall give the consumer notice of the
requirements of this code.
   Pursuant to existing law, the California Department of Health Services shall
have available on the department's web site, commencing January 1, 2007,
approved pool safety information available for consumers to download. Pool
contractors are encouraged to share this information with consumers regarding
the potential dangers a pool or spa poses toddlers. Additionally, pool
contractors may provide the consumer with swimming pool safety materials
produced from organizations such as the United States Consumer Product Safety
Commission, Drowning Prevention Foundation, California Coalition for Children's
Safety & Health, Safe Kids Worldwide, Association of Pool and Spa
Professionals, or the American Academy of Pediatrics. [CBC 3109.1, 115924]
(Ord. 5680 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.18.090   Section 111.17 Final approval.
   Section 111.17 of the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code is hereby
added to read:
   111.17 Final Approval. Prior to the issuance of any final approval for the
completion of permitted construction or remodeling work, the code official
shall inspect the drowning safety prevention devices required and if no
violations are found, shall give final approval. [CBC 3109.1, 15922(b)]
(Ord. 5680 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.18.100   Section 301.1.2 Conflicts.
   Section 301.1.2 of the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code is hereby
added to read:
      301.1.2 Conflicts. In the event of a conflict between the provisions of
the Swimming Pool Safety Act, the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code,
2024 Edition, the 2025 California Building Code, or the 2025 California
Residential Code, the Building Official shall implement the most restrictive
measures cited.
(Ord. 5680 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.18.110   Section 303.3.1 Operating time.
   Section 303.3.1 of the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code is hereby
added to read:
      303.3.1 Operating time. The time switch or other control mechanism shall
be installed as part of a pool water circulation control system that will allow
all pumps to be set or programmed to run only during off-peak electric demand
period, and for the minimum time necessary to maintain the water in the
condition required by applicable public health standards. [California Energy
Code (CEnC) 110.4(b)4ii]
(Ord. 5680 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.18.120   Section 303.1.3 Covers.
   Section 303.1.3 of the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code is hereby
amended to read:
      303.1.3 Covers. Outdoor pools and outdoor spas shall be provided with a
vapor retardant cover.
(Ord. 5680 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.18.130   Section 305.2 Outdoor swimming pools and spas.
   Section 305.2 of the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code is hereby
amended to read:
      305.2 Outdoor swimming pools and spas. All outdoor pools and spas and
indoor swimming pools shall be surrounded by a barrier that complies with
Sections 305.2.1 through 305.7. [CBC 3109.1, 115922]. Refer to 305.9 for
additional drowning prevention safety features.
(Ord. 5680 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.18.140   Section 305.9 Private swimming pools.
   Section 305.9 of the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code is hereby
added to read:
   305.9 Private swimming pools.
   Whenever a building permit is issued for construction of a new swimming pool
or spa, or any building permit is issued for remodeling of an existing pool or
spa, at a private, single-family home, it shall be equipped with at least two
of the following seven drowning prevention safety features:
      1.   The pool/spa shall be isolated from access to a home by an enclosure
that meets the requirements of Section 305.10.
      2.   The pool shall incorporate removable mesh pool fencing that meets
ASTM F2286 in conjunction with a gate that is self-closing and self-latching
and can accommodate a key lockable device.
      3.   The pool shall be equipped with an approved safety pool cover that
meets all requirements of the ASTM F 1346-23 standards.
      4.   The residence shall be equipped with exit alarms on those doors and
windows providing direct access to the pool and spa without any intervening
enclosure. Whenever any door or window is opened or left ajar, exit alarms
shall make either an audible, continuous alarm sound or a repeating verbal
warning, such as a repeating notification that “the door to the pool is open.”
      5.   All doors providing direct access from the home to the swimming pool
or spa shall be equipped with a self-closing, self-latching device with a
release mechanism placed no lower than 54 inches (1,372 mm) above the floor.
      6.   An alarm that, when placed in a swimming pool or spa, will sound
upon detection of accidental or unauthorized entrance into the water. The alarm
shall meet and be independently certified to the ASTM Standard F2208 “Standard
Safety Specification for Residential Pool Alarms,” which includes surface
motion, pressure, sonar, laser, and infrared type alarms. A swimming protection
alarm feature designed for individual use, including an alarm attached to a
child that sounds when the child exceeds a certain distance or becomes
submerged in water, is not a qualifying drowning prevention safety feature.
      7.   Other means of protection, if the degree of protection afforded is
equal to or greater than that afforded by any of the devices set forth in items
1 - 4 and have been independently verified by an approved testing laboratory as
meeting standards for those devices established by the ASTM or ASME.
   Exceptions:
      1.   Public swimming pools.
      2.   Hot tubs or spas with locking safety covers that comply with the
ASTM ES 13-89. b)]
      3.   An apartment complex, or any residential setting other than a
single-family home.
(Ord. 5680 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.18.150   Section 305.10 Enclosure.
   Section 305.10 of the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code is hereby
added to read:
   305.10 Enclosure. The enclosure for private swimming pools shall have all of
the following characteristics:
      1.   Any access gates through the enclosure open away from the swimming
pool and are self-closing with a self-latching device placed no lower than 60
inches (1,524 mm) above the ground.
      2.   A minimum height of 60 inches (1,524 mm).
      3.   A maximum vertical clearance from the ground to the bottom of the
enclosure of two inches (51 mm).
      4.   Gaps or voids, if any, do not allow passage of a sphere equal to or
greater than four inches (102 mm) in diameter.
      5.   An outside surface free of protrusions, cavities or other physical
characteristics that would serve as handholds or footholds that could enable a
child below the age of five years to climb over.
(Ord. 5680 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.18.160   Section 311.2 Construction requirements for building a pool or spa.
   Section 311.2 of the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code is hereby
added to read:
   311.2 Construction requirements for building a pool or spa. Whenever a
building permit is issued for the construction of a new private swimming pool
or spa, the pool or spa shall meet all of the following requirements:
      (a)   (1)   The suction outlets of the pool or spa for which the permit
is issued shall be equipped to provide circulation throughout the pool or spa
as prescribed in paragraphs (2) and (3).
         (2)   The swimming pool or spa shall either have at least two
circulation suction outlets per pump that shall be hydraulically balanced and
symmetrically plumbed through one or more “T” fittings, and that are separated
by a distance of at least three feet in any dimension between the suction
outlets, or be designed to use alternatives to suction outlets, including, but
not limited to, skimmers or perimeter overflow systems to conduct water to the
recirculation pump.
         (3)   The circulation system shall have the capacity to provide a
complete turnover of pool water, as specified in Section 3124B of Chapter 31B
of the California Building Code (Title 24 of the California Code of
Regulations).
         (4)   Suction outlets shall be covered with anti-entrapment grates, as
specified in the ANSI/APSP-16 performance standard or successor standard
designated by the federal Consumer Product Safety Commission, that cannot be
removed except with the use of tools. Slots or openings in the grates or
similar protective devices shall be of a shape, area, and arrangement that
would prevent physical entrapment and would not pose any suction hazard to
bathers.
      (b)   Any backup safety system that an owner of a new swimming pool or
spa may choose to install in addition to the requirements set forth in
subdivisions (a) and (b) shall meet the standards as published in the document,
“Guidelines for Entrapment Hazards: Making Pools and Spas Safer,” Publication
Number 363, March 2005, United States Consumer Product Safety Commission.
(Ord. 5680 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.18.170   Section 317.2.1 Certification and installation.
   Section 317.2.1 of the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code is hereby
added to read:
   317.2.1 Certification and installation.
      (a)   Certification by manufacturers. Heating systems and equipment shall
be certified by the manufacturer that the heating system and equipment complies
with the following:
         1.   Efficiency. A thermal efficiency that complies with the Appliance
Efficiency Regulations in Title 20, Division 2, Chapter 4, Article 4 of the
California Code of Regulations; and [CEnC 110.4(a)1].
         2.   On-off switch. A readily accessible on-off switch, mounted on the
outside of the heater that allows shutting off the heater without adjusting the
thermostat setting; and [CEnC 110.4(a) 2].
         3.   Instructions. A permanent, easily readable and weatherproof plate
or card that gives instruction for the energy efficient operation of the pool
or spa heater and for the proper care of pool or spa water when a cover is
used; and [CEnC 110.4(a)3].
      (b)   Installation. Any pool or spa system or equipment shall be
installed with all of the following:
         1.   Heating equipment: Equipment installed to heat water for pools
and/or spas shall be selected from equipment meeting the standards shown in
Table 110.4-A. [CEnC 110.4(b)1].
 
Table 110.4-A Heating Equipment Standards
Heating Energy Source Standard
Electric Resistance   UL1261
Gas-fired             ANSI Z21.56/CSA 4.7a
Heat Pump             AHRI 1161 and one of the following: CSA C22.2 No. 236,
                      UL1995, or UL/CSA 60335-2-40
Solar                 ICC/APSP902/SRCC 400 for solar pool heaters, ICC 901/
                      SRCC100 for solar collectors
 
         2.   Piping. At least 18 inches of horizontal or vertical pipe shall
be installed between the filter and the heater or dedicated suction and return
lines, or built-in or built-up connections shall be installed to allow for the
future addition of solar heating equipment. [CEnC 110.4(b)2].
         3.   Covers. A cover for outdoor pools or outdoor spas.
         4.   Directional inlets. The swimming pool shall have directional
inlets that adequately mix the pool water. [CEnC 110.4(b)4i].
(Ord. 5680 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.18.180   Section 504.1 Emergency shutoff switch.
   Section 504.1 of the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code is hereby
amended to read:
   504.1 Emergency shutoff switch. One emergency shutoff switch shall be
provided to disconnect power to circulation and jet system pumps and air
blowers. Emergency shutoff switches shall be clearly labeled, accessible,
located within sight of the spa and shall be located not less than five feet
(1,524 mm) but not greater than ten feet (3,048 mm) horizontally from the
inside walls of the spa. [California Electrical Code (CEC), 680.41].
(Ord. 5680 § 1 (part), 2025)
16.18.190   Section 903 to 908.
   Section 903 to 908 of the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code are added
as follows:
   SECTION 903
   MATERIALS
   903.1 Pumps and motors. Pumps and motors shall be listed and labeled for use
in spas.
   SECTION 904
   STRUCTURE AND DESIGN
   904.1 Water depth. The maximum water depth for spas shall be four feet
(1,219 mm) measured from the design waterline except for spas that are designed
for special purposes and approved by the authority having jurisdiction. The
water depth for exercise spas shall not exceed six feet six inches (1,981 mm)
measured from the design waterline.
   904.2 Multilevel seating. Where multilevel seating is provided, the maximum
water depth of any seat or sitting bench shall be 28 inches (711 mm) measured
from the design waterline to the lowest measurable point.
   904.3 Floor slope. The slope of the floor shall not exceed 1 unit vertical
in 12 units horizontal (8.3-percent slope). Where multilevel floors are
provided, the change in depth shall be indicated.
   SECTION 905
   PUMPS AND MOTORS
   905.1 Emergency shutoff switch. One emergency shutoff switch shall be
provided to disconnect power to circulation and jet system pumps and air
blowers. Emergency shutoff switches shall be accessible, located within sight
of the spa and shall be located not less than five feet (1,524 mm) but not
greater than ten feet (3,048 mm) horizontally from the inside walls of the spa.
   Timer. The operation of the hydrotherapy jets shall be limited by a cycle
timer having a maximum setting of ten minutes. The cycle timer shall be located
not less than five feet (1,524 mm) away, adjacent to, and within sight of the
spa.
   SECTION 906
   RETURN AND SUCTION FITTINGS
   906.1 Return fittings. Return fittings shall be provided and arranged to
facilitate a uniform circulation of water and maintain a uniform sanitizer
residual throughout the entire spa or exercise spa.
   906.2 Suction fittings. Suction fittings shall be in accordance with
Sections 505.2.1 through 505.2.4.
      906.2.1 Testing and certification. Suction fittings shall be listed and
labeled in accordance with APSP 16.
      906.2.2 Installation. Suction fittings shall be sized and installed in
accordance with the manufacturer's specifications. Spas and exercise spas shall
not be used or operated if the suction outlet cover is missing, damaged, broken
or loose.
      906.2.3 Outlets per pump. Suction fittings shall be provided in
accordance with Section 311.
      906.2.4 Submerged vacuum fittings. Submerged vacuum fittings shall be in
accordance with Section 311.
   SECTION 907
   HEATER AND TEMPERATURE REQUIREMENTS
   907.1 General. This section pertains to fuel-fired and electric appliances
used for heating spa or exercise spa water.
   907.2 Water temperature controls. Components provided for water temperature
controls shall be suitable for the intended application.
      907.2.1 Water temperature regulating controls. Water temperature
regulating controls shall comply with UL 873 or UL 372. A means shall be
provided to indicate the water temperature in the spa.
         Exception: Water temperature regulating controls that are integral to
the heating appliance and listed in accordance with the applicable end use
appliance standard.
      907.2.2 Water temperature limiting controls. Water temperature limiting
controls shall comply with UL 873 or UL 372. Water temperature at the heater
return outlet shall not exceed 140°F (60°C).
   SECTION 908
   WATER SUPPLY
   908.1 Water temperature. The temperature of the incoming makeup water shall
not exceed 104°F (40°C).
(Ord. 5680 § 1 (part), 2025)
Chapter 16.19
CALIFORNIA HISTORICAL BUILDING CODE, CALIFORNIA CODE OF REGULATIONS, TITLE 24,
PART 8 AND CALIFORNIA EXISTING BUILDING CODE, CALIFORNIA CODE OF REGULATIONS,
TITLE 24, PART 10*
Sections
   
16.19.010   2025 California Historical Building Code, Title 24, Part 8 adopted.
   
16.19.020   2025 California Existing Building Code, Title 24, Part 10 adopted
and amended.
   
16.19.030   Cross-references to California Existing Building Code.
   
16.19.040    Local Amendments.
   
16.19.050   101.2.1 Appendices.
   
16.19.060   Administration & enforcement of 2025 California Existing Building
Code.
   
16.19.070   Adoption of 2025 California Existing Building Code Chapter 1,
Division II - Scope and Administration.
   
16.19.080   Section 101.1 Title.
   
16.19.090   Section 324 Dwelling unit and congregate residence superficial
floor area.
   
16.19.100   Section 503.21 Suspended ceiling systems.
   
16.19.110   Section 503.22 Mechanical and electrical equipment in seismic
design categories D, E or F.
   
16.19.120   Section 405.2.3.1 Seismic evaluation and design procedures for
repairs.
*   Editor’s Note: Prior ordinance history: Ordinance No. 5564
16.19.010   2025 California Historical Building Code, Title 24, Part 8 adopted.
   The California Historical Building Code, 2025 Edition, Title 24, Part 8
(authorized by Health and Safety Code Sections 18950 through 18961), which
provides alternative building regulations for the rehabilitation, preservation,
restoration, or relocation of designated historic buildings, is adopted and
hereby incorporated in this chapter by reference and made a part hereof the
same as if fully set forth herein.
   One copy of the California Historical Building Code, 2025 Edition, has been
filed for use and examination of the public in the Office of the Chief Building
Official of the City of Palo Alto.
(Ord. 5674 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.19.020   2025 California Existing Building Code, Title 24, Part 10 adopted
and amended.
   The California Existing Building Code, 2025 Edition, Title 24, Part 10 of
the California Code of Regulations, which provides alternative building
regulations for the rehabilitation, preservation restoration or relocation of
existing buildings, together with those omissions, amendments, exceptions, and
additions thereto, is adopted and hereby incorporated in this chapter by
reference and made a part hereof the same as if fully set forth herein.
   One copy of the California Existing Building Code, 2025 Edition, has been
filed for use and examination of the public in the Office of the Chief Building
Official of the City of Palo Alto.
(Ord. 5674 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.19.030   Cross-references to California Existing Building Code.
   The provisions of this chapter contain cross-references to the provisions of
the California Existing Building Code, 2025 Edition, in order to facilitate
reference and comparison to those provisions.
(Ord. 5674 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.19.040   Local amendments.
   The provisions of this chapter shall constitute local amendments to the
cross-referenced provisions of the California Existing Building Code, 2025
Edition, and shall be deemed to replace the cross-referenced sections of said
Code with the respective provisions set forth in this chapter.
(Ord. 5674 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.19.050   101.2.1 Appendices.
   Section 101.2.1 of Chapter 1 of the California Existing Building Code is
amended to read:
   2025 California Existing Building Code and International Existing Building
Code Appendix Chapters Adopted. The following Appendix Chapters of the
California Existing Building Code (CEBC), 2025 Edition, and International
Existing Building Code (IEBC), 2024 Edition, are adopted and hereby
incorporated in this chapter be reference and made a part hereof the same as if
fully set forth herein:
      A.   CEBC Appendix A1 – Seismic Strengthening Provisions for Unreinforced
Masonry Bearing Wall Buildings.
      B.   CEBC Appendix Chapter A2 – Earthquake Hazard Reduction in Existing
Reinforced Concrete and Reinforced Masonry Wall Buildings with Flexible
Diaphragms.
      C.   CEBC Appendix A3 – Prescriptive Provisions for Seismic Strengthening
of Cripple Walls and Sill Plate Anchorage of Light, Wood-Frame Residential
Buildings.
      D.   CEBC Appendix A4 – Earthquake Risk Reduction in Wood-Frame
Residential Buildings with Soft, Weak or Open Front Walls.
      E.   CEBC Appendix A5 – Referenced Standards.
(Ord. 5674 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.19.060   Administration & enforcement of 2025 California Existing Building
Code
   Administration and enforcement of this code shall be governed by Chapter 1,
Division II of the 2025 California Building Code as amended by Palo Alto
Municipal Code
Chapter 16.04.
(Ord. 5674 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.19.070   Adoption of 2025 California Existing Building Code Chapter 1,
Division II - Scope and Administration.
   Chapter 1, Division II, Parts 1 and 2 of the 2025 California Existing
Building Code is adopted by the City of Palo Alto to supplement, to the extent
it does not conflict with, Chapter 1, Division II of the 2025 California
Building Code, as amended.
(Ord. 5674 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.19.080   Section 101.1 Title.
   Section 101.1 of Chapter 1 of the California Existing Building Code is
amended to read:
      101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Existing Building
Code of City of Palo Alto, hereinafter referred to as "this code."
(Ord. 5674 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.19.090   Section 324 Dwelling unit and congregate residence superficial
floor area.
   Section 324 of Chapter 3 of the California Existing Building Code is added
to read:
   324 Dwelling unit and congregate residence superficial floor area. Every
dwelling unit and congregate residence shall have at least one room which shall
have not less than 120 square feet of superficial floor area. Every room which
is used for both cooking and living or both living and sleeping purposes shall
have not less than 144 square feet of superficial floor area. Every room used
for sleeping purposes shall have not less than 70 square feet of superficial
floor area. When more than two persons occupy a room used for sleeping purposes
the required superficial floor area shall be increased at the rate of 50 square
feet for each occupant in excess of two. Guest rooms with cooking shall contain
the combined required superficial areas of a sleeping and a kitchen, but not
less than 144 square feet. Other habitable rooms shall be not less than 70
square feet.
   Notwithstanding any provision of this section, children under the age of six
shall not be counted for purposes of determining whether a family with minor
children complies with the provisions of this Code.
   For the purposes of this section, "superficial floor area" means the net
floor area within the enclosing walls of the room in which the ceiling height
is not less than seven feet six inches, excluding built-in equipment such as
wardrobes, cabinets, kitchen units, or fixtures which are not readily
removable.
(Ord. 5674 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.19.100   Section 503.21 Suspended ceiling systems.
   Section 503.21 of Chapter 5 the California Existing Building Code is added
to read:
      503.21 Suspended ceiling systems. In existing buildings or structures,
when a permit is issued for alterations or repairs, the existing suspended
ceiling system within the area of the alterations or repairs shall comply with
ASCE 7-22 Section 13.5.6.
(Ord. 5674 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.19.110   Section 503.22 Mechanical and electrical equipment in seismic
design categories D, E or F.
   Section 503.22 of Chapter 5 of the California Existing Building Code is
added to read:
      503.22 Mechanical and electrical equipment in seismic design categories
D, E or F. In existing buildings or structures, when a permit is issued for
alteration or repairs, the existing mechanical and electrical equipment on the
area of the roof shall comply with ASCE 7-22 Section 13.4 Nonstructural
Component Anchorage.
(Ord. 5674 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.19.120   Section 405.2.3.1 Seismic evaluation and design procedures for
repairs.
   Section 405.2.3.1 of Chapter 5 of the California Existing Building Code is
amended to read:
      405.2.3.1 Evaluation and design procedures. The building shall be
evaluated by a registered design professional, and the evaluation findings
shall be submitted to the code official. The evaluation shall establish whether
the damaged building, if repaired to its pre-damage state, would comply with
the provisions of the California Building Code for load combinations that
include wind or earthquake effects, except that the seismic forces shall be
reduced seismic forces. Evaluation for earthquake loads shall be required if
the substantial structural damage was caused by or related to earthquake
effects or if the building is in Seismic Design Category C, D, E or F. The
seismic evaluation and design shall be based on the procedures specified in the
building code, ASCE 41 Seismic Evaluation and Upgrade of Existing Buildings.
The procedures contained in Appendix A of the International Existing Building
Code (IEBC) shall be permitted to be used as specified in Section 405.2.3.1.
      Wind loads for this evaluation shall be those prescribed in Section 1609.
      405.2.3.1.1 CEBC level seismic forces. When seismic forces are required
to meet the building code level, they shall be one of the following:
         1.   One hundred percent of the values in the building code. The R
factor used for analysis in accordance with Chapter 16 of the building code
shall be the R factor specified for structural systems classified as "Ordinary"
unless it can be demonstrated that the structural system satisfies the
proportioning and detailing requirements for systems classified as
"intermediate" or "special".
         2.   Forces corresponding to BSE-1 and BSE-2 Earthquake Hazard Levels
defined in ASCE 41. Where ASCE 41 is used, the corresponding performance levels
shall be those shown in Table 405.2.3.1.
         3.   Forces corresponding to BSE-1 and BSE-2 Earthquake Hazard Levels
defined in ASCE 41. Where ASCE 41 is used, the corresponding performance levels
shall be those shown in Table 405.2.3.1.
 
TABLE 405.2.3.1
ASCE 41 PERFORMANCE LEVELS
RISK CATEGORY (BASED ON PERFORMANCE LEVEL FOR USE PERFORMANCE LEVEL FOR USE
CBC TABLE 1604.5)       WITH ASCE 41 BSE-         WITH ASCE 41 BSE-
                        1 EARTHQUAKE HAZARD LEVEL 2 EARTHQUAKE HAZARD LEVEL *
I                       Life Safety (LS)          Collapse Prevention (CP)
II                      Life Safety (LS)          Collapse Prevention (CP)
III                     Damage Control            Limited Safety
IV                      Immediate Occupancy (IO)  Life Safety (LS)
* Only applicable when Tier 3 procedure is used.
 
      405.2.3.1.2 Reduced CEBC level seismic forces. When seismic forces are
permitted to meet reduced building code levels, they shall be one of the
following:
         1.   Seventy-five percent of the forces prescribed in the building
code. The R factor used for analysis in accordance with Chapter 16 of the
building code shall be the R factor as specified in Section 405.2.3.1.1.
         2.   In accordance with the California Existing Building Code and
applicable chapters in Appendix A of the International Existing Building Code,
as specified in Items (a.) through (e.) below. Structures or portions of
structures that comply with the requirements of the applicable chapter in
Appendix A shall be deemed to comply with the requirements for reduced building
code force levels.
            a.   The seismic evaluation and design of unreinforced masonry
bearing wall buildings in Risk Category I or II are permitted to be based on
the procedures specified in CEBC Appendix Chapter A1.
            b.   Seismic evaluation and design of the wall anchorage system in
reinforced concrete and reinforced masonry wall buildings with flexible
diaphragms in Risk Category I or II are permitted to be based on the procedures
specified in IEBC Appendix Chapter A2.
            c.   Seismic evaluation and design of cripple walls and sill plate
anchorage in residential buildings of light-frame wood construction in Risk
Category I or II are permitted to be based on the procedures specified in CEBC
Appendix Chapter A3.
            d.   Seismic evaluation and design of soft, weak, or open-front
wall conditions in multi-unit residential buildings of wood construction in
Risk Category I or II are permitted to be based on the procedures specified in
CEBC Appendix Chapter A4.
            e.   Seismic evaluation and design of concrete buildings and
concrete with masonry infill buildings in all risk categories are permitted to
be based on the procedures specified in IEBC Appendix Chapter A5.
Those associated with the BSE-1 Earthquake Hazard Level defined in ASCE 41 and
the performance level as shown in Table 405.2.3.1. Where ASCE 41 is used, the
design spectral response acceleration parameters SXS and SX1 shall not be taken
less than seventy-five percent of the respective design spectral response
acceleration parameters SDS and SD1 defined by the California Building Code and
its reference standards.
(Ord. 5564 § 2 (part), 2022)
Chapter 16.20
SIGNS*
Sections:
   
16.20.010   Definitions.
   
16.20.020   Design review required.
   
16.20.030   Master sign program.
   
16.20.040   Exception procedure.
   
16.20.050   Temporary sign permits.
   
16.20.060   Failure to obtain permit.
   
16.20.070   Inspection.
   
16.20.080   Exempt signs excepted.
   
16.20.090   Prohibited signs.
   
16.20.100   Prohibited locations.
   
16.20.110   Fuel price signs.
   
16.20.120   Freestanding signs.
   
16.20.130   Wall signs.
   
16.20.140   Projecting signs.
   
16.20.150   Awning signs.
   
16.20.160   Special purpose signs.
   
16.20.170   Combinations of signs.
   
16.20.180   Classification of signs.
   
16.20.190   Construction and maintenance.
   
16.20.200   Amortization of nonconforming signs.
   
16.20.210   Abatement of nonconforming signs.
   
16.20.220   Modification of nonconforming signs.
   
16.20.230   Abandoned signs.
   
16.20.240   Unsafe and unlawful signs.
   
16.20.250   Parking of advertising vehicles prohibited.
   
16.20.260   Violations - Penalties.
   
16.20.270   Enforcement - Citation authority.
   *   For state law authorizing cities to regulate outdoor advertising, signs
and billboards - See Gov. C.A., §§ 38774 and 65850. Prior ordinance history:
Prior code §§ 34.401 - 34.422, and Ordinance Nos. 2104, 2124, 2144, 2391, 2392,
2428, 2489, 2558, 2582, 2704, 2749, 2778, 2800, 2818, 2848, 2863, 2960, 2996,
3063, 3169, 3184, 3217, 3334, 3386, 3389, 3394 and 3445.
16.20.010   Definitions.
   (a)   The following words and phrases whenever used in this chapter shall be
construed as defined in this section:
   (1)   "Awning" means a shelter supported entirely from the exterior wall of
a building and composed of a collapsible frame covered completely with nonrigid
material.
   (2)   "Building face" means the general outer surface of a main exterior
wall of a building. For example, a building whose plan is rectangular has four
main exterior walls and four building faces.
   (3)   "Design guidelines" mean documents adopted by the architectural review
board to afford guidance to the public and to city staff containing general
design parameters for areas of the city having unified design or historical
character.
   (4)   "Erect" means and includes erect, construct, place, relocate, enlarge,
substantially alter, attach, suspend, paint, post, maintain and display.
   (5)   "Flashing sign" means any sign or advertising structure which has any
flashing device, intermittent illumination, revolving or rotating light device
in which the brilliance thereof is caused to vary by mechanical or other means.
   (6)   "Freestanding sign" means any sign standing on the ground. Such signs
are usually, but not necessarily, supported from the ground by one or more
poles or posts or similar uprights, with or without braces.
   (7)   "Frontage" means a frontage on a public street.
   (8)   "Marquee" means any permanent roofed structure attached to and
supported by a building and projecting over public property.
   (9)   "Moving sign" means any sign or advertising structure which has any
visible moving parts, visible revolving or rotating parts or visible mechanical
movement of any description, excepting clocks and barber poles.
   (10)   "Mural" means a work of art applied to a building wall for decorative
purposes only. Use of murals for advertising is not permitted.
   (11)   "Pitched roof' means a roof with a slope of a four-inch rise in a
twelve-inch run, or greater.
   (12)   "Projecting sign" means any sign, other than a wall sign, which is
suspended from or supported by a building or wall and which projects outward
therefrom. Any sign suspended under a marquee, porch, walkway covering or
similar covering structure and in a place approximately perpendicular to the
wall of the adjoining building shall be deemed to be a projecting sign.
   (13)   "Roof sign" means any sign erected upon or over the roof or parapet
of any building, including the roof of any porch, walkway covering or similar
covering structure, and supported by or connected to the building or roof.
   (14)   "Sign" means any sign, display board, handbill, poster, picture,
lithograph, map, plat, banner, pennant, balloon, valance, sample, model,
graphic or lettered surround, structure or other device used to announce,
declare, demonstrate, display, advertise or attract the attention of the
public, including but not limited to clocks, barber poles and similar devices.
   (15)   "Sign area" means and is determined as follows:
   (A)   Where the lettered or illustrated material of a sign is placed upon a
sign board or other sign structure having a continuous or essentially
continuous surface or face (whether plane, curved, angulated or otherwise), the
exposed surface or face area of such sign board or sign structure shall be the
sign area.
   (B)   Where the lettered or illustrated material of a sign is not placed as
described in subdivision (15)(A) of this subsection, but is framed either
mechanically or visually by the design or layout of the sign itself, then the
area so framed shall be the sign area.
   (C)   Where the lettered or illustrated material is not placed or framed in
the manner described in subdivisions (15)(A) or (15)(B) of this subsection, but
is composed either vertically, horizontally, diagonally or otherwise,
essentially in the form of a rectangle, parallelogram, pyramid or similar
geometric figure, the area of the geometric figure within which such material
could be enclosed shall be the sign area; except that when the space between
the elements comprising the sign exceeds one and one-half times the average
size of the elements themselves, the area of the elements may be measured
separately as provided in subdivision (15)(D) of this subsection.
   (D)   Where the lettered or illustrative material is not placed, framed or
composed as described in subdivisions (15)(A), (15)(B) or (15)(C) of this
subsection, the total area of the rectangles or other simple geometric shapes
within which the individual words, letters, illustrations, or other elements
comprising the sign could be enclosed shall be the sign area.
   (16)   "Temporary sign" means any sign constructed of paper, cloth, canvas,
light fabric, cardboard, wallboard or other light material, with or without
frames.
   (17)   “Wall sign” means any sign posted or painted or suspended from or
otherwise fixed to the wall of any building or structure in an essentially flat
position, or with the exposed face of the sign in a plane approximately
parallel to the plane of such wall. Any sign suspended from or attached to, and
placed approximately parallel to the front of a canopy, porch, or similar
covering structure shall be deemed to be a wall sign.
(Ord. 5373 § 1 (part), 2016; Ord. 3559 § 1 (part), 1984)
16.20.020   Design review required.
   (a)   No person shall erect or cause to be erected any sign upon any fence,
post, pole, tree, building, or any other structure, or attached to any standing
vehicle in the city without first applying for and receiving architectural
review approval of the sign's location, design and dimensions pursuant to
Chapter 18.76 (Permits and Approvals).
   (b)   Application for design review shall be filed with the planning
division in such form, and contain such information as the planning division
may require. Said application shall be accompanied by a fee as set forth in the
municipal fee schedule. Regulations that are more restrictive than those set
forth in this chapter may be required pursuant to architectural review approval
under
Chapter 18.76 (Permits and Approvals). The architectural review board, in
making recommendations on the design of a sign to the director of planning and
development services, shall take into consideration the design guidelines
adopted by the architectural review board.
(Ord. 5494 § 3, 2020: Ord. 4826 § 8, 2004: Ord. 4305 § 1, 1995: Ord. 3559 § 1
(part), 1984)
16.20.030   Master sign program.
   Upon payment of a fee as set forth in the municipal fee schedule, an
applicant may request architectural review approval of a master sign program in
accordance with
Chapter 18.76 (Permits and Approvals), or through the city council for signs in
areas or for projects subject to site and design review pursuant to Chapter
18.82. "Master sign program" means a program allowing the occupants of a
building or project including a number of buildings to combine the total lawful
sign coverage into one or more lawful signs in an integrated design concept.
   The master sign program shall designate the sign locations and areas of all
signs in the program, as well as typical sign designs, colors and faces.
   Pursuant to the approval of the master sign program, subsequent individual
signs may be erected without further design review.
(Ord. 4826 § 9, 2004: Ord. 4305 § 2 (part), 1995: Ord. 3559 § 1 (part), 1984)
16.20.040   Exception procedure.
   (a)   An application for exception from any of the regulations of this
chapter (except a temporary sign which is regulated by Section
16.20.050) may be made in conjunction with an application for architectural
review approval under
Chapter 18.76 (Permits and Approvals), in such form and including such
information as the director of planning and development services may prescribe.
Such application shall be accompanied (1) by the written consent of the
property owner and (2) by the application fee set forth in the municipal fee
schedule. An exception may be approved by the director of planning and
development services or city council, if on application and/or the facts
presented, it is found that:
   (1)   There are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions
applicable to the property involved that do not apply generally to property in
the same district;
   (2)   The granting of the application is necessary for the preservation and
enjoyment of a substantial property right of the applicant and to prevent
unreasonable property loss or unnecessary hardships;
   (3)   The granting of the application will not be detrimental or injurious
to property or improvements in the vicinity and will not be detrimental to the
public health, safety, general welfare or convenience.
   In granting any such exception, such reasonable conditions or restrictions
as are deemed appropriate or necessary to protect the public health, safety,
general welfare, or convenience, and to secure the purposes of this chapter may
be imposed.
(Ord. 5494 § 3, 2020: Ord. 4826 § 10, 2004: Ord. 4305 § 3, 1995: Ord. 3559 § 1
(part), 1984)
16.20.050   Temporary sign permits.
   (a)   General application may be made for a temporary sign as defined in
Section
16.20.010 upon payment of an application fee as set forth in the municipal fee
schedule. The chief building official may, but need not, refer the application
for architectural review approval pursuant to
Chapter 18.76 (Permits and Approvals). A temporary sign permit shall be issued
for an uninterrupted period of no longer than thirty days, with specified
beginning and ending dates. The period of the permit may be extended once for
an additional fifteen days upon the payment of a fee as set forth in the
municipal fee schedule. In granting a temporary sign permit, such reasonable
conditions or restrictions as are deemed appropriate or necessary to protect
the public health, safety, general welfare, or convenience, and to secure the
purposes of this chapter may be imposed.
   (b)   Private Property. If the temporary sign is on private property, (1)
from the date of issuance of the permit, no additional permit shall be issued
for one year for any one place of business and (2) the maximum area of the
temporary sign shall be calculated from Table 3* provided, that each place of
business may have up to sixty square feet.
   (c)   Public Property. A temporary sign may be placed on public property
only if the sign commemorates or relates to a season or an historical, cultural
or artistic event.
(Ord. 4826 § 11, 2004: Ord. 3559 § 1 (part), 1984)
   *   Editor's Note: Table 3, referred to herein, may be found at the end of
this chapter in a printed edition of this code.
16.20.060   Failure to obtain permit.
   Whenever a sign has been erected without a required permit or design review
having been first obtained therefor, the fee for any permit issued under this
chapter shall be doubled to cover the additional expense to the city.
(Ord. 4305 § 4 (part), 1995: Ord. 3559 § 1 (part), 1984)
16.20.070   Inspection.
   The building official, Director of Planning and Development Services or
designee may, at any time, make such inspection as may be necessary or
appropriate to ascertain whether any sign will comply or is complying with this
chapter and other applicable laws. If required by the building official, an
inspection shall be called for the permittee upon the completion of the
structural portions of every sign and before the structural connections to the
building or structure are concealed or covered.
(Ord. 5494 § 3, 2020: Ord. 5373 § 1 (part), 2016; Ord. 3559 § 1 (part), 1984)
16.20.080   Exempt signs excepted.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit any sign, notice or
advertisement prescribed or required by law, or any notice posted by any lawful
officer.
(Ord. 3559 § 1 (part), 1984)
16.20.090   Prohibited signs.
   (a)   No flashing, moving or roof signs shall be erected within the city.
Flashing or moving signs for which a sign permit was issued prior to April 3,
1969, are continued to be declared nonconforming and shall be amortized in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Roof signs for which a sign
permit was issued prior to November 28, 1973, are continued to be declared
nonconforming and shall be amortized in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
   (b)   Unless otherwise expressly provided in this chapter, no sign shall be
erected or used for advertising purposes of any kind except such signs as shall
be located on a place of business, enterprise or calling and used solely for
naming, designating or identifying said business, enterprise or calling. No
sign shall advertise or display the make, brand name or manufacturers name of
any product, article or service unless the same assists in and is done
incidentally to the naming, designating or identifying of said business,
enterprise or calling. "Place of business, enterprise or calling" means that
portion of a building which is occupied by the business, enterprise or calling
to which the sign refers, except that where a master sign program has been
approved pursuant to the provisions of Section
16.20.030, such term shall refer to the entire building.
(Ord. 3559 § 1 (part), 1984)
16.20.100   Prohibited locations.
   Unless otherwise expressly provided in this chapter, all signs shall comply
with the following location requirements:
   (a)   Public Property. No sign shall be placed on any public property,
including but not limited to any city building, sidewalk, crosswalk, curb,
street lamp post, hydrant, tree, shrub, tree stake or guard, railroad trestle,
electric light or power or telephone or telegraph wire pole or wire
appurtenance thereof or upon any fixture of the fire alarm system or upon any
lighting system, street sign or traffic sign, except for signs that comply with
the city’s adopted parklet standards affixed to parklets permitted via permit
per PAMC
Chapter 12.11.
   (1)   Nothing in this section shall apply to the installation of terrazzo
sidewalks or sidewalks of similar construction, sidewalks permanently colored
by an admixture in the material of which the sidewalks is constructed and for
which the department of public works has granted a written permit.
   (2)   Nothing in this section shall apply to the painting of house numbers
on curbs pursuant to
Chapter 16.36.
   (3)   Application may be made for an encroachment permit pursuant to
Chapter 12.12 for the installation of a metal plaque commemorating an
historical, cultural or artistic event, location or personality. The department
of public works may grant such an encroachment permit only upon the approval of
the city council.
   (4)   Application may be made for an encroachment permit pursuant to
Chapter 12.12 for a portable sign to be placed on public property. The
department of public works may grant such an encroachment permit only upon
architectural review approval of the sign pursuant to
Chapter 18.76 (Permits and Approvals) and pursuant to the guidelines for
portable signs adopted by the architectural review board.
   (5)   Application may be made, pursuant to Section
16.20.050, for a temporary sign on public property if the sign commemorates or
relates to a season or an historical, cultural or artistic event.
   (6)   Any sign found posted on public property contrary to the provisions of
this section may be removed by the division of inspectional services or the
police department.
   (b)   Fire Escapes. No sign shall be erected in such a manner that any
portion of the sign or its support is attached to or will interfere with the
free use of any fire escape, exit or standpipe, or obstruct any required
stairway, door ventilator or window.
   (c)   Marquees. No sign shall be placed upon the roof or on the face of any
marquee except on a theater.
   (d)   Traffic. No sign shall be erected in such a manner that it will or
reasonably may be expected to interfere with, obstruct, confuse or mislead
traffic.
   (e)   Intersections. No sign over three feet in height shall be erected at
the intersection of any street improved for vehicular traffic, within a
triangular area formed by the curb lines, and their projection and a line
connecting them at points thirty-five feet from the intersection of the
projected curb lines, unless the sign, in compliance with the provisions of
this chapter, has a clearance of at least ten feet above curb grade and no part
of whose means of support has a single or combined horizontal cross-section
exceeding eight inches.
   (f)   Residential Districts. No sign shall be erected in any residential
district except as provided below:
   (1)   Churches and Other Organizations. In all residential districts
churches and other permitted or conditional uses in the district may erect
signs on the premises identifying the premises or announcing activities
thereon.
   (2)   Identifying Signs. In all residential districts except R-1, R-E and R-
2, signs may be erected identifying the property or building on which the sign
is situated.
   (3)   Special Purpose Signs. Special purpose signs may be erected in
residential districts in compliance with the provisions of Section
16.20.160.
   (4)   Size and Height. Except as otherwise provided in Section
16.20.160, wall signs in residential districts shall not exceed an area of one
square foot of sign for each forty square feet of wall area except that
regardless of the size of the building face, (1) any such sign or combination
of signs may have an area of at least six square feet and (2) no such sign or
combination of signs shall have an area greater than one hundred fifty square
feet. Freestanding signs shall meet the requirements of Table 1*. No projecting
signs or roof signs shall be erected.
   (5)   Lighting of Signs. No sign in a residential district shall be
constructed in such a way that any light bulb, light filament, neon tubing or
similar material is visible from the front of the sign or from beyond the
property line.
   (6)   PC Planned Community Districts. Unless otherwise provided in the
ordinance approving the PC development, signs hereafter erected in PC districts
shall be governed by the rules applicable to residential districts as set forth
in this subsection.
   (7)   Signs on Landscaped Freeways. Notwithstanding anything elsewhere
contained in this chapter, no sign shall be erected on any property adjacent to
a section of landscaped freeway, expressway or any other landscaped limited
access street or highway in such a way as to be viewed by persons traveling on
such landscaped freeway, expressway or any other landscaped limited access
street or highway except when such sign is used exclusively:
   (A)   To advertise the sale or lease of the property upon which the sign is
situated; or
   (B)   To designate the name of the owner or occupant of the premises upon
which the sign is situated, or to identify such premises.
(Ord. 5594 § 9, 2024: Ord. 4826 § 12, 2004: Ord. 4797 § 2, 2003: Ord. 3359 § 1
(part), 1984)
   *   Editor's Note: Table 1, referred to herein, may be found at the end of
this chapter in a printed edition of this code.
16.20.110   Fuel price signs.
   (a)   Every person or business organization offering for sale or selling any
gasoline or other motor vehicle fuel to the public from any place of business
shall erect a sign which indicates the actual price per gallon, including all
taxes at which such gasoline or other motor vehicle fuel is currently being
offered for sale or sold. Such sign shall be clearly visible from any street or
highway adjacent to such place of business. If more than one grade of gasoline
or other motor vehicle fuel is offered for sale or sold, the price of at least
two grades of such gasoline or fuel shall be indicated on such sign.
   (b)   The sign required by this section shall conform to the requirements of
Article 8 (commencing with Section 20880), Chapter 7, Division 8 of the
Business and Professions Code and the other requirements of this chapter, but
is exempt from architectural review approval pursuant to
Chapter 18.76 (Permits and Approvals) and the requirements of Chapter 18.82
(Site and Design Review) of this code. The permit required by Section
16.20.020 shall be issued without fee.
   (c)   If compliance with this section would cause the total area of lawfully
erected signs to exceed the area allowed by other provisions of this chapter,
one freestanding sign not over five feet in height and three feet by four feet
in dimension may be erected, but only in order to comply with this section.
Such sign may have two faces if both faces are back-to-back in approximately
parallel planes.
(Ord. 4826 § 13, 2004: Ord. 3559 § 1 (part), 1984)
16.20.120   Freestanding signs.
   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, every freestanding sign shall
comply with the requirements of this section.
   (a)   Freestanding Signs Over Five Feet. Freestanding signs over five feet
in height shall be permitted only on nonresidential properties in the Hospital
zone, GM zones and on El Camino Real in the CN and CS zones and for service
stations, restaurants and shopping centers elsewhere.
   (1)   Area and Height. The maximum area and height of such signs is set
forth in Table 2.*
   (2)   Location. Every sign shall be wholly on the owner's property, except
that for any site that encompasses a minimum of ten acres in size and contains
a minimum of 50,000 square feet of retail square footage, but does not have its
primary frontage on a freeway, expressway, or major arterial, a freestanding
sign may be located offsite on private property with frontage on the nearest
major arterial roadway. The sign size and height shall be governed by the
criteria set forth in Table 2*, using the average site length dimension as the
lot frontage for calculation purposes, but in no case shall the sign size
exceed fifty square feet. The sign shall comply with all other regulations of
this chapter, the total site signage (including the offsite sign) shall not
exceed the total allowed for the site, and all other signs on the offsite
property must comply with sign regulations for that site.
   (3)   Number. Subject to the provisions of Section
16.20.170, there may be one such sign for each frontage and one additional sign
for any portion of frontage in excess of two hundred fifty feet. The size of
any additional sign shall be determined from Table 2* by counting as frontage
that portion thereof which is in excess of two hundred fifty feet. In the case
of shopping centers and other multiple occupancies having a common frontage,
the frontage shall be deemed to be that of the shopping center or commonly used
parcel and not the frontages of the individual businesses or occupancies.
   (4)   Construction. In addition to the requirements of Section
16.20.190, every such sign shall be constructed wholly of metal, incombustible
plastic or other approved fire-resistant material.
   (b)   Freestanding Signs Five Feet or Less In Height. Freestanding signs
five feet or less in height shall be permitted in all districts within the
limitations set forth in this section.
   (1)   Area. The maximum area of such signs is set forth in Table 1.*
   (2)   Location. Every such sign shall be wholly on the owner's property.
   (3)   Number. Subject to the provisions of Section
16.20.170, there may be no more than one such sign for each frontage. In the
case of shopping centers and other multiple occupancies having a common
frontage, the frontage shall be deemed to be that of the shopping center or
commonly used parcel and not the frontages of the individual businesses or
occupancies.
   (c)   Multisided Freestanding Sings. Freestanding signs constructed back-to-
back, with faces in approximately parallel planes (such as both sides of a
single panel) shall count as only one sign both as to number and area (i.e.
only one side needbe counted). Every other freestanding sign having multiple
sides or faces, including a sign constructed in the form of a cylinder or
sphere or similar figure shall be limited to total area to that shown on Table
1* or Table 2*, whichever is applicable.
   (d)   Lighting of Freestanding signs. No freestanding sign shall be
constructed in such a way that any light bulb or filament is visible from the
front of the sign or from beyond the property line. Nothing herein shall be
construed to prohibit signs of neon tubing or similar self-illuminating
material of equivalent or less intensity.
(Ord. 5123 § 3 (part), 2011: Ord. 4923 § 6, 2006: Ord. 3559 § 1 (part), 1984)
   *   Editor's Note: Tables 1 and 2, referred to herein, may be found at the
end of this chapter in a printed edition of this code.
16.20.130   Wall signs.
   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, every wall sign shall comply
with the requirements of this section.
   (a)   Area. The maximum wall sign area for each building face shall be as
indicated on Table 3*.
   (b)   Height. No part of any wall sign shall extend above the top level of
the wall upon or in front of which it is situated. Any such sign which is
suspended or projects over any public or private walkway or walk area shall
have an overhead clearance of at least seven feet.
   (c)   Thickness or Projection. No such sign, including any light box or
other structural part, shall exceed a thickness of ten inches. In any sign
consisting of cutout or raised characters, said characters shall project no
more than six inches from the mounting surface, except that when the average
area of the individual characters exceeds six square feet, the projection may
be increased by one-half inch for each additional square foot of average area
over six feet, in no case to exceed fifteen inches.
   (d)   Number. Subject to the provisions of Section
16.20.170, there may be any number of such signs for each building face, but in
no case shall the total wall sign area for each face exceed that shown in Table
3*. No building shall be deemed to have more than four building faces. (Ord.
3359 § 1 (part), 1984)
   *   Editor's Note: Table 3, referred to herein, may be found at the end of
this chapter in a printed edition of this code.
16.20.140   Projecting signs.
   Every projecting sign shall comply with the requirements of this section.
   (a)   Projecting signs in the GM zones and on El Camino Real frontage in the
CS and CN zones.
   (1)   Area. No such sign shall exceed five square feet in area.
   (2)   Height. No part of any projecting sign shall exceed a height of the
building’s adjacent parapet upon or in front of which it is situated, or in the
case of buildings having sloping roofs, above the roof ridge. Any such sign
which projects over public property shall have a clearance of ten feet above
the ground.
   (3)   Location. No such sign shall project more than one foot over public
property.
   (b)   Projecting Signs in Other Zones.
   (1)   Area. No such sign shall exceed three square feet in area.
   (2)   Height. No part of any projecting sign shall exceed a height of twelve
feet, nor shall any part of such sign extend above the top level of the wall
upon or in front of which it is situated. Any such sign over any public or
private sidewalk or walkway shall have a minimum clearance below the sign of
seven feet.
   (c)   Number. Subject to the provisions of Section
16.20.170 there may be no more than one projecting sign for each place of
business for each building face.
   (d)   Multisided Projecting Signs. Projecting signs constructed back-to-
back, with faces in approximately parallel planes (such as on both sides of a
single panel) shall count as only one sign both as to number and area (i.e.,
only one side need be counted). Every other projecting sign having multiple
sides or faces, including a sign constructed in the form of a cylinder or
sphere or similar figure, shall be limited in total area to that set forth
above.
(Ord. 5373 § 1 (part), 2016; Ord 3735 § 26, 1987: Ord. 3559 § 1 (part), 1984)
16.20.150   Awning signs.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit the erecting and
placing of awning signs, subject to the requirements of this section.
   (a)   Type of Sign - Limitation. Awning signs shall be limited to those
signs printed, painted, fixed, marked, stamped or otherwise impressed upon the
surface of an awning covering.
   (b)   Area. The maximum awning sign area on any awning shall be equal to the
area allowed by Table 3* (Wall Signs), on the wall from which the awning is
supported. However, on any wall the aggregate of the wall sign area on said
wall plus the awning sign area, on an awning or awnings supported from said
wall, shall not exceed the maximum wall sign area allowed on said wall.
   (c)   Height. No part of any awning sign shall extend above the top level of
the wall from which it is supported.
(Ord. 3559 § 1 (part), 1984)
   *   Editor's Note: Table 3, referred to herein, may be found at the end of
this chapter in a printed edition of this code.
16.20.160   Special purpose signs.
   (a)   Permit Required. Signs for the special purposes set forth in this
subsection (a) shall be permitted as provided herein upon obtaining design
review and a permit as set forth in Section
16.20.020.
   (1)   Directory Signs. In all districts where group occupancies in office
buildings are permitted, directory signs may be erected displaying the names of
the occupants of a building who are engaged in a particular profession,
business or the like. Such signs shall be situated at least two feet inside the
property line and shall not exceed eight feet in height. Such signs may have an
area of four square feet, plus one and one-half square feet per name, in no
event to exceed seventy-five square feet. In the HD district, director and
directional signs may be up to twelve feet in height, thirty square feet in
area, and located no less than two feet from the nearest public right-of-way
unless an alternative location is approved by the planning director.
   (2)   Construction Project Signs. Signs may be erected in conjunction with
construction projects and used for the purpose of publicizing the future
occupants of the building or the architects, engineers and construction
organizations participating in the project. In residential districts, no such
sign shall exceed twelve square feet in area and no freestanding sign shall
exceed five feet in height. In other districts no sign shall exceed the area
for the applicable frontage set forth in Table 1* and no freestanding sign
shall exceed eight feet in height. All such signs shall be removed before a
final release on the construction is given by the building official.
   (3)   Directional Signs. Directional signs may be erected for the purpose of
facilitating or controlling the efficient or safe movement of pedestrians or
vehicles on private property. Such signs shall not be used for advertising
purposes and particularly shall not include the name of any person, firm,
company, organization or any product or service except as approved to designate
directions to different businesses on the same site. Such signs shall be
located on the property to which they pertain, shall not exceed an area of six
square feet nor a height of three feet and shall be located at least twenty
feet within the nearest property line, except that directional signs of not
more than three square feet in area may be located not less than ten feet
within any front property line. Such signs shall not be permitted in R-E, R-1,
or R-2 districts.
   (4)   Subdivision Signs. Any person or firm offering real estate for sale in
an approved subdivision may erect not more than two signs indicating the
location of the subdivision. No such sign shall exceed forty square feet in
area. Such signs may state the name of the subdivider or subdivision or both.
No such sign shall be erected on or situated within one hundred feet of any
occupied residential property. No such sign shall be illuminated. The permit
for any such sign shall be issued for a period of six months. At the end of
such period additional extensions of ninety days each may be granted by the
building official for good cause shown. Upon expiration of the permit or any
extension thereof the sign shall be removed by the applicant.
   (5)   Off-site Advertising by Art Organizations. Nonprofit organizations
having tax exempt status which are located within the city and which have been
established solely for the purpose of supporting the performing and cultural
arts in the city and other jurisdictions shall be permitted to utilize walls
for off-site murals which may incorporate wording to name, designate, or
identify the organization and/or the arts. The application shall be made
jointly by the nonprofit organization and the property owner who owns the
property where the mural is to be located. Said application shall be subject to
review by the visual arts jury in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 2.26 and shall require architectural review approval pursuant to
Chapter 18.76 (Permits and Approvals). Additionally, the following provisions
shall apply:
   (A)   The provisions of Section
16.20.130 shall be applicable to said murals except that no part of a mural
shall be counted as part of the allowable sign area for the off-site location.
   (B)   Murals must be painted directly on a building wall; no pennants or the
like may be used.
   (C)   The property owner shall give his/her consent to erect, maintain, and
remove the mural.
   (D)   The mural must be properly maintained by the nonprofit organization.
   (E)   The visual arts jury shall establish a maximum time period for the
existence of a mural.
   (F)   The property owner shall be responsible for removing the mural at the
completion of the authorized time period; however, nothing shall prevent an
agreement that the nonprofit organization shall pay for and remove the mural.
   (G)   No organization shall be permitted to have more than two off-site
advertising murals at any one time.
   (H)   Murals which are erected on city property or with city moneys shall be
regulated solely by the provisions of Section
16.20.100 and
Chapter 2.26.
   (6)   Transit Shelter Advertising Signs. Informational and advertising signs
may be erected on transit shelters furnished by contract with the Santa Clara
County Transit District, provided that the shelter prototype (but not each
individual shelter or sign) has been approved by the architectural review
board, that the location of each shelter containing advertising signs has been
approved in writing by the director of planning and development services or
designee, and that an encroachment permit has been obtained pursuant to
Chapter 12.12 for each shelter placed on public property.
   (b)   No Permit Required. Signs for the special purposes set forth in this
subsection (b) shall be permitted as provided herein without design review or a
permit being required.
   (1)   For Sale or Lease Signs. In all districts signs may be erected on real
estate, advertising such real estate for sale or lease. In R-1, R-E, and R-
2 districts such signs shall not exceed an area of six square feet. In all
other districts such signs shall meet with the requirements set forth in Table
1*.
   (2)   Political Signs. Political signs may be erected in conformity with
this chapter including Section
16.20.100 which prohibits signs on public property. In addition, an election
sign must be completely removed no later than six days following the day of the
election to which it relates. Any election sign not removed within six days
shall be considered abandoned and shall be removed by the building division.
   (3)   Window Signs. A place of business which sells goods or services to
consumers may install and maintain signs on the interior face of a window of
the premises or in a position inside such place of business, otherwise viewable
through a window of the premises, subject to the following conditions:
   (A)   No more than twenty percent of the total window space on a wall may be
covered by window signs at any time.
   (B)   A sign affixed to the interior face of a window and a sign inside a
place of business, any point on which is within three feet of any point on the
interior face of a window, through which window said sign may be viewed from
outside such place of business, shall be deemed to be a window sign for the
purposes of the window coverage limitation of this section. The full area of
any window sign shall be used when window coverage is calculated for purposes
of this section.
   (C)   Merchandise on display, which does not constitute a sign (as defined
in Section
16.20.010), shall be exempt from the window coverage limitation of this
section.
(Ord. 5494 § 3, 2020: Ord. 5123 § 3 (part), 2011: Ord. 4826 § 14, 2004: Ord.
4797 § 3, 2003: Ord. 4305 § 1 (part), 1995: Ord. 3559 § 1 (part), 1984)
   *   Editor's Note: Table 1, referred to herein, may be found at the end of
this chapter in a printed edition of this code.
16.20.170   Combinations of signs.
   In each place of business or occupancy there shall be permitted the
following combinations of signs:
   (a)   Where there is a freestanding sign, any one of the following: a flat
wall sign, a projecting wall sign, or an awning sign;
   (b)   Where there is no freestanding sign, any combination of two of the
following: a flat wall sign, a projecting wall sign, an awning sign;
   (c)   On corner lots, each frontage shall be treated separately for the
purposes of subsections (a) and (b) of this section;
   (d)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, when
architectural review is required pursuant to
Chapter 18.76 (Permits and Approvals), one type of sign may be disapproved
where a combination of two or more types is permitted.
(Ord. 4826 § 15, 2004: Ord. 3559 § 1 (part), 1984)
16.20.180   Classification of signs.
   Every sign erected or proposed to be erected shall be classified by the PCE
Director in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Any sign which does
not clearly fall within one of the classifications provided herein shall be
placed by the PCE Director in the classification which the sign, in view of its
design, location and purpose, most nearly approximates. Such classification by
the PCE Director shall be final.
(Ord. 5373 § 1 (part), 2016; Ord. 3559 § 1 (part), 1984)
16.20.190   Construction and maintenance.
   The appropriate sections of the building code (
Chapter 16.04) shall apply to the construction of signs. All signs shall be
able to resist the applicable wind loads set forth in Section 1615 of the 1998
California Building Code, as amended from time to time. All signs having built-
in illumination shall be constructed wholly of metal, incombustible plastic or
other approved fire-resistant material. Guy wires or horizontal struts shall
not be used. Signs and sign structures shall be maintained at all times in a
state of good repair, with all braces, bolts and structural parts and
supporting frames and fastenings free from deterioration, rot, rust and
loosening. Without limiting the foregoing, no person shall maintain or permit
to be maintained on any premises owned or controlled by him any sign which is
in a sagging, leaning, fallen, decayed, deteriorated or other dilapidated or
unsafe condition.
(Ord. 4642 § 25, 2000: Ord.3559 § 1 (part), 1984)
16.20.200   Amortization of nonconforming signs.
   All signs within the city shall be altered, removed or otherwise made to
comply with the provisions of this chapter during the following time periods:
   (a)   General Rule. Signs painted on buildings, walls or fences - two years
from the date of nonconformity. All other signs - five years from the date of
nonconformity;
   (b)   Signs legally erected pursuant to a valid sign permit issued within
the two years immediately preceding April 3, 1969:
   (1)   Signs painted on buildings, walls or fences - three years from permit
date,
   (2)   All other signs - seven years from permit date;
   (c)   Flashing or moving signs legally erected pursuant to a valid sign
permit - seven years from permit date;
   (d)   Signs rendered nonconforming due to the general one-third size
reduction amendments to
Chapter 16.20 of 1974, and legally erected pursuant to a valid sign permit
issued within the two years immediately preceding October 11, 1974:
   (1)   Signs painted on buildings, walls or fences - three years from permit
date or two years from October 11, 1974, whichever period is greater,
   (2)   All other signs - seven years from permit date;
   (e)   Signs rendered nonconforming subsequent to the effective date of this
section, by reason of the annexation to the city of the territory upon which
the sign is located, amendment of this chapter to render such sign
noncomplying, or otherwise shall be subject to the amortization provisions
hereof. The period within which such sign must be abated as provided in this
section shall commence to run upon the effective date of such annexation, or of
such amendment, or the date upon which the sign otherwise becomes
nonconforming.
(Ord. 3559 § 1 (part), 1984)
16.20.210   Abatement of nonconforming signs.
   Nonconforming signs shall either be made to conform with the provisions of
this chapter or be abated within the applicable period of time hereinabove set
forth. In the event they are not, the PCE Director shall order the sign abated
by the owner of the property and any other person known to be responsible for
the maintenance of the sign. It is thereafter unlawful for any such person to
maintain or suffer to be maintained on any property owned or controlled by him
any such sign. Unless some other mode of abatement is approved by the building
official or PCE Director in writing, abatement of nonconforming signs shall be
accomplished in the following manner:
   (a)   Signs painted on buildings, walls or fences: by removal of the paint
constituting the sign or by permanently painting over it in such a way that the
sign shall not hereafter be or become visible;
   (b)   Other Signs. By removal of the sign, including its dependent
structures and supports; or pursuant to a sign permit duly issued, by
modification, alteration or replacement thereof in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 5373 § 1 (part), 2016; Ord. 3559 § 1 (part), 1984)
16.20.220   Modification of nonconforming signs.
   No nonconforming sign shall be in any manner altered, reconstructed, moved
or its face changed without being made to comply in all respects with this
chapter. Normal maintenance or repair of any nonconforming sign is not
prohibited by this section.
(Ord. 3559 § 1 (part), 1984)
16.20.230   Abandoned signs.
   No person shall maintain or permit to be maintained on any premises owned or
controlled by him any sign which has been abandoned. Any such sign shall
promptly be abated by the owner or such other person. Any sign which is located
on property which becomes vacant and unoccupied for a period of three months or
more, and any sign which was erected for an occupant or business unrelated to
the present occupant or his business, and any sign which pertains to a time,
event or purpose which no longer pertains, shall be presumed to have been
abandoned.
(Ord. 3559 § 1 (part), 1984)
16.20.240   Unsafe and unlawful signs.
   (a)   Public Property. Any sign posted on public property contrary to the
provisions of Section
16.20.100 may be removed by the division of inspectional services or the police
department.
   (b)   Unsafe or Abandoned Signs. Any sign deemed by the police department,
the chief building official or PCE Director to be (1) unsafe, due to
interfering with the public’s health, safety, welfare or convenience, or (2)
abandoned, including but not limited to election signs posted more than six
days after the election to which they relate, may be removed by the division of
inspectional services or the police department.
   (c)   Whenever a sign, other than those on public property or those deemed
to be unsafe or abandoned, is found to be erected or maintained in violation of
any provision of this chapter or of any other ordinance or law, the building
official or PCE Director may order that such sign be altered, repaired,
reconstructed, demolished or removed as may be appropriate to abate such
condition. Any work required to be done shall, unless a different time is
specified, be completed within ten days of the date of such order. Failure,
neglect or refusal to comply with such order of the building official or PCE
Director shall be sufficient basis for the revocation of any permit or approval
granted under this chapter and shall constitute a separate offense. In addition
to any other remedies provided by law, the building official may remove, or
cause to be removed any such sign erected or maintained in violation of the
provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 5373 § 1 (part), 2016; Ord. 4305 § 1, 1995: Ord. 3559 § 1 (part), 1984)
16.20.250   Parking of advertising vehicles prohibited.
   No person shall park any vehicle which has attached thereto or suspended
therefrom any advertising sign on the street or on private property to display,
demonstrate, advertise or attract the attention of the public. This section
shall not apply to a peddler who has received a permit from the chief of police
pursuant to
Chapter 4.10.
(Ord. 3559 § 1 (part), 1984)
16.20.260   Violations - Penalties.
   Violation of any provision of this chapter is an infraction, punishable as
provided in this code. Each day of violation constitutes a separate offense and
may be separately punished.
(Ord. 3595 § 1, 1985)
16.20.270   Enforcement - Citation authority.
   Persons employed in the following designated employee positions are
authorized to exercise the authority provided in Penal Code Section 836.5 and
are authorized to issue citations for violations of this chapter: PCE Director
(or designee), chief building official, assistant building official and code
enforcement officer.
(Ord. 5373 § 1 (part), 2016; Ord. 4305 § 1, 1995: Ord. 3595 § 2, 1985)
Chapter 16.20 — Table 1
Allowable Sign Area for Freestanding Signs up to Five Feet High
   NOTE: THESE ARE MAXIMUM DESIGN DIMENSIONS, AND MAY BE REDUCED IN THE DESIGN
REVIEW PROCESS PURSUANT TO
CHAPTER 18.77 (Processing of Permits and Approvals)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7622.jpg]
 
   •    This table is to be used in all Zoning Districts except for the GM
zones, the Hospital District, and for El Camino frontages of CN and CS zoned
properties.
   •   For requirements affecting freestanding signs generally, see Section
16.20.160.
   •   For further requirements as to freestanding signs in residential
districts, see Section
16.20.120.
   •   For computation of sign area generally, see Section
16.20.010(11).
(Ord. 5373 § 1 (part), 2016)
Chapter 16.20 — Table 2
Allowable Sign Area for Freestanding Signs Over Five Feet High
   NOTE: THESE ARE MAXIMUM DESIGN DIMENSIONS, AND MAY BE REDUCED IN THE DESIGN
REVIEW PROCESS PURSUANT TO
CHAPTER 18.77 (Processing of Permits and Approvals)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7624.jpg]
 
   •   Applicable to nonresidential properties in the GM zone and El Camino
Real in the CN and CS zones. Also applicable to restaurants, service stations
and shopping centers in other zones.
   •   For requirements affecting freestanding signs generally, see Section
16.20.160.
   •   For computation of sign area generally, see Section
16.20.010(11).
   •   For requirements in the HD district, see Section
16.20.160(a)(1).
(Ord. 5373 § 1 (part), 2016)
Chapter 16.20 — Table 2
Allowable Sign Height for Freestanding Signs Over Five Feet High
   NOTE: THESE ARE MAXIMUM DESIGN DIMENSIONS, AND MAY BE REDUCED IN THE DESIGN
REVIEW PROCESS PURSUANT TO
CHAPTER 18.77 (Processing of Permits and Approvals)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7626.jpg]
 
   •    Applicable to nonresidential properties in the GM zone and El Camino
Real in the CN and CS zones: also for service stations, restaurants ans
shopping centers in other zones.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7628.jpg]
 
(Ord. 5373 § 1 (part), 2016)
   Chapter 16.20 — Table 3
   Allowable Sign Area for Walls Signs
   NOTE: THESE ARE MAXIMUM DESIGN DIMENSIONS, AND MAY BE REDUCED IN THE DESIGN
REVIEW PROCESS PURSUANT TO
CHAPTER 16.48
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8787.png]
 
   •   Nonresidential zones only.
   •   For wall signs in residential zones, see Section
16.20.120.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8789.png]
Chapter 16.24
FENCES*
Sections:
   
16.24.010   Definitions.
   
16.24.020   Standard fences - Height and location regulations.
   
16.24.030   Special fences - Height and regulations.
   
16.24.040   Fences at intersections.
   
16.24.050   Fences on residential lots abutting frontage roads.
   
16.24.060   Fences on corner lots.
   
16.24.065   Fences on through lots.
   
16.24.070   Prohibited fences.
   
16.24.080   Violations - Penalty - Enforcement.
   
16.24.090   Variances.
   *   Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history: Prior code §§ 34.501 - 34.510,
and Ordinance Nos. 2104, 2863, 2865 and 2960.
16.24.010   Definitions.
   Throughout this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
   (a)   Height Measurement. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter,
height of fences or walls between the setback line and lot line shall be
measured from natural grade, as determined by the chief building official or
Director of Planning and Development Services or designee.
   (b)   "Lot line" means any boundary of a lot. Definitions of front,
interior, rear, side and street lot lines shall be those contained in
Chapter 18.04 of this code.
   (c)   "Street setback line" means a line established by this code or any
ordinance of the city of Palo Alto to govern the placement of buildings with
respect to streets and alleys, and shall be measured from the lot line.
   (d)   Definitions of all "yards" (front, interior, rear, side and street
yards) shall be those contained in
Chapter 18.04 of this code, or as required by the special setbacks of
Chapter 20.08 of this code.
(Ord. 5494 § 3, 2020: Ord. 5373 § 2 (part), 2016; Ord. 3754 § 1 (part), 1987)
16.24.020   Standard fences - Height and location regulations.
   (a)   Fences Between the Street Setback Line and the Lot Line. A fence,
wall, or other structure in the nature of a fence located between the street
setback line and the lot line, shall be permitted up to four feet in height,
except as otherwise provided in this chapter. Support posts or columns, not
exceeding five feet in height or eighteen inches in width, and pedestrian gates
and trellises used as entryway features, not exceeding eight feet in height,
three feet in depth or five feet in width shall be permitted.
   (b)   Fences Beyond Setback Line.
   (1)   Front Yards and Street Side Yards. A fence, wall, or other structure
in the nature of a fence, located beyond the street setback line in a front
yard or other street side yard shall not exceed six feet in height, except
that, where a street setback line exceeds sixteen feet, such fences or walls
may be constructed to within sixteen feet of the lot line.
   (2)   Interior Side Yards and Rear Yards. A fence, wall or other structure
in the nature of a fence, located beyond the street setback line in an interior
side yard or rear yard, shall not exceed seven feet in height, except that
where a street setback line exceeds sixteen feet, such fences or walls may be
constructed to within sixteen feet of the lot line.
   (c)   Fences on University Avenue. A fence, wall or other structure in the
nature of a fence, up to six feet in height, except as otherwise provided in
Section
16.24.040, may be located within the front and street side yard setbacks on
residential property having street frontage on University Avenue, between
Middlefield Road and the eastern city limit, provided that the fence complies
with the following:
   (1)   Fences shall be located on private property, no closer than five feet
from the edge of the sidewalk nearest the house;
   (2)   Structural and decorative posts or columns, not exceeding seven feet
in height or eighteen inches in width, and spaced no closer than six feet
apart, from center to center, shall be permitted;
   (3)   The color, material and design of the fence shall be compatible with
the architecture of the main dwelling unit on the site;
   (4)   Screen landscaping and associated irrigation shall be installed and
maintained on the street side of the fence;
   (5)   Fences exceeding four feet in height shall not be located within a
triangular area (a "sight distance triangle") measured from a driveway, as
shown in Figure 1*. Gates, which when in an open position, are entirely outside
of the "sight distance triangle" shall be permitted.
   (d)   Fences Adjacent to San Francisquito Creek Flood Control Expansion
Area. A fence or wall up to ten feet in height may be located at the rear of
any single family residential site adjacent to San Francisquito Creek and
fronting on Edgewood Drive if the portion of the site subject to a permanent
easement in favor of the Santa Clara Valley Water District (or its successor in
interest) for flood control purposes is reconfigured after January 1, 2002.
(Ord. 4751 § 2, 2002: Ord. 4224 § 1, 1994: Ord. 3754 § 1 (part), 1987)
   *   Editor's Note: Figure 1, referred to herein, may be found at this point
in a printed edition of this code.
16.24.030   Special fences - Height and regulations.
   The following special fences are permitted in accordance with the
regulations contained in each subsection:
   (a)   Fences Around Tennis Courts. Fences not to exceed twelve feet in
height may be located around tennis courts, badminton courts, basketball or
volleyball courts and similar play areas, providing that all parts of the fence
over six feet are made of open wire construction of galvanized steel or other
corrosion-resistant material, and that the fences are behind the zoning setback
line.
   (b)   School Fences. School play areas may be fenced to the street line;
provided, that the fence is made of open wire construction and does not exceed
ten feet in height.
   (c)   Security Fences. Fences not to exceed eight feet in height may be
located around industrial, manufacturing, or research uses where required for
security purposes, screening, or containing hazardous materials.
(Ord. 3754 § 1 (part), 1987)
16.24.040   Fences at intersections.
   A fence, wall or structure in the nature of a fence located at the
intersection of any street improved for vehicular traffic, shall not exceed
three feet in height above the adjacent curb grade, within a triangular area
formed by the curblines, and their projection, and a line connecting them at
points thirty-five feet from the intersection of the projected curblines.
(Ord. 3754 § 1 (part), 1987)
16.24.050   Fences on residential lots abutting frontage roads.
   Where residential properties abut frontage roads, railroad rights-of-way,
industrial or commercial areas, or public property other than a public street,
fences of solid board or similar materials may be constructed to a height not
to exceed eight feet. The height of such fences behind a sixteen-foot setback
line shall be measured from natural grade.
(Ord. 3754 § 1 (part), 1987)
16.24.060   Fences on corner lots.
   Where corner lots are adjacent to each other with rear yards joining, a six-
foot fence is permitted on the street side yard lot line at a point beginning
fifty feet from the radius point of the corner, except that where a driveway
occurs in that area, no fence may be constructed for a clear distance of twelve
feet from the point of intersection of driveway and property lines. This
provision shall not apply to corner lots whose rear or side yard abuts an
interior side yard of an adjacent property.
(Ord. 3754 § 1 (part), 1987)
16.24.065   Fences on through lots.
   On a through lot, a six-foot fence is permitted on the rear lot line. The
rear lot line is the property line abutting the street that does not provide
the primary access to the lot.
(Ord. 4081 § 2, 1992)
16.24.070   Prohibited fences.
   The following type fences are prohibited and are a nuisance constituting an
unsafe and unlawful condition, and may be abated pursuant to
Chapter 9.56 of this code:
   (a)   Barbed wire fences;
   (b)   All wire, twine or rope fences consisting of one or more strands of
wire, twine or rope less than three feet in height and within three feet of any
public sidewalk.
(Ord. 3754 § 1 (part), 1987)
16.24.080   Violations - Penalty - Enforcement.
   (a)   No person shall erect, construct or maintain any fence, wall or
structure in the nature of a fence which does not meet the requirements of this
section.
   (b)   Violation of any provision of this chapter is an infraction,
punishable as provided in this code. Each day of violation constitutes a
separate offense and may be separately punished.
   (c)   Persons employed in the following designated employee positions are
authorized to exercise the authority provided in Penal Code Section 836.5 and
are authorized to issue citations for violations of this chapter: chief
building official, assistant building official, PCE Director or designee, and
code enforcement officer.
(Ord. 5373 § 2 (part), 2016; Ord. 4305 § 8, 1995: Ord. 3754 § 1 (part), 1987)
16.24.090   Variances.
   A variance to any of the requirements of this chapter may be granted in
accordance with the provisions and procedures set forth in
Chapter 18.76 (Permits and Approvals) of this code, except that no variance may
be granted to the requirements contained in Sections
16.24.040 or
16.24.070.
(Ord. 4826 § 16, 2004: Ord. 3754 § 1 (part), 1987)
Chapter 16.28
GRADING AND EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL*
Sections:
   
16.28.010   Purpose - Legislative intent.
   
16.28.020   Scope.
   
16.28.030   Definitions.
   
16.28.040   Hazards.
   
16.28.050   Other laws.
   
16.28.060   Permit required.
   
16.28.065   Minimization of impacts required.
   
16.28.070   General exemptions.
   
16.28.080   Specific exemptions.
   
16.28.090   Application.
   
16.28.100   Application form.
   
16.28.110   Site map and grading plan.
   
16.28.120   Interim erosion and sediment control and storm water pollution
prevention plan.
   
16.28.130   Final erosion and sediment control and storm water pollution
prevention plan (final plan).
   
16.28.140   Soils engineering report.
   
16.28.150   Engineering geology report.
   
16.28.155   Additional requirements for temporary construction-related
dewatering.
   
16.28.156   Additional requirements for temporary construction-related
groundwater dewatering in groundwater plume areas.
   
16.28.160   Work schedule.
   
16.28.170   Security.
   
16.28.180   Fees.
   
16.28.190   Decision on a permit.
   
16.28.200   Permit duration.
   
16.28.210   Transfer of permit.
   
16.28.220   No improvements planned.
   
16.28.230   Issuance of permits.
   
16.28.240   Implementation of permits-permittee's duties.
   
16.28.250   Implementation of permits.
   
16.28.260   Post-grading procedures.
   
16.28.270   Grading requirements.
   
16.28.280   Wet season work.
   
16.28.290   Cuts.
   
16.28.300   Fills.
   
16.28.310   Setbacks.
   
16.28.320   Drainage and terracing.
   
16.28.321   Construction of bridges, culverts, and storm drain outfalls.
   
16.28.322   Stream bank erosion repair.
   
16.28.330   Protection of adjacent property - fences and guard rails.
   
16.28.340   Prohibition of deposits of earth, rock, etc.
   
16.28.350   Suspension or revocation of permit.
   
16.28.360   Appeals.
   
16.28.370   Action against the security.
   
16.28.380   Release of security.
   
16.28.390   Fines and penalties.
   
16.28.400   Enforcement - Citation authority.
   
16.28.410   Cumulative Enforcement Procedures.
   *   Editor's Note: This chapter was previously entitled "Excavations,
Grading and Fills," and was renamed by Ordinance No. 4564.
   Prior ordinance history: Prior code §§ 34.601 - 34.630; Ord. 2417, and § 63
of Ord. 2960 were also previously codified in this chapter, and were not
specifically repealed by adoption of Ord. 4564.
16.28.010   Purpose - Legislative intent.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for safe grading operations, to
safeguard life, limb and property, and to preserve and enhance the natural
environment, including, but not limited to, water quality, by regulating
clearing and grading on private property. This chapter shall not apply to
grading associated with excavation in public streets, grading in connection
with construction of a public improvement or public work for which inspection
is provided by the city or other public agency, nor grading by a public
utility.
(Ord. 4564 § 1 (part), 1999)
16.28.020   Scope.
   This chapter sets forth rules and regulations to control land disturbances,
land fill, soil storage, and erosion and sedimentation resulting from such
activities. This chapter establishes procedures for issuance, administration
and enforcement of a permit.
(Ord. 4564 § 1 (part), 1999)
16.28.030   Definitions.
   When used in this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section.
   (a)   "Applicant" means any person, corporation, partnership, association of
any type, public agency, or any other legal entity who submits an application
to the building official for a permit pursuant to this chapter.
   (b)   "As-graded" means the surface conditions extant on completion of
grading.
   (c)   "Bedrock" means in-place solid rock.
   (d)   "Bench" means a relatively level step excavated into earth material on
which fill is to be placed.
   (e)   “Best management practices” or “BMPs” means a technique or series of
techniques which, when used in an erosion control plan, is proven to be
effective in controlling construction-related runoff and erosion.
   (f)   "Borrow" means earth material acquired from an off-site location for
use in grading on a site.
   (g)   "Building official" means the chief building official of the city of
Palo Alto and his/her duly authorized designees.
   (h)   "City engineer" means the city engineer of the city of Palo Alto and
his/her duly authorized designees.
   (i)   "Civil engineer" means a professional engineer registered in the state
of California to practice in the field of civil works.
   (j)   "Civil engineering" means the application of the knowledge of the
forces of nature, principles of mechanics, and the properties of materials to
the evaluation, design, and construction of civil works for the beneficial uses
of mankind.
   (k)   "Compaction" means the densification of a fill by mechanical means.
   (l)   "Drainageway" means a natural or manmade channel which collects and
intermittently or continuously conveys storm water runoff.
   (m)   "Earth material" means any rock, natural soil, or fill, and/or
combination thereof.
   (n)   "Engineering geologist" means a geologist experienced and
knowledgeable in engineering geology and certified by the state of California
to practice engineering geology.
   (o)   "Engineering geology" means the application of geologic knowledge and
principles in the investigation and evaluation of naturally occurring rock and
soil for use in the design of civil works.
   (p)   "Erosion" means the wearing away of the ground surface as a result of
the movement of wind, water, and/or ice.
   (q)   "Final erosion and sediment control and storm water pollution
prevention plan ('final plan')" means a set of best management practices or
equivalent measures designed to control surface runoff and erosion and to
retain sediment on a particular site after all other planned final structures
and permanent improvements have been erected or installed.
   (r)   "Grade" means the vertical location of the ground surface. "Existing
grade" means the grade prior to grading. "Rough grade" means the stage at which
the grade approximately conforms to the approved plan. "Finish grade" means the
final grade of the site which conforms to the approved plan.
   (s)   “Grading” means any civil engineering or landscape construction work
that involves establishing a level base, or one with a specified slope, for
foundations, surface drainage or other construction work.
   (t)   “Groundwater” means water that is found underground in the cracks and
spaces in soil, sand and rock formations called aquifers.
   (u)   “Groundwater exclusionary techniques” means methods that use cut-off
walls and other barriers to minimize or exclude groundwater from the
excavation.
   (v)   “Groundwater plume” means a volume of contaminated (polluted)
groundwater in an aquifer that extends downward and outward from a specific
source (usually a site where pollutants have been released to the ground and
entered groundwater).
   (w)   “Groundwater plume area” means a groundwater plume with a specific
buffer of five hundred feet from the outer-boundary of the mapped groundwater
plume, or a lesser distance from the outer-boundary as determined by the city
engineer and established in the regulations adopted under Section
16.28.155(i) of this chapter.
   (x)   “Interim erosion and sediment control and stormwater pollution
prevention plan” or “interim plan” means a set of best management practices or
equivalent measures designed to control surface runoff and erosion and to
retain sediment on a particular site during the period in which pre-
construction and construction-related land disturbances, fills, and soil
storage occur, and before final improvements are completed.
   (y)   “Key” means a designed compacted fill placed in a trench excavated in
earth material beneath the toe of a proposed fill slope.
   (z)   “Land disturbance” or “land-disturbing activities” means any moving or
removing by manual or mechanical means of the soil mantle or top six inches
(6") of soil, whichever is shallower, including but not limited to excavations.
   (aa)   “Land fill” means any human activity depositing soil or other earth
materials.
   (bb)   “Manual of standards” means a compilation of technical standards and
design specifications published by the Association of Bay Area Governments.
   (cc)   “Permittee” means the applicant in whose name a valid permit is duly
issued pursuant to this chapter and his/her agents, employees, and others
acting under his/her direction.
   (dd)   “Sediment” means earth material deposited by water or wind.
   (ee)   “Site” means any lot or parcel of land, or contiguous combination
under the same ownership where grading is performed or permitted.
   (ff)   “Slope” means an inclined ground surface, the inclination of which is
expressed as a ratio of horizontal distance to vertical distance.
   (gg)   “Soil” means naturally occurring superficial deposits overlying
bedrock.
   (hh)   “Soils engineer” means a professional civil engineer experienced and
knowledgeable in the practice of soils engineering and licensed by the state of
California for practice in that field.
   (ii)   “Soils engineering” means the application of the principles of soils
mechanics in the investigation, evaluation, and design of civil works involving
the use of earth materials and the inspection and/or testing of the
construction thereof.
   (jj)   “Temporary construction-related ground-water de-watering” means
temporary pumping of groundwater to facilitate construction of below ground
structures such as basements and garages. Discharge may occur to either the
sanitary sewer or storm drain system, depending on project type.
   (kk)   “Wet season” means the period from October 1 to April 15.
(Ord. 5425 § 1, 2018: Ord. 5410 § 2, 2017: Ord. 4564 § 1 (part), 1999)
16.28.040   Hazards.
   Whenever the building official or city engineer determines by inspection
that any existing excavation, embankment, or fill from any cause has become a
hazard to life or limb, or endangers property, or affects the safety, usability
or stability of any public property, the owner of the property upon which such
excavation or fill is located or other person or agent in control of the
property, upon receipt of notice in writing from the building official or city
engineer to do so, shall, within a maximum of one hundred eighty days from the
date of such written notice, repair or reconstruct such excavation or fill, so
that it will conform to the requirements of this chapter, or otherwise repair,
reconstruct, strengthen or eliminate such excavation, embankment, or fill in a
manner satisfactory to the building official or city engineer, so that it will
no longer constitute a menace or danger as aforesaid. A shorter period of time
may be specified by the building official or city engineer if an imminent and
immediate hazard is found to exist.
(Ord. 4564 § 1 (part), 1999)
16.28.050   Other laws.
   Neither this chapter nor any administrative decision made under it:
   (a)   Exempts the permittee from procuring other required permits or
complying with the requirements and conditions of such a permit; or
   (b)   Limits the right of any person to maintain, at any time, any
appropriate action, at law or in equity, for relief or damages against the
permittee arising from the permitted activity.
(Ord. 4564 § 1 (part), 1999)
16.28.060   Permit required.
   No person shall grade, fill, excavate, store, or dispose of soil and earth
materials, perform any other land-disturbing or land-filling activity, or
engage in temporary construction- related dewatering, without first obtaining a
permit as set forth in this chapter, except when the activity is performed in
accordance with one or more of the general or specific exemptions set forth in
Sections
16.28.070 and
16.28.080. Exemption from the requirement to obtain a permit does not provide
relief from the requirement to conduct all grading activities in conformance
with the general grading requirements contained in Sections
16.28.270 through
16.28.340 of this chapter.
(Ord. 5425 § 2, 2018: Ord. 5410 § 3, 2017: Ord. 4564 § 1 (part), 1999)
16.28.065   Minimization of impacts required.
   All land-disturbing, land-filling, soil storage, and grading activities, and
all temporary construction-related groundwater dewatering, shall be undertaken
in a manner designed to minimize surface runoff and erosion, and impacts to
downstream waterbodies, and to safeguard life, limb, property, and the public
welfare.
(Ord. 5425 § 3, 2018)
16.28.070   General exemptions.
   A person performing land-disturbing, land-filling, soil storage, and grading
activities in conformance with Section
16.28.065, except where performing temporary construction-related dewatering,
need not apply for a permit pursuant to this chapter, if all the following
criteria are met:
   (a)   The site upon which land area is to be disturbed or filled is less
than 10,000 square feet.
   (b)   Natural and finished slopes are flatter than 10:1.
   (c)   Volume of soil or earth materials stored is 100 cubic yards or less.
   (d)   Rainwater runoff is diverted to a nearby pervious area (e.g.,
landscaped area) during and after construction, from an area smaller than 5,000
square feet.
   (e)   An impervious surface, if any, of less than 5,000 square feet is
created.
   (f)   No drainageway is blocked or has its stormwater carrying capacities or
characteristics modified.
   (g)   The activity does not take place within 100 feet by horizontal
measurement from the top of the bank of a watercourse, the mean high watermark
(line of vegetation) of a body of water or the boundary of the wetlands
associated with a watercourse or water body, whichever distance is greater.
(Ord. 5425 § 4, 2018: Ord. 5410 § 4, 2017: Ord. 4564 § 1 (part), 1999)
16.28.080   Specific exemptions.
   Sections
16.28.060 and
16.28.070(a) – (f) notwithstanding, the following activities are exempt from
the permit requirements of this chapter.
   (a)   An excavation below finished grade for the footing of a building,
retaining wall, or other structure authorized by a valid building permit,
excluding basements and below grade parking structures. This shall not exempt
any fill made with the material from such excavation nor shall it exempt any
excavation having an unsupported depth greater than five feet after the
completion of the structure.
   (b)   Cemetery graves.
   (c)   Refuse disposal sites controlled by other regulations.
   (d)   Excavations for wells, sanitary sewers, water pipes, natural gas
pipes, and electrical/ communications conduits or cables. However, when such
excavation is performed within a public utility easement, an encroachment
permit is required.
   (e)   Mining, quarrying, excavating, processing, stockpiling of rock, sand,
gravel, aggregate, or clay, where authorized and regulated by law, provided
such operations do not affect the lateral support or increase the stresses in
or pressure upon any adjacent or contiguous property.
   (f)   Exploratory excavations under the direction of soils engineers or
engineering geologists.
   (g)   Routine agricultural crop management practices.
   (h)   Emergencies posing an immediate danger to life or property, or
substantial flood or fire hazards.
   (i)   Any activity where the total volume of material disturbed, stored,
disposed of, or used as fill does not exceed 100 cubic yards and does not
obstruct or modify the storm water carrying capacity or characteristics of a
drainage course.
   (j)   Sections
16.28.060 and
16.28.070 (a) – (g) notwithstanding, any activity where the total volume of
material disturbed, stored, disposed of, or used as fill does not exceed five
cubic yards is always exempt from the permit requirements.
   (k)   Any grading or construction activity within a Santa Clara Valley Water
District right-of-way or easement which requires a water district encroachment
permit.
(Ord. 5043 § 2, 2009: Ord. 4932 § 2, 2007: Ord. 4564 § 1 (part), 1999)
16.28.090   Application.
   The application for a permit shall include all of the following items:
   (a)   Application form.
   (b)   Site map and grading plan.
   (c)   Interim erosion and sediment control and storm water pollution
prevention plan (also referred to, collectively, as "interim plan").
   (d)   Final erosion and sediment control and storm water pollution
prevention plan (also referred to, collectively, as "final plan"), where
required.
   (e)   Soils engineering report, unless waived by the city engineer.
   (f)   Engineering geology report, unless waived by the city engineer.
   (g)   Work schedule.
   (h)   Application fees.
   (i)   Performance bond or other acceptable security, in accordance with
Section
16.28.170.
   (j)   The route or routes proposed to be followed within the city in coming
to and going from the site by the trucks used to haul borrow or excess
excavated material and the trucks used to haul the grading equipment.
   (k)   Any supplementary material required by the building official or the
city engineer.
(Ord. 4564 § 1 (part), 1999)
16.28.100   Application form.
   The following information is required on the application form:
   (a)   Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant and the property
owner.
   (b)   Street address of the property on which the work is to be performed.
   (c)   Names, addresses, and telephone numbers of any and all contractors,
subcontractors, or persons actually doing the land-disturbing and land-filling
activities, and their respective tasks.
   (d)   Name(s), address(es), and telephone number(s) of the person(s)
responsible for the preparation of the site map and grading plan.
   (e)   Name(s), address(es), and telephone number(s) of the person(s)
responsible for the preparation of the interim and/or final plan(s).
   (f)   Name(s), address(es), and telephone number(s) of the registered
engineer(s) responsible for the preparation of the soils engineering and
engineering geology reports, where required.
   (g)   A vicinity map showing the location of the site in relationship to the
surrounding area's watercourses, water bodies, and other significant geographic
features, and roads and other significant structures.
   (h)   Name(s), address(es), and telephone number(s) of the person(s), if
any, who will receive excavated material removed from the site.
   (i)   Date of the application.
   (j)   Signature(s) of the owner(s) of the site or of an authorized
representative.
(Ord. 4564 § 1 (part), 1999)
16.28.110   Site map and grading plan.
   The Site Map and Grading Plan (also referred to, collectively, as "grading
plan") shall be prepared and signed by an individual licensed or registered by
the state of California to perform such grading design and shall contain all
the following information.
   (a)   Existing and proposed topography of the site taken at a contour
interval sufficiently detailed to define the topography over the entire site.
Ninety percent of the contours shall be plotted within one contour interval of
the true location.
   (b)   Two contour intervals that extend a minimum of 100 feet off-site, or
sufficient to show on- and off-site drainage.
   (c)   The property lines of the site shown in true location with respect to
the plan's topographic information.
   (d)   Location and graphic representation of all existing and proposed
natural and manmade drainage facilities.
   (e)   Detailed plans of all surface and subsurface drainage devices, walls,
cribbing, dams, and other protective devices to be constructed with or as a
part of the proposed work, together with a map showing the drainage area and
the estimated runoff of the area served by any drain.
   (f)   Location and graphic representation of proposed excavations and fills,
of on-site storage of soil and other earth material, and of on-site disposal.
   (g)   Location of existing vegetation types and the location and type of
vegetation to be left undisturbed, including the location, species, size, and
dripline area of all trees (including public trees within 30 feet of the site
and trees on neighboring properties that overhang the site).
   (h)   Location of proposed final surface runoff, erosion, and sediment
control measures.
   (i)   Quantity of soil or earth material in tons and cubic yards to be
excavated, filled, stored, or otherwise utilized on-site.
   (j)   Outline of the methods to be used in clearing vegetation, and in
storing and disposing of the cleared vegetative matter.
   (k)   Proposed sequence and schedule of excavation, filling, and other land-
disturbing and filling activities, and soil or earth material storage and
disposal.
   (l)   Location of any buildings or structures on the property where the work
is to be performed and the location of any buildings or structures on land of
adjacent owners which are within fifteen feet of the property or which may be
affected by the proposed grading operations.
   (m)   Information covering construction and material requirements and
specifications.
   (n)   Such further applicable plans or drawings as the building official or
city engineer may require in order to carry out the purposes of this chapter.
   The building official or city engineer may waive any of the requirements of
this section if he/she finds that the information on the application is
sufficient to show that the work will conform to the requirements of this
chapter.
(Ord. 4564 § 1 (part), 1999)
16.28.120   Interim erosion and sediment control and storm water pollution
prevention plan.
   All the following information shall be provided with respect to conditions
existing on the site during land-disturbing or filling activities or soil
storage:
   (a)   Maximum surface runoff from the site shall be calculated using the
method approved by the city engineer and maintained in the Manual of Standards,
or any other method proven to the city engineer to be as or more accurate.
   (b)   The interim erosion and sediment control and storm water pollution
prevention plan (also referred to, collectively, as "interim plan") shall also
contain the following information:
   (1)   A delineation and brief description of the measures to be undertaken
to retain sediment on the site, including, but not limited to, the designs and
specifications for sediment detention basins and traps; silt fences; straw
bales; and stabilized construction entrances, and a schedule for their
maintenance and upkeep;
   (2)   A delineation and brief description of the surface runoff and erosion
control measures to be implemented, including, but not limited to, types and
method of applying seeds and mulches, and designs and specifications for
diverters, dikes, and drains, and a schedule for their maintenance and upkeep;
   (3)   A delineation and brief description of the vegetative measures to be
used, including, but not limited to, types of seeds and fertilizer and their
application rates, the type, location and extent of pre-existing and
undisturbed vegetation types, and a schedule for their maintenance and upkeep;
   (4)   A delineation and brief description of the measures to be implemented
to control potential storm water pollution during construction from sources
including, but not limited to, construction material storage and disposal;
vehicle/equipment cleaning, maintenance, and fueling; dewatering; paving; saw
cutting; concrete/mortar placement; and painting, and a schedule for their
maintenance and upkeep.
   (c)   The location of all the measures listed by the applicant under
subsection (b) of this section shall be depicted on the grading plan, or on a
separate plan at the discretion of the city engineer.
   (d)   An estimate of the cost of implementing and maintaining all interim
erosion and sediment control measures must be submitted in a form acceptable to
the city engineer.
   (e)   The applicant may propose the use of any erosion and sediment control
techniques in the interim plan provided such techniques are proven to be as or
more effective than the equivalent best management practices contained in the
Manual of Standards.
(Ord. 4564 § 1 (part), 1999)
16.28.130   Final erosion and sediment control and storm water pollution
prevention plan (final plan).
   All the following information shall be provided with respect to conditions
existing on the site after final structures and improvements (except those
required under this section) have been completed and where these final
structures have not been covered by an interim plan (see Section
16.28.220):
   (a)   Maximum runoff from the site shall be calculated using the method
approved by the city engineer and maintained in the Manual of Standards, or any
other method proven to the city engineer to be as or more accurate.
   (b)   The final plan shall also contain the following information:
   (1)   A description of and specifications for sediment retention devices;
   (2)   A description of and specification for surface runoff and erosion
control devices;
   (3)   A description of vegetative measures;
   (4)   A description of the permanent control measures to be incorporated
into the final structures and improvements in order to improve the quality of
storm water runoff from the site, including, but not limited to, grassy swales,
storm drain inlet filters, covered or bermed dumpster areas, covered loading
docks, permeable pavement materials, storm drain inlet stencils, covered
parking areas, and other permanent storm water pollution prevention control
measures acceptable to the city engineer.
   (5)   A graphic representation of the location of all items in subsections
(b)(1) - (4) of this section;
   (c)   An estimate of the costs of implementing all final erosion and
sediment control measures must be submitted in a form acceptable to the city
engineer.
   (d)   The applicant may propose the use of any erosion and sediment control
techniques in the final plan provided such techniques are proven to be as or
more effective than the equivalent best management practices contained in the
Manual of Standards.
(Ord. 4564 § 1 (part), 1999)
16.28.140   Soils engineering report.
   A soils engineering report shall be based on adequate and necessary test
borings, and shall contain all the following information:
   (a)   Data regarding the nature, distribution, strength, and erodibility of
existing soils.
   (b)   Data regarding the nature, distribution, strength, and erodibility of
soil to be placed on the site, if any.
   (c)   Data regarding existing and projected maximum groundwater levels at
the site.
   (d)   Conclusions and recommendations for grading procedures, taking into
account the soils and groundwater data listed above.
   (e)   Conclusions and recommended designs for interim soil stabilization
devices and measures and for permanent soil stabilization after construction is
completed.
   (f)   Design criteria for corrective measures when necessary.
   (g)   Opinions and recommendations covering adequacy of sites to be
developed by the proposed grading.
   Recommendations included in the report and approved by the city engineer
shall be incorporated in the grading plans or specifications.
(Ord. 4564 § 1 (part), 1999)
16.28.150   Engineering geology report.
   An engineering geology report shall be based on adequate and necessary test
borings and shall contain the following information:
   (a)   An adequate description of the geology of the site.
   (b)   Conclusions and recommendations regarding the effect of geologic
conditions on the proposed development.
   (c)   Opinions and recommendations covering the adequacy of sites to be
developed by the proposed grading.
   Recommendations included in the report and approved by the city engineer
shall be incorporated in the grading plans or specifications.
(Ord. 4564 § 1 (part), 1999)
16.28.155   Additional requirements for temporary construction-related
dewatering.
   (a)   Compliance with regulations. Where temporary construction-related
groundwater dewatering will be required, applicants shall conduct dewatering in
full compliance with the provisions of this chapter, including this section,
the regulations established by the city engineer, and all permit conditions.
Applicants shall promptly implement corrective actions identified and required
by the city engineer, including, but not limited to, directives requiring
immediate cessation of discharge.
   (b)   Types of dewatering. Temporary construction-related groundwater
dewatering may be conducted using 1) groundwater exclusionary techniques (e.g.,
secant wall), or 2) controlled groundwater pumping.
   (c)   Groundwater exclusionary technique submittal requirements. When
groundwater exclusionary techniques will be required or utilized, applicants
shall submit to the city engineer a street work permit application, and a
dewatering plan and traffic control plan in a form approved by the city
engineer.
   (d)   Groundwater exclusionary technique operational requirements. Temporary
construction-related groundwater dewatering through groundwater exclusionary
techniques shall be conducted in compliance with the following:
   (1)   The rate of discharge of groundwater shall be limited to thirty
gallons per minute or less.
   (2)   Groundwater discharge shall be percolated onto the same property where
pumping is occurring rather than discharged into the storm drain system, if
feasible.
   (3)   The approved dewatering plan and traffic control plan for the project,
approved by the city engineer, shall be followed during dewatering activities.
The traffic control plan shall include, among other provisions, an appropriate
schedule for an attendant to be present on the street during the period of the
installation of groundwater exclusionary technique.
   (4)   Discharge of groundwater to the city storm drain or sanitary sewer
systems shall only occur from April 1 through October 31. The city may grant an
exemption and allow discharge from November 1 through March 31, upon
application, if:
   (A)   The discharge is limited to an average of ten gallons per minute over
a twenty-four hour period and other conditions warrant allowance of discharge;
or
   (B)   It is demonstrated that a ten year storm event can be accommodated by
the receiving storm drain system and water system to the satisfaction of the
city engineer.
   (C)   Any such exemption granted under subsections (A) or (B) above shall be
subject to immediate cessation orders from the city. A cessation order may be
issued for reasons including, but not limited to: capacity issues in the storm
drain or sanitary sewer systems; the discharge is causing or contributing to
surcharging in the storm drain or sanitary sewer systems; the storm drain or
sanitary sewer systems fail; excess flow entering the Palo Alto Regional Water
Quality Control Plant; emergency or routine maintenance of city infrastructure;
and protection of the environment, public health, safety and welfare. The
applicant shall immediately comply with any cessation order issued.
   (5)   The applicant shall install a groundwater monitoring well, and during
the construction period of the underground structure, submit periodic
groundwater level and other measurements and reports as required by the city
engineer. During pumping, the groundwater monitoring water level shall be
measured at a monitoring well located at a farthest feasible point on the
subject site from the underground structure. This monitoring shall be conducted
daily for the first two weeks, then weekly thereafter.
   (6)   Designs and plans submitted to the city engineer for approval shall
incorporate all of the requirements hereinabove.
   (e)   When controlled groundwater pumping required. If the rate of
groundwater discharge is greater than thirty gallons per minute, the
requirements of subsections (f) and (g) below shall be followed.
   (f)   Controlled groundwater pumping submittal requirements. When controlled
groundwater pumping will be required, applicants shall submit the following to
the city engineer:
   (1)   The applicant shall prepare and submit a street work permit
application, a dewatering plan and a groundwater use plan, all in a form
approved by the city engineer. The groundwater use plan shall show how the
groundwater will be used to the maximum extent practicable and incorporate the
operational requirements of subsection (h) below.
   (2)   The applicant shall submit a dewatering hydrogeological study
conforming to the regulations issued by the city engineer, adhere to the
study's findings, and make modifications as directed by the city engineer.
Avoidance measures identified in the study shall be employed to the maximum
extent practicable to minimize the flow rate and duration of the pumping, even
when off-site effects are not specifically identified. The dewatering
hydrogeological study shall be stamped by a California licensed hydrogeologist
or equivalent and submitted to the city.
   (3)   The applicant shall submit a pre- construction building condition
survey and report on structures on adjacent parcels prepared by a qualified
professional and meeting the standards established by the city engineer. The
survey shall include a photographic and narrative report on the interior and
external condition of each structure and surveyed and marked elevations of
adjacent parcels, with particular attention to the condition of concrete
foundations, structural connections, brickwork, plasterwork and other
architectural finishes that are susceptible to cracking. The report shall
assess the likelihood that the proposed dewatering would cause effects
(including but not limited to settlement or movement) on off-site private or
public structures or infrastructure, including the right-of-way, easements, and
utilities within public utility easements, and the health or viability of
vegetation or trees. To the extent that report concludes that off-site effects
are reasonably likely to occur, the applicant shall identify avoidance measures
to be implemented that will minimize the type and severity of those effects,
and shall develop a monitoring plan to assess any actual effects on vegetation,
trees, structures and infrastructure.
   (g)   Controlled groundwater pumping operational requirements. Temporary
construction-related groundwater dewatering through controlled groundwater
pumping shall be conducted in compliance with the following:
   (1)   Dewatering shall only occur April 1 through October 31, if discharge
to the storm drain or sanitary sewer system is required. The city may grant an
exemption and allow discharge from November 1 through March 31, upon
application, if it is demonstrated that a ten year storm event can be
accommodated by the receiving storm drain system and water system to the
satisfaction of the city engineer. Any such exemption shall be subject to
immediate cessation orders from the city, which shall be complied with
immediately upon issuance.
   (2)   Groundwater pumping for underground residential structures shall be
limited to ten weeks, with an additional two week start-up period. At the end
of the start-up period, the applicant must demonstrate compliance with all
performance and water quality standards established by the city engineer.
   (3)   The applicant shall verify the anticipated drawdown curve in the
dewatering hydrogeological study with a pump test performed on monitoring wells
installed on the project site, as specified by the city engineer. Following the
two-week start-up period, the dewatering, pumping rates and maximum amount of
water pumped on a daily basis shall be limited to the values calculated in
verification study.
   (4)   Fill station(s) shall be designed to provide the minimum delivery
flowrates and incorporate instructional and public safety signage in accordance
with the regulations issued by the city engineer.
   (5)   The applicant shall deliver pumped groundwater to any nearby parks and
schools as requested by the city.
   (6)   The applicant shall truck water one full day (eight hours) per week
from the project site to irrigation sites as directed by the city during the
first six weeks of dewatering activities (not including the two-week start-up
period). The applicant shall truck water five days per week (eight hours per
day) during the remainder of the dewatering period.
   (7)   The applicant shall allow adjacent properties to use hoses connected
to the fill station(s). If used, applicant must set up hoses with bridges along
sidewalks. Hoses shall be placed in a manner that is safe to the public and
does not cause damage to neighboring or city property, and shall not cross the
street. The city engineer may modify these requirements as circumstances
require.
   (8)   Prior to the commencement of dewatering activities, the applicant
shall notify occupants of neighboring properties of the temporary construction
and availability of water.
   (9)   The applicant shall use the pumped groundwater on-site for dust
suppression and other construction needs.
   (10)   Prior to pouring a basement slab, groundwater may be pumped no deeper
than three feet below the depth of the slab, measured at the center. After the
slab is poured, groundwater may be pumped no deeper than one foot below the
center.
   (11)   The applicant shall install a groundwater monitoring well prior to
the commencement of dewatering, and during the construction period of the
underground structure, submit periodic groundwater level and other measurements
and reports as required by the city engineer.
   (A)   During pumping, the groundwater monitoring water level shall be
measured at a monitoring well located at a farthest feasible point on the
subject site from the underground structure. This monitoring shall be conducted
daily for the first week, then weekly thereafter. At the end of the start-up
period or thereafter, if drawdown results are greater than anticipated, the
applicant shall submit a revised dewatering hydrogeological study and any
revised conclusions on impacts of the groundwater drawdown.
   (B)   Survey and mark land elevations on structures on adjacent parcels
weekly, if allowed by the adjacent property owners. These locations should
coincide with the pre-construction building condition survey. If permission is
not granted, inform the city immediately.
   (12)   While discharging to the storm drain system, construction work on the
underground structure shall be continuous, occurring daily, and make progress
towards completion of the underground structure without delay.
   (h)   City engineer authority to issue regulations. The city engineer is
authorized to establish and from time to time revise regulations to implement
this section and related provisions of this chapter and to advance the goals of
minimizing temporary construction-related dewatering and reducing its impacts.
(Ord. 5425 § 5, 2018: Ord. 5410 § 5, 2017)
16.28.156   Additional requirements for temporary construction-related
groundwater dewatering in groundwater plume areas.
   For temporary construction-related groundwater dewatering in the groundwater
plume area, the following additional requirements must be followed:
   (a)   The applicant shall contact the city's watershed protection group for
guidance and requirements on sampling, treatment and disposal of temporary
construction-related groundwater.
   (b)   The city engineer may require monitoring and an associated plan for
specific pollutants. The applicant shall adhere to any such requirements
established by the city engineer.
(Ord. 5425 § 6, 2018)
16.28.160   Work schedule.
   The applicant shall submit a master work schedule showing the following
information:
   (a)   Proposed grading schedule.
   (b)   Proposed conditions of the site on each July 15, August 15, September
15, October 1, and October 15 during which the permit is in effect.
   (c)   Proposed schedule for installation of all interim erosion and sediment
control measures including, but not limited to, the stage of completion of
erosion and sediment control devices and vegetative measures on each of the
dates set forth in subsection (b) of this section.
   (d)   Schedule for construction of final improvements, if any.
   (e)   Schedule for installation of permanent erosion and sediment control
devices where required.
(Ord. 4564 § 1 (part), 1999)
16.28.170   Security.
   If, in the opinion of the city engineer, the nature of the work regulated by
this chapter is such that if left incomplete will create a hazard to human life
or endanger adjoining property or property at a higher or lower level, or any
street or street improvement, or any other public property, the applicant shall
provide security for the performance of the work described and delineated on
the approved grading plan, interim plan, and final plan in an amount to be set
by the city engineer. The form of security shall be one or a combination of the
following to be determined by the city engineer:
   (a)   A bond or bonds issued by one or more duly authorized corporate
sureties. The form of the bond or bonds shall be subject to the approval of the
city attorney;
   (b)   The deposit, either with the city or a responsible escrow agent or
trust company, at the option of the city, of money, negotiable bonds of the
kind approved for securing deposits of public monies, or other instrument of
credit from one or more financial institutions subject to regulation by the
state or federal government wherein said financial institution pledges that
funds are and will remain on deposit and guaranteed for payment;
   (c)   Cash in U.S. currency.
(Ord. 4564 § 1 (part), 1999)
16.28.180   Fees.
   Fees shall be paid pursuant to the municipal fee schedule.
(Ord. 4564 § 1 (part), 1999)
16.28.190   Decision on a permit.
   The city engineer and the building official shall review all documents
submitted pursuant to this chapter and, if necessary, request additional data,
clarification of submitted data or correction of defective submissions. The
city engineer or building official shall notify the applicant in writing of
his/her decision on the permit.
(Ord. 4564 § 1 (part), 1999)
16.28.200   Permit duration.
   Permits issued under this chapter shall be valid for the period set forth in
the permit. The term of the permit may be extended upon receipt and approval of
a request from the permittee as specified in Sections
16.28.240 and
16.28.250. If the permittee has not commenced permitted activities within sixty
days of the scheduled commencement date for grading, the permit shall expire,
and the permittee shall resubmit all required application forms, maps, plans,
schedules, and security to the building official except where an item to be
resubmitted is waived by the building official. The building official may
require additional fees if the application is modified from its previously
approved form.
(Ord. 4564 § 1 (part), 1999)
16.28.210   Transfer of permit.
   A permit issued pursuant to this chapter may be transferred only if the
following conditions are met:
   (a)   The permittee notifies the building official prior to the proposed
transfer.
   (b)   The proposed transferee:
   (1)   Submits an application form pursuant to Section
16.28.100;
   (2)   Agrees in writing to all the conditions and duties imposed by the
permit, including those that have already been performed prior to the transfer;
   (3)   Provides security pursuant to Section
16.28.170; and
   (4)   Agrees to pay all applicable fees.
   (c)   The city engineer and the building official approve the transfer.
   The building official shall set forth in writing the reasons for his/her
approval or disapproval of a transfer.
(Ord. 4564 § 1 (part), 1999)
16.28.220   No improvements planned.
   Where an applicant does not plan to construct permanent improvements on the
site, or plans to leave portions of the site graded but unimproved, the
applicant shall:
   (a)   Meet all the requirements of this chapter; provided, that an interim
plan designed to control runoff and erosion on the site for the period of time
during which the site, or portions thereof, remain unimproved shall be
submitted in lieu of a final plan; and
   (b)   Submit executed contract(s) as defined in Section
16.28.260(a) after completion of grading.
(Ord. 4564 § 1 (part), 1999)
16.28.230   Issuance of permits.
   The building official shall issue a permit upon approval of a grading plan;
interim plan, and where required, final plan; soils engineering report and
engineering geology report; deposit of appropriate security; and payment of
fees. The permit shall be issued subject to the following conditions:
   (a)   The permittee shall maintain a copy of the permit, approved plans and
reports required under Section
16.28.240 on the work site and available for public inspection during all
working hours.
   (b)   The permittee shall, at all times, be in conformity with the approved
grading plan, and interim and final plans.
(Ord. 4564 § 1 (part), 1999)
16.28.240   Implementation of permits-permittee's duties.
   In addition to performing as required under Section
16.28.230:
   (a)   Unless this requirement is waived by the city engineer, the permittee
shall notify the city engineer at least 72 hours prior to:
   (1)   The beginning of the permitted activity;
   (2)   The completion of rough grading;
   (3)   The completion of finished grading;
   (4)   The installation of all erosion control devices and the completion of
planting requirements;
   (5)   Readiness of the site for final inspection, including, but not limited
to, finished grading, installation of drainage devices and final erosion
control measures.
   (b)   The permittee shall submit to the city engineer, reports if:
   (1)   There are any delays in land-disturbing or filling activities or soil
storage;
   (2)   The work is not being done in conformance with the approved grading
and interim and/or final plans;
   (c)   Unless waived by the city engineer, the permittee shall submit
recommendations for corrective measures and/or revisions to the approved
grading and interim and/or final plans, with the reports made under subsection
(b) of this section.
(Ord. 4564 § 1 (part), 1999)
16.28.250   Implementation of permits.
   (a)   The city engineer shall review all reports submitted by the permittee.
The city engineer may require the permittee to modify the grading plan, the
interim and/or final plan, and maintenance methods and schedules. The city
engineer shall notify the permittee in writing of the requirement and specify a
reasonable period of time within which the permittee must comply. All
modifications shall be subject to the city engineer's approval.
   (b)   The building official or city engineer may inspect the site:
   (1)   Upon receipt of a report by the permittee pursuant to Section
16.28.240(a) and (b);
   (2)   To verify completion of modifications required under subsection (a) of
this section;
   (3)   During and following any rainfall;
   (4)   At any other time, at the discretion of the building official or city
engineer.
   (c)   Upon completion of the rough grading work and at the final completion
of the work, the city engineer may require the following reports and drawings
and supplements thereto:
   (1)   An as-graded grading plan prepared by the civil engineer including
original ground surface elevations, as-graded ground surface elevations, lot
drainage patterns and locations and elevations of all surface and subsurface
drainage facilities. The civil engineer shall certify that the work was done in
accordance with the final approved grading plan.
   (2)   A soil grading report prepared by the soils engineer, including
locations and elevation of field density tests, summaries of field and
laboratory tests and other substantiating data, and comments on any changes
made during grading and their effect on the recommendations made in the soils
engineering investigation report. The soils engineer shall certify as to the
adequacy of the site for the intended use.
   (3)   A geologic grading report prepared by the engineering geologist
including a final description of the geology of the site including any new
information disclosed during the grading and the effect of same on
recommendations incorporated in the approved grading plan. The engineering
geologist shall certify as to the adequacy of the site for the intended use as
affected by geologic factors.
(Ord. 4564 § 1 (part), 1999)
16.28.260   Post-grading procedures.
   The owner of any property on which an excavation or fill has been made
pursuant to a permit granted under this chapter, or any other person or agent
in control of such property, shall maintain in good condition and repair all
retaining walls, cribbing, drainage structures, planted slopes, and other
protective devices shown in the approved plans or drawings submitted with the
application for the grading permit.
   Upon completion of final grading and permanent improvements, where such
permanent improvements are planned at the time grading is performed, the
permittee may be required to submit executed contract(s) with third party
providers as a means to ensure continued maintenance and upkeep of final plan
runoff and erosion control measures and storm water pollution prevention
control measures for a period as determined by the city engineer.
(Ord. 4564 § 1 (part), 1999)
16.28.270   Grading requirements.
   Designation. All grading in excess of 5,000 cubic yards shall be performed
in accordance with the approved grading plan prepared by a civil engineer, and
shall be designated as "engineered grading." Grading involving less than 5,000
cubic yards shall be designated "regular grading" unless the permittee, with
the approval of the city engineer, chooses to have the grading performed as
"engineered grading."
   (a)   Engineered Grading Requirements. For engineered grading, it shall be
the responsibility of the civil engineer who prepares the approved grading plan
to incorporate all recommendations from the soils engineering and engineering
geology reports into the grading plan. The civil engineer also shall be
responsible for the professional inspection and approval of the grading within
his/her area of technical specialty. This responsibility shall include, but
need not be limited to, inspection and approval as to the establishment of
line, grade, and drainage of the development area. The civil engineer shall act
as the coordinating agent in the event the need arises for liaison between the
other professionals, the contractor, and the building official. The civil
engineer also shall be responsible for the preparation of revised plans and the
submission of as-graded grading plans upon completion of the work. The grading
contractor shall submit in a form prescribed by the city engineer a statement
of compliance to the as-built plan.
   Soils engineering and engineering geology reports shall be required unless
waived by the city engineer. During grading, all necessary reports, compaction
data, and soils engineering and engineering geology recommendations shall be
submitted to the civil engineer and the city engineer by the soils engineer and
the engineering geologist.
   The soils engineer shall be responsible for the professional inspection and
approval concerning the preparation of ground to receive fills, testing for
required compaction, stability of all finish slopes, and the design of buttress
fills, where required, incorporating data supplied by the engineering
geologist.
   The engineering geologist shall be responsible for professional inspection
and approval of the adequacy of natural ground for receiving fills and the
stability of cut slopes with respect to geological matters and the need for
subdrains or other ground water drainage devices. The engineering geologist
shall report his/her findings to the soils engineer and the civil engineer for
engineering analysis.
   The building official or city engineer may inspect the project as described
under Section
16.28.250 and at any more frequent intervals necessary to determine that
adequate control is being exercised by the professional consultants.
   (b)   Regular Grading Requirements. The city engineer may require inspection
and testing by an approved independent testing agency.
   The testing agency shall:
   (1)   Inspect cleared areas and benches to verify that they have been
adequately prepared to receive fill; and
   (2)   Test fill for adequacy of compaction.
   When the city engineer has cause to believe that unusual geologic conditions
are present, the grading operation will be required to conform to "engineered
grading" requirements.
   (c)   If, in the course of fulfilling their responsibility under this
chapter, the civil engineer, the soils engineer, the engineering geologist, or
the testing agency finds that the work is not being done in conformance with
this chapter or the approved grading plans, the discrepancies shall be reported
immediately in writing to the person in charge of the grading work and to the
city engineer in accordance with Section
16.28.240.
   (d)   If the civil engineer, the soils engineer, the engineering geologist
or the testing agency of record is replaced during the course of the work, the
work shall be stopped until the replacement has agreed to accept the
responsibility within the area of his/her technical competence for approval
upon completion of the work.
(Ord. 4564 § 1 (part), 1999)
16.28.280   Wet season work.
   (a)   For commencement of land-disturbing or filling activity during the wet
season, the applicant shall demonstrate, as part of the permit application,
that the land disturbance is relatively minor and that erosion and
sedimentation can be controlled.
   (b)   For continuation of land-disturbing or filling activities, other than
installation, maintenance, or repair of measures in the interim or final plans,
during the wet season, the permittee must apply for and receive, every five
working days, special permission to proceed.
   (c)   The city engineer shall grant permission under this section on the
basis of weather forecasts, experience, and other pertinent factors which
indicate the activity may commence or continue without excessive erosion
occurring.
   (d)   It shall be unlawful to commence any land-disturbing or filling
activity during the wet season without having obtained specific permission for
wet season activity pursuant to this section. Violation may result in
suspension or revocation of the permit, action against the security, in
addition to any other remedy available for enforcement of this code.
(Ord. 4564 § 1 (part), 1999)
16.28.290   Cuts.
   (a)   General. Unless otherwise recommended in the approved soils
engineering and/or engineering geology report, cuts shall conform to the
provisions of this section.
   (b)   Slope. The slope of cut surfaces shall be no steeper than is safe for
the intended use. Cut slopes shall be no steeper than two horizontal to one
vertical.
   (c)   Drainage and Terracing. Drainage and terracing shall be provided as
required by Section
16.28.320.
(Ord. 4564 § 1 (part), 1999)
16.28.300   Fills.
   (a)   General. Unless otherwise recommended in the approved soils
engineering report, fills shall conform to the provisions of this section. In
the absence of an approved soils engineering report, these provisions may be
waived for minor fills not intended to support structures.
   (b)   Fill Location. Fill slopes shall not be constructed on natural slopes
steeper than two to one.
   (c)   Preparation of Ground. The ground surface shall be prepared to receive
fill by removing vegetation, noncomplying fill, topsoil, and other unsuitable
materials, scarifying to provide a bond with the new fill, and, where slopes
are steeper than five to one and the height is greater than five feet, by
benching into sound bedrock or other competent material as determined by the
soils engineer. The bench under the toe of a fill on a slope steeper than five
to one shall be at least ten feet wide. The area beyond the toe of fill shall
be sloped for sheet overflow or a paved drain shall be provided. Where fill is
to be placed over a cut, the bench under the toe of fill shall be at least ten
feet wide but the cut must be made before placing fill and approved by the
soils engineer and engineering geologist as suitable foundation for fill.
Unsuitable soil is soil which, in the opinion of the building official or the
civil engineer or the soils engineer or the geologist, is not competent to
support other soil or fill, to support structures or to satisfactorily perform
the other functions for which the soil is intended.
   (d)   Fill Material. Detrimental amounts of organic material shall not be
permitted in fills. Except as permitted by the building official or city
engineer, no rock or similar irreducible material with a maximum dimension
greater than 12 inches shall be buried or placed in fills.
   EXCEPTION: The building official or city engineer may permit placement of
larger rock when all the following conditions are met:
   (1)   The soils engineer properly devises a method of rock placement;
   (2)   The soils engineer continuously inspects placement of the rock and
approves the fill stability;
   (3)   Potential rock disposal areas are delineated on the grading plan prior
to issuance of the grading permit;
   (4)   Rock sizes greater than twelve inches in maximum dimension will be
placed ten feet or more below grade, measured vertically; and
   (5)   Rocks will be placed so as to assure filling of all voids with fines.
   (e)   Compaction. All fills shall be compacted to a minimum of ninety
percent of maximum density.
   (f)   Slope. The slope of fill surfaces shall be no steeper than is safe for
the intended use. Fill slopes shall be no steeper than two horizontal to one
vertical.
   (g)   Drainage and Terracing. Drainage and terracing shall be provided and
the area above fill slopes and the surfaces of terraces shall be graded and
paved as required by Section
16.28.320.
(Ord. 4564 § 1 (part), 1999)
16.28.310   Setbacks.
   (a)   General. The setbacks and other restrictions specified by this section
are minimum and may be increased by the building official, the city engineer,
or by the recommendations of a civil engineer, soils engineer, or engineering
geologist, if necessary for safety and stability, or to prevent damage of
adjacent properties from deposition or erosion, or to provide access for slope
maintenance and drainage. Retaining walls may be used to reduce the required
setbacks when approved by the building official or city engineer.
   (b)   Setbacks from Property Lines. The tops of cuts and toe of fill slopes
shall be set back from the outer boundaries of the permit area (PA), including
slope-right areas and easements, in accordance with Figure 1.
   [Editor's Note: Please refer to Figure 1 in a printed edition of this code.]
   (c)   Design Standards for Setbacks. Setbacks between graded slopes (cut or
fill) and structures shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 18 of the
Uniform Building Code.
(Ord. 4564 § 1 (part), 1999)
16.28.320   Drainage and terracing.
   (a)   General. Unless otherwise indicated on the approved grading plan,
drainage facilities and terracing shall conform to the provision of this
section.
   (b)   Terrace. Terraces at least six feet in width shall be established at
not more than thirty-foot vertical intervals on all cut or fill slopes to
control surface drainage and debris, except that where only one terrace is
required it shall be at mid-height. For cut or fill slopes greater than sixty
feet and up to 120 feet in vertical height, one terrace at approximately mid-
height shall be twelve feet in width. Terrace widths and spacing for cut and
fill slopes greater than 120 feet in height shall be designed by the civil
engineer and approved by the building official or city engineer. Suitable
access shall be provided to permit proper cleaning and maintenance.
   Swales or ditches on terraces shall have a minimum gradient of five percent
and must be paved with reinforced concrete not less than three inches in
thickness or an approved equal paving. They shall have a minimum depth at the
deepest point of one foot and a minimum paved width of five feet.
   A single run of swale or ditch shall not collect runoff from a tributary
area exceeding 13,500 square feet (projected) without discharging into a
downdrain.
   (c)   Subsurface Drainage. Cut and fill slopes shall be provided with
subsurface drainage as necessary for stability.
   (d)   General Drainage. All sites shall be developed so as to provide
control of storm and surface waters. Adequate provision shall be made to
prevent any storm or surface waters from damaging the face of an excavation or
the sloping face of a fill. All drainage provisions shall be subject to the
approval of the city engineer, and shall be of such design as to carry storm
and surface waters, including storm and surface waters from properties in
upstream watershed areas, to the nearest practical street, storm drain, or
natural watercourse, approved by the city engineer as a safe place to deposit
and receive such waters.
   (e)   Interceptor Drains. Paved interceptor drains shall be installed along
the top of all cut slopes where the tributary drainage area above slopes
towards the cut and has a drainage path greater than forty feet measured
horizontally. Interceptor drains shall be paved with a minimum of three inches
of concrete or gunite and reinforced. They shall have a minimum depth of twelve
inches and a minimum paved width of thirty inches measured horizontally across
the drain. The slope of drain shall be approved by the building official or
city engineer.
   (f)   Roof Drainage. All storm waters falling upon roofs will be collected
in eave gutters, roof drains, or other approved devices and conducted to an
approved location in a manner that minimizes erosion and storm water pollution.
   (g)   Building Pads. Building pads shall be sloped at a minimum of two
percent to the street or an approved drainage device.
(Ord. 4564 § 1 (part), 1999)
16.28.321   Construction of bridges, culverts, and storm drain outfalls.
   (a)   Bridges, culverts, and storm drain outfalls shall be constructed in a
manner consistent with the Santa Clara Valley Water Resources Protection
Collaborative User Manual: Guidelines and Standards for Land Uses Near Streams
(Revised July 2006), as amended from time to time.
   (b)   Streams shall not be filled or placed in culverts to accommodate
grading and construction for land development projects, except for road
crossings.
   (c)   Stream culverts constructed to accommodate road access shall be clear-
span whenever possible and shall be constructed in a manner consistent with the
Santa Clara Valley Water Resources Protection Collaborative User Manual:
Guidelines and Standards for Land Uses Near Streams (Revised July 2006), as
amended from time to time.
(Ord. 4932 § 3, 2007)
16.28.322   Stream bank erosion repair.
   (a)   Stream bank erosion repair shall use the softest possible method
appropriate for the stream characteristics. Use of hardscape materials or
retaining walls within the banks of a stream shall be avoided. Stream bank
erosion repairs shall be constructed in a manner consistent with the Santa
Clara Valley Water Resources Protection Collaborative User Manual: Guidelines
and Standards for Land Uses Near Streams (Revised July 2006), as amended from
time to time.
   (b)   Exceptions to this requirement may be granted by the director of
public works where the applicant provides an engineering report demonstrating
that softer methods have been evaluated and found to be infeasible, that the
proposed method will effectively reduce bank erosion, and that the proposed
method will not cause erosion or negatively impact proper stream function in
other areas. Any use of hardscape under this exception, will require the
planting of appropriate native riparian vegetation onsite or at another
suitable location to be approved by the director of public works in order to
mitigate the impacts of the hardscape.
(Ord. 4932 § 4, 2007)
16.28.330   Protection of adjacent property - fences and guard rails.
   No person shall excavate on land sufficiently close to the property line to
endanger any adjoining public street, sidewalk, alley or other public property
without supporting and protecting such public street, sidewalk, alley or other
public property from settling, cracking, or other damage which might result
from such excavation. Should the nature of the excavation in the opinion of the
city engineer create a hazard to life unless adequately fenced, the permittee
shall construct such fences or guard rails to safeguard persons using the
public street, sidewalk, alley or other public property as the city engineer
may require.
(Ord. 4564 § 1 (part), 1999)
16.28.340   Prohibition of deposits of earth, rock, etc.
   (a)   Premises of Another Person. No person shall dump, move or place any
earth, sand, gravel, rock, stone or other excavated material so as to cause the
same to be deposited upon or to roll, flow or wash upon or over the premises of
another, including a public entity, without the express consent of the owner of
such premises so affected.
   (b)   Spilling. No person shall, when hauling any earth, sand, gravel, rock,
stone or other excavated material over any public street, alley or other public
place, allow such material to blow or spill over and upon such street, alley,
or place or adjacent private property.
   (c)   Removal of Debris. If due to a violation of subsection (a) or (b) of
this section, any earth, sand, gravel, rock, stone or other excavated material
is caused to be deposited upon or to roll, flow or wash upon any public place
or way, the person responsible therefor shall cause the same to be removed from
such public place or way within thirty-six hours. In the event it is not so
removed, the city engineer may cause such removal and recover the cost of such
removal from the person who failed to so remove the material.
(Ord. 4564 § 1 (part), 1999)
16.28.350   Suspension or revocation of permit.
   (a)   The building official or city engineer may suspend the permit and
issue a stop work order, and the permittee shall cease all work on the work
site, except work necessary to remedy the cause of the suspension, upon
notification of such suspension when:
   (1)   The building official or city engineer determines that the permit was
issued in error or on the basis of incorrect information supplied, or in
violation of any ordinance or regulation or the provisions of this ordinance;
   (2)   The permittee fails to submit reports when required under Sections
16.28.240 and
16.28.250(c);
   (3)   Inspection by the building official or city engineer under Section
16.28.250(b) reveals that the work or the work site:
   (A)   Is not in compliance with the conditions set forth in Section
16.28.230, or
   (B)   Is not in conformity with the grading plan, interim, or final plan as
approved or as modified under Section
16.28.250(a), or
   (C)   Is not in compliance with an order to modify under Section
16.28.250(a), or
   (D)   Is likely to be a hazard to life or limb or to endanger any private or
public property;
   (4)   The permittee fails to comply with an order to modify within the time
limits imposed by the building official or city engineer pursuant to Section
16.28.250(a);
   (5)   The permittee fails to obtain permission for wet season activity under
Section
16.28.280.
   (b)   The building official or city engineer may reinstate the suspended
permit and lift the stop order, upon the permittee's correction of the cause of
the suspension. The building official or city engineer may require as a
condition to allowing further work to be done that such reasonable safety
precautions be taken as the building official or city engineer considers
advisable to avoid the likelihood of continued danger to any private or public
property. Such safety precautions may include, but shall be limited to,
specifying a flatter exposed slope, construction of additional drainage
facilities, berms, terracing, compaction or cribbing.
   (c)   Failure or refusal to comply with a stop work order is unlawful. If
the permittee fails or refuses to cease work after being issued a stop work
order, the building official or city engineer may revoke the permit and enforce
the stop order by any means available under the law.
   (d)   The building official or city engineer shall not reinstate a revoked
permit.
(Ord. 4564 § 1 (part), 1999)
16.28.360   Appeals.
   (a)   Any applicant for a permit or any permittee aggrieved by any action or
decision of the building official or city engineer under this chapter may
appeal to the city manager by filing a written notice thereof within five
working days from the date of mailing or receipt of notice of such action.
   (b)   After receiving a notice of appeal, the city manager or the manager's
designee shall conduct a hearing within thirty days of the receipt of the
applicant's appeal, unless otherwise agreed to by the applicant. The hearing
shall be informal, but oral and written evidence may be given by both sides.
The city manager or designee shall have the authority to grant or deny the
appeal or modify the decision appealed, and shall render a written decision
within ten working days after the date of the hearing. The decision of the city
manager or designee shall be final.
(Ord. 4564 § 1 (part), 1999)
16.28.370   Action against the security.
   The building official or city engineer may act against the appropriate
security if any of the following conditions exist:
   (a)   The permittee ceases land-disturbing activities and/or filling and
abandons the work site prior to completion of the grading plan.
   (b)   The permittee fails to conform to the interim plan or final plan as
approved or as modified under Section
16.28.250(a) and has had his/her permit revoked under Section
16.28.350.
   (c)   The techniques utilized under the interim or final plan fail within
one year of installation, or before a final plan is implemented for the site or
portions of the site, whichever is later.
   (d)   The building official or city engineer determines that emergency
action by the city is necessary to prevent excessive erosion from occurring on
the site.
   The building official or city engineer shall use funds from the appropriate
security to finance remedial work undertaken by the city or a private
contractor under contract to the city, and to reimburse the city for all direct
costs incurred in the process of the remedial work.
(Ord. 4564 § 1 (part), 1999)
16.28.380   Release of security.
   Security deposited with the city for faithful performance of the grading and
erosion control work and to finance necessary remedial work shall be released
according to the following schedule:
   (a)   Securities held against the successful completion of the grading plan
and the interim plan, except for interim plans described in Section
16.28.220, shall be released to the permittee at the termination of the permit,
provided no action against such security is filed prior to that date.
   (b)   Securities held against the successful completion of the final plan
and an interim plan described in Section
16.28.220 shall be released to the permittee either one year after termination
of the permit or when a final plan is submitted for the unimproved site,
whichever is later, provided no action against such security has been filed
prior to that date.
(Ord. 4564 § 1 (part), 1999)
16.28.390   Fines and penalties.
   Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of this chapter
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished
as provided in subsection (a) of Section
1.08.010 of this code. Each separate day or any portion thereof during which
any violation of this chapter occurs or continues shall be deemed to constitute
a separate offense, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable as provided
in this section.
(Ord. 4564 § 1 (part), 1999)
16.28.400   Enforcement - Citation authority.
   The employee positions designated in this section may enforce the provisions
of this chapter by the issuance of citations; persons employed in such
positions are authorized to exercise the authority provided in Penal Code
Section 836.5 and are authorized to issue citations for violations of this
chapter. The designated employee positions are: (1) chief building official;
(2) assistant building official; (3) building inspection supervisor; code
enforcement officer; (4) supervisor, inspection and surveying; (5) industrial
waste inspector; (6) industrial waste investigator; (7) associate engineer; (8)
manager, environmental control programs; (9) supervisor, industrial waste; and
(10) manager, environmental compliance division.
(Ord. 4745 § 11, 2002: Ord. 4564 § 1 (part), 1999)
16.28.410   Cumulative Enforcement Procedures.
   The remedies provided herein are not exclusive, and are in addition to other
remedies provided under this code, or under any other law.
(Ord. 4564 § 1 (part), 1999)
Chapter 16.32
MOVING AND RELOCATING BUILDINGS
Sections:
   
16.32.010   Permit required to move building.
   
16.32.020   Application - Contents.
   
16.32.030   Fees and deposits.
   
16.32.040   Deduction from deposit.
   
16.32.050   Relocation permit.
   
16.32.060   Permit application - Contents.
   
16.32.070   Relocation bond.
   
16.32.080   Combination of moving bond and relocation bond.
   
16.32.090   Public hearing - Notice.
   
16.32.100   Grounds for granting or denying permit.
   
16.32.110   Permit granted without hearing.
   
16.32.120   Default - Consequences.
16.32.010   Permit required to move building.
   It is unlawful for any person to move any building or structure over the
public streets or alleys of the city without first filing a written application
and securing a permit from the building official so to do in the manner
provided in this chapter.
(Ord. 2104 (part), 1962: prior code § 34.701)
16.32.020   Application - Contents.
   The application for a permit to move a building or structure shall be filed
with the building official and shall contain the following:
   (a)   A description of the building proposed to be moved, giving a street
number, construction materials, dimensions, number of rooms and condition of
exterior and interior;
   (b)   A legal description of the lot from which the building is to be moved,
giving the lot, block and tract number, if located in the city;
   (c)   A legal description of the lot to which it is proposed such building
be removed, giving lot, block and tract number, if located in the city;
   (d)   The portion of the lot to be occupied by the building when removed;
   (e)   The highways, streets and alleys over, along or across which the
building is proposed to be moved;
   (f)   Proposed moving date and hours;
   (g)   Any additional information which the building official finds necessary
to a fair determination of whether a permit should be issued.
(Ord. 2104 (part), 1962: prior code § 34.702)
16.32.030   Fees and deposits.
   (a)   Application Fee. A fee as set forth in the municipal fee schedule
shall be paid on filing the application for a moving or relocation permit,
which fee shall be in addition to any other fee required under the provisions
of the building code. The fee shall be levied for moving or relocation of a
building to a site or destination within the city and for moving a building
located within the city to a site or destination outside the city.
   (b)   Deposit. Before the issuance of a permit under this chapter, the
applicant shall deposit with the building official the minimum sum of five
hundred dollars plus a sum to be determined by the building official to be
sufficient to pay the cost of service rendered by city employees in protecting,
trimming or cutting trees along the route of moving, in safeguarding, removing
and restoring wires, poles or equipment of the department of utilities of the
city, in rendering inspection services necessary to protect the interest of the
city, and in putting the original building site in a safe and sanitary
condition.
   (c)   Moving Bond in Lieu of Deposit. In lieu of a cash deposit, the
applicant may file in the office of the building official a faithful
performance bond commonly designated a "moving bond," guaranteeing completion
of the moving work within the time specified in the permit, in an amount to be
determined by the building official as provided in subsection (b). Said bond
shall also guarantee the costs of repair for damaged curbs, gutters, sidewalks,
driveways, pavement, signs, trees, poles and light and power facilities caused
by said moving or the cost of moving a building from a public street or alley
as specified in this chapter. Such bond shall also guarantee the costs of
repair for damage done to private property by said moving.
(Ord. 2960 § 64, 1976: Ord. 2611 § 16, 1971: Ord. 2104 (part), 1962: prior code
§ 34.703)
16.32.040   Deduction from deposit.
   (a)   Special Inspector. If, in the opinion of the building official, the
services of an inspector are necessary to protect the interest of the city, he
may appoint such inspector and the cost of such inspection, including
transportation costs, shall be deducted from the deposit at an hourly rate as
set forth in the municipal fee schedule.
   (b)   Removal of Building from Public Street. In case a building is left on
a public street or alley beyond the time specified on the moving permit
therefor, the building official may remove or have removed such building, and
the cost thereof shall be deducted from the deposit as made under this chapter.
   (c)   Damage to Public Facilities. In case of any damage to any public
street or sidewalk or other public or private property or facilities by reason
of the moving of any building, vehicle or equipment on any street in the city,
the building official may cause the necessary repairs to be made and the cost
thereof shall be deducted from the deposit as made under this chapter.
   (d)   City Employees Services. The building official shall also deduct from
the deposit the cost of the service rendered by any employees of the city in
protecting, trimming or cutting any trees along the route of moving, in
safeguarding, removing and restoring wires, poles or equipment of the
department of utilities and in rendering any inspection or other service deemed
necessary by the building official to protect the interests of the city.
   (e)   Insufficiency of Deposit. In case the deposit made pursuant to this
chapter is not sufficient to pay the costs as specified in this section, the
person to whom such permit is issued shall, upon demand, pay to the building
official a sufficient sum to cover all such costs. Upon failure to pay such
sum, the same may be recovered by the city in any court of competent
jurisdiction.
   (f)   Refund of Remainder. The remainder of any deposit, if there is any
remainder, shall be refunded to the person making such deposit, together with
an itemized statement of all deductions. No deposit shall be refunded or a bond
exonerated until the permittee has removed all rubbish and materials, filled
all excavations to existing grade at the original building site so that the
premises is left in a safe and sanitary condition, plugged all sewer lines with
concrete stoppers and capped all water and gas connections six inches below
grade.
(Ord. 2960 § 65, 1976: Ord. 2611 § 17, 1971: Ord. 2104 (part), 1962: prior code
§ 34.704)
16.32.050   Relocation permit.
   No permit for the moving of any building or structure to any premises
located within the city shall be issued until the owner thereof or his duly
authorized agent has applied to the building official for a permit to relocate
the particular building upon those premises, and the city manager has duly
authorized the issuance of such relocation permit after conducting a hearing
thereon as provided in this chapter.
(Ord. 2104 (part), 1962: prior code § 34.705)
16.32.060   Permit application - Contents.
   An application for a relocation permit shall contain the same information
required in an application for a moving permit, plus the following:
   (a)   Alterations, if any, proposed to be made to the building;
   (b)   A list of owners of property within the zone of interest and their
addresses.
(Ord. 2104 (part), 1962: prior code § 34.706)
16.32.070   Relocation bond.
   Before any such relocation permit is issued, the applicant shall file in the
office of the building official a faithful performance bond, commonly
designated a relocation bond, in an amount at least ten percent more than the
building official's estimated cost of the work required under the terms and
conditions imposed by the building official. Such bond shall be in addition to
the moving bond.
   Said bond shall inure to the benefit of the city and shall guarantee that
the required work shall be completed within ninety days of the date on which
the building or structure is moved to its new location; provided, however, that
such time may be extended by the building official upon written application
showing good cause therefor. In lieu of said faithful performance bond, a cash
deposit in the amount may be made with the building official.
(Ord. 2104 (part), 1962: prior code § 34.707)
16.32.080   Combination of moving bond and relocation bond.
   When both a moving bond and a relocation bond are required, they may be
combined as one bond and may be filed in the office of the building official.
(Ord. 2104 (part), 1962: prior code § 34.708)
16.32.090   Public hearing - Notice.
   Upon receipt of an application for a relocation permit, the building
official shall notify the city manager who shall set a date for a public
hearing on said application to be held not less than ten days after the filing
of the application.
   The city clerk shall publish a notice of the public hearing, and the
building official shall mail a notice of said hearing not less than five days
prior to the date thereof to all owners of property within the zone of
interest. The zone of interest shall include all property on both sides of the
same street or streets as the property to which it is proposed to move the
building, any part of which is three hundred feet or less from the nearest
corner of the property to which it is proposed to move the building as measured
on the centerline of the street. Any property immediately opposite shall be
included. Widths of intersecting streets shall be included in the measurements.
In case the proposed location is a corner lot, the zone of interest shall
include the property on all streets on which said lot fronts, measured as
designated in this section.
   At the public hearing, any person may appear to support or protest the
granting of the relocation permit.
(Ord. 3709 § 8, 1986: Ord. 2104 (part), 1962: prior code § 34.709)
16.32.100   Grounds for granting or denying permit.
   No permit shall be issued to relocate any building or structure which is so
constructed or in such condition as to be dangerous; or which is unsanitary; or
which, if it is a dwelling or habitation, is unfit for human habitation; or
which is so dilapidated, defective, unsightly or in such a condition of
deterioration or disrepair that its relocation at the proposed site would cause
appreciable harm to or be materially detrimental to the property or
improvements in the district within a radius of three hundred feet from the
proposed site; or if the proposed use is prohibited by the Zoning Code, Title
18, or if the structure is of a type prohibited in the fire zone in which it is
proposed to be located; provided, however, that if the condition of the
building or structure in the judgment of the city manager admits of practicable
and effective repair the permit may be issued upon such terms and conditions as
the city manager may deem reasonable and proper including but not limited to
the requirement of changes, alterations, additions or repairs to be made to or
upon the building or structures, to the end that the relocation thereof will
not be materially detrimental or injurious to public safety or to public
welfare or to the property and improvements, or either, in the district, as
hereinbefore limited, to which it is to be moved. The terms and conditions upon
which each permit is granted shall be written upon the permit or appended in
writing thereto.
   If the unlawful, dangerous or defective condition of the building or
structure proposed to be relocated is such that remedy or correction cannot
practicably and effectively be made, the relocation permit shall be denied.
(Ord. 2104 (part), 1962: prior code § 34.710)
16.32.110   Permit granted without hearing.
   The city manager may grant a permit without a hearing subject to conditions
as he may deem reasonable and necessary in the following cases:
   (a)   Where the parcel upon or to which the move is to be made is two acres
or greater in size.
   (b)   Where the relocation of the building has been caused by the exercise
of the power of eminent domain by the city or any public agency.
(Ord. 2104 (part), 1962: prior code § 34.711)
16.32.120   Default - Consequences.
   (a)   Notice to Principal - Deposit. Whenever the building official finds
that a default has occurred in the performance of any term or condition of any
relocation permit issued hereunder, he shall give written notice thereof to the
principal and to the surety on the bond. In such notice of default he shall
state the work to be done, the estimated cost thereof, and the period of time
deemed by him to be reasonably necessary for the completion of such work. After
receipt of said notice the surety, within the time therein specified, shall
either cause the required work to be performed or shall pay over to the
building official the estimated cost of doing the work as set forth in the
notice plus an additional sum equal to ten percent of the said estimated cost.
Upon the receipt of such money the building official shall proceed by such mode
as he deems convenient to cause the required work to be performed and completed
but he shall incur no liability other than for the expenditure of the said sum
in hand therefor.
   (b)   Noncompliance - Use of Deposit. If a cash bond has been deposited the
building official shall give notice of default as provided above, to the
principal, and if compliance is not had within the time specified the building
official shall proceed without delay and without further notice or proceeding
whatever, to use the cash deposit or any portion of said deposit to cause the
required work to be done by contract or otherwise in his discretion.
   (c)   Cash Deposit Returned. The balance, if any, of such cash deposit, upon
the completion of the work, shall be returned to the depositor or to his
successors or assigns after deducting the cost of the work plus ten percent
thereof, which ten percent shall be retained by the city to cover
administrative costs of the building department. The building official shall
return the cash deposit to the depositor or to his successors or assigns upon
the satisfactory completion of the work as herein provided, except any portion
thereof which may have been used or deducted as in this section provided.
   (d)   Demolition. In lieu of completing the work required, the building
official may demolish the building or structure and clear, clean and restore
the site, pursuant to the provisions of
Chapter 9.56 of this code for abatement of nuisances.
   (e)   Permittee Bound. Every permittee accepting a permit hereunder agrees
to be bound by the above provision without recourse to his surety, the building
official or the city.
(Ord. 2104 (part), 1962: prior code § 34.712)
Chapter 16.36
HOUSE NUMBERING
Sections:
   
16.36.010   Placing numbers on buildings and curbs.
   
16.36.020   Odd and even numbers.
   
16.36.030   Official street numbering map.
   
16.36.040   Numbers designated by building official.
   
16.36.050   Permit required for numbers on streets, sidewalks or curb.
   
16.36.060   Display of numbers required.
   
16.36.070   Placing of numbers at occupant's expense.
16.36.010   Placing numbers on buildings and curbs.
   All entrances from the public streets of the city of Palo Alto to buildings
fronting thereon shall be numbered as provided in this chapter. The numbers
shall be placed upon, or immediately above or to one side of the door or gate
or post of such entrance or shall be otherwise conspicuously located near said
entrance so that the same shall be in plain view. All numerals in the number
shall be at least three inches in height and placed to read from left to right.
(Ord. 2104 (part), 1962: prior code § 34.801)
16.36.020   Odd and even numbers.
   Where possible all numbers on the northerly and westerly sides of streets
shall be odd numbers and all numbers on the southerly and easterly sides of
streets shall be even numbers.
(Ord. 2104 (part), 1962: prior code § 34.802)
16.36.030   Official street numbering map.
   A map entitled "Official Street Numbering Map of the City of Palo Alto" on
file in the office of the building official exhibiting the various numbers to
lots and parcels of land fronting on the various streets in the city of Palo
Alto is hereby referred to for particulars and is made a part hereof and all
numbers shall be determined and located as shown on the map.
(Ord. 2104 (part), 1962: prior code § 34.803)
16.36.040   Numbers designated by building official.
   It shall be the duty of the building official to designate the respective
numbers for buildings or parcels of land fronting on streets heretofore laid
out or hereafter to be laid out or extended.
(Ord. 2104 (part), 1962: prior code § 34.804)
16.36.050   Permit required for numbers on streets, sidewalks or curb.
   No person shall place or maintain or permit to be placed or maintained any
number, figure, letter, carving, drawing, design or other marking upon any
street, sidewalk, parking space or curb in the city without first obtaining
authorization in writing from the city engineer in the manner provided for
other street work. No fee shall be required for such work. Any person
soliciting such work shall in addition obtain a solicitor's permit. Any
numerals painted, stenciled, or otherwise marked on a curb or any other portion
of a street shall conform to the following specifications:
   Numbers on curbs shall be black on a white background and shall be three
inches in height.
(Ord. 2104 (part), 1962: prior code § 34.805)
16.36.060   Display of numbers required.
   No owner, occupant, lessee, tenant or subtenant of any building having an
entrance which fronts on a public street shall display any number of such
building or entrance thereto other than the proper number designated by the
building official. Such designated number shall be placed upon or immediately
above or to one side of the door, gate, post or entrance to such building or in
some other conspicuous location as provided in this chapter or
Chapter 16.04.
(Ord. 5397 § 1, 2016: Ord. 2104 (part), 1962: prior code § 34.806)
16.36.070   Placing of numbers at occupant's expense.
   It shall be the duty of an owner or occupant of any building, at his
expense, to cause the same to be numbered in accordance with this chapter.
(Ord. 2104 (part), 1962: prior code § 34.807)
Chapter 16.38
CERTIFICATE OF USE AND OCCUPANCY FOR COMMUNITY HOUSING
Sections:
   
16.38.010   Definitions.
   
16.38.020   Certificate of use and occupancy for community housing.
   
16.38.030   General requirements for certificate.
   
16.38.040   Unoccupied structures.
   
16.38.050   Previously occupied structures.
   
16.38.060   Issuance of certificate.
   
16.38.070   Advertising.
   
16.38.080   Voidable transactions.
16.38.010   Definitions.
   As used in this chapter:
   (a)   "Association" means the organization of persons who own a lot, parcel,
area, condominium or right of exclusive occupancy in a community housing
project.
   (b)   "Community housing" and "community housing project" mean and include
the following: a condominium project, as defined in Section 1350 of the Civil
Code, containing two or more condominiums, as defined in Section 783 of the
Civil Code; a community apartment project, as defined in Section 11004 of the
Business and Professions Code, containing two or more rights of exclusive
occupancy; a stock cooperative, as defined in Section 11003.2 of the Business
and Professions Code, containing two or more rights of exclusive occupancy; and
a planned development, as defined in Section 11003 of the Business and
Professions Code, containing two or more separately owned lots, parcels or
areas.
   (c)   "Developer" means the owner or subdivider with a controlling
proprietary interest in the community housing project, or the person or
organization making application under this chapter.
   (d)   "Organizational documents" means the declaration of restrictions,
articles of incorporation, bylaws and any contracts for the maintenance,
management or operation of all or any part of a community housing project.
(Ord. 2821 § 1 (part), 1974)
16.38.020   Certificate of use and occupancy for community housing.
   A developer shall first obtain a certificate of use and occupancy for
community housing prior to the sale, lease, use or occupancy of any building or
structure as community housing.
   Such certificate shall be obtained regardless of the previous use, occupancy
or tenancy or whether any changes, alterations or modifications have been made
to any portion of any existing building or structure.
   Application for a certificate of use and occupancy for community housing
shall be made to the building official. Such application shall be submitted
with an inspection fee as set forth in the municipal fee schedule, and shall
include the following:
   (a)   The organizational documents;
   (b)   A preliminary annual operating budget containing a sinking fund
reasonably calculated to accumulate reserve funds to pay for major anticipated
maintenance, repair or replacement expenses.
(Ord. 3295 § 2, 1981: Ord. 2960 § 66, 1976: Ord. 2821 § 1 (part), 1974)
16.38.030   General requirements for certificate.
   The requirements for issuance of a certificate of use and occupancy for all
community housing projects are as follows:
   (a)   The organizational documents shall provide that the association is
responsible for maintenance and landscaping of all parts of the community
housing project which are held in common and that such maintenance shall be
performed to the standard of maintenance prevalent in the neighborhood.
   (b)   The organizational documents shall allow the association to terminate
the contract of any person or organization engaged by the developer to perform
management or maintenance duties three months after the association assumes
control of the community housing project or any time thereafter.
   (c)   Any violations of the Uniform Housing Code, promulgated by the
International Conference of Building Officials, shall be corrected and any
equipment or facilities which the building official determines are deteriorated
or hazardous shall be repaired or replaced.
(Ord. 4642 §§ 17, 27, 2000: Ord. 2821 § 1 (part), 1974)
16.38.040   Unoccupied structures.
   Buildings and structures which have not been previously occupied or used
shall comply with the following requirements, in addition to those in Section
16.38.030:
   (a)   At least two hundred cubic feet, with a minimum horizontal surface
area of twenty-five square feet, or enclosed, weatherproof, lockable storage
space shall be provided for each dwelling unit. Such storage space shall be in
addition to that ordinarily contained within a unit as cabinets, pantries and
clothes closets. Such storage space may be located in or separated from the
dwelling unit.
   (b)   Wall and floor-ceiling assemblies shall conform to the sound
insulation performance criteria promulgated in Title 25, California
Administrative Code, Section 1092, or its successor.
   (c)   The consumption of gas and electricity within each dwelling unit shall
be separately metered so that the unit owner can be separately billed for each
utility. A water shut-off valve shall be provided for each unit.
   (d)   All permanent mechanical equipment, including domestic appliances,
which is determined by the building official to be a source or potential source
of vibration or noise, shall be shock-mounted, isolated from the floor and
ceiling, or otherwise installed in a manner approved by the building official
to lessen the transmission of vibration and noise.
(Ord. 2821 § 1 (part), 1974)
16.38.050   Previously occupied structures.
   Buildings and structures that have been previously occupied shall comply
with the additional requirements set forth in Section
21.40.060 of the chapter on conversions of rental housing to condominiums and
other community housing projects.
(Ord. 3295 § 3, 1981: Ord. 2821 § 1 (part), 1974)
16.38.060   Issuance of certificate.
   (a)   Upon receipt of an application for a certificate of use and occupancy
for community housing, the building official shall cause an inspection to be
made of all buildings and structures in the proposed community housing project.
The building official shall prepare an inspection report identifying all items
in violation of the Uniform Housing Code and any additional equipment and
facilities he determines to be deteriorated or hazardous.
   The initial inspection report shall be presented to the developer who shall
correct all violations of the Uniform Housing Code and repair or replace any
equipment or facilities determined to be deteriorated or hazardous.
   (b)   The building official shall review the property report and may require
its revision and resubmission if he determines that substantial evidence shows
that any statement therein is without foundation in fact. Such report may be
revised to reflect improvement, repair or replacement.
   (c)   The developer shall repair or replace any damaged or infested areas in
need of repair or placement as shown in the structural pest report.
   (d)   The building official shall cause a final inspection of all buildings
and structures to be made, upon request by the developer, to determine that the
requirements of this chapter have been fulfilled. The building official shall
then mark the inspection report to show the corrections, repairs and
replacements which have been made.
   (e)   The organizational documents shall be submitted to the city attorney
for a determination that such documents comply with the requirements of this
chapter.
   (f) (1)   The building official shall issue a certificate of use and
occupancy for community housing if the requirements of this chapter have been
fulfilled. The property report, the marked inspection report, the structural
pest report and the preliminary annual operating budget shall be kept on file
for five years as public records in the division of inspectional services and
copies of such documents shall be sent to the real estate commissioner.
   (2)   The property report and a primer relating to community housing for
prospective purchasers of community housing, approved by the director of
planning, shall be presented by the developer to each prospective purchaser of
any interest in a community housing project prior to taking a written offer to
sell or lease. The developer shall also present to each prospective purchaser,
prior to taking a written offer to sell or lease, written notice that property
taxes are likely to increase if the project is reassessed as community housing
and that monthly association fees are difficult to predict and may increase
substantially.
(Ord. 2852 § 1, 1975: Ord. 2821 § 1 (part), 1974)
16.38.070   Advertising.
   The developer shall make no advertising use of such certificate of use and
occupancy for community housing or the fact that such certificate has been
issued.
(Ord. 2821 § 1 (part), 1974)
16.38.080   Voidable transactions.
   Any sale, lease, contract to sell or lease, deed or conveyance of any
building, structure or unit therein, or right of exclusive occupancy made
contrary to the provisions of this chapter is voidable at the sole option of
the purchaser, person contracting to purchase, lessee, grantee, his heir,
personal representative, or trustee in insolvency or bankruptcy within one year
after the date of execution of the deed, conveyance, lease or contract to sell,
but such instrument is binding upon any assignee or transferee of the grantee,
buyer or person contracting to purchase, lease or take and upon the grantor,
vendor, lessor or person or organization contracting to sell, lease or convey,
and his assignee, transferee, heir or devisee.
(Ord. 2821 § l (part), 1974)
Chapter 16.40
UNSAFE BUILDINGS
Sections:
   
16.40.010   Dangerous building defined.
   
16.40.020   Substandard residential building defined.
   
16.40.030   Occupy defined.
   
16.40.040   Dangerous buildings declared.
   
16.40.050   Standards for repair, vacation and demolition.
   
16.40.060   Notice and order of building official.
   
16.40.070   Posting of imminently dangerous buildings.
   
16.40.080   Appeal.
   
16.40.090   Enforcement of order of building official.
   
16.40.100   Repair or demolition by city engineer.
   
16.40.110   Account of expense - Filing of report.
   
16.40.120   Report transmitted to council - Notice for hearing.
   
16.40.130   Protests.
   
16.40.140   Hearing on proposed assessment.
   
16.40.150   Contest of assessment.
   
16.40.160   Notice of lien - Form and contents.
   
16.40.170   Collection - Procedure.
   
16.40.180   Interference with repair or demolition work prohibited.
16.40.010   Dangerous building defined.
   For the purpose of this chapter, any building or structure which has any or
all of the conditions or defects hereinafter described shall be deemed a
dangerous building:
   (a)   Whenever any door, aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit
is not of sufficient width or size, or it is so arranged as to provide safe and
adequate means of exit, in case of fire or panic, for all persons housed or
assembled therein who would be required to, or might, use such door, aisle,
passageway, stairway or other means of exit.
   (b)   Whenever the stress in any materials, member or portion thereof, due
to all dead and live loads, is more than one and one-half times the working
stress or stresses allowed in the building code.
   (c)   Whenever any portion thereof has been damaged by earthquake, wind,
flood, or by any other cause, in such a manner that the structural strength or
stability thereof is appreciably less than it was before such catastrophe and
is less than the minimum requirements of this code for a new building or
similar structure, purpose or location.
   (d)   Whenever any portion or member or appurtenance thereof is likely to
fall, or to become detached or dislodged, or to collapse and thereby injure
persons or damage property.
   (e)   Whenever any portion of a building, or any member, appurtenance or
ornamentation on the exterior thereof is not of sufficient strength or
stability, or is not so anchored, attached or fastened in place so as to be
capable of resisting a wind pressure of one-half that specified in the building
code without exceeding the working stresses permitted in the building code.
   (f)   Whenever any portion thereof has settled to such an extent that walls
or other structural portions have materially less resistance to winds or
earthquakes than is required in the case of new construction.
   (g)   Whenever the building or structure, or any portion thereof, because of
dilapidation, deterioration, decay, faulty construction, or because of the
removal or movement of some portion of the ground necessary for the purpose of
supporting such building or portion thereof, or some other cause, is likely to
partially or completely collapse, or some portion of the foundation or
underpinning is likely to fall or give way.
   (h)   Whenever, for any reason whatsoever, the building or structure or any
portion thereof, is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is used.
   (i)   Whenever the exterior walls or other vertical structural members list,
lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the center
of gravity does not fall inside the middle third of the base.
   (j)   Whenever the building or structure, exclusive of the foundation, shows
thirty-three percent or more of damage or deterioration to the member or
members, or fifty percent of damage or deterioration of a nonsupporting
enclosing or outside wall covering.
   (k)   Whenever the building or structure has been so damaged by fire, wind,
earthquake or flood, or has become so dilapidated or deteriorated as to become
an attractive nuisance to children who might play therein to their danger, or
as to afford a harbor for vagrants, criminals or immoral persons, or as to
enable persons to resort thereto for the purpose of committing nuisance or
unlawful or immoral acts.
   (l)   Any building or structure which has been constructed, or which now
exists or is maintained in violation of any specific requirement or
prohibition, applicable to such building or structure, of the building
regulations of this city, as set forth in the building code, or of any
provisions of Title 15 of this code relating to the prevention of fire, when so
determined and reported by the fire marshal, or of any law or ordinance of this
state or city relating to the condition, location or structure of buildings.
   (m)   Any building or structure which, whether or not erected in accordance
with all applicable laws and ordinances, has in any nonsupporting part, member
or portion, less than fifty percent, or in any supporting member less than
sixty-six percent of the strength, fire-resisting qualities or characteristics
or weather resisting qualities or characteristics required by law or ordinance
in the case of a newly constructed building of like area, height and occupancy
in the same location.
   (n)   Whenever a building or structure, used or intended to be used for
dwelling purposes, because of dilapidation, decay damage, or faulty
construction or arrangement, or otherwise, is unsanitary or unfit for human
habitation or is in a condition that is likely to cause sickness or disease,
when so determined by the health officer, or is likely to work injury to the
health, safety or general welfare of those living within.
   (o)   Whenever the building or structure, used or intended to be used for
dwelling purposes, has light, air, and sanitation facilities inadequate to
protect the health, safety, or general welfare of persons living within.
   (p)   Whenever any building or structure by reason of obsolescence,
dilapidated condition, deterioration, damage, electric wiring, gas connections,
heating apparatus, or other cause, is in such condition as to be a fire hazard
and is so situated as to endanger life or other buildings or property in the
vicinity or provide a ready fuel supply to augment the spread and intensity of
fire arising from any cause.
(Ord. 2104 (part), 1962: prior code § 34.901(a))
16.40.020   Substandard residential building defined.
   The term "substandard residential building" shall mean any residential
building including any dwelling unit, guest room, or suite of rooms or the
premises on which the same is located, in which any of the following conditions
exist to an extent that endangers the life, limb, health, property, safety or
welfare of the public or the occupants thereof:
   (a)   Structural unsoundness, including:
   (1)   Weakened or deteriorated footings.
   (2)   Footings of insufficient size to carry imposed loads with safety.
   (3)   Defective or deteriorated flooring or floor supports.
   (4)   Flooring or floor supports of insufficient size to carry imposed loads
with safety.
   (5)   Members of walls, partitions, or other vertical supports that split,
lean, list, or buckle due to defective material or deterioration.
   (6)   Members of walls, partitions, or other vertical supports that are of
insufficient size to carry imposed loads with safety.
   (7)   Members of ceilings, roofs, ceiling and roof supports, or other
horizontal members which sag, split, or buckle due to defective material or
deterioration.
   (8)   Members of ceilings, roofs, ceiling and roof supports, or other
horizontal members that are of insufficient size to carry imposed loads with
safety.
   (9)   Fireplaces or chimneys which list, bulge, or settle, due to defective
material or deterioration.
   (10)   Fireplaces or chimneys which are of insufficient size or strength to
carry imposed loads with safety.
   (b)   Improper materials of construction, including all materials except
those specifically allowed or approved by this code.
   (c)   Fire hazard, as defined in Title 15 of this code.
   (d)   Nuisance, as defined in
Chapter 9.56 of this code.
   (e)   Improperly weatherproofed, including:
   (1)   Crumbling, loose, or failing plaster.
   (2)   Broken windows or doors.
   (3)   Defective or lack of waterproofing for wood frame walls.
   (4)   Defective or weathered exterior wall covering due to lack of paint or
other approved protective coating.
   (5)   Defective or lack of waterproofing for wood frame roofs.
   (6)   Broken, split, decayed, or buckled exterior wall or roof covering.
   (f)   Defective wiring, including all wiring except that which was legally
installed in compliance with the Palo Alto Electrical Code in effect at the
time of installation and is still maintained in good condition.
   (g)   Defective plumbing, including all plumbing except that which was
legally installed in compliance with the Palo Alto Plumbing Code in effect at
the time of installation and is still maintained in good condition.
   (h)   Defective heating and ventilation devices and accessory vents and
piping, including all such devices and accessory vents and piping except those
which:
   (1)   Were legally installed in compliance with this code in effect at the
time of installation and are still maintained in good condition; and
   (2)   Are properly vented as required by this chapter.
   (i)   Improper sanitation and safety, including:
   (1)   Lack of one bath, lavatory and water closet in a dwelling unit.
   (2)   Lack of one bath, lavatory and water closet either serving each ten
guest rooms, or serving each twenty guests if housed in less than ten guest
rooms.
   (3)   Lack of kitchen sink in the kitchen of a dwelling unit.
   (4)   Lack of running water to sink, bath, water closet and lavatory in a
dwelling unit.
   (5)   Lack of running water in bath, water closet and lavatory guest rooms.
   (6)   Lack of heating device to provide hot running water for bath and
kitchen sink in a dwelling unit.
   (7)   Lack of heating device to provide hot running water for the baths
serving guest rooms.
   (8)   Lack of adequate electric lighting.
   (9)   Lack of adequate heating system.
   (10)   Window areas or ventilation less than that required by this chapter.
   (11)   Room areas, ceiling height and cubic air space less than those
required by this chapter.
   (12)   Damp, wet rooms used for living purposes.
   (13)   Infestation with insects, vermin and rodents, when so determined by
the health officer.
   (14)   General dilapidated condition and not maintained as required by this
chapter.
   (15)   Improperly enclosed or unsanitary underfloor area.
   (16)   Improperly ventilated or reduced height of underfloor area.
   (17)   Improperly ventilated cooking facilities.
   (j)   Exits, including:
   (1)   All doors, passageways, stairways, and courts which do not comply with
the provisions of this chapter.
   (2)   Lack of access to each dwelling unit, guest room, or suite of rooms
without passing through some portion of another dwelling unit, guest room or
suite of rooms.
   (k)   Lack of, or defective fire protective equipment, where required by
this chapter.
   (l)   Any building which is occupied by a residential occupancy for which it
was not designed or intended.
   (m)   Visible mold growth, as determined by a health officer or a code
enforcement officer, except mold that is minor and found on surfaces that
accumulate moisture as part of their proper functioning and use.
   (n)   Any residential building which constitutes a "dangerous building," as
defined in this code.
   (o)   Any residential building which constitutes a substandard building
under the California State Housing Law, Section 17920.3, as it may be amended
from time to time.
(Ord. 5397 § 2, 2016: Ord. 2104 (part), 1962: prior code § 34.901(b))
16.40.030   Occupy defined.
   The term "occupy" shall mean to use for human habitation, for living.
sleeping, cooking, or eating purposes, or any combination thereof, or for the
conduct of any business, profession, occupation, or calling, including storage
of merchandise or materials of any kind.
(Ord. 2104 (part), 1962: prior code § 34.901(c))
16.40.040   Dangerous buildings declared.
   (a)   All buildings or portions thereof which are determined by the building
official to be dangerous or substandard as defined in this chapter are hereby
declared to be public nuisances and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation,
demolition or removal in accordance with the procedure in this chapter or
Chapter 9.56 (Abatement of Nuisances).
   (b)   The procedure provided in this chapter shall be cumulative and in
addition to any other procedure or procedures provided in ordinances of this
city or by state law for the abatement of any of the conditions described in
this chapter, and abatement under this chapter shall not prejudice or affect
any other action, administrative, civil, or criminal, for the maintenance of
any such condition.
(Ord. 5397 § 3, 2016: Ord. 2104 (part), 1962: prior code § 34.902)
16.40.050   Standards for repair, vacation and demolition.
   The following standards shall be followed in substance by the building
official in ordering repair, vacation or demolition:
   (a)   If the dangerous building can reasonably be repaired so that it will
no longer exist in violation of the terms of this chapter, it shall be ordered
repaired;
   (b)   If the dangerous building is in such condition as to make it dangerous
to the health, morals, safety or general welfare of its occupants, it shall be
ordered to be vacated;
   (c)   In any case where a dangerous building is fifty percent damaged,
decayed or deteriorated from its replacement value or structure, it shall be
demolished, and in all cases where a building cannot be repaired so that it
will no longer exist in violation of the terms of this chapter, it shall be
demolished. In all cases where a dangerous building is a fire hazard existing
or erected in violation of the terms of this chapter, any ordinance of this
city, or statute of the state, it shall be demolished.
(Ord. 2104 (part), 1962: prior code § 34.903)
16.40.060   Notice and order of building official.
   (a)   Building Official to Commence Proceedings. Whenever the building
official has inspected or caused to be inspected any building and has found and
determined that such building is a dangerous building, he may commence
proceedings to cause the repair or rehabilitation of the building or, if he
finds that repairs or rehabilitation are impracticable, to cause the vacation
and demolition of the building.
   (b)   Notice and Order - Contents. To commence proceedings under this
section, the building official shall issue a notice and order directed to the
record owner of the building and the person, if any, occupying or otherwise in
real or apparent charge and control of the building. The notice and order shall
contain:
   (1)   The street address and a legal description sufficient for
identification of the premises on which the building is located.
   (2)   A statement that the building official has found the building to be
dangerous and a public nuisance, with a brief description of the conditions
which render the building dangerous and a public nuisance under the provisions
of Sections
16.40.010 through
16.40.040 of this chapter, including, whenever an order to vacate and demolish
is given, a finding that repair or rehabilitation is impracticable, with a
brief statement of the facts upon which such finding is based.
   (3)   An order to secure permits and physically commence elimination of the
described conditions within a reasonable timeframe as determined by the
building official or, if repair or rehabilitation has been found impracticable,
to vacate the building and commence demolition and complete demolition within a
reasonable timeframe as determined by the building official.
   (4)   A statement advising that if the required repair or demolition work is
not commenced within the time specified, the building official will order the
building vacated and posted to prevent further occupancy until the work is
completed, and may proceed to cause the work to be done and assess the costs
thereof against the property.
   (5)   A statement advising that any person having any record title or
interest in the building may appeal from the notice and order, or any action of
the building official to the city council, provided the appeal is made in
writing as provided in this section, and filed with the building official
within fifteen days from the date of service of such notice and order.
   (c)   Persons Served. The notice and order, and any amended notice and
order, shall be served upon each person to whom it is directed, and one copy
thereof shall be served on each of the following: the holder of any mortgage or
deed of trust or other lien or encumbrance of record; the owner or holder of
any lease of record; and the holder of any other estate or interest of record
in or to the building or the land on which it is located. The failure of the
building official to make or attempt service on any person required herein to
be served shall not invalidate any proceedings hereunder as to any other person
duly served from any duty or obligation imposed on him by the provisions of
this section.
   (d)   Method of Service. Service of the notice and order shall be made upon
all persons entitled thereto either personally or by mailing a copy of such
notice and order by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested,
to each such person at his address as it appears on the last equalized
assessment roll of the county or as known to the building official. If no
address of any such person so appears or is known to the building official,
then a copy of the notice and order shall be so mailed, addressed to such
person, at the address of the building involved in the proceedings. The failure
of any such person to receive such notice shall not affect the validity of any
proceedings taken under this section. Service by certified mail in the manner
provided shall be effective on the date of mailing.
   (e)   Proof of service of the notice and order shall be documented at the
time of service by a declaration under penalty of perjury executed by the
person effecting service, declaring the time and manner in which service was
made. The declaration, together with any receipt card returned in
acknowledgment of receipt by certified mail shall be affixed to the copy of the
notice and order retained by the building official.
   (f)   At the time the notice and order is served the building official shall
file in the office of the county recorder a certificate legally describing the
property and certifying that the building is a dangerous building and the owner
has been so notified. Whenever the corrections ordered shall have been
completed or the notice and order reversed, modified or set aside by the city
council upon appeal, so that the building no longer exists as a dangerous
building on the property described in the certificate, the building official
shall file a new certificate with the county recorder that the building has
been demolished or removed or is no longer dangerous.
(Ord. 5397 § 4, 2016: Ord. 2104 (part), 1962: prior code § 34.904)
16.40.070   Posting of imminently dangerous buildings.
   If the building official finds from inspection he has made or caused to be
made of any building that there exists therein or on the premises thereof any
conditions imminently dangerous to life should such building be or remain
occupied by human beings, he may order the immediate evacuation of such
building, if occupied, and shall cause to be posted at each entrance thereto a
notice reading:
      DO NOT ENTER
      UNSAFE TO OCCUPY
      BUILDING OFFICIAL OF CITY OF PALO ALTO
   It is a misdemeanor to use or occupy this building or to remove or deface
this notice.
City of Palo Alto Municipal Code Section
16.40.070
   Whenever such notice is posted, the building official shall include a
notification thereof in the notice and order issued by him under subsection (b)
of Section
16.40.060, reciting the emergency and specifying the conditions which
necessitate the posting. No person shall remain in or enter any building which
has posted at each entrance door thereof a notice as prescribed in this
section, except that entry may be made to repair, demolish or remove such
building. No person shall remove or deface any such notice so posted until the
required repairs, demolition, or removal have been completed and a certificate
of occupancy issued pursuant to the provisions of the building code.
   (Ord. 2104 (part), 1962: prior code § 34.905)
16.40.080   Appeal.
   (a)   Time for Filing - Form. Any person entitled to service under
subsection (c), Section
16.40.060 may appeal from any notice and order or any action of the building
official by filing at the office of the city clerk within fifteen days from the
date of service of such order, a written, dated appeal, in duplicate,
containing:
   (1)   A heading in the words: "Before the city council of the city of Palo
Alto."
   (2)   A caption reading: "Appeal of ___________________," giving the names
of all appellants participating in the appeal.
   (3)   A brief statement setting forth the legal interest of each of the
appellants in the building or the land involved in the notice and order.
   (4)   A brief statement in ordinary and concise language of the specific
order or action protested, together with any material facts supporting the
contentions of the appellant.
   (5)   A statement of the relief sought, and the reason why it is claimed the
protested order or action should be reversed, modified. or set aside.
   (6)   The signatures of all parties named as appellants, and their official
mailing addresses.
   (7)   The verification of at least one appellant as to the truth of the
matters stated in the appeal.
   (b)   Clerk to Set Hearing. Upon receipt at his office of any appeal filed
pursuant to this section, the city clerk shall set a date for hearing of the
appeal by the city council, which date shall be not less than ten days nor more
than thirty days from the date the appeal was filed with the city clerk.
Written notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given, at least
seven days prior to the date of the hearing, to each appellant by the city
clerk either by causing a copy of such notice to be delivered to the appellant
personally or by mailing a copy thereof, postage prepaid, addressed to the
appellant at his address shown on the appeal. Copies of the notice shall also
be delivered to the building official and the city attorney.
   (c)   Continuances. Continuances of the hearing may be granted by the city
council on motion of either party for good cause shown, or on the city
council's own motion. A request for continuance by signed stipulation of all
appellants and the building official or their attorneys may be granted by the
mayor.
   (d)   Conduct of Hearings. The hearings shall be informally conducted, and
the technical rules of evidence shall not apply except that irrelevant and
unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded. Oral evidence shall be received
only on oath or affirmation. During the course of the hearing the city council
may visit and inspect any building or premises involved in the proceeding, and
may there receive oral testimony of any sworn witness.
   An appellant may present his case personally or by his attorney. The
appellant's case shall be presented first. The building official may then
present evidence in support of the notice and order and in rebuttal of
appellant's case, after which the appellant may submit evidence in rebuttal of
any evidence presented by the building official. Oral arguments or summations
may be given after all the evidence is in, with the appellant opening and
closing.
   (e)   Council to Make Findings. At the conclusion of the hearing, the city
council shall consider the evidence presented and shall make written findings
of fact, based upon the evidence, to support its decision. The decision may
affirm, reverse, modify or set aside any order or action of the building
official. A majority of the members of the city council must concur in any such
decision. The decision of the city council shall be final.
   Written findings and decisions shall be rendered by the city council within
ten days from the date the hearing is concluded, and copies thereof shall be
delivered to each appellant and the building official in the manner prescribed
in subsection (d) of Section
16.40.060 for serving notices and orders of the building official. Proof of
service shall be filed with the city council's records of the case.
   (f)   Appeal Stays Notice and Order. Except for emergency evacuation orders
made pursuant to Section
16.40.070, enforcement of any notice and order of the building official issued
under this chapter shall be stayed during the pendency of an appeal therefrom
properly and timely filed.
(Ord. 2104 (part), 1962: prior code § 34.906)
16.40.090   Enforcement of order of building official.
   (a)   Noncompliance. After any order of the building official made pursuant
to this chapter shall have become final, either by decision of the city council
affirming the same in part or in whole or by failure to file an appeal within
the time prescribed herein, no person to whom any such order is directed shall
fail, neglect, or refuse to obey any such order of the building official.
   (b)   Owner Prosecuted. If, after any order of the building official made
pursuant to this chapter has become final, either by decision of the city
council affirming the same in part or whole or by failure to file an appeal
within the prescribed time, the owner, lessee, occupant or other person in
charge and control of the building which is the subject of such order shall
continue to occupy or maintain such building without making the corrections
thereof as required by such order, the building official may in the alternative
either prosecute such owner, lessee, occupant or other person under subsection
(a) of this section or institute court action to abate such building as a
public nuisance.
   (c)   Building Official May Repair or Demolish. Whenever work is not
commenced within the time specified in the notice and order and no appeal has
been filed, and whenever work is not commenced pursuant to any notice and
order, as affirmed or modified by the city council within ten days from the
date of service of the decision of the city council after hearing on appeal:
   (1)   The building official shall cause the building or buildings described
in such notice and order to be vacated by posting at each entrance thereto a
notice reading:
      DANGEROUS BUILDING
      DO NOT OCCUPY
      BUILDING OFFICIAL OF CITY OF PALO ALTO
   It is a misdemeanor to use or occupy this building or to remove or deface
this notice.
Palo Alto Municipal Code Section
16.40.090(c)(1)
   No person shall use or occupy any building which has been posted at each
entrance door thereto a notice as prescribed in this subsection from and after
the date of such posting until such building shall be restored to a condition
of safety and stability, as required by the order of the building official
except that entry may be made to repair, demolish or remove such building. No
person shall remove or deface any such notice so posted until the repairs,
demolition, or removal ordered by the building official have been completed and
a certificate of occupancy issued pursuant to the provisions of the building
code.
   (2)   The building official shall have the power, in addition to any other
remedy herein provided, to cause the building to be repaired to the extent
reasonably necessary to correct the conditions which render the building
dangerous as set forth in the notice and order, or, if the notice and order
shall have directed demolition, to cause the building to be sold and demolished
or demolished and the materials, rubble and debris therefrom removed and the
lot cleaned. Any such repair or demolition work shall be accomplished and the
cost thereof paid and recovered in the manner hereinafter provided in this
chapter. Any surplus realized from the sale of any such building, or from the
demolition thereof, over and above the cost of demolition and of cleaning of
the lot shall be paid over to the person or persons lawfully entitled thereto.
(Ord. 2104 (part), 1962: prior code § 34.907)
16.40.100   Repair or demolition by city engineer.
   When any work of repair or demolition is to be done pursuant to Section
16.40.090 hereof the building official shall issue his order therefor to the
city engineer and the work shall be accomplished under the direction of the
city engineer. Plans and specifications may be prepared by the city engineer,
or he may employ such architectural and engineering assistance on a contract
basis as he may deem reasonably necessary.
(Ord. 2104 (part), 1962: prior code § 34.908)
16.40.110   Account of expense - Filing of report.
   The city engineer shall keep an itemized account of the net expense incurred
by the city in the repairing or demolishing of any building. Upon the
completion of the work of repair or demolition, said city engineer shall
prepare and file with the city clerk a report specifying the work done, the
itemized net cost of the work, a description of the real property upon which
the building or structure is or was located, the names and addresses of the
persons entitled to notice pursuant to subsection (c) of Section
16.40.060 and the amount of the assessment against each lot or parcel of land
proposed to be levied to pay the cost of the work. Any such report may include
repair or demolition work on any number of buildings on any number of parcels
or property, whether or not contiguous to each other.
(Ord. 2104 (part), 1962: prior code § 34.909)
16.40.120   Report transmitted to council - Notice for hearing.
   Upon receipt of the report of the city engineer the city clerk shall set the
report for hearing by the city council to be held not less than fifteen days
nor more than sixty days after such filing and shall cause notice of the amount
of the proposed assessment, as shown in the report, to be given in the manner
and to the persons specified in subsections (c) and (d) of Section
16.40.060. Such notice shall contain a description of the property sufficient
to enable the persons served to identify it, and shall specify the day, hour
and place when the council will hear and pass upon the report, together with
any objections or protests, if any, which may be raised by any property owner
liable to be assessed for the cost of such repair or demolition and any other
interested persons. Such notice of the hearing shall be so given not less than
ten days prior to the time fixed by the council for the hearing, and shall also
be published one time, at least ten days prior to the date of hearing, in a
daily newspaper published and circulated in the city.
(Ord. 2104 (part), 1962: prior code § 34.910)
16.40.130   Protests.
   Any interested person may file a written protest with the city clerk at any
time prior to the time set for the hearing on the report of the city engineer.
Each such protest shall contain a description of the property in which the
person signing the protest is interested and the grounds of such protest. The
city clerk shall endorse on every such protest the date and time of filing in
his office, and shall present such protest to the council at the time set for
the hearing.
(Ord. 2104 (part), 1962: prior code § 34.911)
16.40.140   Hearing on proposed assessment.
   Upon the day and hour fixed for the hearing the council shall consider the
report of the city engineer, together with any protests which have been filed
with the city clerk as hereinbefore provided. The council may make such
revision, correction or modification in the report as it may deem just, and
when the council is satisfied with the correctness of the assessment, the
report and proposed assessment, as submitted or as revised, corrected or
modified, shall be confirmed. The decision of the council on the report and
assessment and on all protests shall be final and conclusive. The council may
adjourn the hearing from time to time.
(Ord. 2104 (part), 1962: prior code § 34.912)
16.40.150   Contest of assessment.
   The validity of any assessment levied under the provisions of this chapter
shall not be contested in any action or proceeding unless such action or
proceeding is commenced within thirty days after the assessment is confirmed by
the council.
(Ord. 2104 (part), 1962: prior code § 34.913)
16.40.160   Notice of lien - Form and contents.
   Immediately upon the confirmation of the assessment by the council, the
building official shall file in the office of the county recorder of Santa
Clara County a certificate in substantially the following form:
      NOTICE OF LIEN
   Pursuant to the authority vested in the Building Official by the provisions
of
Chapter 9.56 of the Palo Alto Municipal Code, said building official did on or
about the __ day of ________, 19__, cause the building or structure on the
property hereinafter described to be repaired or demolished (as the case may
be) in order to abate a nuisance on said real property, and the council of the
city of Palo Alto did on ___ day of ________, 19__, assess the cost of such
repair or demolition (as the case may be) upon the real property hereinafter
described, and the same has not been paid nor any part thereof, and the said
city of Palo Alto does hereby claim a lien on said real property for the net
expense of the doing of said repair or demolition (as the case may be) in the
amount of said assessment, to wit: the sum of $ ________, and the same shall be
a lien upon said real property until the sum has been paid in full and
discharged of record.
   The real properly hereinbefore mentioned, and upon which a lien is claimed,
is that certain parcel of land lying and being in the city of Palo Alto, county
of Santa Clara, state of California, and particularly described as follows:
   [DESCRIPTION]
   Dated: This __ day of ___________, 19__.
   ___________________
   Building Official of the
   City of Palo Alto.
   NOTARIAL
   ACKNOWLEDGMENT
   Immediately upon the recording of the notice of lien the assessment shall
constitute a lien on the real property assessed. Such lien shall, for all
purposes, be upon a parity with the lien of state, county and city taxes.
   (Ord. 2104 (part), 1962: prior code § 34.914, 1964)
16.40.170   Collection - Procedure.
   The amount of the lien shall be entered on the next tax roll upon which
general municipal taxes are to be collected. Thereafter such amount shall be
collected at the same time and in the same manner as general city taxes are
collected, and shall be subject to the same interest and penalties and to the
same procedure and sale in the case of delinquency. All laws applicable to the
levy, collection and enforcement of city taxes are hereby made applicable to
such assessment.
(Ord. 2452 § 11, 1968: Ord. 2104 (part), 1962: prior code § 34.915, 1964)
16.40.180   Interference with repair or demolition work prohibited.
   No person shall obstruct, impede or interfere with any officer, employee,
contractor or authorized representative of the city, or with any person who
owns or holds any estate or interest in any building which has been ordered by
the building official to be repaired, vacated and repaired, demolished or
removed, or with any person to whom such building has been lawfully sold
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, whenever such officer, employee,
contractor or authorized representative of the city, person having an interest
or estate in such building or structure, or purchaser is engaged in the work of
repairing, vacating and repairing, or demolishing any such building, pursuant
to the provisions of this chapter, or in performing any necessary act
preliminary to or incidental to such work or authorized or directed pursuant to
this chapter.
(Ord. 2104 (part), 1962: prior code § 34.916, 1964)
Chapter 16.42
SEISMIC HAZARDS IDENTIFICATION PROGRAM
Sections:
   
16.42.010   Purpose.
   
16.42.020   Definitions.
   
16.42.030   Scope of program.
   
16.42.040   Building categories and implementation schedule.
   
16.42.050   Engineering reports.
   
16.42.060   Review of reports.
   
16.42.070   Responsibilities of the building owners.
   
16.42.080   Program status reports to the city council.
   
16.42.090   Remedies.
16.42.010   Purpose.
   It is found and declared that in the event of a strong or moderate local
earthquake, loss of life or serious injury may result from damage to or
collapse of buildings in Palo Alto. It is generally acknowledged that Palo Alto
will experience earthquakes in the future due to its proximity to both the San
Andreas and Hayward faults. The purpose of this chapter is to promote public
safety by identifying those buildings in Palo Alto which exhibit structural
deficiencies and by accurately determining the severity and extent of those
deficiencies in relation to their potential for causing loss of life or injury.
The city council finds it desirable to identify the hazards that these
deficiencies may pose to occupants of buildings and pedestrians in the event of
an earthquake. Such a seismic hazards identification program is consistent with
California Health and Safety Code Sections 19160 - 19169 and is necessary to
implement the Palo Alto Comprehensive Plan's Environmental Resources Policy 14,
Program 47.
(Ord. 3666 § 1 (part), 1986)
16.42.020   Definitions.
   (a)   "Bearing wall" means any wall supporting a floor or roof where the
total superimposed load exceeds one hundred pounds per linear foot, or any
unreinforced masonry wall supporting its own weight when over six feet in
height.
   (b)   "Building," for the purpose of determining occupant load, means any
contiguous or interconnected structure; for purposes of engineering evaluation,
means the entire structure or a portion thereof which will respond to seismic
forces as a unit.
   (c)   "Capacity for transfer" means the maximum allowable capacity of a
structural system or connection to resist in a ductile manner the lateral
forces it would encounter due to earthquake forces.
   (d)   "Civil engineer or structural engineer" means a licensed civil or
structural engineer registered by the state of California pursuant to the rules
and regulations of Title 16, Chapter 5 of the California Administrative Code.
   (e)   "External hazard" means an object attached to or forming the exterior
facade of a building which may fall onto pedestrians or occupants of adjacent
buildings. Examples of this type of hazard include, but are not limited to, the
following:
   (1)   Nonstructural exterior wall panels, such as masonry infill or
decorative precast concrete;
   (2)   Parapets;
   (3)   Marquees, awnings or other roof-like projections from a building;
   (4)   Masonry or stone wall veneer and wall ornamentation, including
cornices or other decorative appendages;
   (5)   Masonry chimneys;
   (6)   Tile roofing;
   (7)   Wall signs and exterior lighting fixtures hung from a building
exterior;
   (8)   Fire escapes or balconies.
   (f)   "Geometry" means a building's shape or configuration, including
setbacks of wall/column lines, reentrant corners, discontinuities in vertical
and horizontal lateral force diaphragms, open storefront and building stiffness
variations due to the distribution of resisting elements or the use of
materials of differing properties within the same structural element, or other
irregularities in plan or elevation.
   (g)   "Occupants" means the total occupant load of a building determinedm
pursuant to the Uniform Building Code, or the actual maximum number of
occupants in that building if that number is less than seventy-five percent of
the number determined pursuant to the code. The number of actual occupants may
be documented by counting actual seating capacity if permanent seating is
provided in the occupancy, or by employee and client counts which can be
substantiated as a practical maximum use of the space in the building. The
chief building official will establish the procedure for documenting occupant
loads.
   (h)   "Solution" means any justifiable method that will provide for the
transfer of lateral forces through a system or connection to a degree which
will substantially eliminate a potential collapse failure. A general
description of the methods and materials to be used shall be included in
sufficient detail to allow for a cost estimate of the solution to be made
(i.e., adding shear walls, overlaying horizontal diaphragms, strengthening
critical connections, etc.).
   (i)   "Unreinforced masonry" ("URM") building means any building containing
walls constructed wholly or partially with any of the following materials:
   (1)   Unreinforced brick masonry;
   (2)   Unreinforced concrete masonry;
   (3)   Hollow clay tile;
   (4)   Adobe or unburned clay masonry.
(Ord. 4642 § 28, 2000: Ord. 3666 § 1 (part), 1986)
16.42.030   Scope of program.
   (a)   Applicability. The following buildings in Palo Alto shall be required
to have an engineering report submitted to the city's building inspection
division, pursuant to Section
16.42.050, to determine: (i) the existence, nature and extent of structural
deficiencies which could result in collapse or partial collapse of the
building; and (ii) the existence, nature and extent of deficiencies in the
anchoring of external hazards:
   (1)   Buildings constructed of unreinforced masonry (URM), except those of
less than one thousand nine hundred square feet containing six or fewer
occupants;
   (2)   Buildings constructed prior to January 1, 1935 containing one hundred
or more occupants;
   (3)   Buildings constructed prior to August 1, 1976 containing three hundred
or more occupants.
   (b)   Exemptions. The following buildings need not comply with this chapter:
   (1)   Buildings which have been structurally upgraded in substantial
accordance with either the Los Angeles Division 88 Standard for URM buildings
or the 1973, or later, edition of the Uniform Building Code;
   (2)   Buildings whose uses are subject to amortization under this code;
provided that, upon the termination of the nonconforming use, such a building
shall be required to be rehabilitated to the then current lateral force
requirements in the Uniform Building Code prior to occupancy by a conforming
use.
(Ord. 3666 § 1 (part), 1986)
16.42.040   Building categories and implementation schedule.
   (a)   Building Categories. The categories of buildings within the scope of
this chapter are set forth in Table A, below.
   (b)   Owner Notification. The owners of buildings in categories I through
III, except those designated as historic buildings, shall be notified within
six months of enactment of the ordinance codified in this chapter by the
building inspection division of the city of Palo Alto that their buildings are
required to have an engineering report submitted to the city. Owners of
designated historic buildings, as defined in
Chapter 16.49, shall be notified within eighteen months of enactment of the
ordinance codified in this chapter.
   (c)   Implementation Schedule. The owners of buildings in categories I
through III must submit engineering reports within the time frame set out in
Table A, below, from the date of mailed notice by the city.
Table A
 
Category Description                       Engineering Report Submitted Within
                                           Date of Mailed Notice (in Years)
I        All URM buildings.                1-1/2
II       All pre-1935 buildings other than 2
         URM with 100 occupants or more.
         All buildings with 300 occupants
III      or more constructed between       2-1/2
         January 1, 1935 and August 1976.
(Ord. 3666 § 1 (part), 1986)
16.42.050   Engineering reports.
   (a)   Preparation of Reports. Building owners shall employ a civil or
structural engineer to prepare the investigation and engineering report
outlined below.
   (b)   Purpose. To investigate, in a thorough and unambiguous fashion, a
building's structural systems that resist the forces imposed by earthquakes and
to determine if any individual portion or combination of these systems is
inadequate to prevent a structural failure (collapse or partial collapse).
   (c)   General. Each building shall be treated as an individual case without
prejudice or comparison to similar type or age buildings which may have greater
or lesser earthquake resistance. Generalities or stereotypes are to be avoided
in the evaluation process by focusing on the specifics of the structural system
of the building in question and the local geology of the land on which the
building is constructed.
   (d)   Level of Investigation. Some buildings will require extensive testing
and field investigation to uncover potential structural deficiencies, while
others will allow the same level of overall evaluation by a less complicated
process due to simplicity of design or the availability of original or
subsequent alteration design and construction documents.
   It is the responsibility of the engineer performing the evaluation to choose
the appropriate level of investigation which will produce a report that is
complete and can serve as a sound basis for a conclusion on the collapse hazard
the building may present.
   (e)   Format for the Report. The following is a basic outline of the format
each engineering report should follow. This outline is not to be construed to
be a constraint on the professional preparing the report, but rather to provide
a skeleton framework within which individual approaches to assembling the
information required by the ordinance may be accomplished. It also will serve
as a means for the city to evaluate the completeness of each report.
   (1)   General Information. A description of the building including: (i) the
street address; (ii) the type of occupancy use within the building, with
separate uses that generate different occupant loads indicated on a plan
showing the square footage of each different use; (iii) plans and elevations
showing the location, type and extent of lateral force resisting elements in
the building (both horizontal and vertical elements); (iv) a description of the
construction materials used in the structural elements and information
regarding their present condition; (v) the date of original construction, if
known and the date, if known, of any subsequent additions or substantial
structural alterations of the building; and (vi) the name and address of the
original designer and contractor, if known, and the name and address of the
designer and contractor, if known, for any subsequent additions or substantial
structural alterations.
   (2)   Investigation and Evaluation of Structural Systems. All items to be
investigated and the methods of investigation for each type of building under
consideration are contained in Appendices A and B, attached to the ordinance
codified in this chapter, available from the city's building inspection
division.
   (3)   Test Reports. All field and laboratory test results shall be included
in the report. Evaluation of the significance of these test results shall be
made with regard to each structural system or typical connection being
evaluated. This evaluation may be limited to a statement of the adequacy or
inadequacy of the system or connection based on the lateral load demand it
would be required to resist by calculation. If tests reveal inadequacy, a
conceptual solution must be included in the report.
   (4)   Conclusions. Based on the demand/capacity ratio and the specific
evaluation items contained in Appendices A or B attached to the ordinance
codified in this chapter, a statement shall be provided explaining the overall
significance of the deficiencies found to exist in the building's lateral
force-resisting system regarding potential collapse or partial collapse
failure.
   (5)   Recommendations. An appropriate solution, which could be used to
strengthen the structure to alleviate any collapse or partial collapse threat,
shall be specified.
   (f)   Exceptions and Alternatives. Exceptions to the specific items required
to be included in an engineering report may be granted by the chief building
official upon review of a written request from the engineer preparing the
report. Such a request shall provide evidence that adequate information
concerning the required item(s) can be determined by alternate means or that a
conclusion can be made about the item without following the solution called for
in the appropriate appendix. The purpose of granting such exceptions shall be
to reduce the costs or disruption that would result from taking required
actions, when it can be shown that they are unnecessary to provide information
available by other equivalent means. In no case will an exception be granted
which would result in an item not being completely evaluated. The decision of
the chief building official in granting exceptions is final.
(Ord. 3666 § 1 (part), 1986)
16.42.060   Review of reports.
   (a)   The city shall utilize the services of civil or structural engineers
to assist the building inspection division in determining if the submitted
engineering reports conform to the requirements of this chapter.
   (b)   The cost of this review shall be recovered by a fee assessed from the
building owner based on the time required for the review. This fee amount shall
be deducted from the plan checking fee collected for any future construction
work that deals directly with correcting any of the structural inadequacies
specified in the engineering report.
   (c)   Copies of the engineering reports shall be available to interested
individuals for a standard copying fee or may be reviewed at the building
inspection division offices.
(Ord. 3666 § 1 (part), 1986)
16.42.070   Responsibilities of the building owners.
   (a)   Notification of Building Tenants. A building owner shall notify all
tenants, in writing, that a structural investigation has been performed and
that the report is available at the building inspection division offices. This
notice must be sent within thirty days of the date the report is submitted to
the city.
   (b)   Letter of Intent. A building owner shall submit a letter to the
building inspection division within one year of the date the engineering report
was submitted, indicating the owner's intentions for dealing with the potential
collapse hazards found to exist in the building.
(Ord. 3666 § 1 (part), 1986)
16.42.080   Program status reports to the city council.
   The chief building official shall submit a semiannual report to the city
council on the status of the seismic hazards identification program. The
reports shall include information regarding the number of buildings analyzed,
the severity of the structural inadequacies discovered and any actions taken by
individual building owners to correct these inadequacies.
(Ord. 3666 § 1 (part), 1986)
16.42.090   Remedies.
   It shall be unlawful for the owner of a building identified as being
included in the scope of this chapter to fail to submit a report on either
building collapse hazards or external hazards within the time period specified
in Section
16.42.040(c), Table A, or to fail to submit a letter of intent within the time
period specified in Section
16.42.070(b). The following remedies are available to the city:
   (a)   The city may seek injunctive relief on behalf of the public to enjoin
a building owner's violation of this chapter.
   (b)   Any building owner violating this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable as provided in
Section
1.08.010 of this code. Such building owner is guilty of a separate offense for
each and every day during any portion of which such violation of this chapter
is committed, continued or permitted by such building owner.
   (c)   These remedies are not exclusive.
(Ord. 3881 § 9, 1989: Ord. 3666 § 1 (part), 1986)
Chapter 16.44
FALLOUT SHELTERS
Sections:
   
16.44.010   Fallout shelters - Construction requirements.
16.44.010   Fallout shelters - Construction requirements.
   Fallout shelters, buildings or structures, or portions thereof constructed,
designed, modified, altered, or intended for or devoted to use as a radiation
fallout shelter shall meet the following requirements:
   (a)   Construction shall be of incombustible or Class II materials designed
to withstand normally imposed loads and pressures and to provide radiation
protection of the equivalent of three feet of earth (three hundred pounds per
square foot).
   (b)   Shelters designed or used for multipurpose use shall meet all the
requirements for such other use as well as the requirements of this chapter.
   (c)   Fallout shelters shall be used for human habitation only when
necessary during a period of public emergency and shall be maintained in a
condition of readiness for such use.
   (d)   Entrances shall incorporate a ninety degree change of direction.
   (e)   The occupant load shall be not less than ten square feet of floor
space and eighty-five cubic feet of room volume per person.
   (f)   Shelters with an occupant load of more than ten shall be provided with
two exits located at opposite sides of the shelter.
   (g)   Exit doors shall be operable from the inside without the use of a key
or any special knowledge or effort.
   (h)   Stairways need not comply with Section 3305 of the Uniform Building
Code, as mended, unless the occupant load is fifty or more persons.
   (i)   Ventilation providing not less than five cubic feet of air per person
per minute shall be provided by a hand-operated blower or blowers.
   (j)   No light or heat source depleting the oxygen supply of the shelter
shall be permitted.
   (k)   Shelters need not comply with the requirements of Chapter 38 of the
building code when used for no other purpose than a fallout shelter.
   (l)   Group fallout shelters may be constructed upon two or more separately
owned contiguous parcels of land under the following conditions:
   (1)   That portion of each contiguous lot encompassing the shelter and its
appurtenances together with an access way not less than five feet in width
connecting with a public way shall be dedicated as a "group shelter easement"
for the sole purpose of locating and constructing an underground fallout
shelter for the convenience and use of the property owners of all lands upon
which such shelter and its access way is located and further that such shelter
shall not be used for any other purpose whatsoever nor used or occupied except
when necessary for protection from fallout radiation, blast, thermal or other
effects of nuclear weapons.
   (2)   Such shelter shall be entirely below ground. Mounding of earth, or the
entrance structure, vents or other appurtenances shall not be higher than
thirty-six inches above the natural level of the ground.
   (3)   Such shelter shall be open and accessible at all times to the city of
Palo Alto police, building and fire departments for inspection purposes.
   (4)   Construction of the shelter shall comply with subsections (a), (c),
(d), (e), (f), (g), (h), (i), (j), and (k) above and with acceptable
engineering standards.
(Ord. 2104 (part), 1962: prior code § 34.1001)
Chapter 16.45
TRANSPORTATION IMPACT FEE FOR NEW NONRESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT IN THE STANFORD
RESEARCH PARK/EL CAMINO REAL CS ZONE
Sections:
   
16.45.010   Declaration of goal and purpose.
   
16.45.020   Definitions.
   
16.45.030   Declaration of relationships of use, type and need between fee and
new development.
   
16.45.040   Declaration of relationship between amount of fee and cost of
capacity improvements attributed to new development.
   
16.45.050   Applicability.
   
16.45.060   Calculation of transportation impact fee.
   
16.45.070   Penalties.
   
16.45.080   Severability.
16.45.010   Declaration of goal and purpose.
   The goal and purpose of this chapter is to assess new nonresidential
development in the Stanford Research Park/El Camino Real CS zone so as to
assure that such new development collectively bears full responsibility for the
capital expenditures needed to provide capacity improvements at eight
intersections identified herein, through establishment of a transportation
impact fee.
(Ord. 3894 § 1 (part), 1989)
16.45.020   Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall be in
effect:
   (a)   "Area" means Area 8, the Stanford Research Park/El Camino Real CS
zone, as shown in EIR Figure A-7.
   (b)   "Capacity improvement" means any physical change designed to improve
the level of service of an intersection or street segment.
   (c)   "Change of use" means the replacement of an existing use by a new use,
or a change in the nature of an existing use, but not including a change of
ownership, tenancy, or management where the previous nature of the use, line of
business, or other function is substantially unchanged.
   (d)   "City" means city of Palo Alto.
   (e)   "Development" means a habitable building, whether or not in use.
   (f)   "EIR" means the Citywide Land Use and Transportation Study Draft
Environmental Impact Report, September 1988, certified by the city council on
March 6, 1989.
   (g)   "Fee" means transportation impact fee.
   (h)   "Fund" means the Stanford Research Park/El Camino Real CS zone area
fund.
   (i)   "Gross square feet" means gross floor area, as defined in Section
18.04.030 of this code.
   (j)   "New development" means (i) a nonresidential development that is
constructed on a vacant site or sites on which there was never a previous
development; or (ii) any resultant increase in gross square feet when a
nonresidential development replaces all or part of an existing or previous
development on a site; (iii) any additional gross square feet added to an
existing nonresidential development.
   (k)   "Previous development" means a habitable building that was present at
any time on a site but which has since been removed.
   (l)   "Site" means a parcel of land consisting of a single lot of record,
used or intended for use under the regulations of Title 18 (Zoning) as one site
for a use or a group of uses.
   (m)   "Use" means the conduct of an activity, or the performance of a
function or operation, on a site or in a building or facility.
   (n)   "Designated intersections" means those eight intersections listed in
Section
16.45.060(a) to which capacity improvements will be made and paid for by the
fee collected pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. 3894 § 1 (part), 1989)
16.45.030   Declaration of relationships of use, type and need between fee and
new development.
   The EIR Final Addendum, February 1989, pages VI.12 through 22, showed that
new nonresidential development in the area will create additional commute
period vehicular traffic that will travel through, among others, the designated
intersections, which are already operating at level of service "E" or worse, or
will be so after adding projected traffic from the new development. The city
defines congestion as beginning at level of service "E" and considers an
increase in traffic under these conditions to be a significant adverse impact.
The EIR final addendum showed that specific capacity improvements are necessary
to mitigate the demonstrated significant traffic impacts of the new
development.
(Ord. 4642 § 29, 2000: Ord. 3894 § 1 (part), 1980)
16.45.040   Declaration of relationship between amount of fee and cost of
capacity improvements attributed to new development.
   Data developed for the EIR showed that new development in the area will
generate from sixty to ninety percent (average eighty percent) of total new
commute period traffic from all nonresidential areas in the city at the
designated intersections. Areas 2-7 and 9 studied in the EIR will each generate
from zero to fifteen percent of such traffic at the designated intersections
(City Manager's Report CMR:154:9, 2/16/89). On the basis that the area is
projected to generate almost all of such traffic at the designated
intersections, and that the shares of Areas 2-7 and 9 are too small to
calculate for purposes of assessing the fee, such new development in the area
will be assessed the full cost of capacity improvements at the designated
intersections.
(Ord. 3894 § 1 (part), 1989)
16.45.050   Applicability.
   (a)   This chapter shall apply to the following development in the area:
   (1)   New development of a nonresidential use of two hundred fifty square
feet or greater on a site;
   (2)   Any existing development of two hundred fifty gross square feet or
greater on a site that undergoes a change in use from an exempt use as
described in the following subsection (b), to a nonresidential use.
   (b)   This chapter shall not apply to the following development or uses in
the area ("exempt uses"):
   (1)   An on-site cafeteria facility, recreational facility, credit union,
and/or day care facility to be provided for employees and/or their children and
not open to the general public;
   (2)   An accessory hazardous materials storage facility required to comply
with Title 17 of this code; provided that such facility does not, in itself,
generate new employment;
   (3)   A thermal storage facility provided for the purpose of energy
conservation, provided that such facility does not, in itself, generate new
employment;
   (4)   Residential development;
   (5)   Temporary uses of less than six months' duration;
   (6)   Any development that replaces all or part of the square footage of an
existing or previous development on a site, whether or not the existing
development is in active use, provided that the resultant increase in gross
floor area on the site is two hundred square feet or less;
   (7)   Development for which a building permit has been issued on or before
the effective date of the ordinance enacting this chapter (September 6, 1989);
   (8)   Retail service, eating and drinking service, personal service, or
automotive service when the total additional square footage is 1,500 square
feet or less. This exemption shall apply only when the additional square
footage of new development does not exceed 1,500 square feet. New development
that is larger than 1,500 square feet shall pay a fee for all square footage,
including the first 1,500 square feet.
(Ord. 4763 § 1, 2002: Ord. 3894 § 1 (part), 1989)
16.45.060   Calculation of transportation impact fee.
   (a)   Capacity Improvements at the Designated Intersections and Estimated
Cost Thereof. The following capacity improvements were identified in the EIR
(pages IV.B-50 through 85) and in Chapter 4.3, Section 5(a) of the
Environmental Impact Report for the 1998-2010 Comprehensive Plan.
 
Intersection Number and Name         Capacity Improvement*     Est. Cost ($)**
             Page Mill               Add southbound right-turn
B-5          Expressway/Hanover      lane; restripe northbound 1,072,469
             Street                  approach
C-1          Middlefield Road/Oregon Add north- and south-     1,212,617
             Expressway              bound left-turn lanes
                                     Add additional westbound
                                     lane on Arastradero at
new          Foothill Expressway/    Miranda to provide two    4,598,554
             Arastradero/Miranda     left-turn lanes and a
                                     right turn lane at
                                     Foothill
D-2(a)       Page Mill Expressway/El Add right-turn lanes all  7,807,133
             Camino Real             approaches
Total Estimated Cost of Capacity Improvements                  $14,690,773
 
   Notes:
      * Full descriptions of the capacity improvements are contained n Chapter
4.3, Section 5(a) of the EIR for the 1998-2010 Comprehensive Plan.
      ** The estimated cost of the capacity improvements reflect the EIR
estimates, revised in accordance with current rates, as set forth in a report
entitled "Estimated Cost of Capacity Improvements for Stanford Research Park/El
Camino Real Service Commercial (CS) Zone," prepared by Korne Engineering, June
2001.
   (b)   Estimated Development. Approximately 1,794,000 gross square feet of
new development is estimated to occur under the zoning regulations established
for the area. This figure represents the realistic, long-term, maximum
development potential of the area, taking into consideration the existing
roadway network, the planned capacity improvements and the planned
transportation demand management program.
   (c)   Calculation of Fee. In order for new nonresidential development in the
area to bear proportionately the cost of the identified capacity improvements,
such new development shall pay a fee of $8.20 per gross square foot of
development, determined by dividing the total estimated cost of $14,690,773.00
by the total permitted new development of 1,794,000 square feet. This fee shall
be adjusted annually on July 1 by an amount equal to the change in the
construction cost index for the preceding year, as determined by the
Engineering News Record, the McGraw Hill Construction Weekly.
   (d)   Payment. The fee shall be paid in full to the city building inspection
division prior to issuance of the building permit for the development. If no
building permit is required for a change of use, the fee shall be paid in full
prior to issuance of a certificate of use and occupancy.
   (e)   Special Fund. There is established a special Stanford Research Park/El
Camino Real CS Zone Fund into which all fees, and any interest thereon,
collected pursuant to this chapter, shall be deposited in a separate capital
facilities account in a manner to avoid any commingling of the fees with other
revenues and funds of the city. Upon receipt and entry to the accounting
records for the fund, such moneys shall be considered committed to the
designated improvements or alternative improvements in accordance with
subsections (f) and (g) hereof.
   (f)   Use of Fund. The moneys in the fund shall be eligible for expenditure
only for the capacity improvements at the designated intersections, as direct
expenditures, or reimbursements if improvements are constructed prior to
deposit of moneys into the fund, or for alternative improvements or alternative
intersections that are determined by the chief transportation official, subject
to the approval of the city council, to provide adequate feasible alternative
mitigation of those impacts addressed in the EIR that are proposed to be
mitigated by the capacity improvements in subsection (a) hereof. In no event
shall fund moneys be used for regular road maintenance. The priority for
spending moneys in the fund among the eight intersections shall be determined
by the chief transportation official.
   (g)   Budget Approval. The uses proposed for expenditure by the moneys in
the fund shall be reviewed annually by the city council along with its review
of the capital improvement program, and fund moneys shall be appropriated for
such expenditure in the manner provided for adoption of the annual budget by
the charter of the city.
(Ord. 4744 § 1, 2002: Ord. 3894 § 1 (part), 1989)
16.45.070   Penalties.
   (a)   All remedies provided for in this chapter shall be cumulative and not
exclusive.
   (b)   Violation of any provision of this chapter, including, but not limited
to, converting an exempt use to a use to which this chapter applies, without
tendering the appropriate fee to the city, is a misdemeanor punishable as
provided in this code.
   (c)   Each person or entity is guilty of a separate offense for each and
every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this
chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person or entity and shall
be punished accordingly.
   (d)   Any person or entity violating any provision of this chapter,
including, but not limited to, converting an exempt use to a use to which this
chapter applies, without tendering the appropriate fee to the city, may be
liable civilly in a sum not to exceed five hundred dollars for each day in
which such violation occurs.
   (e)   Persons employed in the following designated employee positions are
authorized to exercise the authority provided in the California Penal Code
Section 836.5 and are authorized to issue citation for violations of this
chapter: development services director, director of planning and development
services and their designees.
(Ord. 5494 § 3, 2020: Ord. 5400 § 2, 2016: Ord. 3894 § 1 (part), 1989)
16.45.080   Severability.
   If any provision or clause of this chapter or the application thereof to any
person or circumstance is held to be invalid by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not affect any other chapter provision, and
clauses of this chapter are declared to be severable.
(Ord. 3894 § 1 (part), 1989)
Chapter 16.46
APPROVAL OF PROJECTS WITH IMPACTS ON TRAFFIC IN THE SAN ANTONIO/WEST BAYSHORE
AREA
Sections:
   
16.46.010   Declaration of goal and purpose.
   
16.46.020   Definitions.
   
16.46.030   Applicability.
   
16.46.040   Calculation of transportation impact fee.
   
16.46.050   Large projects.
   
16.46.060   Penalties.
   
16.46.070   Severability.
16.46.010   Declaration of goal and purpose.
   The goal and purpose of this chapter is to regulate new development in the
San Antonio/West Bayshore Area so as to assure that such new development bears
a proportionate share of the cost of capital expenditures needed to provide
operational improvements at certain intersections. The San Antonio/West
Bayshore Environmental Impact Report (EIR) showed that these improvements are
necessary to mitigate the demonstrated significant traffic impacts of such new
development.
(Ord. 3665 § 1 (part), 1986)
16.46.020   Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall be in
effect:
   (a)   "Area" means the San Antonio/West Bayshore Area, as shown in Exhibit A
attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter, and as generally bounded by
U.S. Highway 101, Middlefield Road, Fabian Way and the city limits.
   (b)   "Gross square feet" means the square feet of all floors of a building,
measured to the outside surfaces of exterior walls, and including halls,
stairways, elevator shafts, service and mechanical equipment rooms, and
basement, cellar or attic areas deemed usable by the building official. Parking
facilities accessory to a permitted or conditional use and located on the same
site are excluded from gross square foot calculations.
   (c)   "Operational improvement" means any increase in roadway capacity or
other physical change designed to improve the level of service of an
intersection or street segment.
(Ord. 3665 § 1 (part), 1986)
16.46.030   Applicability.
   (a)   This chapter shall apply to the following development in the area:
   (1)   Any new development of two hundred fifty gross square feet or greater
on a site;
   (2)   Any development of two hundred fifty gross square feet or greater on a
site that is converted from an exempt use to a nonexempt use.
   (b)   The following uses shall be exempt from the requirements of this
chapter:
   (1)   An on-site cafeteria, recreational facility, and/or day care facility
to be provided for employees and/or their children and not open to the general
public;
   (2)   An accessory hazardous materials storage facility;
   (3)   Residential uses;
   (4)   Temporary uses of less than six months' duration;
   (5)   The replacement of existing square footage of a nonexempt use.
"Replacement" shall mean that the new use receives architectural review
approval pursuant to
Chapter 18.76 (Permits and Approvals) within one year of the previous use being
demolished;
   (6)   Uses that have received architectural review approval pursuant to
Chapter 18.76 (Permits and Approvals) on or before the date this chapter
becomes effective.
(Ord. 4826 § 17, 2004: Ord. 3665 § 1 (part), 1986)
16.46.040   Calculation of transportation impact fee.
   (a)   Estimated Improvements and Costs. The following operational
improvements and their estimated costs were identified in the San Antonio/West
Bayshore EIR:
 
   (1)   Feasibility study for a second left-turn lane on westbound Middlefield $ 20,000
San Antonio
   (2)   Right-turn lane on westbound Charleston at San Antonio (including      250,000
feasibility study)
   (3)   Signalized intersection at Ford Aerospace driveway (including feasibili200,000
study)
   (4)   Interconnections of area traffic signals                               70,000
TOTAL                                                                                 $540,000
   (b)   Estimated Development. Approximately four hundred fifty thousand gross
square feet of new nonexempt development is allowed under the zonings
established for the area.
   (c)   Calculation of Fee. In order for all new projects to bear
proportionately the cost of the operational improvements in the area, a project
shall pay a traffic impact fee of one dollar and twenty cents (five hundred
forty thousand dollars divided by four hundred fifty thousand square feet) per
gross square foot of development. This per-square-foot fee shall be adjusted on
July 1, 1986 and annually thereafter by an amount equal to the change in the
construction cost index for the preceding year, as determined by the
Engineering News Record, the McGraw Hill Construction Weekly.
   (d)   Payment. The fee shall be paid as set forth in
Chapter 16.64 of this code.
   (e)   Special Fund. A special San Antonio/West Bayshore Fund shall be
established by the city where all traffic impact fees, and any interest
thereon, collected pursuant to this chapter shall be held separate from all
other city funds.
   (f)   Use of Funds. The moneys in the San Antonio/West Bayshore Fund shall
be eligible for expenditure only for the operational improvements described in
subsection (a) of this section or for alternative improvements in the area as
determined by the chief transportation official, subject to the approval of the
city council. In no case shall any of the moneys be used for regular road
maintenance.
(Ord. 5400 § 3, 2016: Ord. 3665 § 1 (part), 1986)
16.46.050   Large projects.
   If a project is fifty thousand gross square feet or greater, the city may
require a traffic analysis to be prepared to more specifically identify direct
adverse traffic impacts generated by such a project. If specific improvements
are identified that would mitigate any such adverse impacts, then the chief
transportation official may require specific mitigation measures to be funded
and/or built by the applicant for the project. If such specific mitigation
measures are required, the cost of such measures shall be credited against the
required traffic impact fee. If such specific mitigation measures are more
costly than the required traffic impact fee, the project shall nevertheless be
responsible for the specific mitigation measures.
(Ord. 3665 § 1 (part), 1986)
16.46.060   Penalties.
   (a)   All remedies provided for in this chapter shall be cumulative and not
exclusive.
   (b)   Violation of any provision of this chapter, including, but not limited
to, converting an exempt use to a nonexempt use without tendering the
appropriate traffic impact fee to the city, is a misdemeanor punishable as
provided in this code.
   (c)   Each person or entity is guilty of a separate offense for each and
every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this
chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person or entity, and
shall be punished accordingly.
   (d)   Any person or entity violating any provision of this chapter,
including, but not limited to, converting an exempt use to a nonexempt use
without tendering the appropriate traffic impact fee to the city, may be liable
civilly in a sum not to exceed five hundred dollars for each day in which such
violation occurs.
   (e)   Persons employed in the following designated employee positions are
authorized to exercise the authority provided in California Penal Code Section
836.5 and are authorized to issue citations for violations of this chapter:
development services director, director of planning and development services
and their designees.
(Ord. 5494 § 3, 2020: Ord. 5400 § 4, 2016: Ord. 3665 § 1 (part), 1986)
16.46.070   Severability.
   If any provision or clause of this chapter or the application thereof to any
person or circumstance is held to be invalid by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not affect any other chapter provision, and
clauses of this chapter are declared to be severable.
(Ord. 3665 § 1 (part), 1986)
Chapter 16.47
RESERVED*
*   Editor’s Note: Chapter 16.47, Approval of Projects with Impacts on Housing,
previously codified herein, was repealed in its entirety by Section 1 of
Ordinance No. 5408.
Chapter 16.48
RESERVED*
*   Editor's Note: Chapter 16.48, Architectural Review, previously codified
herein, was repealed in its entirety by Section 21 of Ordinance No. 4826.
Chapter 16.49
HISTORIC PRESERVATION*
Sections:
   
16.49.010   Purpose.
   
16.49.020   Definitions.
   
16.49.040   Designation of historic structures/sites.
   
16.49.050   Exterior alteration of historic structures.
   
16.49.060   Demolition of significant buildings in the downtown area.
   
16.49.070   Demolition of contributing buildings in the downtown area and
significant buildings other than in the downtown area.
   
16.49.080   Maintenance of historic structures in the downtown area.
   
16.49.090   Enforcement.
   
16.49.100   Severability.
   *   Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history: Ordinance Nos. 3197, 3243, 3333
and 3523.
16.49.010   Purpose.
   It is found that the protection, enhancement, perpetuation and use of
structures, districts and neighborhoods of historical and architectural
significance located within the city are of cultural and aesthetic benefit to
the community. It is further found that the economic, cultural and aesthetic
standing of this city will be enhanced by respecting the heritage of the city.
The purposes of this chapter are to:
   (a)   Designate, preserve, protect, enhance and perpetuate those historic
structures, districts and neighborhoods which contribute to the cultural and
aesthetic heritage of Palo Alto;
   (b)   Foster civic pride in the beauty and accomplishments of the past;
   (c)   Stabilize and improve the economic value of certain historic
structures, districts and neighborhoods;
   (d)   Develop and maintain appropriate settings for such structures;
   (e)   Enrich the educational and cultural dimensions of human life by
serving aesthetic as well as material needs and fostering knowledge of the
living heritage of the past;
   (f)   Enhance the visual and aesthetic character, diversity and interest of
the city;
   (g)   Establish special requirements so as to assure the preservation and
the satisfactory maintenance of significant historic structures within the
downtown area.
(Ord. 3721 § 1 (part), 1986)
16.49.020   Definitions.
   Throughout this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
   (a)   "Downtown area" means that area of the University Avenue business
district subject to Chapter 18.48 of Title 18 of the Palo Alto Municipal Code
(the Zoning Code) and all zones within the geographical boundaries shown on the
maps incorporated into Chapter 18.48, including planned community and public
facility districts.
   (b)   "Historic categories" means those categories established to define and
categorize the historic structures/sites on the historic inventory. Those
categories are as follows:
   Category 1: "Exceptional building" means any building or group of buildings
of preeminent national or state importance, meritorious work of the best
architects or an outstanding example of the stylistic development of
architecture in the United States. An exceptional building has had either no
exterior modifications or such minor ones that the overall appearance of the
building is in its original character.
   Category 2: "Major building" means any building or group of buildings of
major regional importance, meritorious works of the best architects or an
outstanding example of an architectural style or the stylistic development of
architecture in the state or region. A major building may have some exterior
modifications, but the original character is retained.
   Category 3 or 4: "Contributing building" means any building or group of
buildings which are good local examples of architectural styles and which
relate to the character of a neighborhood grouping in scale, materials,
proportion or other factors. A contributing building may have had extensive or
permanent changes made to the original design, such as inappropriate additions,
extensive removal of architectural details, or wooden facades resurfaced in
asbestos or stucco.
   (c)   "Historic district" means a collection of buildings in a
geographically definable area possessing a significant concentration or
continuity of buildings unified by past events, or aesthetically by plan or
physical development. A district should have integrity of design, setting,
materials, workmanship and association. The collective value of a historic
district taken together may be greater than the value of each individual
building. All structures/sites within a historic district are categorized as
significant on the historic inventory.
   (d)   "Historic inventory" means the current edition of the Palo Alto
Historical and Architectural Resources Report and Inventory, and the master
list of categories for those structures or sites.
   (e)   "Historic structure/site" means any structure or site within the city
which has been identified as having historic or architectural significance and
has been placed on the historic inventory of the city of Palo Alto, including
structures and sites within categories 1, 2, 3 or 4, and all structures within
historic districts.
   (f)   "Significant building" means any building, group of buildings or site
categorized on the historic inventory as number one or number two and all
structures within historic districts.
(Ord. 3721 § 1 (part), 1986)
16.49.040   Designation of historic structures/sites.
   (a)   Procedure for Designation of Historic Structures/Sites or Districts.
Any individual or group may propose designation as a historic structure/site or
district. Such proposals shall be reviewed by the historic resources board,
which will make its recommendation to the council. Designation of a historic
structure/site or district must be approved by the city council. The procedure
for such designation is as follows:
   (1)   Any proposal for designation shall be filed with the department of
planning and development services and shall include the following data:
   (A)   The address and assessor's parcel number of the site or boundaries of
the proposed district;
   (B)   A description detailing the structure/site or district's special
aesthetic, cultural, architectural, or engineering interest or value of a
historic nature;
   (C)   A description of the historical value of the structure/site or
district;
   (D)   A description of the current condition of and any known threats to the
structure/site or district;
   (E)   What restoration, if any, would be necessary to return the structure/
site or district to its original appearance;
   (F)   Sketches, drawings, photographs or other descriptive material;
   (G)   Other supporting information.
   (2)   Each proposal shall be considered by the historic resources board at a
public hearing within sixty days of the receipt of the proposal. In any case
where an application for a planning or building permit affecting the exterior
of a building is pending concurrently with a proposal for designation, the
recommendation of the historic resources board shall be made within twenty days
of receipt of the proposal.
   (3)   Notice of the time, place and purpose of the hearing shall be given at
least twelve days prior to the date of the hearing by publication at least once
in a newspaper of general circulation, or by mail to the applicant, to the
owner or owners of the property, and to the owners of property within three
hundred feet of the site.
   (4)   The historic resources board shall recommend to the city council
approval, disapproval or modification of an application for designation.
   (5)   The city council may approve, disapprove or modify a recommendation
for designation and, in any case where an application for a planning or
building permit is pending concurrently with the proposal for designation, such
decision shall be made within thirty days of the recommendation, if any, of the
historic resources board.
   (6)   After approval of the designation of a structure/site or district, the
city clerk shall send to the owners of the property so designated, by mail, a
letter outlining the basis for such designation and the regulations which
result from such designation. Notice of this designation shall also be filed in
the building department and the department of planning and development services
files.
   (b)   Criteria for Designation. The following criteria, along with the
definitions of historic categories and districts in Section
16.49.020, shall be used as criteria for designating additional historic
structures/sites or districts to the historic inventory:
   (1)   The structure or site is identified with the lives of historic people
or with important events in the city, state or nation;
   (2)   The structure or site is particularly representative of an
architectural style or way of life important to the city, state or nation;
   (3)   The structure or site is an example of a type of building which was
once common, but is now rare;
   (4)   The structure or site is connected with a business or use which was
once common, but is now rare;
   (5)   The architect or building was important;
   (6)   The structure or site contains elements demonstrating outstanding
attention to architectural design, detail, materials or craftsmanship.
(Ord. 5494 § 3, 2020: Ord. 3721 § 1 (part), 1986)
16.49.050   Exterior alteration of historic structures.
   (a)   Review Process. Except for accessory dwelling units and junior
accessory dwelling units proposed on properties listed in the Palo Alto local
historic inventory, all applications for a building permit for exterior
alteration to any historic structure/site in the downtown area or a significant
building elsewhere in the city, new construction on a parcel where there is
currently a historic structure in the downtown area or a significant building
elsewhere in the city, or such application for construction within a historic
district shall be reviewed as follows:
   (1)   Review Bodies.
   (A)   Architectural review approval pursuant to
Chapter 18.76 (Permits and Approvals) is required for any historic structure/
site in the downtown area and any significant structure/site elsewhere in the
city, other than single-family and duplex residences. The architectural review
board shall refer applications to the historic resources board for a
recommendation on the proposed alteration of the structure.
   (B)   The historic resources board shall review applications involving
single-family and duplex residences which are historic structures/sites in the
downtown area or which are significant buildings elsewhere in the city.
Compliance of the property owner with the recommendations shall be voluntary,
not mandatory.
   (C)   The planning staff may review and approve minor exterior alterations
pursuant to guidelines which the historic resources board may adopt. Minor
exterior alterations are those alterations which the director of planning and
development services or his/her designee determines will not adversely affect
the exterior architectural characteristics nor the historical or aesthetic
value of the historic structure, its site or surroundings.
   (2)   Time Limit. Recommendations of the historic resources board on
alterations to a historic single-family or duplex residence shall be rendered
within thirty days of the date of referral by the architectural review board or
the chief building official. Failure to provide a recommendation within the
time limit shall cause an application for a commercial or multiple-family use
to be returned to the architectural review board, and a single-family or duplex
application to be forwarded to the chief building official for consideration of
issuance of a building permit.
   (b)   Standards of Review. In evaluating applications, the review bodies
shall consider the architectural style, design, arrangement, texture, materials
and color, and any other pertinent factors. The prime concern should be the
exterior appearance of the building site.
   (1)   On buildings not in a historical district, the proposed alterations
should not adversely affect the exterior architectural characteristics nor the
historical or aesthetic value of the building and its site.
   (2)   In historic districts, the proposed alterations should not adversely
affect:
   (A)   The exterior architectural characteristics nor the historical,
architectural or aesthetic value of the building and its site; or
   (B)   The relationship of the building, in terms of harmony and
appropriateness, with its surroundings, including neighborhood structures;
   (C)   Appeals. Any interested party may appeal to the city council the
decision of the architectural review board not to recommend approval of an
application for a building permit to alter the exterior of any historic
structure in the downtown area, or a significant structure elsewhere in the
city or in a historic district. Such appeal shall be processed in accordance
with
Chapter 18.78 (Appeals).
(Ord. 5656 § 4, 2025: Ord. 5494 § 3, 2020: Ord. 4826 §§ 22, 23, 2004: Ord. 3721
§ 1 (part), 1986)
16.49.060   Demolition of significant buildings in the downtown area.
   (a)   Permit and Findings. No permit shall be issued to demolish or cause to
be demolished all or any part of a significant building in the downtown area
unless:
   (1)   The city council determines that under the historic designation,
taking into account the current market value, the value of transferable
development rights, and the costs of rehabilitation to meet the requirements of
the building code or other city, state or federal laws, the property retains no
reasonable economic use; or
   (2)   The chief building official or the fire chief, after consultation, to
the extent feasible, with the department of planning and development services,
determines that an imminent safety hazard exists and that demolition of the
building is the only feasible means to secure the public safety; or
   (3)   The city council determines that demolition of the building will not
have a significant effect on the achievement of the purposes of this chapter.
   (b)   Application for a Permit to Demolish. An application for a permit to
demolish any significant building in the downtown area shall comply with
Chapter 16.04 of the Palo Alto Municipal Code. In addition to the contents
specified under
Chapter 16.04, any application for a permit to demolish a significant building
in the downtown area, on the grounds specified in Section
16.49.060(a)(1), shall contain any appropriate and relevant economic
information which will enable the council to make the necessary determination.
   (c)   Review of Application.
   (1)   Historic Resources Board. Applications which are accepted as complete
for a permit to demolish a significant building in the downtown area on the
grounds specified in Section
16.49.060(a)(1) or (3) shall be placed on the agenda of the historic resources
board for hearing and recommendation. If the historic resources board does not
act on the application within thirty days of referral to it, the city council
may proceed without a recommendation from the historic resources board.
   (2)   City Council Hearing and Decision. Any application for permit to
demolish a significant building in the downtown area on the grounds specified
in Section
16.49.060(a)(1) or (3) shall be heard by the city council. Notice shall be
given by mailed notice to all owners of property immediately adjacent to the
property that is the subject of the application, and by publication at least
once in a local newspaper of general circulation. The applicant shall have the
burden of establishing that the criteria set forth in Section
16.49.060(a)(1) or (3) has been met. The council may approve, disapprove or
approve the application with conditions, and shall make findings relating its
decision to the standards set forth in Section
16.49.060(a). The decision of the council shall be rendered within thirty days
from the date of the conclusion of the hearing.
   (d)   Permit to Move a Significant Building in the Downtown Area or in a
Historic District. In reviewing an application for a permit to demolish a
significant building in the downtown area or in a historic district on the
grounds specified in Section
16.49.060(a)(1) or (3), the historic resources board may decide that the
building may be moved without destroying its historic or architectural
integrity and importance, and may recommend to the city council that the
demolition permit be denied, but that a permit to relocate be processed,
pursuant to
Chapter 16.32 of this code. In that case, the time limits and notice
requirements of Section
16.49.070(c) shall also be applicable.
(Ord. 5494 § 3, 2020: Ord. 3721 § 1 (part), 1986)
16.49.070   Demolition of contributing buildings in the downtown area and
significant buildings other than in the downtown area.
   (a)   Application and Moratorium. Any person wishing to demolish a
contributing building in the downtown area or a significant building other than
downtown shall file an application for a demolition permit in accordance with
the procedures established by
Chapter 16.04 of this code. With the application, the applicant shall submit
one clear photograph of the front of the building and such other information as
may be required by the chief building official in accordance with the
requirements for the demolition permit. A copy of the application and
photograph shall be forwarded to the city council as an information item in the
next council packet. The chief building official may not take action on the
application for sixty days following receipt of a completed application.
   (b)   Referral to Architectural Review Board or Historical Resources Board.
During the sixty-day moratorium, the chief building official shall refer the
application for a permit to demolish to the architectural review board, in the
case of all buildings other than single-family and duplex residences, for
review and recommendation. The architectural review board shall refer the
application to the historic resources board for recommendations on the
historical and/or architectural significance of the building and the
appropriate time for the moratorium. A demolition permit application for a
single-family or duplex residence shall be referred to the historic resources
board for recommendation.
   (c)   Council Action. The architectural review board, the historic resources
board, or any interested person may recommend that the council extend the
moratorium. The council shall agendize such a request and may extend the sixty-
day period for a period up to one year. In the case of an extended moratorium,
the council, upon the recommendation of the historic resources board, may
require that appropriate and reasonable public notice of the availability of
the structure be provided by the applicant.
(Ord. 3721 § 1 (part), 1986)
16.49.080   Maintenance of historic structures in the downtown area.
   The owner, lessee or other person legally in possession of a historic
structure in the downtown area shall comply with all applicable codes, laws and
regulations governing the maintenance of property. Additionally, it is the
intent of this section to preserve from deliberate or inadvertent neglect the
exterior features of buildings designated as significant or contributory in the
downtown area, and the interior portions thereof when such maintenance is
necessary to prevent deterioration and decay of the exterior. All such
buildings shall be preserved against such decay and deterioration, and shall
remain free from structural defects through prompt corrections of any of the
following defects:
   (a)   Facades which may fall and injure members of the public or property;
   (b)   Deteriorated or inadequate foundation, defective or deteriorated
flooring or floor supports, deteriorated walls or other vertical structural
supports;
   (c)   Members of ceilings, roofs, ceiling and roof supports or other
horizontal members which sag, split or buckle due to defective material or
deterioration;
   (d)   Deteriorated or ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roofs,
foundations or floors, including broken windows or doors;
   (e)   Defective or insufficient weather protection for exterior wall
covering, including lack of paint or other protective covering;
   (f)   Any fault or defect in the building which renders it not properly
watertight or structurally unsafe.
(Ord. 3721 § 1 (part), 1986)
16.49.090   Enforcement.
   (a)   Unlawful Alteration or Demolition.
   (1)   Violation - Penalties. It is unlawful for a person or entity to
demolish or cause to be demolished any significant building or portion thereof
in the downtown area in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. Any
person or entity violating these provisions is guilty of a misdemeanor and,
upon conviction of any such violation, such person shall be punishable by a
fine of not more than one thousand dollars or by imprisonment for not more than
six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
   (2)   Civil Penalty. Any person or entity who demolishes a building or
causes a demolition in violation of the provisions of this chapter may be
liable civilly in a sum equal to the replacement value of the building or an
amount in the court's discretion, not to exceed ten thousand dollars.
   (3)   Injunctive Relief. The city attorney may maintain an action for
injunctive relief to restrain a violation or cause, where possible, the
complete or partial restoration, reconstruction, or replacement in kind of any
building or site demolished, altered or partially demolished in violation of
this chapter.
   (4)   Restriction on Development. Alteration or demolition of a historic
structure in violation of this chapter shall eliminate the eligibility of the
structure's lot for any transfer of development rights, pursuant to the Palo
Alto Comprehensive Plan, and such lot, if it is the site of an unlawfully
demolished historic structure from which development rights have been
transferred, shall not be developed in excess of the floor area ratio of the
demolished structure for a period of twenty years from the unlawful demolition.
A person or entity may be relieved of the penalties provided in this section
if: (i) the unlawful alteration or demolition did not constitute a major
alteration, as determined by the chief building official, or (ii) as to an
unlawful alteration, the person or entity restores the original distinguishing
qualities and character of the building destroyed or altered. Such restoration
must be undertaken pursuant to a valid building permit issued after a
recommendation by the historic resources board and a finding by the city
council that the proposed work will effect adequate restoration and can be done
with a substantial degree of success.
   (b)   Failure to Abide by Maintenance Regulations.
   (1)   Abatement. The procedures set forth in
Chapter 16.40 of the Palo Alto Municipal Code governing unsafe, dangerous or
substandard buildings, whether in commercial or residential use, shall be
applicable to any violations of Section
16.49.080.
   (2)   Misdemeanor. It is unlawful for any person or entity to fail to
maintain any building in the downtown area designated as significant or
contributory in violation of Section
16.49.080. Any such violation constitutes a misdemeanor punishable as set forth
in Section
16.49.090(a)(1) above. Each day of violation constitutes a separate offense and
may be separately punished. The chief building official and ordinance
compliance inspector are authorized to exercise the authority in California
Penal Code Section 836.5 and to issue citations for violation of Section
16.49.080.
   (3)   Civil Penalty. Any person or entity who fails to maintain any building
in the downtown area designated as significant or contributory in violation of
Section
16.49.080 may be liable civilly in a sum not to exceed one thousand dollars.
Each day of violation constitutes a separate offense for which a penalty may be
assessed.
   (c)   Remedies not Exclusive. The remedies provided by this section are not
exclusive.
(Ord. 3721 § 1 (part), 1986)
16.49.100   Severability.
   If any provision or clause of this chapter is held to be unconstitutional or
otherwise invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall
not affect other provisions of this chapter, and clauses of this chapter are
declared to be severable.
(Ord. 3721 § 1 (part), 1986)
Chapter 16.50
RESERVED*
   *   Editor's Note: Former Chapter 16.50, entitled "Historic Designation and
Demolition of Pre-1940 Residential Structures," was adopted as an interim
ordinance. The city had intended to implement a full revision of Chapter 16.49
prior to the expiration of Chapter 16.50 on March 31, 1999. On February 22,
1999, the city adopted Ordinance No. 4549, which ordinance was intended to
provide further interim regulations regarding demolition and major alteration
of certain historic resources pending completion of revisions to Chapter 16.49.
   On June 28, 1999, the council adopted Ordinance No. 4571, which ordinance
would have effected amendments to Chapter 16.49, as well as other related
legislation in the code. However, Ordinance 4571 was subject to petition and
was rejected by vote of the electorate on March 7, 2000. Because Ordinance No.
4549 was adopted as an interim measure, and in order to give effect to the
voters' rejection of the permanent historic preservation, Ordinance No. 4549
was repealed by Ordinance No. 4633, effective June 8, 2000.
Chapter 16.52
FLOOD HAZARD REGULATIONS
Sections:
   
16.52.010   Findings.
   
16.52.020   Purpose.
   
16.52.030   Goals.
   
16.52.040   Definitions.
   
16.52.050   Application of chapter.
   
16.52.060   Establishment of special flood hazard areas.
   
16.52.070   Compliance with regulations.
   
16.52.075   Requirement to submit new technical data.
   
16.52.080   Abrogation of easements and greater restrictions.
   
16.52.090   Interpretation.
   
16.52.100   Disclaimer of liability.
   
16.52.110   Development permit required.
   
16.52.120   Designation and duties of the floodplain administrator.
   
16.52.130   Standards of construction.
   
16.52.140   Standards for utilities.
   
16.52.150   Standards for subdivisions.
   
16.52.160   Standards for manufactured homes.
   
16.52.165   Standards for recreational vehicles.
   
16.52.170   Floodways.
   
16.52.180   Coastal high hazard areas.
   
16.52.190   Appeal officer.
   
16.52.200   Conditions for variances.
16.52.010   Findings.
   The city council finds that:
   (a)   The National Flood Insurance Act of 1968, as amended, and federal
regulations promulgated thereunder, require the city to adopt certain flood
hazard regulations in conformance with standards established by the Flood
Insurance Administration;
   (b)   The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation
which may result in loss of life and property, impose health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base,
all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare;
and
   (c)   These flood losses are often caused by the cumulative effect of
obstructions in areas of special flood hazards which increase flood heights and
velocities, and when inadequately anchored, damage uses in other areas. Uses
that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise protected from flood
damage also contribute to the flood loss.
(Ord. 3158 § 1 (part), 1979)
16.52.020   Purpose.
   This chapter is adopted in order to comply with the National Flood Insurance
Program (NFIP) (implementing the National Flood Act of 1968, as amended), and
federal regulations adopted thereunder for the purpose of promoting public
health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses
due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed:
   (a)   To protect human life and health;
   (b)   To minimize the need for costly flood control projects, and to
supplement the effectiveness of such projects;
   (c)   To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   (d)   To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
   (e)   To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water
and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located
in areas of special flood hazard;
   (f)   To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future blight
areas;
   (g)   To ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an
area of special flood hazard; and
   (h)   To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their actions.
(Ord. 4557 § 1, 1999: Ord. 3795 § 1, 1988: Ord. 3158 § 1 (part), 1979)
16.52.030   Goals.
   In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and
provisions for:
   (a)   Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety,
and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging
increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
   (b)   Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
   (c)   Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels,
and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel floodwaters;
   (d)   Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which
may increase flood damage; and
   (e)   Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in other
areas.
(Ord. 3158 § 1 (part), 1979)
16.52.040   Definitions.
   (a)   The definitions contained hereafter shall govern the interpretation of
the terms defined for the purposes of this chapter, except where the context
clearly requires otherwise. Words used in this chapter and not defined in this
section shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common
usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
   (1)   "Appeal" means a request for a review of the floodplain
administrator's interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request
for a variance.
   (2)   "Area of shallow flooding" means a designated AO or AH zone on the
Flood Insurance Rate Map. The base flood depths range from one to three feet; a
clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable
and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident.
   (3)   "Area of Special Flood Hazard." See "Special flood hazard area."
   (4)   "Base flood" or "one hundred year flood" means the flood having a one
percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
   (5)   “Base flood elevation (BFE)” means elevation of flooding, including
wave height, relative to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD), North
American Datum (NAVD) or other datum specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map
(FIRM) having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
   (6)   “Basement” means any area of the building having its floor subgrade
(below ground level) on all sides.
   (7)   “Breakaway walls” means any type of walls, whether solid or lattice,
and whether constructed of concrete, masonry, wood, metal, plastic or any other
suitable building material which is not part of the structural support of the
building and which is designed to break away under abnormally high tides or
wave action without causing any damage to the structural integrity of the
building on which they are used or any buildings to which they might be carried
by floodwaters. A breakaway wall shall have a safe design loading resistance of
not less than ten and no more than twenty pounds per square foot. Use of
breakaway walls must be certified by a registered engineer or architect and
shall meet the following conditions:
      (A)   Breakaway wall collapse shall result from a water load less than
that which would occur during the base flood; and
      (B)   The elevated portion of the building shall not incur any structural
damage due to the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously in the
event of the base flood.
   (8)   “Coastal high hazard area” is the area subject to high velocity
waters, including coastal and tidal and inundation or tsunamis. The area is
designated on the Flood Insurance Rate Map as Zone V1 - V30, VE or V.
   (9)   “Design Flood Elevation (DFE)” means elevation of the design flood,
including wave height, relative to the datum specified on the community's flood
hazard map.
   (10)   “Development” means any man-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures,
mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations
or bulk storage of equipment or materials.
   (11)   “Dry floodproofing” means a combination of measures that results in a
structure, including the attendant utilities and equipment, being watertight
with all elements substantially impermeable and with structural components
having the capacity to resist flood loads.
   (12)   “Flood” or “Flooding” means a general and temporary condition of
partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from (A) the overflow
of floodwaters, (B) the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface
waters from any source, and/or (C) the collapse or subsidence of land along the
shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining
caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or
suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water,
accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as
flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and
unforeseeable event which results in flooding.
   (13)   “Flood Boundary and Floodway Map” means the official map on which the
Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has
delineated both the areas of flood hazard and the floodway.
   (14)   “Flood control project” means a dam or barrier design and constructed
to keep water away from or out of a specific area, including but not limited to
levees, floodwalls and channelization.
   (15)   “Flood Insurance Rate Map” means the official map on which the
Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has
delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones
applicable to the community.
   (16)   “Flood Insurance Study” means the official report provided by the
Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the Flood
Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the water surface
elevation of the base flood.
   (17)   “Floodplain” or “flood-prone area” means any land area susceptible to
being inundated by water from any flood.
   (18)   “Floodplain management” means the operation of an overall program of
corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not
limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain
management regulations.
   (19)   “Floodplain management regulations” means zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose
ordinances (such as floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control
ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such
State of California or local regulations in any combination thereof, which
provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
   (20)   “Floodproofing” means any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes or adjustments to non-residential structures which reduce or
eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and
sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
   (21)   “Floodway” or “regulatory floodway” means the channel of a river or
other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to
discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface
elevation more than one foot.
   (22)   “Functionally dependent use” means a use which has an intended
purpose that cannot be performed, unless it is located or carried out in close
proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities
that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and
shipbuilding and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage
or related manufacturing facilities.
   (23)   “Highest adjacent grade” means the highest natural elevation of the
ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed foundations of a
structure.
   (24)   “Historic structure” means any structure that is listed individually
in the National Register of Historic Places or in the State of California
Register of Historical Resources or any structure that is listed individually
in the current edition of the Palo Alto Master List of Structures on the
Historic Inventory in Category 1 “Exceptional Building” or Category 2 “Major
Building” or any structure that has been certified by the Keeper of the
National Register as contributing to the historical significance of a
registered historic district.
   (25)   “Hydrodynamic loads” means loads imposed on an object by water
flowing against and around it.
   (26)   “Hydrostatic loads” means loads imposed on an object by standing mass
of water.
   (27)   “Letter of map change (LOMC)” means an official determination issued
by FEMA that amends or revises an effective Flood Insurance Rate Map or Flood
Insurance Study through a Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA), Letter of Map
Revision (LOMR) or Letter of Map Revision based on fill (LOMR-F).
      (A)   “Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA)”: An amendment based on technical
data showing the property was incorrectly included in a designated special
flood hazard area. A LOMA amends the current effective Flood Insurance Rate Map
and establishes that a specific property, portion of a property, or structure
is not located in a special flood hazard area.
      (B)   “Letter of Map Revision (LOMR)”: A revision based on technical data
that may show changes to flood zones, flood elevations, special flood hazard
area boundaries and floodway delineations, and other planimetric features.
      (C)   “Letter of Map Revision (LOMR-F)”: A determination that a structure
or parcel of land has been elevated by fill above the base flood elevation and
is, therefore, no longer located within the special flood hazard area. In order
to qualify for this determination, the fill must have been permitted and placed
in accordance with the community's floodplain management regulation.
      (D)   “Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR)”: A formal review and
comment as to whether a proposed flood protection project or other project
complies with the minimum NFIP requirements for such projects with respect to
delineation of special flood hazard area. A CLOMR does not revise the effective
Flood Insurance Rate Map or Flood Insurance Study, upon submission and approval
of certified as-built documentation, a Letter of Map Revision may be issued by
FEMA to revise the effective FIRM.
   (28)   “Lowest floor” means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area,
including basement.
      (A)   An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure below the lowest floor
that is usable solely for the parking of vehicles, building access or storage
in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building’s lowest
floor, provided that it conforms to the applicable non-elevation design
requirements, including but not limited to:
         (1)   The standard set forth in subdivision (3) of subsection (c) of
Section
16.52.130;
         (2)   The anchoring standards set forth in subdivision (1) of
subsection (a) of Section
16.52.130;
         (3)   The construction materials and methods standards set forth in
subsection (b) of Section
16.52.130; and
         (4)   The standards for utilities set forth in Section
16.52.140.
      (B)   For residential structures, all subgrade enclosed areas are
prohibited as they are considered to be basements. This prohibition includes
below-grade garages, storage areas and subfloor crawl spaces, except existing
below-grade subfloor crawl spaces meeting the standards set forth in subsection
(d) of Section
16.52.130.
   (29)   “Manufactured home” means a structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or
without a permanent foundation when it is attached to the required utilities.
The term does not include a recreational vehicle.
   (30)   “Manufactured home park or subdivision” means a parcel (or contiguous
parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for sale or
rent.
   (31)   “Market value of the structure” means that value of a structure
determined by estimating the cost to replace the structure in a new condition
and adjusting that cost figure by the amount of depreciation which has accrued
since the structure was constructed. The cost of replacement of the structure
shall be based on a square foot cost factor determined by reference to a
building cost estimating guide recognized by the building construction
industry, as approved by the floodplain administrator. The amount of
depreciation shall be determined by taking into account the age and physical
deterioration of the structure and functional obsolescence, as approved by the
floodplain administrator, but shall not include economic or other forms of
external obsolescence. The use of replacement costs or accrued depreciation
factors different from those contained in recognized building cost estimating
guides may be approved at the discretion of the floodplain administrator only
if such factors are included in a report prepared by an independent
professional appraiser and supported by a written explanation of the
differences.
   (32)   “Mean sea level” means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance
Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to
which base flood elevations shown on a community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map are
referenced.
   (33)   “New construction,” for floodplain management purposes, means
structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the
effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by this community,
and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
   (34)   “Person” means an individual or his agent, firm, partnership,
association or corporation, or agent of the aforementioned groups, or the State
of California or its agencies or political subdivisions.
   (35)   “Recreational vehicle” means a vehicle which:
      (A)   Is built on a single chassis;
      (B)   Measures 400 square feet or less at its largest or widest
horizontal projection;
      (C)   Is designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a small
truck;
      (D)   Is designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, seasonal use camping or travel; and
      (E)   Incorporates a vehicle that is defined by the State of California
as a camp trailer, camper, fifth-wheel travel trailer, or house car.
   (36)   “Remedy a violation” means to bring the structure or other
development into compliance with the State of California or local floodplain
management regulations, or, if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of
its noncompliance. Ways that impacts may be reduced include protecting the
structure or other affected development from flood damages, implementing the
enforcement provisions of this chapter or otherwise deterring future similar
violations, or reducing federal or State of California financial exposure with
regard to the structure or other development.
   (37)   “Riverine” means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river
(including tributaries), stream, or brook.
   (38)   “Sand dunes” means naturally occurring accumulations of sand in
ridges or mounds landward of the beach.
   (39)   “Special flood hazard area (SFHA)” means an area having special flood
or flood-related erosion hazards, and shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map as
Zone A, AO, Al - A30, AE, AH, V1 - V30, VE or V.
   (40)   “Start of construction” includes substantial improvement and other
proposed new development, and means the date on which the building permit was
issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement commenced within 180
days from the date of issuance of the permit. The actual start means either the
first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the
pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of
columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land
preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the
installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a
basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms;
nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings,
such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main
structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction
means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other part of a
structure, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of
the structure.
   (41)   “Structure” means a walled and roofed building, including but not
limited to a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as
well as a manufactured home.
   (42)   “Substantial damage” means damage of any origin sustained by a
structure, whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its original damage-
free condition would equal or exceed fifty percent of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred.
   (43)   “Substantial improvement” means any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other proposed new development of a structure, the cost of which
equals or exceeds fifty percent of the market value of the structure before the
start of construction of the improvement. This term includes a structure which
has incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work to be
performed.
   The term shall not include:
      (A)   Any project, or any portion of a project, for improvement of a
structure undertaken in response to a finding by the local code enforcement
official that there are existing violations of State of California or local
health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which render the structure
unfit for human occupancy; or
      (B)   Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the
alteration will not result in the termination of a structure’s continued
designation as an historic structure; or
      (C)   Any project, or any portion of a project, for improvement of a
structure that is required to comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act
of 1990 (42 U.S.C. Section 12101 et.seq.).
   (44)   “Variance” means a grant of relief from the requirements of this
chapter which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be
prohibited by this chapter.
   (45)   “Violation” means the failure of a structure or other development to
be fully compliant with the community’s floodplain management regulations. A
structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in this chapter is
presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
   (46)   “Wet floodproofing” means a floodproofing method that relies on the
use of flood damage-resistant materials and construction techniques in areas of
a structure that are below the elevation required by this standard by
intentionally allowing those areas to flood.
(Ord. 5566 § 3, 2022: Ord. 4824 § 1, 2004: Ord. 4557 § 2, 1999: Ord. 3795 § 2,
1988: Ord. 3158 § 1 (part), 1979)
16.52.050   Application of chapter.
   This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the
jurisdiction of the city.
(Ord. 3158 § 1 (part), 1979)
16.52.060   Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard.
   The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Insurance
Administration of the Federal Emergency Management Agency in the Flood
Insurance Study, dated June 2, 1999, the accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Map,
and all subsequent amendments and revisions thereto, are hereby adopted by
reference and declared to be a part of this ordinance. The areas of special
flood hazard that are identified in the Flood Insurance Study and depicted in
the attendant mapping are the minimum surface areas of land to which the
ordinance codified in this chapter will apply. The Flood Insurance Study may be
supplemented by a study or studies for other areas which will allow the
implementation of this ordinance and which are recommended to the city council
by the floodplain administrator. The Flood Insurance Study and the Flood
Insurance Rate Map shall be made available for inspection at the department of
public works of the City of Palo Alto, 250 Hamilton Avenue, Palo Alto,
California.
(Ord. 4557 § 3, 1999: Ord. 3795 § 3, 1988: Ord. 3158 § 1 (part), 1979)
16.52.070   Compliance with regulations.
   No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and
other applicable regulations. Violations of the provisions of this chapter by
failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall
constitute a misdemeanor. Nothing herein shall prevent the city from taking
such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
(Ord. 3795 § 4, 1988: Ord. 3158 § 1 (part), 1979)
16.52.075   Requirement to submit new technical data.
   A community's base flood elevations may increase or decrease resulting from
physical changes affecting flooding conditions. As soon as practicable, but not
later than six months after the date such information becomes available, the
City shall notify FEMA of the changes by submitting technical or scientific
data. Such submission is necessary so that, upon confirmation of those physical
changes affecting flooding conditions, risk premium rates and flood plain
management requirements will be based upon current data.
(Ord. 5566 § 4, 2022)
16.52.080   Abrogation of easements and greater restrictions.
   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and
another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap,
whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
(Ord. 3158 § 1 (part), 1979)
16.52.090   Interpretation.
   In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall
be:
   (a)   Considered as minimum requirements;
   (b)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
   (c)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
provisions of law.
(Ord. 3158 § 1 (part), 1979)
16.52.100   Disclaimer of liability.
   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. Larger floods than those upon which these regulations are based
can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade
or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of
special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from
flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part
of the city, any officer or employee thereof, the State of California, or the
Federal Insurance Administration of the Federal Emergency Management Agency,
for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any
administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. All persons performing any
construction within the city should and are advised to determine to their own
satisfaction the level of flood protection in addition to that required by this
chapter necessary or desirable to insure protection of their property.
(Ord. 4557 § 4, 1999: Ord. 3158 § 1 (part), 1979)
16.52.110   Development permit required.
   A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development
begins within any area of special flood hazard established by Section
16.52.060. Applications for a development permit shall be made with the chief
building official on forms consistent with those provided by the floodplain
administrator and upon such application as may be specified by the chief
building official. In the case of any construction or development for which a
permit such as a building, electrical, plumbing or grading permit is otherwise
required by this title, that permit shall constitute the development permit for
the project and no separate application shall be required. In such event, the
provisions of this chapter shall be complied with and the course of issuance of
such permit and such permit shall be conditioned upon such provisions as may be
required by this chapter. In addition to any other requirements, the chief
building official may require the submission of such materials as are necessary
to insure compliance with the provisions of this chapter, which may include,
but shall not be limited to: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the
nature, location, dimensions and elevations of the area in question; existing
or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities; and
the location of the foregoing. In all cases, the following information shall be
required:
      (a)   A site plan, including but not limited to:
         (1)   For all proposed structures, spot ground elevations at building
corners and twenty-foot or smaller intervals along the foundation footprint, or
one-foot contour elevations throughout the building site;
         (2)   The proposed locations of water supply, sanitary sewers, and
utilities; and
         (3)   The base flood elevation from the Flood Insurance Study or the
Flood Insurance Rate Map, or both, to the extent available;
      (b)   The foundation design details, including but not limited to:
         (1)   The proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the
lowest floor, including basement, of all structures;
         (2)   For a crawl-space foundation, the location and total net area of
foundation openings as required in this ordinance and applicable Federal
Emergency Management Agency technical bulletins, including but not limited to,
TB 1 and TB 7; and
         (3)   For foundations placed on fill, the location and height of the
fill, and compaction requirements (compacted to ninety-five percent using the
Standard Proctor Test method);
      (c)   Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any
nonresidential structure will be floodproofed, as required in subdivision (3)
of subsection (c) of Section
16.52.130 and applicable Federal Emergency Management Agency Technical
Bulletins, including but not limited to TB 3;
      (d)   All appropriate certifications listed in subsection (d) of Section
16.52.120; and
      (e)   A description of the extent to which any watercourse will be
altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development.
(Ord. 5566 § 5, 2022: Ord. 4557 § 5, 1999: Ord. 3795 § 5, 1988: Ord. 3158 § 1
(part), 1979)
16.52.120   Designation and duties of the floodplain administrator.
   The city engineer is appointed to administer and implement this chapter by
granting or denying development permits in accordance with its provisions, and
shall be known as the floodplain administrator. The duties and responsibilities
of the floodplain administrator shall include but not be limited to the
following:
   (a)   Permit review.
   (1)   Review all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied;
   (2)   All other required state and federal permits have been obtained;
   (3)   The site is reasonably safe from flooding; and
   (4)   The proposed development does not adversely affect the carrying
capacity of areas where base flood elevations have been determined but a
floodway has not been designated. For purposes of this chapter, "adversely
affects" means that the cumulative effect of the proposed development when
combined with all other existing and anticipated development will increase the
water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point.
   (b)   Use of Other Base Flood Data. When base flood elevation data have not
been provided, in accordance with Section
16.52.060, the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably
utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal,
state or other source, in order to administer the standards of construction,
standards for utilities, standards for subdivisions, standards for manufactured
homes, provisions relating to floodways and provisions relating to coastal high
hazard areas provided in this chapter.
   (c)   Whenever a watercourse is to be altered or relocated:
   (1)   Notify adjacent communities, the Santa Clara Valley Water District,
and the California Department of Water Resources prior to such alteration or
relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the
Federal Insurance Administration of the Federal Emergency Management Agency;
and
   (2)   Require that the flood-carrying capacity of the altered or relocated
portion of the watercourse is maintained.
   (d)   Obtain and maintain for public inspection and make available as
needed:
   (1)   The certifications required in subdivision (1) of subsection (c) of
Section
16.52.130 (Lowest floor elevations);
   (2)   The certification required in paragraph (C) of subdivision (2) of
subsection (c) of Section
16.52.130 (Elevation or floodproofing of nonresidential structures);
   (3)   The certification required in paragraph (B) of subdivision (3) of
subsection (c) of Section
16.52.130 (Wet floodproofing standard);
   (4)   The certified elevation required in subsection (b) of Section
16.52.150 (Subdivision standards);
   (5)   The certification required in subsection (a) of Section
16.52.170 (Floodway encroachments); and
   (6)   The information required in subsection (f) of Section
16.52.180 (Coastal construction standards).
   (e)   Make interpretations where needed, as to the exact location of the
boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards. Where there is an apparent
conflict between a mapped boundary and the actual field conditions, grade and
base flood elevations shall be used to determine the boundaries of the special
flood hazard area. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be
given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided
hereinafter.
   (f)   Take action to remedy violations of this chapter as specified in
Section
16.52.070.
(Ord. 4557 § 6, 1999: Ord. 3795 § 6, 1988: Ord. 3158 § 1 (part), 1979)
16.52.130   Standards of construction.
   In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are required:
      (a)   Anchoring.
         (1)   All new construction and substantially improved structures shall
be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure
resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of
buoyancy.
         (2)   All manufactured homes shall meet the anchoring standards of
Section
16.52.160.
      (b)   Construction Materials and Methods.
         (1)   All new construction and substantially improved structures shall
be constructed with flood-resistant materials as specified in applicable
Federal Emergency Management Agency Technical Bulletins, including but not
limited to TB 2, and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.
         (2)   All new construction and substantially improved structures shall
be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
         (3)   All new construction and substantially improved structures shall
be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air
conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding.
         (4)   Require within Zones AH or AO, adequate drainage paths around
structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed
structures.
      (c)   Elevation and Floodproofing.
         (1)   In residential new construction and substantial improvement of
any residential structure, the lowest floor, including basement:
            (A)   In an AO zone, shall be elevated to a height above the
highest adjacent grade of not less than the depth number specified in feet on
the Flood Insurance Rate Map plus 1 foot, or not less than 3 feet above the
highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified;
            (B)   In an A zone, shall be elevated at least two feet above the
highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified or one foot above the
base flood elevation, whichever is higher; or
            (C)   In all other zones, including Coastal A zones shall be
elevated at least one foot above the base flood elevation.
            (D)   Basement floors that are below grade on all sides shall be
elevated to or above base flood elevation plus 1 foot, or design flood
elevation, whichever is higher.
            (E)   Garages and carport floors shall comply with one of the
following:
               (i)   They shall be elevated to or above the elevations required
above in (A), (B) and (C) or
               (ii)   They shall be at or above grade on all but one side of
the structure and allow the automatic flow of floodwater into and out of the
garage or carport. Where a garage or carport shall solely be used parking,
building access or storage.
   Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor,
including basement, shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or
surveyor, and verified by a community official to be properly elevated. Such
certification and verification shall be provided to the floodplain
administrator.
         (2)   Nonresidential new construction and any substantially improved
nonresidential structure shall either be elevated to conform with subdivision
(1) of this subsection (c) or, together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities:
            (A)   Shall be floodproofed below the minimum elevation required in
subdivision (1) above so that the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water;
            (B)   Shall possess structural components capable of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loans and effects of buoyancy; and
            (C)   Shall be certified by a registered professional engineer that
the standards of this subdivision are satisfied. The certification shall be
provided to the floodplain administrator.
            (D)   Shall provide a flood emergency plan that includes
maintenance and operation requirements. The plan shall be approved by the
floodplain administrator. Plans shall be recorded as a covenant.
         (3)   All new construction and substantially improved structures, with
fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor (excluding basements) that are
usable solely for the parking of vehicles, building access or storage, and
which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit
of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement shall comply with the
guidelines set forth in the applicable Federal Emergency Management Agency
technical bulletins, including but not limited to TB 1 and TB 7, and shall meet
or exceed the following minimum criteria:
            (A)   Possess a minimum of two openings on different sides of each
enclosed area. If a building has more than one enclosed area, each area shall
have openings with the total net area of nonengineered openings of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area, where the enclosed
area is measured on the exterior of the enclosure walls. The bottom of all
openings shall be no higher than one foot above the higher of the final
interior grade or floor and the finished exterior grade immediately under each
opening. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters into and out of the enclosed areas and shall be accounted for in
the determination of the net open area; or
            (B)   Be certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect. Construction documents shall include a statement by a registered
design professional that the design of the openings will provide for
equalization of hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters as specified on Section 2.7.2.2 of ASCE
24.
            (C)   Openings shall be not less than 3 inches in any direction in
the plane of the wall.
            (D)   Openings shall be permitted to be installed in doors and
windows; doors and windows without installed openings do not meet the
requirement of this section.
         (4)   Manufactured homes shall also meet the standard in Section
16.52.160.
      (d)   Existing Residential Below Grade Subfloor Crawl Spaces.
Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (c)(1) for existing residential
structures, existing below-grade subfloor crawl spaces shall be allowed to
remain beneath substantially improved structures provided all other standards
of construction set forth in Section
16.52.130 and the following conditions are met:
         (1)   The lowest floor of the living space of the existing structure
is at the elevation required under subsection (c) above;
         (2)   The below-grade crawl space shall be backfilled to the maximum
extent possible without violating Uniform Building Code requirements for
minimum crawl space height;
         (3)   The crawl space grade is not more than two feet below the lowest
adjacent grade outside the foundation;
         (4)   The height of the crawl space, measured from the interior grade
of the crawl space to the top of the foundation wall, does not exceed four
feet;
         (5)   There is an adequate drainage system capable of removing
floodwaters from the interior area of the crawl space within seventy-two hours
after the flood event; and
         (6)   The expected velocity of the floodwaters at the site does not
exceed five feet per second.
      (e)   Prohibition of Residential Basement Construction.
         (1)   For residential structures located within a Special Flood Hazard
Area:
            (A)   No new basements shall be constructed; and
            (B)   No existing basements shall be expanded.
(Ord. 5580 § 1, 2023: Ord. 5566 § 6, 2022: Ord. 4824 § 2, 2004: Ord. 4557 § 7,
1999: Ord. 3795 § 7 (part), 1988)
16.52.140   Standards for utilities.
   (a)   All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall
be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the
system and discharge from systems into floodwaters.
   (b)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to
them or contamination from them during flooding.
(Ord. 3795 § 7 (part), 1988)
16.52.150   Standards for subdivisions.
   (a)   All preliminary subdivision proposals shall identify the special flood
hazard area and the elevation of the base flood.
   (b)   All subdivision plans will provide the elevation of proposed structure
(s) and pad(s). If the site is filled above the base flood elevation, the
lowest floor and final pad elevations shall be certified by a registered
professional engineer or surveyor and provided to the floodplain administrator.
   (c)   All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage.
   (d)   All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to
minimize flood damage.
   (e)   All subdivisions shall provide adequate drainage to reduce exposure to
flood hazards.
(Ord. 4557 § 8, 1999: Ord. 3795 § 7 (part), 1988)
16.52.160   Standards for manufactured homes.
   All new and replacement manufactured homes and additions to manufactured
homes on foundations in flood hazard areas or coastal high-hazard areas shall:
      (a)   Be elevated so that the lowest floor elevation meets requirements
specified in sections
16.52.130 and
16.52.180 as applicable; and
      (b)    Be securely anchored to a permanent foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse or lateral movement in accordance with ASCE 24.
(Ord. 5566 § 7, 2022: Ord. 3795 § 7 (part), 1988)
16.52.165   Standards for recreational vehicles.
   (a)   All recreational vehicles placed onsite within Zones A, A1 - A30, AH,
and AE on the Flood Insurance Rate Map will either:
   (1)   Be located on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days, and be
fully licensed and ready for highway use; a recreational vehicle is "ready for
highway use" if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site
only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no
permanently attached additions; or
   (2)   Meet the permit requirements of Sections
16.52.110 and
16.52.120 and the elevation and anchoring for manufactured homes requirements
of Section
16.52.160.
(Ord. 4557 § 9, 1999)
16.52.170   Floodways.
   Located within areas of special flood hazard established in Section
16.52.060 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely
hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential
projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply:
   (a)   Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, and other development unless certification by a registered
professional engineer is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not
result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood
discharge.
   (b)   If subsection (a) of this section is satisfied, all new construction
and substantial improvements shall comply with all other applicable flood
hazard reduction provisions of Section
16.52.130,
16.52.150,
16.52.160 and
16.52.180.
(Ord. 4557 § 10, 1999: Ord. 3795 § 7 (part), 1988)
16.52.180   Coastal high hazard areas.
   Within coastal high hazard areas established in Section
16.52.060 the following standards shall apply:
      (a)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be elevated
on adequately anchored pilings or columns and securely anchored to such pilings
or columns so that the lowest horizontal portion of the structural members of
the lowest floor (excluding the pilings or columns, grade beams and bracing) is
elevated to or above the base flood elevation plus 1 foot or design flood
elevation, whichever is higher. Wind loading values used shall be those
required by applicable state or local building standards.
      (b)   All new construction and other development shall be located on the
landward side of the reach of mean high tide.
      (c)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall have the
space below the lowest floor free of obstructions or constructed with breakaway
walls. Such temporarily enclosed space shall not be used for human habitation
and will be usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage.
      (d)   Fill shall not be used for structural support of buildings.
      (e)   Manmade alteration of sand dunes which would increase potential
flood damage is prohibited.
      (f)   The floodplain administrator shall obtain and maintain the
following records:
         (1)   Certification by a registered engineer or architect that a
proposed structure complies with subsection (a) of this section; and
         (2)   The elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the bottom of
the lowest structural member of the lowest floor (excluding pilings or columns)
of all new and substantially improved structures, and whether such structures
contain a basement.
(Ord. 5566 § 8, 2022: Ord. 4557 § 11, 1999: Ord. 3795 § 7 (part), 1988)
16.52.190   Appeal officer.
   (a)   The city manager or her designee shall hear and decide appeals and
requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter.
   (b)   The city manager shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged
there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the
floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter.
   (c)   In passing upon such applications, the city manager shall consider all
technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other
sections of this chapter, and:
   (1)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury
of others;
   (2)   The danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
   (3)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the existing individual owner and
future owners of the property;
   (4)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
   (5)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
   (6)   The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which
are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
   (7)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
   (8)   The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive Plan and
floodplain management program for that area;
   (9)   The safety of access to the property in time of flood for ordinary and
emergency vehicles;
   (10)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment
transport of the floodwaters expected at the site; and
   (11)   The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water system, and streets and bridges.
   (d)   Upon consideration of the factors of subsection (c) of this section
and the purposes of this chapter, the city manager may attach such conditions
to the granting of variances as she deems necessary to further the purposes of
this chapter.
   (e)   The floodplain administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal
actions and report any variances to the Federal Insurance Administration upon
request.
(Ord. 4557 § 12, 1999: Ord. 3795 § 7 (part), 1988)
16.52.200   Conditions for variances.
   (a)   Variances may be issued, as follows:
   (1)   For new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new
development to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous
to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base
flood level, provided that the procedures of Sections
16.52.110,
16.52.120,
16.52.130,
16.52.140,
16.52.150,
16.52.160,
16.52.170 and
16.52.180 of this ordinance shall be fully considered, and, as the lot size
increases beyond one-half acre, the technical justifications required for
issuing the variance shall increase; and
   (2)   For new construction and substantial improvements and for other
development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided
that the provisions of subsections (a) through (c) of this section are
satisfied and that the structure or other development is protected by methods
that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional
threats to public safety.
   (b)   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
such increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
   (c)   Variances shall be issued only upon:
   (1)   A showing of good and sufficient cause; and
   (2)   A determination that:
   (A)   The variance is reasonably necessary, considering the flood hazard, to
afford relief;
   (B)   The failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship
to the applicant; and
   (C)   The granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights,
additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create
nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with
existing local laws or ordinances.
   (d)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice over the signature of a community official that:
   (1)   The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base
flood elevation could result in a substantial increase in the cost of flood
insurance; and
   (2)   Any construction below the base flood elevation could increase the
risk to life and property.
   (e)   A copy of the notice shall be recorded by the floodplain administrator
in the office of the Santa Clara county recorder and shall be recorded in a
manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land.
   (f)   The floodplain administrator will maintain a record of all variance
actions, including the essential facts supporting their issuance, and the
administrator shall report on the variances that are issued in the city of Palo
Alto's biennial report that is submitted to the Federal Insurance
Administration of the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
(Ord. 4557 § 13, 1999: Ord. 3795 § 7 (part), 1988)
Chapter 16.56
HANDICAPPED ACCESS REGULATIONS - APPEAL
Sections:
   
16.56.010   Purpose.
   
16.56.020   Definitions.
   
16.56.030   Authorization for exceptions and appeals.
   
16.56.040   Notice of determination.
   
16.56.050   Advisory committee on regulations for handicapped access.
   
16.56.060   Appeal procedure.
   
16.56.070   Severability.
16.56.010   Purpose.
   It is found and declared that under the Handicapped Access Regulations
promulgated by the Office of the State Architect, state of California,
effective July 1, 1982, and contained in Part 2, Title 24 of the California
Administrative Code, every building occupancy type except non-publicly funded
housing is required to be made accessible to the physically handicapped. The
chief building official may grant certain exceptions to the regulations.
Section 2-105(b) 11D of the regulations requires that some determinations of
the chief building official be subject to an appeals process. The purpose of
the ordinance codified in this chapter is to ensure that procedures set forth
in this code are in compliance with the requirements of state law by
establishing a process whereby the city manager, with the assistance of a
voluntary advisory committee, hears appeals and renders final decisions
concerning compliance with the Handicapped Access Regulations.
(Ord. 3374 § 1 (part), 1982)
16.56.020   Definitions.
   (a)   The following words shall have the following meanings:
   (1)   "Equivalent facilitation" means an alternate means of complying with
the literal requirements of the standards and specifications contained in the
regulations that provide access in keeping with the purposes of such
regulations. In determining equivalent facilitation, consideration shall be
given to means that provide for the maximum independence of the physically
handicapped, while presenting the least risk of harm, injury or other hazard to
handicapped persons or others.
   (2)   "Regulations" means Handicapped Access Regulations promulgated by the
Office of the State Architect, state of California, effective July 1, 1982, and
contained in Part 2, Title 24 of the California Administrative Code.
   (3)   "Unreasonable hardship" means compliance with the regulations would
make the specific work of a project affected by the regulations unfeasible
based upon an overall evaluation of the following factors:
   (A)   The cost of providing access;
   (B)   The cost of all construction contemplated;
   (C)   The impact of proposed improvements on the financial feasibility of
the project;
   (D)   The nature of the accessibility which would be gained or lost;
   (E)   The nature of the use of the facility under construction and its
availability to handicapped persons.
   The details of any finding of unreasonable hardship shall be written and
entered in the files of the division of inspectional services.
(Ord. 3374 § 1 (part), 1982)
16.56.030   Authorization for exceptions and appeals.
   The chief building official may grant certain exceptions to the regulations
if he determines that, in existing buildings, (a) compliance would create an
unreasonable hardship and that equivalent facilitation is provided, or (b)
legal and physical constraints will not allow compliance or equivalent
facilitation without creating an unreasonable hardship. An appeal may be taken
from a determination of the chief building official's granting or not granting
of an exception to the regulations only where the regulations authorize an
appeal by referring to Section 2-105(b) 11D of the regulations wherein an
appeal process is required.
(Ord. 3374 § 1 (part), 1982)
16.56.040   Notice of determination.
   (a)   In those cases where an appeal is authorized by the regulations, the
chief building official shall distribute notice of the initial decision
regarding an exception to the regulations in the next available city council
packet after the rendering of the decision. Such notice shall also be published
once in a local newspaper of general circulation not later than five days after
the distribution of the notice in the city council packet.
   (b)   The notice referred to in this section shall state the address and
general description of the subject property and project, and the nature of the
determination. Such notice shall also recite the fact that details regarding
the project and the decision will be available in the division of inspectional
services and that an appeal may be taken from the chief building official's
determination within ten days after the publication of the notice.
(Ord. 3374 § 1 (part), 1982)
16.56.050   Advisory committee on regulations for handicapped access.
   (a)   The city manager, pursuant to the authority granted in the Palo Alto
City Charter, Article IV, Section 6(q), shall appoint an advisory committee on
regulations for handicapped access to be present at all hearings of appeals and
to advise the city manager or designee in making a determination regarding the
issues appealed.
   (b)   The advisory committee on regulations for handicapped access shall be
composed of five members, two of whom shall be physically handicapped persons,
two of whom shall be persons experienced in construction, and one who shall be
a member of the public. The members of the committee shall serve at the
discretion of the city manager and without compensation.
(Ord. 3374 § 1 (part), 1982)
16.56.060   Appeal procedure.
   (a)   The following persons or entities may appeal a decision of the chief
building official in those cases described in Section
16.56.030:
   (1)   A project owner or his representative appealing a determination
regarding unreasonable hardship;
   (2)   A project owner or his representative appealing a determination
regarding equivalent facilitation;
   (3)   An interested individual or organization appealing an exception
granted.
   (b)   An appeal from the decision of the chief building official shall be
initiated within ten days after the publication of notice of the decision, as
provided in Section
16.56.040, by the filing at the office of the city manager of a written, dated
appeal in duplicate, containing:
   (1)   A caption reading: "Appeal of _________________ Before the City
Manager," stating the names of all appellant(s) participating in the appeal and
their status in relation to the project being appealed;
   (2)   A statement containing all facts supporting the contentions of the
appellant(s) and all reasons why the decision of the chief building official
should be reversed, modified, or set aside;
   (3)   The signatures of all parties named as appellants and their official
mailing addresses;
   (4)   A fee, as set forth in the municipal fee schedule for planning
department appeals.
   (c)   Upon receipt of any appeal, the city manager or a designee shall set a
date for a hearing. Such hearing shall be held within fifteen days of receipt
of the appeal. A notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given to
the appellant(s) by the city manager or designee in writing. The notice shall
be mailed, postage prepaid, addressed to the appellant(s) at the address listed
on the appeal, or it shall be delivered to the appellant(s) personally, at
least ten days prior to the hearing date. If the appellant is other than the
project owner, the project owner shall also be notified of the hearing. In
addition, members of the advisory committee (Section
16.56.050) shall be mailed notice of the hearing.
   (d)   The city manager or designee (other than any personnel from the
division of inspectional services), shall hear the appeal. At the time and
place set for the hearing the city manager or designee shall receive all
testimonial, documentary and tangible evidence bearing on the issues. The city
manager or designee may continue the hearing from time to time. The city
manager or designee acting with the advice of those members of the advisory
committee who are present, may approve, modify or disapprove the determination
of the chief building official. If circumstances warrant, those members of the
advisory committee who were present at the hearing may have up to three working
days to transmit their recommendations to the city manager or designee.
   (e)   Within three working days of the receipt of the advisory committee's
recommendations, the city manager or designee shall render a decision in
writing. This decision shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the appellant(s) at
the address listed on the appeal or delivered to the appellant(s) personally.
If the appellant is other than the project owner, the project owner shall also
be notified of the decision. The decision of the city manager or designee shall
also be mailed to members of the advisory committee.
   (f)   The decision of the city manager or the designee, shall be final.
(Ord. 3374 § 1 (part), 1982)
16.56.070   Severability.
   If any provision or clause of this chapter or the application thereof to any
person or circumstance is held to be unconstitutional or to be otherwise
invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not
affect other chapter provisions, and clauses of this chapter are declared to be
severable.
(Ord. 3374 § 1 (part), 1982)
Chapter 16.57
IN-LIEU PARKING FEE FOR NEW NONRESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT IN THE COMMERCIAL
DOWNTOWN (CD) ZONING DISTRICT
Sections:
   
16.57.010   Applicability.
   
16.57.020   Definitions.
   
16.57.030   Calculation of in-lieu payment.
   
16.57.040   Timing of payment.
   
16.57.045   Reserved.
   
16.57.050   Creation of special fund.
   
16.57.060   Use of fees.
   
16.57.070   Fee review.
   
16.57.080   Severability.
16.57.010   Applicability.
   The in-lieu parking fee regulations set forth in this chapter shall apply
only to nonresidential development within the University Avenue parking
assessment district which meets the eligibility criteria set forth in
subsection (d) of Section
18.52.070 of this code. In accordance with Section
18.52.070 of this code, provision of a parking space or payment of the fee
established by this chapter shall be a condition of the approval of or permit
for any new development, any addition or enlargement of existing development,
or any use of any floor area that has never been assessed under any Bond Plan G
financing pursuant to Title 13 of this code.
(Ord. 5552 § 2, 2022: Ord. 5373 § 3, 2016; Ord. 4528 § 2, 1998: Ord. 4256 § 3
(part), 1995)
16.57.020   Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
   (a)   "Assessment district" means the University Avenue parking assessment
district.
   (b)   "City" means the city of Palo Alto.
   (c)   "EIR" means the Downtown Study Environmental Impact Report, dated
December 1985, and certified by the city council on July 14, 1986.
   (d)   "Fee" means a payment in lieu of the provision of required parking
spaces.
   (e)   "Fund" means the University Avenue parking assessment district in-lieu
parking fund.
   (f)   "Gross floor area" shall be defined as set forth in Section
18.04.030 of this code.
   (g)   "Net new parking space" means a public parking space that is
constructed at a particular location in the assessment district, in excess of
any existing public parking spaces lost or removed from that same location.
   (h)   "Public parking space" means a parking space owned and operated by or
on behalf of the assessment district.
(Ord. 4256 § 3 (part), 1995)
16.57.030   Calculation of in-lieu payment.
   (a)   Initial Fee. The fee for each two hundred fifty square feet of gross
floor area in a development shall equal the sum of the construction, land
acquisition, if any, and administrative costs attributable to the provision of
one new parking space, as established by the city council on the basis of
calculations made under this chapter. The fee shall be $30,250.00 per two
hundred fifty square feet of gross floor area, and has been calculated based
upon the feasibility study.
   (b)   Recalculated Fee. In the event the city council approves the
construction of a public parking structure or structures, the city shall adjust
the fee as follows:
   (i)   At the time the construction contract is awarded, the fee shall be
adjusted to reflect the actual “design costs” incurred by the city for the
construction project as of the date the construction contract is awarded, plus
“construction costs” based on the construction contract award.
   (ii)   At the time the final payment is made upon completion of the
construction project, the fee shall be adjusted to reflect the actual “design
costs” and “construction costs” incurred by the city for the construction
project.
   (iii)   The fee as recalculated pursuant to subsection (b)(i) or (b)(ii) may
be higher or lower than the initial fee.
   (iv)   In the event that a construction project involves the construction of
more than one parking structure, the recalculation of the fee shall be based on
the structure with the highest cost per net new parking space.
   (c)   The rate of the fee shall be subject to annual adjustment for
inflation pursuant to Section
16.64.110.
   (d)   For the purposes of this section, the following definitions shall
apply:
   (i)   “Construction costs” shall mean and include the construction costs, as
bid, including any authorized contingency or as paid, based upon actual
construction. “Construction costs” shall include bond financing costs, if
applicable.
   (ii)   “Design costs” shall mean and include architect fees, engineering
fees and other consultant fees, as proposed or as paid, based upon actual
performance. “Design costs” shall include bond financing costs, if applicable.
   (iii)   “Net new parking space” cost shall mean the cost to provide one new
parking space in a public parking structure, and shall equal the sum of
the construction, land acquisition, if any, and administrative costs of the
structure attributable to each space in the structure.
(Ord. 5400 § 7 (part), 2016: Ord. 4528 § 3, 1998: Ord. 4256 § 3 (part), 1995)
16.57.040   Timing of payment.
   The fee shall be paid as set forth in
Chapter 16.64 of this code.
(Ord. 5400 § 7 (part), 2016: Ord. 4528 § 4, 1998: Ord. 4256 § 3 (part), 1995)
16.57.045   Reserved.
16.57.050   Creation of special fund.
   There is hereby established a special University Avenue parking assessment
district in-lieu parking fund (the "fund"), into which all fees, and any
interest thereon, shall be deposited. The fund shall be maintained as a
separated capital facilities account in a manner to avoid any commingling of
the fees with other revenues, funds or accounts of the city. Upon receipt and
entry to the accounting records for the fund, such moneys shall be considered
committed to the uses prescribed in Section
16.57.060.
(Ord. 4256 § 3 (part), 1995)
16.57.060   Use of fees.
   The moneys in the fund shall be eligible for expenditure only for
construction of public parking spaces within the assessment district to serve
the parking needs of the district created by the developments that paid the
fees, as determined by the chief transportation official, subject to the
approval of city council. If facilities are constructed prior to deposit of
sufficient moneys into the fund, then fees may be used to reimburse the city
for expenditures made in advance of receipt of fees. In no event shall moneys
in the fund be used for regular maintenance of parking facilities or for any
parking facilities not available to employees and customers of businesses
located in the assessment district. The priorities for expenditures of moneys
in the fund as among various types and locations of parking facilities shall be
as determined by the city council, after considering the recommendation of the
chief transportation official.
(Ord. 4256 § 3 (part), 1995)
16.57.070   Fee review.
   The uses proposed for expenditure of the moneys in the fund shall be
reviewed annually by the city council along with its review of the city’s
capital improvement program, and the moneys from the fund shall be appropriated
for such expenditure in the manner provided by the Palo Alto City Charter and
Municipal Code for adoption of the annual budget.
(Ord. 5400 § 7 (part), 2016: Ord. 4256 § 3 (part), 1995)
16.57.080   Severability.
   If any provision of this chapter or the applicability thereof to any person
or entity is held to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such
invalidity shall not affect any other provision of this chapter which can be
given effect without the invalid provisions or application; and to this end the
provisions of this chapter are declared to be severable.
(Ord. 4256 § 3 (part), 1995)
Chapter 16.58
DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES
Sections:
   
16.58.010   Definitions.
   
16.58.020   Applicability.
   
16.58.030   Exemptions.
   
16.58.040   Timing of payment.
   
16.58.050   Creation of special funds.
   
16.58.060   Fee review.
   
16.58.070   Severability.
   
16.58.080   Public safety and government facility fees.
   
16.58.090   Annual rate adjustment.
16.58.010   Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
   (a)   “Affordable residential housing” shall mean a purchase price or rental
price that is affordable to a “moderate,” “low” or “very low” income household,
as those terms are defined by the California Department of Housing and
Community Development, as applicable to Santa Clara County.
   (b)   “New development” shall mean, with respect to residential development,
any development that creates additional residential units. “New development”
shall not mean replacement of an existing residential unit.
   “New development” shall mean, with respect to nonresidential development,
any development that creates additional square footage. Where a development
project includes replacement of existing square footage, the “new development”
shall mean only the portion that constitutes additional square footage.
(Ord. 4742 § 2 (part), 2002)
16.58.020   Applicability.
   The following fees are hereby established and shall be imposed as a
condition of the approval of, or permit for, any new development, whether
residential or nonresidential, except as otherwise exempted by this chapter:
   (a)   A fee, known as a “park development fee,” to fund acquisition of land
and improvements for neighborhood and district parks, in an amount as set forth
in the municipal fee schedule.
   (b)   A fee, known as a “community center development fee,” to fund
development and improvements to community centers, in an amount as set forth in
the municipal fee schedule.
   (c)   A fee, known as a “library development fee,” to fund development and
improvements to libraries, in an amount as set forth in the municipal fee
schedule.
(Ord. 4742 § 2 (part), 2002)
16.58.030   Exemptions.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following:
   (a)   City buildings or structures;
   (b)   Public school buildings or structures;
   (c)   Residential housing, either for sale or rental, which, by recordable
means, is permanently obligated to be 100% affordable, as defined in Section
18.14.040(c);
   (d)   Retail service, eating and drinking service, personal service, or
automotive service when the total additional square footage is 1,500 square
feet or less. This exemption shall apply only when the additional square
footage of new development does not exceed 1,500 square feet. New development
that is larger than 1,500 square feet shall pay a fee for all square footage,
including the first 1,500 square feet;
   (e)   Day care centers used for child care, nursery school or preschool
education;
   (f)   Below market rate housing units above and beyond the minimum number
required for projects subject to the City’s Below Market Rate (BMR) Housing
program or other housing incentive programs. The additional units must be
offered and constructed in a manner consistent with all requirements of the BMR
program;
   (g)   Accessory dwelling units (ADU) less than 750 square feet in size. Any
impact fees to be charged for an accessory dwelling unit of 750 square feet or
more shall be proportional to the square footage of the primary dwelling unit;
   (h)   Junior accessory dwelling units (JADU);
   (i)   Any residential subdivision for which land dedication or fees in lieu
thereof are required pursuant to
Chapter 21.50 of the Palo Alto Municipal Code. This exemption shall only apply
to the park development fee described in Section
16.58.020(a).
   (j)   Below market rate housing units affordable to lower income households
constructed pursuant to the El Camino Focus Area standards pursuant to Section
18.14.020, subdivision (c)(v)(B), of the Palo Alto Municipal Code.
(Ord. 5657 § 3, 2025: Ord. 5507 § 4, 2020: Ord. 5456 § 2, 2018: Ord. 5400 § 8
(part), 2016: Ord. 4907 § 3, 2006: Ord. 4763 § 3, 2002: Ord. 4742 § 2 (part),
2002)
16.58.040   Timing of payment.
   The fee shall be paid as set forth in
Chapter 16.64 of this Code.
(Ord. 5400 § 8 (part), 2016: Ord. 4742 § 2 (part), 2002)
16.58.050   Creation of special funds.
   The city manager is hereby directed to establish and maintain the following
special funds, into which all fees of each type described in Section
16.58.020, and any interest thereon, shall be deposited. Each fund shall be
maintained as a separate capital facilities account in a manner to avoid any
commingling of the fees with other revenues, funds or accounts of the city.
Upon receipt and entry into the accounting records for each fund such monies
shall be considered committed to the uses described in Section
16.58.020.
   The special funds established by this section are:
   (a)   Park development fee fund;
   (b)   Community center development fee fund;
   (c)   Library development fee fund.
(Ord. 4742 § 2 (part), 2002)
16.58.060   Fee review.
   On an annual basis following the enactment of this chapter, the city manager
shall review the estimated cost of the described public improvements to be
funded by the fees, the continued need for those improvements and the
reasonable relationship between such need and the impacts of pending or
anticipated new development within the city. The city manager shall report his
or her findings to the city council at a noticed public hearing and recommend
any adjustment to the fees or other action as may be needed.
(Ord. 4742 § 2 (part), 2002)
16.58.070   Severability.
   If any provision of this chapter or the applicability thereof to any person
or entity is held to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such
invalidity shall not affect any other provision of this chapter which can be
given effect without the invalid provisions or application; and to this end the
provisions of this chapter are declared to be severable.
(Ord. 4742 § 2 (part), 2002)
16.58.080   Public safety and government facility fees.
   (a)   In addition to the fees established by Section
16.58.020, the following fees are hereby established and shall be imposed as a
condition of the approval of, or permit for, any new development, whether
residential or nonresidential, except as otherwise exempted by this chapter:
(i) a Public Safety Facility Development Fee, to fund police and fire
facilities (including fire apparatus and vehicles) and (ii) a General
Government Facility Development Fee, to fund facilities associated with
municipal administration.
   (b)    The fees imposed by this section shall be charged in in an amount as
set forth in the municipal fee schedule.
   (c)    A Public Safety Facility Development Fee Fund and a General
Government Facility Development Fee Fund are hereby established. Such funds
shall be administered in connection with the fees imposed by this section in
the manner set forth in Section
16.58.050.
   (d) Any fee imposed by this section shall be effective on the sixty-first
day following the adoption of an ordinance or resolution amending the municipal
fee schedule to include a rate for that fee.
(Ord. 5320 § 3, 2015)
16.58.090   Annual rate adjustment.
   The rate of the fee shall be subject to annual adjustment for inflation
pursuant to Section
16.64.110.
(Ord. 5400 § 9, 2016)
Chapter 16.59
CITYWIDE TRANSPORTATION IMPACT FEE
Sections:
   
16.59.010   Short title.
   
16.59.020   Definitions.
   
16.59.030   Fee imposed.
   
16.59.040   Exemptions.
   
16.59.045   Application of fee to projects in the approval process at effective
date.
   
16.59.050   Timing of payment.
   
16.59.060   Calculation of fee.
   
16.59.070   Special fund.
   
16.59.080   Accountability measures.
   
16.59.090   Enforcement and penalties.
16.59.010   Short title.
   This chapter may be referred to as the "Citywide Transportation Impact Fee
Ordinance."
(Ord. 4958 § 2 (part), 2007)
16.59.020   Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
   (a)   “Affordable unit” shall have the meaning provided in Section
16.65.020 of this title.
   (b)   “Citywide transportation enhancements” shall mean public facilities
that relieve citywide traffic congestion caused by new development projects.
Citywide transportation enhancements include, but are not limited to, bicycle
and pedestrian improvements, and roadway and intersection improvements.
Citywide transportation enhancements do not include (i) intersection
improvements designed primarily to accommodate increased traffic generated by a
specific development or (ii) the addition of through-traffic lanes designed for
primary use by private motorized vehicles.
   (c)   “Construction cost index” shall mean the construction cost index for
the San Francisco Bay Area set forth in the Engineering News Record published
by McGraw Hill and Associates. In the event the Engineering News Record ceases
to calculate and publish this index, then the city manager may designate a
comparable, alternative index to serve as the construction cost index.
   (d)   “Eligible citywide transportation enhancements” shall mean (i) the
citywide transportation enhancements identified in the most recent citywide
transportation impact fee nexus study approved by the city council, and (ii)
other citywide transportation enhancements that are approved by the city
council that may be substituted for an identified improvement or service
because they will mitigate similar congestion.
   (e)   “Existing development” shall mean structures present (at the time the
amount of the fee is calculated) and in use (within the two years prior to the
time the amount of the fee is calculated) on parcels upon which new development
is planned to occur. Where it is necessary to project PM peak hour vehicle
trips generated by existing development, such projection shall be made based on
either (i) the trip generation estimates used to determine the fee owed with
respect to such existing development when the fee was last paid with respect to
such existing development or (ii) if the fee has not been paid with respect to
such existing development (or any portion thereof), the most recent use of the
existing development.
   (f)   “Fee” shall mean the citywide transportation impact fee imposed
pursuant to this chapter.
   (g)   Any reference in this chapter to the “Government Code” or to a section
of the “Government Code” shall refer to the California Government Code as it
exists at the time this chapter is applied and shall include amendments to the
Government Code made subsequently to the adoption of this chapter, it being the
intent of the city to maintain the fee in compliance with applicable law.
   (h)   “New development” shall mean the construction of new structures or
additions to existing structures in the city and, with respect to residential
development, any development project that creates additional residential units.
“New development” shall not mean replacement or expansion of an existing
residential unit. With respect to nonresidential development, “new development”
shall also mean any development project that creates additional gross floor
area, or involves a change in use that requires a use and occupancy permit.
   (i)   “Transportation Impact Analysis Guidelines” shall mean the most recent
edition of the “Transportation Impact Analysis Guidelines” promulgated by the
Valley Transportation Authority or such other trip projection methodology
adopted by the city for the purpose of traffic impact analysis reports.
(Ord. 5463 § 2 (part), 2019: Ord. 4958 § 2 (part), 2007)
16.59.030   Fee imposed.
   The fee is hereby imposed as a condition of the issuance of any permit for
any new development, unless expressly exempted by this chapter.
(Ord. 4958 § 2 (part), 2007)
16.59.040   Exemptions.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
   (a)   City buildings or structures.
   (b)   Public school buildings or structures.
   (c)   Affordable units, either for sale or rental, that exceed the minimum
number required for projects under the city's below market rate (BMR) housing
program or other provisions of this code, which units are, by recordable means,
obligated to be and remain affordable units for a period consistent with the
requirements of Section
16.65.075(c) of this code.
   (d)   Day care centers used for childcare, nursery school or preschool
education.
   (e)   Accessory dwelling units (ADU).
   (f)   Junior accessory dwelling units (JADU).
   (g)   New development which is exempt from the fee by virtue of the
Constitution of the United States or California or by virtue of other
applicable state or federal law.
(Ord. 5463 § 2 (part), 2019: Ord. 5456 § 3, 2018: Ord. 4958 § 2 (part), 2007)
16.59.045   Application of fee to projects in the approval process at effective
date.
   The fee shall apply to development projects that are in the approval process
at the effective date of this section, except as modified herein. A project
that has its final planning permit before the effective date of this section
and was exempt from the fee at the time of that permit's issuance shall not be
subject to the fee.
(Ord. 5463 § 2 (part), 2019)
16.59.050   Timing of payment.
   (a)   The fee shall be paid as set forth in
Chapter 16.64 of this code.
   (b)   A credit against the fee may be given for dedications of eligible
citywide transportation enhancements constructed or provided at private expense
and for the value of land dedicated to the city that is necessary or useful to
an eligible citywide transportation enhancement. Such credit will be granted
only if the city council determines that: (i) the city will experience a
substantial cost savings or service quality improvement as a result of private
construction or provision of the enhancement or the dedication of land, (ii)
the enhancement can be expected to immediately and significantly relieve
citywide traffic congestion, and (iii) the grant of the credit will not cause
the city to delay the implementation of elements of the city’s transportation
plan that are of higher priority, in the judgment of the city council, than the
land or enhancement that will be dedicated. The credit shall be applied at the
time the city accepts the land or enhancement. Where the city council has made
the determinations required by this subdivision, payment of a portion of the
fee equal to the amount of an expected credit against the fee may be deferred
to the date of final building inspection approval of the development, provided
the owner of the real property for which the fees are required enters into a
recordable agreement with the city prior to issuance of the building permit for
the development, which from the date of recordation, shall constitute a lien on
the property and shall be enforceable against successors in interest to the
property owner. The agreement shall provide that final occupancy approval shall
not be given until the credit is applied and any remaining fees are paid. The
agreement shall also provide that, in any action to collect the fees or any
portion thereof, the city shall be entitled to all of its costs of enforcement
and collection, including reasonable attorney’s fees. The director of planning
and development services may execute the agreement on behalf of the city in a
form acceptable to the city attorney. Any deferral granted pursuant to this
paragraph (b) shall be consistent with the requirements of Government Code
Section 66007. In no event shall a credit exceed the amount of the fee, and the
city shall have no obligation to make payment to or otherwise compensate a
developer or applicant if the value of the dedication exceeds the fee amount.
(Ord. 5494 § 3, 2020: Ord. 5463 § 2 (part), 2019: Ord. 5400 § 10, 2016: Ord.
4958 § 2 (part), 2007)
16.59.060   Calculation of fee.
   (a)   The fee imposed upon a new development shall be calculated by
multiplying (i) the number of net new PM peak hour vehicle trips projected to
be generated by a new development by (ii) the current fee rate.
   (b)   The number of net new PM peak hour vehicle trips projected to be
generated by a new development shall be calculated by subtracting the projected
PM peak hour vehicle trips generated by existing development on the parcel(s)
to contain the new development from the projected PM peak hour vehicle trips
generated by the new development (including any existing structures to remain
on the parcel after the construction of the new development). In no event shall
a new development be projected to generate less than zero new PM peak hour
vehicle trips as a result of this calculation.
   (c)   For purposes of subdivision (b), the number of PM peak hour vehicle
trips projected to be generated by a new development shall be calculated
pursuant to the transportation impact analysis guidelines. For development
projects required to prepare, receive approval of, implement and monitor a
transportation demand management (TDM) plan consistent with Comprehensive Plan
Program T1.2.2, a target-based trip reduction approach allowed under the
transportation impact analysis guidelines may be used, provided that the TDM
plan is subject to an enforceable agreement approved by the city.
   (d)   To the extent existing development on a parcel qualifies as new
development after the effective date of the most recent ordinance amending this
section, but was exempt from the fee by virtue of Section
16.59.040 of this code in effect at the time the existing development was
permitted, the PM peak hour vehicle trips projected to be generated by that
existing development, shall not be subtracted (as otherwise required by
subdivision (b) of this section) from the projected PM peak hour vehicle trips
generated by the new development.
   (e)   The rate of the fee shall be established from time to time by
resolution or ordinance of the city council in the manner required by
Government Code Sections 66004 and 66018.
   (f)   The rate of the fee shall be subject to annual adjustment for
inflation pursuant to Section
16.64.110.
   (g)   The department of planning and development services shall be
responsible for the calculation of the fee when the fee is due. Applicants
shall supply the city with the necessary information to calculate the fee in a
format acceptable to the city.
   (h)   The number of net new PM peak hour vehicle trips projected to be
generated by a new development shall be calculated in a manner that accounts
for peak hour vehicle trips expected to be reduced by any Transportation Demand
Management (TDM) Plan approved or required by the city.
   (i)   New retail service developments, as defined in Section
18.04.030(a)(125) of this code, shall be charged a fee at 50% of the ordinary
rate set under subdivision (e) of this section.
(Ord. 5494 § 3, 2020: Ord. 5463 § 2 (part), 2019: Ord. 5400 § 11, 2016: Ord.
4958 § 2 (part), 2007)
16.59.070   Special fund.
   (a)   There is hereby established a special fund, entitled the "Citywide
Transportation Impact Mitigation Fund", into which all fee proceeds and any
interest thereon shall be deposited. The fund shall be maintained as required
by Government Code Section 66006.
   (b)   Moneys in the fund shall be expended only on the installation,
acquisition, and construction of eligible citywide transportation enhancements.
(Ord. 5463 § 2 (part), 2019: Ord. 4958 § 2 (part), 2007)
16.59.080   Accountability measures.
   (a)   At least annually and as required by Government Code Section 66006,
the city manager, or his or her designee, shall review the estimated cost of
the public improvements to be funded by the fee, the continued need for those
improvements and the reasonable relationship between such need and the impacts
of pending or anticipated new developments. The city manager, or his or her
designee shall report his or her findings to the city council at a noticed
public hearing and recommend any adjustment to the fee or other action as may
be needed.
   (b)   The city council shall review such report in the manner required by
Government Code Section 66006(b)(2).
   (c)   To the extent required by Government Code Section 66001(d), the city
council shall make the findings required by that section.
(Ord. 4958 § 2 (part), 2007)
16.59.090   Enforcement and penalties.
   (a)   Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the requirements
of this chapter shall be subject to an administrative penalty or administrative
compliance order as set forth in
Chapters 1.12 and
1.16 of this code.
   (b)   The city attorney shall be authorized to enforce the provisions of
this chapter and all agreements entered into in accordance with this chapter,
by civil action and any other proceeding or method permitted by law.
   (c)   Each person is guilty of a separate offense for each and every day
during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this chapter is
committed, continued or permitted by such person.
   (d)   All remedies provided for in this section shall be cumulative and not
exclusive and shall not preclude the city from any other remedy or relief to
which it otherwise would be entitled under law or equity.
   (e)   Failure of any official to fulfill the requirements of this chapter
shall not excuse any person from the requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 5463 § 2 (part), 2019: Ord. 5400 § 12, 2016: Ord. 4958 § 2 (part), 2007)
Chapter 16.60
CHARLESTON ARASTRADERO CORRIDOR PEDESTRIAN
AND BICYCLIST SAFETY IMPACT FEE
Sections:
   
16.60.010   Short title.
   
16.60.020   Definitions.
   
16.60.030   Fee imposed.
   
16.60.040   Exemptions.
   
16.60.050   Timing of payment.
   
16.60.060   Calculation of fee.
   
16.60.070   Special fund.
   
16.60.080   Accountability measures.
   
16.60.090   Penalties.
16.60.010   Short title.
   This chapter may be referred to as the "Charleston Arastradero Corridor
Pedestrian and Bicyclist Safety Impact Fee Ordinance."
(Ord. 4880 § 2 (part), 2005)
16.60.020   Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
   (a)   "Affordable housing" shall mean housing with a purchase price or rent
that is affordable to a "moderate," "low" or "very low" income household, as
those terms are defined by the California Department of Housing and Community
Development, as applicable to Santa Clara County.
   (b)   "Construction cost index" shall mean the construction cost index for
the San Francisco Bay Area set forth in the Engineering News Record published
by McGraw Hill and Associates. In the event the Engineering News Record ceases
to calculate and publish this index, then the city manager may designate a
comparable, alternative index to serve as the construction cost index.
   (c)   "Dwelling unit" shall have the meaning set forth in Section
18.04.030 of this code
   (d)   "Eligible safety enhancements" shall mean (i) the improvements
identified in the Charleston Arastradero Corridor Pedestrian and Bicyclist
Safety Impact Fee Nexus Study approved by the city council, and (ii) other
improvements to streets, sidewalks, and related facilities that are approved by
the city council that may be substituted for an identified improvement because
they will mitigate similar pedestrian or bicyclist safety impacts.
   (e)   "Existing development" shall mean structures present (at the time the
amount of the fee is calculated) on parcels upon which new development is
planned to occur.
   (f)   "Fee" shall mean the Charleston Arastradero Corridor Pedestrian and
Bicyclist Safety Impact Fee imposed pursuant to this chapter.
   (g)   Any reference in this chapter to the "Government Code" or to a section
of the "Government Code" shall refer to the California Government Code as it
exists at the time this ordinance is applied and shall include amendments to
that code made subsequently to the adoption of this chapter, it being the
intent of the city to maintain the fee in compliance with applicable law.
   (h)   "New development" shall mean the construction of new structures or
additions to existing structures in the city and, with respect to residential
development, any development project that creates additional dwelling units.
"New development" shall not mean replacement or expansion of an existing
dwelling unit. With respect to nonresidential development, "new development"
shall also mean any development project that creates additional square footage
of useful area or changes the use of an existing structure.
(Ord. 4880 § 2 (part), 2005)
16.60.030   Fee imposed.
   The fee is hereby imposed as a condition of the issuance of any permit for
any new development, unless expressly exempted by this chapter.
(Ord. 4880 § 2 (part), 2005)
16.60.040   Exemptions.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
   (a)   City buildings or structures.
   (b)   Public school buildings or structures.
   (c)   Affordable Housing, either for sale or rental, which, by recordable
means, is permanently obligated to be 100% affordable.
   (d)   Retail service, eating and drinking service, personal service, or
automotive service when the total square footage (including new development) is
1,500 square feet or less.
   (e)   Day care centers used for childcare, nursery school or preschool
education.
   (f)   Below market rate housing units above and beyond the minimum number
required for projects subject to the city's Below Market Rate (BMR) Housing
Program. The additional units must be offered and constructed consistently with
the requirements of the BMR program.
   (g)   Accessory dwelling units (ADU) established by the conversion of an
existing garage or carport, provided that the existing garage or carport was
legally constructed, or received building permits, as of January 1, 2017, and
is converted to an ADU with no expansion of the existing building envelope.
   (h)   Junior accessory dwelling units (JADU).
   (i)   New development which is exempt from the fee by virtue of the
Constitutions of the United States and California or by virtue of other
applicable state or federal law.
(Ord. 5456 § 4, 2018: Ord. 4880 § 2 (part), 2005)
16.60.050   Timing of payment.
   (a)   The fee shall be paid as set forth in
Chapter 16.64 of this code.
   (b)   A credit against the fee may be given for dedications of eligible
safety enhancements constructed or provided at private expense and for the
value of land dedicated to the city that is necessary or useful to an eligible
safety enhancements. Such credit will be granted only if the city council
determines that: (i) the city will experience a substantial cost savings or
service quality improvement as a result of private construction or provision of
the eligible safety enhancements or the dedication of land, (ii) the eligible
safety enhancements can be expected to immediately and significantly improve
bicyclist or pedestrian safety, and (iii) the grant of the credit, in lieu of
the fee, will not cause the city to delay the implementation of elements of the
Program that are of higher priority, in the judgment of the city council, than
the land or eligible safety enhancement that will be dedicated. The credit
shall be applied at the time the city accepts the land or eligible safety
enhancement. Where the city council has made the determinations required by
this subdivision, payment of a portion of the fee equal to the amount of an
expected credit against the fee may be deferred to the date of final building
inspection approval of the development, provided the owner of the real property
for which the fees are required enters into a recordable agreement with the
city prior to issuance of the building permit for the development, which from
the date of recordation, shall constitute a lien on the property and shall be
enforceable against successors in interest to the property owner. The agreement
shall provide that final occupancy approval shall not be given until the fees
are paid or the credit issued. The agreement shall also provide that, in any
action to collect the fees or any portion thereof, the city shall be entitled
to all of its costs of enforcement and collection, including reasonable
attorney’s fees. The director of planning and development services may execute
the agreement on behalf of the city in a form acceptable to the city attorney.
Any deferral granted pursuant to this paragraph (b) shall be consistent with
the requirements of Government Code Section 66007. Where a credit is given for
the provision of a service that is an eligible safety enhancement, the deferral
of the fee, and the application of the credit, may be according to a schedule
set forth in the recorded agreement, which schedule shall be designed to ensure
that no credit is applied in advance of the provision of services for which the
credit is made.
(Ord. 5494 § 3, 2020: Ord. 5400 § 13, 2016: Ord. 4880 § 2 (part), 2005)
16.60.060   Calculation of fee.
   (a)   The fee imposed upon a new development shall be calculated with
respect to any residential use by multiplying the number of dwelling units
(after the completion of the new development) on the parcels comprising the new
development by the then applicable residential rate. With respect to any non-
residential use the fee shall be calculated by multiplying the number of square
feet of such use (after the completion of the new development) on the parcels
comprising the new development by the then applicable non-residential rate.
   (b)   The fee imposed upon a new development shall be reduced by the amount
of the fee which would be imposed on the existing development on the parcels
comprising the new development if such existing development were to be
constructed at the time the fee was calculated. However, such adjustment shall
not cause the amount of the fee to be below $0.
   (c)   To the extent existing development on a parcel qualified as new
development after the effective date of this section, but was exempt from the
fee by virtue of Section
16.60.040 of this code, that existing development shall not be considered for
purposes of subdivision (b) of this section.
   (d)   The rate of the fee shall be established from time to time by
resolution or ordinance of the city council in the manner required by
Government Code Sections 66004 and 66018.
   (e)   The rate of the fee shall be subject to annual adjustment for
inflation pursuant to Section
16.64.110.
   (f)   The department of planning and development services shall be
responsible for the calculation of the fee at the time of plan review or when
the fee is due, whichever is earlier.
(Ord. 5494 § 3, 2020: Ord. 5400 § 14, 2016: Ord. 4880 § 2 (part), 2005)
16.60.070   Special fund.
   (a)   There is hereby established a special fund, entitled the "Charleston
Arastradero Corridor Pedestrian and Bicyclist Safety Mitigation Fund," into
which all fee proceeds and any interest thereon shall be deposited. The fund
shall be maintained as required by Government Code Section 66006.
   (b)   Moneys in the fund shall be expended only on the installation,
acquisition, construction, maintenance and operation of eligible safety
enhancement.
(Ord. 4880 § 2 (part), 2005)
16.60.080   Accountability measures.
   (a)   At least annually and as required by Government Code Section 66006,
the city manager, or his or her designee, shall review the estimated cost of
the public improvements to be funded by the fee, the continued need for those
improvements and the reasonable relationship between such need and the impacts
of pending or anticipated new developments. The city manager, or his or her
designee shall report his or her findings to the city council at a noticed
public hearing and recommend any adjustment to the fee or other action as may
be needed.
   (b)   The city council shall review such report in the manner required by
Government Code Section 66006(b)(2).
   (c)   To the extent required by Government Code Section 66001(d), the city
council shall make the findings required by that section.
(Ord. 4880 § 2 (part), 2005)
16.60.090   Penalties.
   (a)   All remedies provided for in this chapter shall be cumulative and not
exclusive.
   (b)   Violation of any provision of this chapter, including, but not limited
to, converting an exempt use to a use to which this chapter applies without
paying the fee, is a misdemeanor punishable as provided in this code.
   (c)   Each person is guilty of a separate offense for each and every day
during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this chapter is
committed, continued or permitted by such person.
   (d)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, including, but not
limited to, converting an exempt use to a use to which this chapter applies,
without paying the fee, shall be liable civilly to the city in a sum not to
exceed five hundred dollars for each day in which such violation occurs.
   (e)   Persons employed in the following designated employee positions are
authorized to exercise the authority provided in the California Penal Code
Section 836.5 and are authorized to issue citation for violations of this
chapter: development services director, planning and community environment
director and their designee.
(Ord. 5400 § 15, 2016: Ord. 4880 § 2 (part), 2005)
Chapter 16.61
PUBLIC ART FOR PRIVATE DEVELOPMENTS
Sections:
   
16.61.010   Definitions.
   
16.61.020   Application.
   
16.61.030   Public art requirement for private developments.
   
16.61.040   On-site public art.
   
16.61.050   Eligible expenditures for on-site public art projects.
   
16.61.060   Ineligible expenditures for on-site public art projects.
   
16.61.070   Process for planning and approval of on-site public art.
   
16.61.080   Additional requirements for on-site public art.
   
16.61.090   Developer’s option to pay fees to public art fund in-lieu of
providing on-site art.
   
16.61.100   Inspection and final approval.
   
16.61.110   Public Art Fund.
   
16.61.120   Regulations.
16.61.010   Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
   “Affordable Housing Developments” means a project where 100% of the units
are affordable to a “moderate,” “low” or “very low” income household, as those
terms are defined by the California Department of Housing and Community
Development, as applicable to Santa Clara County.
   “Art” or “Work of Art” means original artist-designed and produced unique
works in any of a variety of styles and forms.
   “Artist” means a practitioner of the creative arts, generally recognized as
such by critics and peers, with a body of work including commissions,
exhibitions, sales, publications, and collections. For the purposes of this
Chapter, “artist” shall not include: (i) persons primarily working in the
professional fields of architecture, engineering, design or landscaping; (ii)
an employee or relative of the development project architect, landscape
architect, engineer or project manager; (iii) any person with a business
interest in a development project or with respect to individuals or entities
serving as project architects, landscape architects, engineers or project
managers; or (iv) a relative of or anyone with a financial interest with
respect to an individual or entity serving on an art selection panel for the
development project.
   “Developer” means a person or entity that is financially and legally
responsible for the planning, development and construction of any development
project covered by this Chapter. The developer may or may not also be the
project owner.
   “Development Project” means any commercial or residential development
described in Section
16.61.040(a).
   “Historic Renovation” means a Development Project involving preservation of
a historic resource listed on or eligible for listing on the California
Register of Historical Resources, where such preservation follows the Secretary
of the Interior’s Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties with
Guidelines for Preserving, Rehabilitating, Restoring, and Reconstruction
Historic Buildings or the Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for
Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings.
   “Public Art” means a work of art that is visible or accessible to the public
for a minimum of 40 hours per week. Public art is generally large-scale and may
include sculpture, painting, installations, photography, video, works of light
or sound, or any other work or project determined by the Public Art Commission
to satisfy the intent of this chapter, provided, however, that none of the
following shall be considered public art for the purposes of satisfying the
requirements of this chapter:
   (i)   Objects that are mass produced of standard design, such as banners,
signs, playground equipment, benches, statuary, street or sidewalk barriers, or
fountains;
   (ii)   Reproduction, by mechanical or other means, of original works of art,
except as incorporated into film, video, photography, printmaking or other
derivative works as approved by the Public Art Commission;
   (iii)   Decorative, architectural, or functional elements that are designed
by the building architect or landscape architect as opposed to an artist
commissioned for this purpose; or
   (iv)   Landscape architecture or gardening, except where these elements are
designed by an artist and are an integral part of a work of art.
   “Public Art Commission” means the Commission established by
Chapter 2.18 of the Municipal Code.
(Ord. 5226 § 3, 2013)
16.61.020   Application.
   (a)   This chapter shall apply to all new commercial developments (including
mixed use projects), including new construction, remodels, additions and
reconstruction that (i) have a floor area of 10,000 square feet or more, and
(ii) have a construction value of $200,000 or more, exclusive of costs for
architecture, design, engineering and required studies; and all new residential
projects of five or more units.
   (b)   Notwithstanding subsection (a) above, this Chapter shall not apply to:
   i.    Buildings or structures primarily used for religious worship;
   ii.    Historic renovations;
   iii.    Affordable housing developments;
   iv.    Municipal facilities;
   v.    Repair or reconstruction of structures damaged by flood, fire, wind,
earthquake or other disaster;
   vi.   Seismic retrofit projects; or
   vii.   Any project exempted by federal or state law.
   (c)    In mixed use projects, those portions of projects excluded from
application of this chapter under subsection (b) shall be subtracted from the
project for purposes of determination of applicability under subsection (a),
above, and from construction valuation under Section
16.61.040 and
16.61.090.
(Ord. 5226 §4, 2013)
16.61.030   Public art requirement for private developments.
   Before a certificate of occupancy is issued for any development project
subject to this chapter, the developer shall participate in the construction or
installation of on-site public art under Section 16.61.040, or, at the
developer’s option, make a contribution to the Public Art Fund in lieu of
providing on-site art, as provided in Section
16.61.090.
(Ord. 5226 § 5, 2013)
16.61.040   On-site public art.
   (a)   A developer may satisfy the requirements of this Chapter by
constructing or installing on-site public art valued at 1% of the first $100
million construction valuation, adjusted as described in subsection (b) below,
and .9% of construction valuation for valuation in excess of $100 million. For
purposes of budgeting and planning for on-site art, an initial estimate of the
art contribution shall be calculated based on estimated construction valuation
at the time of application for entitlements. The arts contribution shall be
finally determined based on the construction valuation determined at the time
the building permit is issued.
   (b)   Beginning in FY 2015 and annually thereafter, the Director of Planning
and Community Development shall adjust the ceiling for 1% valuation as set
forth in subsection (a) above to reflect increases in the Consumer Price Index
for all urban consumers.
   (c)    If the market value of the on-site public art is greater than the art
contribution provided in Subsection
16.61.040(a), the city shall have no obligation to refund the excess amount. If
expenditures do not utilize the entire amount provided in
16.61.040(a), the remainder shall be deposited into the Public Art Fund.
(Ord. 5226 § 6, 2013)
16.61.050   Eligible expenditures for on-site public art projects.
   The public art contribution for on-site installation may be expended only on
costs associated with the selection, acquisition, purchase, commissioning,
design, fabrication, placement, installation or exhibition of the public art,
and project management and administrative costs not to exceed 20% of the total
budget. Eligible expenditures include:
   (a)   Artist fees;
   (b)   Labor of assistants, materials, and contracted services required for
design, fabrication, engineering and installation of the public art;
   (c)   Any required permit or certificate fees and reasonable business and
legal costs directly related to the public art;
   (d)   Reasonable art consultant fees, as established in regulations or
guidelines approved by the City Manager to implement this Section;
   (e)   Communication, utilities, insurance and other indirect costs
associated with the creation but not the operation of the public art;
   (f)    Transportation of the public art to the site;
   (g)    Preparation of the site specifically required for the public art,
such as fabrication of platforms or pedestals;
   (h)    Installation of the public art;
   (i)    Mountings, anchorages, containments or other materials necessary for
installation of the public art;
   (j)   Public art project management and administration, in an amount not to
exceed 20% of the total art contribution; and
   (k)   A plaque or plaques identifying the public art.
(Ord. 5226 § 7, 2013)
16.61.060   Ineligible expenditures for on-site public art projects.
   Expenditures that are ineligible to be counted toward the on-site public art
contribution include:
   (a)   Labor of assistants, materials, and contracted services not required
for design, fabrication, engineering and installation of the public art;
   (b)   Promotional materials or activities for the artist, the public art,
the development project, the developer or other parties involved in the
development project;
   (c)   Opening, dedication or other costs of events for the public art,
artist, developer or development;
   (d)   Services, materials, utilities or other expenses association with the
ongoing operation or maintenance of the public art; and
   (e)   Land costs or any other costs associated with the development that are
not part of and solely attributable to the public art.
(Ord. 5226 § 8, 2013)
16.61.070   Process for planning and approval of on-site public art.
   (a)   Application and planning.  Within 60 days of initial application for
permitting or other discretionary approval, the developer shall consult with
the Public Art program staff regarding a plan for meeting the requirements of
this Chapter. This consultation must be complete before the development project
is calendared for consideration by a public body, including the Architectural
Review Board, Planning & Transportation Commission or City Council, and before
the Director of Planning and Development Services issues any approvals with
respect to the project.
   (b)   Public Art Commission review and approval. If the developer elects to
comply with this chapter by providing on-site art, the developer’s public art
plan must be presented to the Public Art Commission. The plan should include
the process by which the art and artist will be selected while ensuring that no
single artist be commissioned for more than 3 public art in private development
projects within Palo Alto, the type of art proposed, a plan to integrate the
art into the site, and a proposed budget and schedule of payments. The Public
Art Commission shall render a decision whether the proposed public art plan
conforms to the requirements and intent of this Chapter within 90 days of
submission of a complete application, as determined by the Director of Planning
and Development Services, in consultation with the public art program staff.
The developer shall not enter into contracts or make expenditures until the
Public Arts Commission approves the on-site art plan. In addition, before
initiating fabrication and installation of the on-site art, the developer shall
return to the Public Art Commission for final approval of the artist and the
proposed public art. The Public Art Commission shall render a decision within
60 days of submission of a complete proposal, as determined by the Director of
Planning and Development Services, in consultation with the public art program
staff. No building permit may issue until the Public Art Commission issues the
approvals required under this subsection.
(Ord. 5494 § 3, 2020: Ord. 5226 § 9, 2013)
16.61.080   Additional requirements for on-site public art.
   (a)   Plaque. The public art shall be identified by a plaque that meets the
standards in use by the city at the time of installation of the public art
   (b)   Ownership and maintenance. All on-site public art shall remain the
property of the property owner or the property owner’s successor in interest.
The property owner shall retain the obligation to provide all necessary
maintenance to preserve the public art in good condition. Immediately upon
installation and continuously thereafter, the developer and the property owner
shall maintain the public art and shall promptly perform all necessary repairs
and maintenance to the satisfaction of the City. The obligation to maintain and
preserve the public art includes the obligation to take reasonable steps to
protect the public art against destruction, damage or modification.
   (c)    Location and relocation of public art. Except as provided herein, the
public art must remain at the development in the location approved by the
Public Art Commission. A property owner may petition the Public Art Commission
to relocate the public art within the development project.
      When and if the development project is sold, the public art must remain
at the development and may not be claimed as the property of the seller or
removed from the site. If the development is to be demolished, the owner must
relocate the public art to another publicly accessible permanent location
approved in advance by the Public Art Commission.
   (d)    Removal and replacement of public art. If the owner desires to
deaccession, sell or remove the art from the site, the owner shall give prior
notice to the city by providing written notice to the public art program staff
no less than 90 days before the intended action. The owner must receive prior
approval from the Public Art Commission. The developer will be required to
replace the sold or de-accessioned artwork with an alternative work of
equivalent or greater value, as determined by the Public Art Commission, in
current dollars. In the alternative, the developer may elect to pay fees in
lieu of replacing on-site art, at a reasonable rate equivalent to the cost of
replacing the art in current dollars, as determined by the Public Art
Commission.
   (e)    Statutory and contractual rights of artists.  The owner is solely
responsible for complying with all statutory and contractual rights of the
artist, including rights under the California Preservation of Works of Art Act,
the federal Visual Artists’ Rights Act, and any other applicable law.
   (f)   Covenant; recordation. The property owner shall record against the
property a declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions, in favor of
the city, and in a form approved by the City Attorney. The declaration shall
include (i) the owner’s obligation to provide all necessary maintenance of the
public art, including preservation and restoration of the public art, in good
condition, to the reasonable satisfaction of the city, and to protect the
public art against destruction or damage; (ii) the owner’s obligation to ensure
that the public art is accessible to the public as required by this chapter;
and (iii) any other terms reasonably necessary to implement this chapter.
   (g)   Inspection; remedies.  The city shall have the right to inspect the
public art, on reasonable notice, to ensure compliance with this chapter.
Failure to maintain the public art as required by this Section is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance. The city may remedy the public nuisance and
may pursue additional remedies to obtain compliance with this chapter. In
addition to all other remedies provided by law, in the event the owner fails to
maintain the public art, on reasonable notice the city may perform all
necessary repairs and maintenance, or may secure insurance or other needed
services, and the costs thereof shall become a lien against the real property.
(Ord. 5226 § 10, 2013)
16.61.090   Developer’s option to pay fees to public art fund in-lieu of
providing on-site art.
   In lieu of installation of on-site public art, the developer may elect to
make a monetary contribution to the Palo Alto Public Arts Fund. The amount of
the contribution shall be the cost of the public art required by Section
16.61.040. A developer who elects to satisfy the requirements of this chapter
through a contribution to the Fund must complete the payment in-lieu prior to
the issuance of any building permit for the development project. The payment
shall be made as set forth in
Chapter 16.64 of this code.
(Ord. 5400 § 16, 2016: Ord. 5226 § 11, 2013)
16.61.100    Inspection and final approval.
   Before a certificate of occupancy is issued for the development project, the
city shall inspect and confirm that either: (i) public art has been installed
as required by the Public Art Commission approvals and to the satisfaction of
the Director of Planning and Development Services, in consultation with the
Public Art program staff; or (ii) in-lieu contributions have been paid in full.
In addition, before a certificate of occupancy is issued, the city shall
confirm that the developer has executed and recorded a covenant as required by
Section 16.61.080(f).
(Ord. 5494 § 3, 2020: Ord. 5226 § 12, 2013)
16.61.110   Public Art Fund.
   There shall be a fund entitled “Public Art Fund” to account for in-lieu
contributions made under Section
16.61.090. This fund and the interest thereon shall be maintained by the Chief
Financial Officer according to standard governmental accounting requirements.
The Public Art Fund shall be reserved for the design, acquisition, commission
and installation of new works of art and art experiences in Palo Alto, or for
such other equivalent artistic purposes approved by the Public Art Commission.
Funds may be used for project management and administration costs associated
with acquisition of new works, not to exceed 20% of the project budget, and for
the repair, maintenance, conservation and insurance of those works. Art works
acquired through the Public Art Fund shall be owned by the City of Palo Alto
and generally made accessible to the public.
(Ord. 5226 § 13, 2013)
16.61.120   Regulations.
   The City Manager, or his or her designee, is authorized to adopt
administrative regulations, procedures or guidelines that are consistent with
and that further the terms and requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 5226 § 14, 2013)
Chapter 16.62
EXPIRED PERMITS FOR RESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION
Sections:
   
16.62.010   Application.
   
16.62.020   Timely renewal of expired permits.
   
16.62.030   Penalty for expired permits.
   
16.62.040   Appeal of assessed penalty.
   
16.62.050   Construction of fence.
   
16.62.060   Public nuisance declared.
16.62.010   Application.
   This chapter shall apply to all residential construction and demolition,
including, but not limited to, all additions, alterations, modifications,
repairs, and improvements, that require a building permit or demolition permit.
(Ord. 5227 § 3 (part), 2014)
16.62.020   Timely renewal of expired permits.
   In the event a permit expires under section
16.04.090 for suspension or abandonment of work, the property owner shall seek
renewal of the permit within thirty (30) days following its expiration.
(Ord. 5227 § 3 (part), 2014)
16.62.030    Penalty for expired permits.
   A property owner shall be subject to the following penalties for violation
of section
16.62.020:
 
Time from Permit Expiration        Penalty
0 to 30 days                       $0
31st day through 60th day          $200.00 per day (i.e., $6,000.00 maximum
                                   penalty applicable to this 30-day period)
61st day through 120th day         $400.00 per day (i.e., $24,000.00 maximum
                                   penalty applicable to this 60-day period)
121st day and every day thereafter $800.00 per day
 
   (a)   For purposes of this section, if a renewed permit expires and the
property owner has not advanced a project to the next level of required
inspection, the calculation of penalties shall relate back to the date of the
previous permit expiration.
   (b)   The chief building official may reduce or waive a penalty accrued
under this chapter upon finding that the property owner acted in good faith and
either: (1) the delay was attributable to circumstances beyond the property
owner’s control; or (2) imposition of the full accrued penalty would harm the
public interest, provided, however, that and reduction or waiver of more than
$10,000 must be approved by the City Manager.
(Ord. 5389 § 3, 2016: Ord. 5227 § 3 (part), 2014)
16.62.040   Appeal of assessed penalty.
   A property owner may request a hearing to contest a citation issued under
this chapter in accordance with
chapter 1.12.
(Ord. 5227 § 3 (part), 2014)
16.62.050   Construction of fence.
   In the event a permit remains expired for more than thirty (30) days, the
chief building official may require the construction of a wood fence at least
six (6) feet tall, if necessary to secure the property from unauthorized entry
and to minimize the aesthetic impacts of the construction visible from the
public right of way. Such fence shall comply with the requirements of
chapter 16.24.
(Ord. 5227 § 3 (part), 2014)
16.62.060   Public nuisance declared.
   Any violation of this chapter shall constitute a public nuisance and, in
addition to being subject to any other remedies allowed by law, may be abated
as provided in
chapter 9.56 of the Palo Alto Municipal Code.
(Ord. 5227 § 3 (part), 2014)
Chapter 16.63
SMALL RESIDENTIAL ROOFTOP SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS
Sections:
   
16.63.010   Purpose.
   
16.63.020   Application.
   
16.63.030   Definitions.
   
16.63.040   Solar energy system requirements.
   
16.63.050   Duties of development services and building official.
   
16.63.060   Plan review and inspection requirements.
16.63.010   Purpose.
   The purpose of the chapter is to adopt an expedited, streamlined solar
permitting process that complies with the Solar Rights Act and AB 2188 (Chapter
521, Statutes 2014) to achieve timely and cost-effective installations of small
residential rooftop solar energy systems. The chapter encourages the use of
solar systems by removing unreasonable barriers, minimizing costs to property
owners and the City of Palo Alto, and expanding the ability of property owners
to install solar energy systems. The chapter allows the City of Palo Alto to
achieve these goals while protecting the public health and safety.
(Ord. 5353 § 1 (part), 2015)
16.63.020   Application.
   (a)   This chapter shall apply to small residential rooftop solar energy
systems including, but not limited to, all additions, alterations,
modifications, repairs, and improvements that require a building permit.
   (b)   Small residential rooftop solar energy systems legally established or
permitted prior to the effective date of this chapter are not subject to the
requirements of this chapter unless physical modifications or alterations are
undertaken that materially change the size, type, or components of a small
rooftop energy system in such a way as to require new permitting.
(Ord. 5353 § 1 (part), 2015)
16.63.030   Definitions.
   The words and phrases in this chapter are defined as provided in California
Civil Code section 714 and Government Code section 65850.5, except that the
following words and phrases as used in this section are defined as follows:
   (a)   "Association" means a nonprofit corporation or unincorporated
association created for the purpose of managing a common interest development.
   (b)   "Common interest development" means any of the following:
   (1)   A community apartment project.
   (2)   A condominium project.
   (3)   A planned development.
   (4)   A stock cooperative.
   (c)   "Electronic submittal" means the utilization of one or more of the
following:
   (1)   E-mail;
   (2)   The Internet;
   (3)   Facsimile.
   (d)   "Small residential rooftop solar energy system" means all of the
following:
   (1)   A solar energy system that is no larger than ten kilowatts alternating
current nameplate rating or thirty kilowatt-thermal.
   (2)   A solar energy system that conforms to all applicable state fire,
structural, electrical, and other building codes as adopted or amended by the
city and paragraph (iii) of subdivision (c) of Section 714 of the Civil Code,
as such section or subdivision may be amended, renumbered, or redesignated from
time to time.
   (3)   A solar energy system that is installed on a single or duplex family
dwelling.
   (4)   A solar panel or module array that does not exceed the maximum legal
building height as defined by the authority having jurisdiction.
   (e)   "Solar energy system" has the same meaning set forth in paragraphs (1)
and (2) of subdivision (a) of Section 801.5 of the Civil Code, as such section
or subdivision may be amended, renumbered, or redesignated from time to time.
   (f)   "Specific, adverse impact" means a significant, quantifiable, direct,
and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified, and written public
health or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date
the application was deemed complete.
   (g)   "Reasonable restrictions" on a solar energy system are those
restrictions that do not significantly increase the cost of the system or
significantly decrease its efficiency or specified performance, or that allow
for an alternative system of comparable cost, efficiency, and energy
conservation benefits. As provided in Civil Code section 714, subdivision (d)
(1), reasonable restrictions may include, but are not limited to:
   (1)   For water heater systems or solar swimming pool heating systems: an
amount exceeding ten percent of the cost of the system, but in no case more
than one thousand dollars ($1,000), or decreasing the efficiency of the solar
energy system by an amount exceeding ten percent, as originally specified and
proposed.
   (2)   For photovoltaic systems: an amount not to exceed one thousand dollars
($1,000) over the system cost as originally specified and proposed, or a
decrease in system efficiency of an amount exceeding ten percent as originally
specified and proposed.
(Ord. 5353 § 1 (part), 2015)
16.63.040   Solar energy system requirements. 
   (a)   All solar energy systems shall meet applicable health and safety
standards and requirements imposed by the State of California and the City of
Palo Alto Development Services, City of Palo Alto Fire Department and City of
Palo Alto Utilities Department.
   (b)   Solar energy systems for heating water in single-family residences and
for heating water in commercial or swimming pool applications shall be
certified by an accredited listing agency as defined by the California Plumbing
and Mechanical Code.
   (c)   Solar energy systems for producing electricity shall meet all
applicable safety and performance standards established by the California
Electrical Code, the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, and
accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories and, where
applicable, rules of the Public Utilities Commission regarding safety and
reliability.
   (d)   Prior to submitting an application, the applicant shall:
   (1)   Verify to the applicant's reasonable satisfaction through the use of
standard engineering evaluation techniques that the support structure for the
small residential rooftop solar energy system is stable and adequate to
transfer all wind, seismic, and dead and live loads associated with the system
to the building foundation; and
   (2)   At the applicant's cost, verify to the applicant's reasonable
satisfaction using standard electrical inspection techniques that the existing
electrical system including existing line, load, ground and bonding wiring as
well as main panel and subpanel sizes are adequately sized, based on the
existing electrical system's current use, to carry all new photovoltaic
electrical loads.
(Ord. 5353 § 1 (part), 2015)
16.63.050   Duties of development services and building official.
   (a)   The building official shall develop and adopt an eligibility checklist
and standard plan. All documents required for the submission of an expedited
solar energy system application shall be made available on the publicly
accessible City of Palo Alto Website.
   (b)   The small residential rooftop solar system permit process, standard
plan(s), and checklist(s) shall substantially conform to recommendations for
expedited permitting, including the checklist and standard plans contained in
the most current version of the California Solar Permitting Guidebook adopted
by the Governor's Office of Planning and Research.
   (c)   The applicant may submit the permit application and associated
documentation to the City's Development Services by personal, mailed, or
electronic submittal together with any required permit processing and
inspection fees.
   (d)   In the case of electronic submittal, the electronic signature of the
applicant on all forms, applications and other documentation may be used in
lieu of a wet signature.
(Ord. 5353 § 1 (part), 2015)
16.63.060   Plan review and inspection requirements.
   (a)   An application that satisfies the information requirements in the
eligibility checklist and standard plan, as determined by the building
official, shall be deemed complete. Upon receipt of an incomplete application,
the building official shall issue a written correction notice detailing all
deficiencies in the application and any additional information required to be
eligible for expedited permit issuance.
   (b)   The building official may require an applicant to apply for a use
permit if the official makes written findings, based on substantial evidence,
that the solar energy system could have a specific, adverse impact upon the
public health and safety. The building official's findings may be appealed to
the Planning and Transportation Commission under Section
18.78.030 of this Code.
   (c)   Any condition imposed on an application shall be designed to mitigate
the specific, adverse impact upon health and safety at the lowest possible
cost.
   (d)   "A feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific,
adverse impact" includes, but is not limited to, any cost-effective method,
condition, or mitigation imposed by the city on another similarly situated
application in a prior successful application for a permit. The city shall use
its best efforts to ensure that the selected method, condition, or mitigation
meets the conditions of subparagraphs (A) and (B) of paragraph (1) of
subdivision (d) of Section 714 of the California Civil Code defining
restrictions that do not significantly increase the cost of the system or
decrease its efficiency or specified performance.
   (e)   The city shall not condition the approval of an application on the
approval of an association, as defined in Section 4080 of the California Civil
Code.
   (f)   Issuance of the permit does not authorize an applicant to connect the
small residential rooftop energy system to City of Palo Alto Utilities'
electricity grid. The applicant is responsible for obtaining such approval or
permission from City of Palo Alto Utilities before requesting a building
inspection.
   (g)   For a small residential rooftop solar energy system eligible for
expedited review, only one consolidated inspection shall be required, which
shall be done in a timely manner. This inspection shall encompass all
applicable local, state, and federal health and safety regulations including
fire department regulations. If a small residential rooftop solar energy system
fails inspection, a subsequent inspection is authorized; however the subsequent
inspection need not conform to the requirements of this section.
(Ord. 5353 § 1 (part), 2015)
Chapter 16.64
DEVELOPMENT FEE AND IN-LIEU PAYMENT ADMINISTRATION
Sections:
   
16.64.010   Applicability.
   
16.64.020   Due date.
   
16.64.030   Deferred payment.
   
16.64.040   Calculation of fees.
   
16.64.050   Adoption of fee schedule.
   
16.64.060   Notice of protest.
   
16.64.070   Informal hearing and preparation of additional analysis.
   
16.64.080   Reserved.
   
16.64.090   Cost of protest.
   
16.64.100   Administration.
   
16.64.110   Inflation adjustment.
16.64.010   Applicability.
   This
Chapter 16.64 applies to any fee or in-lieu payment imposed under any provision
of this code that states that that payment of the fee or in-lieu payment shall
be made pursuant to this
Chapter 16.64. For purposes of this chapter the term "fee" shall be used to
refer to any such fee or in-lieu payment, regardless of how denominated
elsewhere in this code.
(Ord. 5400 § 17 (part), 2016)
16.64.020   Due date.
   A fee shall be paid on or before the issuance of the first building permit
for the project. For a phased project, payments may be made for each portion of
a phased project prior to issuance of the first building permit for that phase.
If there is no building permit for the project, the fee shall be paid upon
issuance of the first city permit or other approval. If no city permit or other
approval is required, and the obligation to pay the fee is triggered by a
change in use, payment of the fee must be made before the change in use occurs.
(Ord. 5400 § 17 (part), 2016)
16.64.030   Deferred payment.
   For residential development only, payment of a fee may be deferred to the
date the development is approved for occupancy. If the development contains
more than one dwelling, the fee shall be paid on a pro rata basis for each
dwelling when it is approved for occupancy.
   The fees may be deferred only if the owner of the real property for which
the fees are required enters into a recordable agreement with the city prior to
issuance of the building permit for the development, which from the date of
recordation, shall constitute a lien on the property and shall be enforceable
against successors in interest to the property owner. The agreement shall
provide that final occupancy approval shall not be given until the fees are
paid. The director of planning and development services may execute the
agreement on behalf of the city in a form acceptable to the city attorney.
(Ord. 5645 § 2, 2025: Ord. 5641 § 2 (part), 2024: Ord. 5494 § 3, 2020: Ord.
5400 § 17 (part), 2016)
16.64.040   Calculation of fee.
   A fee shall be payable at the rate specified in the council-adopted
municipal fee schedule in effect on the date the fees are paid, except: (1) an
applicant for a vesting tentative map for a development project shall pay the
fees in effect on the date the application for the vesting tentative map is
deemed complete, and (2) an applicant that defers fees for a designated
residential redevelopment project, as defined in California Government Code
Section 66007, may elect to pay the fees in effect at the time of building
permit issuance.
(Ord. 5645 § 3, 2025: Ord. 5641 § 2 (part), 2024: Ord. 5400 § 17 (part), 2016)
16.64.050   Adoption of fee schedule.
   The city council can revise the rate of any fee by amending, by ordinance or
resolution, the rate set forth in the municipal fee schedule. Any inflation-
adjustment provided in this code with respect to a fee shall go into effect
upon approval by the city council of a change to the municipal fee schedule
reflecting the adjusted amount of the fee.
(Ord. 5400 § 17 (part), 2016)
16.64.060   Notice of protest.
   (a)   Each applicant is hereby notified that, in order to protest the
imposition of any impact fee required by this chapter, the protest must be
filed in accordance with the requirements of this chapter and, if applicable to
the protest, the Mitigation Fee Act. Failure of any person to comply with the
protest requirements of this chapter and, if applicable, the Mitigation Fee Act
shall bar that person from any action or proceeding or any defense of
invalidity or unreasonableness of the imposition, to the extent allowed by law.
   (b)   On or before the date on which payment of the fee is due, the
applicant shall serve a written notice to the director of planning and
development services with all of the following information:
      (1)   For challenges under the Mitigation Fee Act, a statement that the
required payment is tendered, or will be tendered when due, under protest; and
      (2)   a statement informing the city of the factual elements of the
dispute and the legal theory forming the basis for the protest.
(Ord. 5669 § 2, 2025: Ord. 5494 § 3, 2020: Ord. 5400 § 17 (part), 2016)
16.64.070   Informal hearing and preparation of additional analysis.
   (a)   The director shall schedule an informal hearing regarding the protest,
to be held no later than sixty days after service of the applicant’s written
notice of protest, and with at least ten days' prior notice to the applicant
(unless alternative dates are agreed by the director and the applicant).
   (b)   Either at the applicant’s request or upon the director’s initiative,
the director may seek preparation, at the applicant’s expense, of additional
analysis of the impacts created by the application. The time in which an
informal hearing must be scheduled shall be tolled while these studies are
prepared.
   (c)   During the informal hearing, the director shall consider the
applicant's protest, relevant evidence assembled as a result of the protest,
and any additional relevant evidence provided during the informal hearing by
the applicant and the city. The director shall provide an opportunity for the
applicant to present additional evidence at the hearing in support of the
protest.
   (d)   The director shall issue a written determination regarding the protest
directing that the fee shall remain unchanged or shall be increased or
decreased based on the evidence presented at the hearing.   
   (e)   The director may elect to appoint an independent hearing officer or
other designee to hear and decide a protest under this section.
(Ord. 5669 § 3, 2025: Ord. 5400 § 17 (part), 2016)
16.64.080   Reserved.
16.64.090   Cost of protest.
   The applicant shall pay all city costs related to any protest pursuant to
this chapter, in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by the city. At the
time of the applicant's protest the applicant shall pay a deposit in an amount
established by the city to cover the estimated reasonable cost of processing
the protest. If the deposit is not adequate to cover all city costs, the
applicant shall pay the difference within twenty days after receipt of written
notice from the director.
(Ord. 5669 § 5, 2025: Ord. 5400 § 17 (part), 2016)
16.64.100   Administration.
   The city manager, or her/his designee, is authorized to adopt administrative
regulations or guidelines that are consistent with and that further the terms
and requirements set forth in this code. All such administrative regulations or
guidelines must be in writing. Such regulations or guidelines may interpret any
provision of this chapter, as well as any provision of this code relating to
the calculation of a fee.
(Ord. 5400 § 17 (part), 2016)
16.64.110   Inflation adjustment.
   Where it is indicated in this code that a fee is subject to inflation
adjustment pursuant to this section, on each July 1, the amount of the fee
shall be recalculated according to the following formula:
   Adjusted Rate = Prior Rate * Most Recent ENR / ENR for Prior Rate
   Where the "Prior Rate" is the rate in effect prior at the time this
adjustment is calculated, "Most Recent ENR" is the most recently published
construction cost index when the adjustment is calculated and "ENR at Council-
Approval" is the construction cost index (i) used to calculated the prior rate
when it was set pursuant to this section or (ii) published for the month in
which the council approved the "Prior Rate." "Construction cost index" means
the construction cost index for the San Francisco Bay Area set forth in the
Engineering News Record published by McGraw Hill and Associates. In the event
the Engineering News Record ceases to calculate and publish this index, then
the city manager may designate a comparable, alternative index to serve as the
construction cost index.
   The existing rate for a fee shall remain in effect until the recalculated
rate is adopted and effective pursuant to Section
16.64.050.
(Ord. 5400 § 17 (part), 2016)
Chapter 16.65
CITYWIDE AFFORDABLE HOUSING REQUIREMENTS
Sections:
   
16.65.010   Purpose.
   
16.65.020   Definitions.
   
16.65.025   Exemptions.
   
16.65.030   Basic affordable housing requirements - residential ownership
projects.
   
16.65.040   Basic requirement - mixed use, nonresidential and residential
rental projects.
   
16.65.060   Housing impact fee and in-lieu fee.
   
16.65.070   Requirements for residential projects containing ownership and
rental units and for mixed use projects.
   
16.65.075   Provision of affordable units.
   
16.65.080   Alternative means of compliance.
   
16.65.090   Application and review procedures.
   
16.65.100   Affordable housing funds.
   
16.65.110   Administrative relief.
   
16.65.120   Enforcement.
16.65.010   Purpose.
   The purposes of this chapter are to:
   A.   Enhance the public welfare by establishing policies to provide
affordable housing, meet the city's regional share of housing needs, and
implement the goals and objectives of the comprehensive plan and housing
element.
   B.   Mitigate the impacts of residential rental and nonresidential projects
on the need for affordable housing by imposing a housing impact fee whereby
developers of residential rental and nonresidential projects will contribute to
the supply of housing for households with very low, low, and moderate incomes.
   C.   Increase funds available to support the preservation and production of
new affordable housing in the City of Palo Alto.
   D.   Ensure that developers of new nonresidential square footage provide
funding to mitigate the impacts of new employment on the demand for affordable
housing.
   E.   Ensure that developers of new market-rate rental housing provide
funding to mitigate the impacts of new residents on local employment and the
resultant increased demand for affordable housing.
   F.   To create incentives for developers to build new affordable units on-
or off-site instead of paying impact fees or in lieu fees.
   G.   To provide affordable housing that serves qualifying Palo Alto
residents and those who work in the city.
(Ord. 5408 § 3 (part), 2017)
16.65.020   Definitions.
   The definitions set forth in this section shall govern the application and
interpretation of this chapter. Words and phrases not defined in this section
shall be interpreted so as to give this chapter its most reasonable
application.
   (a)   "Affordable housing agreement" means an agreement in conformance with
Section
16.65.090(b) between the city and an applicant, governing how the applicant
shall comply with this chapter.
   (b)   "Affordable housing guidelines" means the requirements for
implementation and administration of this chapter adopted by the planning and
community environment director in accordance with Section
16.65.090(d).
   (c)   "Affordable housing plan" means a plan containing all of the
information specified in and submitted in conformance with Section
16.65.090(a) specifying the manner in which affordable units will be provided
in conformance with this chapter and the affordable housing guidelines.
   (d)   "Affordable rent" means the total monthly housing expenses for a
rental affordable unit not exceeding the rents specified by Section 50053 of
the California Health and Safety Code and California Code of Regulations Title
25, Sections 6910-6924. As used in this chapter, "affordable rent" shall
include the total of monthly payments by the tenant for all of the following:
(1) use and occupancy of the affordable unit and land and all facilities
associated with the affordable unit, including but not limited to parking,
bicycle storage, storage lockers, and use of all common areas; (2) any
additional separately charged fees or service charges assessed by the owner,
other than security deposits; (3) an allowance for utilities paid by the tenant
as established by the city, including garbage collection, sewer, water,
electricity, gas, and other heating, cooking, and refrigeration fuel, but not
telephone service or cable TV; and (4) any other interest, taxes, fees or
charges for use of the land or affordable unit or associated facilities and
assessed by a public or private entity other than the owner, and paid by the
tenant.
   (e)   "Affordable sales price" means the maximum purchase price that will be
affordable to the specified household at the specified income level, calculated
in accordance with California Health and Safety Code Section 50052.5. The
affordable sales price shall include a reasonable down payment, and monthly
housing payments (including interest, principal, mortgage insurance, property
taxes, homeowners insurance, homeowners association dues, property maintenance
and repairs, and a reasonable allowance for utilities), all as determined by
the city.
   (f)   "Affordable unit" means a dwelling unit affordable to very low, low,
or moderate income households.
   (g)   "Applicant" or "developer" means a person, persons, or entity that
applies for a residential or nonresidential project and also includes the owner
or owners of the property if the applicant does not own the property on which
development is proposed.
   (h)   "Area median income" or "AMI" means the annual median income for Santa
Clara County, adjusted for household size, as published periodically in the
California Code of Regulations, Title 25, Section 6932, or its successor
provision, or as established by the City of Palo Alto in the event that such
median income figures are no longer published periodically in the California
Code of Regulations.
   (i)   "Building permit" includes full structural building permits as well as
partial permits such as foundation-only permits.
   (j)   "Common ownership or control" refers to property owned or controlled
by the same person, persons, or entity, or by separate entities in which any
shareholder, partner, member, or family member of an investor of the entity
owns ten percent or more of the interest in the property.
   (k)   "Commercial housing fund" means a fund or account designated by the
city to maintain and account for all monies received from nonresidential
project applicants pursuant to this chapter.
   (l)   "Decision-making body" means the city staff person or body authorized
to approve or deny an application for a planning or building permit for a
residential, mixed use or nonresidential project.
   (m)   "Density bonus units" means dwelling units approved in a residential
project pursuant to California Government Code Section 65915 that are in excess
of the maximum allowable residential density otherwise permitted by the City of
Palo Alto.
   (n)   "First approval" means the first of the following approvals to occur
with respect to a residential project: planning permit or building permit.
   (o)   "Housing impact fee" or "housing fee" means the fee paid by developers
of residential and nonresidential projects to mitigate the impacts that such
developments have on the demand for affordable housing in the city.
   (p)   "Low income households" are those households whose income does not
exceed the low income limits applicable to Santa Clara County as defined in
California Health and Safety Code Section 50079.5 and published annually
pursuant to Title 25 of the California Code of Regulations, Section 6932 (or
its successor provision) by the California Department of Housing and Community
Development, generally households with incomes between fifty percent and eighty
percent of area median income.
   (q)   "Market rate unit" means a new dwelling unit in a residential project
that is not an affordable unit.
   (r)   "Mixed use project" means an application for a planning permit or
building permit that includes the creation of one or more new dwelling units
and the construction of net new gross square footage of non-residential space
or the conversion of a residential use to a nonresidential use.
   (s)   "Moderate income households" are those households whose income does
not exceed the moderate income limits applicable to Santa Clara County as
defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 50093 and published
annually pursuant to Title 25 of the California Code of Regulations, Section
6932 (or its successor provision) by the California Department of Housing and
Community Development, generally households with incomes between eighty percent
and one hundred twenty percent of area median income.
   (t)   "Nonresidential project" means an application for a planning permit or
building permit that includes the new construction of net new gross square feet
of nonresidential space, the conversion of a residential use to a
nonresidential use, or the conversion of exempt space (as provided in Section
16.65.025) to non-exempt space.
   (u)   "Planning permit" means any discretionary approval of a residential
project, including but not limited to a comprehensive or specific plan adoption
or amendment, rezoning, tentative map, parcel map, conditional use permit,
variances, or architectural review.
   (v)   "Residential housing fund" means a fund or account designated by the
city to maintain and account for all monies received from residential project
applicants pursuant to this chapter.
   (w)   "Residential ownership project" means any residential project that
includes the creation of one or more new dwelling units that may lawfully be
sold individually. A residential ownership project also includes the conversion
of a residential rental project to a residential ownership project.
   (x)   "Residential project" means any development for which a planning
permit or building permit is required that includes the creation of one or more
new dwelling units, conversion of nonresidential uses to dwelling units, or the
conversion of a use from a residential rental project to a residential
ownership project.
   (y)   "Residential rental project" means any residential project on property
under common ownership and control that creates one or more net new dwelling
units that cannot be lawfully sold individually.
   (z)   "Very low income households" are those households whose income does
not exceed the very low income limits applicable to Santa Clara County as
defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 50105 and published
annually pursuant to Title 25 of the California Code of Regulations, Section
6932 (or its successor provision) by the California Department of Housing and
Community Development, generally households with incomes less than fifty
percent of area median income.
(Ord. 5408 § 3 (part), 2017)
16.65.025   Exemptions.
   The following development projects are exempt from the provisions of this
chapter:
   (a)   Residential projects consisting of the construction of one or two
units, other than accessory dwelling units and junior accessory dwelling units,
unless: (1) included in a mixed use project, (2) constructed on a lot created
by an Urban Lot Split under
Chapter 21.10; or (3) resulting in a two-family use on a single-family zoned
lot;
   (b)   Accessory dwelling units, unless: (1) constructed on a lot created by
an Urban Lot Split under
Chapter 21.10; or (2) the accessory dwelling unit is constructed on a single-
family zoned lot containing a two-family use;
   (c)   Junior accessory dwelling units and, notwithstanding subsection (b),
all accessory dwelling units less than 750 square feet;
   (d)   Places of worship;
   (e)   Colleges and universities;
   (f)   Commercial recreation;
   (g)   Hospitals and convalescent facilities;
   (h)   Private clubs, lodges, and fraternal organizations;
   (i)   Private education facilities;
   (j)   Public facilities;
   (k)   Retail service, eating and drinking service, personal service, or
automotive service when the total additional service related square footage is
1,500 square feet or less. This exemption shall apply only when the additional
square footage of new development does not exceed 1,500 square feet. New
development that is larger than 1,500 square feet shall pay a fee or otherwise
comply with this chapter for all square footage, including the first 1,500
square feet;
   (l)   New gross square footage used for (1) an on-site cafeteria,
recreational facility, or day care facility provided for employees or their
children and not open to the public; or (2) a hazardous materials storage
facility;
   (m)   Projects that have established a vested right not to be subject to
this chapter; and
   (n)   Any nonresidential project otherwise determined to be exempt pursuant
to city council resolution.
   If a development project is exempt from this chapter at initial
construction, but later converts to a use subject to this chapter, the
converted square footage will be deemed net new square footage or dwelling
units, as applicable, subject to the requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 5587 § 24, 2023: Ord. 5542 § 23, 2022: Ord. 5408 § 3 (part), 2017)
16.65.030   Basic affordable housing requirement - residential ownership
projects.
   The provisions of this section shall apply to all residential ownership
projects, including the residential ownership portion of any mixed use project
containing three or more units, except for any residential ownership project
exempt under Section
16.65.025.
   (a)   Unless an alternative is approved as described in Section
16.65.080, residential ownership projects shall provide the following:
      (1)   For projects on sites of less than five acres, fifteen percent of
the dwelling units in the project shall be made available at affordable sales
price to very low, low, and moderate income households;
      (2)   For projects on sites of five acres or more and all townhome
projects in the NV districts, twenty percent of the dwelling units in the
project shall be made available at affordable sales price to very low, low, and
moderate income households; and
      (3)   For projects that convert existing rental housing to condominiums,
other residential ownership or nonresidential space or that remove existing
rental housing, twenty-five percent of the dwelling units in the project shall
be made available at affordable sales price to very low, low, and moderate
income households.
      (4)   Calculations of the number of affordable units required by this
section shall be based on the number of dwelling units in the residential
project, excluding any density bonus units. Projects shall not receive a credit
for any existing dwelling units demolished as part of the project.
   (b)   The affordable units shall be made available at the following
affordable sales prices:
      (1)   For projects subject to subsections (a)(1) and (2) of this section,
at least two-thirds of the required affordable units must be made available at
affordable sales price to households earning eighty percent to one hundred
percent of the area median income, and one-third may be made available at
affordable sales prices to households earning between one hundred percent and
one hundred twenty percent of the area median income.
      (2)   For projects subject to subsection (a)(3) of this section, at least
four-fifths of the required affordable units must be made available at
affordable sales price to households earning eighty percent to one hundred
percent of the area median income, and one-fifth may be made available at
affordable sales prices to households earning between one hundred percent and
one hundred twenty percent of the area median income.
   (c)   When the affordable housing requirements described in this section
result in a fractional unit, an in-lieu payment as specified in Section
16.65.060 may be made for the fractional unit instead of providing an
affordable unit, except that, if the project contains thirty or more units, an
additional affordable unit shall be provided for each fractional unit of 0.50
or more. The in-lieu fee for a fractional unit shall be calculated as described
in the city's affordable housing guidelines.
(Ord. 5634 § 6, 2024: Ord. 5408 § 3 (part), 2017)
16.65.040   Basic requirement - mixed use, nonresidential and residential
rental projects.
   (a)   Unless the mixed use, nonresidential or residential rental project is
exempt under Section
16.65.025 or an alternative is approved as described in Section
16.65.080, all mixed use, nonresidential and residential rental projects shall
pay housing impact fees as specified in Section
16.65.060 to mitigate the projects' impacts on the need for affordable housing;
except:
      (1)   The residential ownership portion of a mixed use project containing
three or more units shall comply with Section
16.65.030.
      (2)   In the NV districts, residential rental projects, including mixed
use projects containing residential rental units, shall provide fifteen percent
of the dwelling units in the project at rates affordable to lower income
households.
(Ord. 5634 § 7, 2024: Ord. 5408 § 3 (part), 2017)
16.65.060   Housing impact fee and in-lieu fee.
   (a)   Fees. The amount of any housing impact fees and in-lieu fees shall be
established from time to time by ordinance or resolution of the city council.
Housing impact fees shall not exceed the cost of mitigating the impact of
mixed-use, nonresidential and residential rental projects on the need for
affordable housing in the city.
   (b)   Fee payment. Housing impact fees and in-lieu fees, if required, shall
be paid prior to issuance of any building permit for a development project
subject to this chapter or at a time otherwise specified by city council
ordinance or resolution.
(Ord. 5408 § 3 (part), 2017)
16.65.070   Requirements for residential projects containing ownership and
rental units and for mixed use projects.
   (a)   Residential projects containing ownership and rental units. When a
residential project includes both ownership and rental dwelling units, the
provisions of this chapter that apply to ownership residential projects shall
apply to that portion of the development that consists of ownership dwelling
units, while the provisions of this chapter that apply to rental residential
project shall apply to that portion of the development that consists of rental
dwelling units.
   (b)   Mixed use projects containing residential units. When a mixed use
project contains three or more dwelling units, either residential rental or
residential ownership, the provisions of this chapter that apply to residential
ownership and residential rental projects shall apply to those portions of the
development that consist of residential ownership or residential rental units,
as applicable, while the provisions of this chapter that apply to non-
residential projects shall apply to that portion of the development that
consists of non-residential uses. When a mixed use project contains fewer than
three dwelling units, impact fees shall apply to those units.
(Ord. 5408 § 3 (part), 2017)
16.65.075   Provision of affordable units.
   (a)   Standards for affordable units.
   (1)   Affordable units shall be comparable in exterior appearance and
overall quality of construction to market-rate units in the same housing
development. Interior finishes and amenities must equal those provided in the
base model market-rate units.
   (2)   The number of bedrooms and the size of the affordable units shall be
comparable to the average number of bedrooms in the market-rate units, except
that in a single-family detached development, the decision-making body may
allow smaller affordable units or duplex affordable units, if permitted in the
zoning district, when this furthers the provision of on-site affordable units.
The affordable units shall be reasonably dispersed within the residential
project, with unit locations comparable to those of the market-rate units, or,
subject to the approval of the planning and community environment director, may
be clustered within the residential project when this furthers affordable
housing opportunities.
   (3)   The affordable units shall have the same amenities as the market rate
units, including the same access to and enjoyment of common open space,
parking, storage, and other facilities in the residential project.
   (b)   Timing of construction. The affordable units shall be constructed in
proportion to construction of the market-rate units. No building permit shall
be issued for any market-rate unit unless a proportional number of building
permits have been issued for affordable units, and no certificates of occupancy
or final inspections shall be issued for any market-rate units unless a
proportional number of certificates of occupancy or final inspections have been
issued for affordable units. An alternative phasing plan may be approved as
part of the approval of the affordable housing plan described in Section
16.65.090.
   (c)   Continued affordability.
   (1)   All affordable units provided under Section
16.65.030 or Section
16.65.080 shall be subject to a resale restriction, deed of trust, and/or
regulatory agreement recorded against the property for execution by the city
manager, in a form approved by the city attorney, to ensure the continued
affordability of the affordable units.
   (2)   Notwithstanding Section
18.15.040, to be considered as affordable units under this chapter, all
affordable units shall remain affordable to the targeted income group for
ninety-nine years, except in the case of affordable housing developments
provided as an alternate means of compliance pursuant to Section
16.65.080, the city may authorize a fifty- five year affordability restriction
if required to maintain eligibility for tax credit financing.
   (3)   Any household that occupies an affordable unit must occupy that unit
as its principal residence, unless otherwise approved in writing for rental to
a third party for a limited period of time due to household hardship, as
determined by the city.
   (4)   No household may begin occupancy of an affordable unit until the
household has been determined to be eligible to occupy that unit by the city or
designee.
(Ord. 5408 § 3 (part), 2017)
16.65.080   Alternative means of compliance.
   The developer of a mixed use, residential or nonresidential project may
request an alternate means of compliance, as described in this section, as a
component of the affordable housing plan required by Section
16.65.090.
   (a)   Provisions applicable to all alternatives. The following provisions
apply to all alternative means of compliance described in this section.
   (1)   The applicant shall bear the burden of presenting substantial evidence
to support a finding of infeasibility under subection (b) of this section and
to support the feasibility of any proposed alternative. The applicant shall set
forth in detail the factual and legal basis for any request under this section.
   (2)   Any request under this section shall be submitted to the planning and
community environment director together with an economic analysis, if required,
or other supporting documentation and shall be acted upon by the city council.
   (3)   When the affordable housing alternative results in a fractional unit,
fees shall be paid as specified in the affordable housing guidelines for any
fractional units.
   (4)   All affordable units shall conform with the provisions of Section
16.65.075.
   (5)   The city council may approve or conditionally approve any alternative
set forth in this section if it makes all of the following findings and any
additional findings required for the selected alternative:
   (A)   The number of affordable units provided by the alternative equals or
exceeds that provided by on-site units or by the payment of impact fees, as
applicable to the project;
   (B)   The level of affordability provided by the alternative is the same or
lower as provided by on-site units or by the payment of impact fees, as
applicable to the project; and
   (C)   The alternative is consistent with the comprehensive plan and housing
element and the provisions of this chapter.
   (b)   Residential ownership projects.
   (1)   If the provision of affordable ownership units under Section
16.65.030 is infeasible, an applicant for a residential ownership project may
request, in order of priority, to: (a) provide on-site affordable rental units
as provided in subsection (c) below; (b) provide off-site affordable units as
provided in subsection (d) below; (c) dedicate land for affordable housing as
provided in subsection (d) below; (d) rehabilitate and convert existing
residences to affordable housing, or preserve existing affordable housing, as
provided in subsection (e) below; or (e) pay the in-lieu fee adopted as
described in Section
16.65.060. The applicant must demonstrate that each of the higher priority
options is infeasible before the city will consider a lower priority option.
   (2)   For the purposes of this section, "infeasible" means either that: (a)
the affordable sales price would be less than the cost of constructing the
affordable unit, including financing but excluding all other costs, including
land, marketing, improvements, and profit; or (b) provision of the units would
produce a confiscatory or unconstitutional result.
   (3)   Notwithstanding Section
16.65.080(a)(5), the city council may accept fees in lieu of the alternatives
in paragraph one provided it makes a finding that special circumstances justify
payment of fees over provision of ownership units, such as a finding that the
fees generated would result in more affordable units than those required to be
provided on site or that funds are needed to finance a pending affordable
housing project.
   (c)   Affordable rental units in a residential ownership project or a
residential rental project.
   (1)   An applicant for a residential ownership project or a residential
rental project may elect to make available dwelling units in the residential
project at affordable rent rather than provide on-site for-sale affordable
units or pay housing impact fees, as applicable. The city council may by
ordinance or resolution specify the percentage and affordability level of
rental affordable units that are equivalent to provision of on-site for-sale
affordable units or payment of housing impact fees, as applicable.
   (2)   To ensure compliance with the Costa-Hawkins Act (Chapter 2.7 of Title
5 of Part 4 of Division 3 of the Civil Code), the city may approve such a
proposal only if the applicant agrees in a rent regulatory agreement with the
city to limit rents in consideration for a direct financial contribution or a
form of assistance specified in Chapter 4.3 (commencing with Section 65915) of
Division 1 of Title 7 of the Government Code.
   (3)   Any rent regulatory agreement for rental units in a residential
ownership project shall include provisions for sale of the affordable units and
relocation benefits for tenants of the affordable units if the owner of the
residential ownership project later determines to offer the affordable units in
the residential project for sale to moderate income households at an affordable
sales price.
   (d)   Dedication of land and off-site construction of affordable units.
   (1)   The applicant may submit an affordable housing plan that proposes
either to dedicate vacant land suitable for affordable housing or to construct
affordable units on another site. Two or more applicants may also jointly
propose the provision of vacant land suitable for affordable housing or the
construction of off-site affordable units on a single site.
   (2)   Construction of the off-site affordable units may not commence prior
to the first approval of the residential project, and construction of the off-
site units must occur concurrently with construction of the market-rate units
in the residential project as described in Section
16.65.075.
   (3)   The city council may approve or conditionally approve the dedication
of land or off-site construction if it makes all of the following findings in
addition to making the findings in subsection (a)(5) above:
   (A)   Financing or a viable financing plan, which may include public
funding, is in place for the off-site affordable units; and
   (B)   The off-site location is suitable for the proposed affordable housing,
consistent with any affordable housing guidelines and the housing element, and
will not tend to cause residential segregation.
   (4)   No building permit shall be issued for any units in the residential
project until committed funding is available for the off -site units, or units
to be constructed on land to be dedicated.
   (5)   Off-site construction of affordable units does not qualify the
residential project for a density bonus or other regulatory incentives allowed
by Government Code Section 65915 unless the off-site development includes the
dedication of land conforming to the provisions of Section 65915(g). No off-
site alternative may be approved by the city if a density bonus or other
regulatory incentive is requested for the site on which the affordable housing
is to be built. Any off-site alternative must comply with the density,
intensity and other development standards that are permitted under the zone for
the site.
   (e)   Rehabilitation and conversion of existing market-rate housing.
   (1)   The applicant may submit an affordable housing plan that proposes the
rehabilitation and conversion of existing market-rate housing to affordable
housing, or the preservation of existing affordable housing that is not deed
restricted as affordable.
   (2)   The market-rate units to be converted to affordable units shall be
located in a residential project that is not subject to any existing
affordability covenants except covenants restricting other units in the
development.
   (3)   The affordable housing plan shall include a plan for long-term
financial sustainability of the market-rate units to be converted to affordable
units, which incorporate, among other things, provisions to accommodate
increases in homeowners' association fees, special assessments and maintenance
costs.
   (4)   Any existing tenants in the market-rate units to be converted to
affordable units shall be eligible to remain in the units; or the applicant
shall provide relocation assistance pursuant to California Government Code §§
7260 et seq.
   (5)   The city council may approve or conditionally approve the proposal if
it makes all of the following findings in addition to making the findings in
subsection (a)(5) above:
   (A)   The proposal includes substantial rehabilitation of the existing
housing equal to at least twenty-five percent of the after-rehabilitation value
of the property, inclusive of land value, and the units shall be in decent,
safe and sanitary condition and in compliance with all codes;
   (B)   Financing or a viable financing plan is in place for the units to be
converted to affordable units; and
   (C)   The off-site location is suitable for the proposed affordable housing,
consistent with any affordable housing guidelines and the housing element, and
will not tend to cause residential segregation.
   (6)   No building permit shall be issued for any units in the residential
project until regulatory agreements approved by the city have been recorded for
the existing units to be converted to affordable housing.
   (f)   Mixed use projects. An applicant for a mixed use development may
submit an affordable housing plan that proposes to mitigate the affordable
housing impacts of the non-residential and residential rental portions of the
development through any of the options listed above or through on-site
provision of affordable units conforming with applicable provisions of Section
16.65.075. In addition to making the findings in subsection (a)(3) above, the
city council may approve or conditionally approve such an alternative if it
determines, based on substantial evidence, that such alternative will provide
equal or greater public benefit than would payment of the housing impact fee.
   (g)   Nonresidential projects. An applicant for a nonresidential development
may submit an affordable housing plan that proposes to mitigate the affordable
housing impacts of the development through any of the options listed above or
through on-site provision of affordable units conforming with applicable
provisions of Section
16.65.075. In addition to making the findings in subsection (a)(5) above, the
city council may approve or conditionally approve such an alternative if it
determines, based on substantial evidence, that such alternative will provide
equal or greater public benefit than would payment of the housing impact fee.
(Ord. 5408 § 3 (part), 2017)
16.65.090   Application and review procedures.
   (a)   Affordable housing plan.
   (1)   All residential ownership projects and any mixed use, residential
rental or nonresidential project proposing to provide affordable units under
the provisions of Section
16.65.080 shall submit an affordable housing plan concurrently with the
application for the first approval of the project. The city shall provide an
application form specifying the contents of the affordable housing plan. If an
affordable housing plan is required, no application for a first approval the
project may be deemed complete until a complete affordable housing plan is
submitted. The cost of reviewing any proposed alternative, including but not
limited to the cost to the city of hiring a consultant to review the
application, shall be borne by the applicant.
   (2)   No affordable housing plan is required for a mixed use, residential
rental project or a nonresidential project if the applicant proposes to pay
housing impact fees, or if the project is exempt under Section
16.65.025.
   (3)   Any affordable housing plan shall be processed concurrently with all
other permits required for the development project. Before approving the
affordable housing plan, the decision-making body shall find that the
affordable housing plan conforms to this chapter. A condition shall be attached
to require recordation of an affordable housing agreement, as described in
subsection (b) of this section below, prior to the approval of any final or
parcel map or building permit for the development project.
   (4)   The approved affordable housing plan may be amended prior to issuance
of any building permit for the development project. A request for a minor
modification of an approved affordable housing plan may be granted by the
planning and community environment director if the modification is
substantially in compliance with the original affordable housing plan and
conditions of approval. Other modifications to the affordable housing plan
shall be processed in the same manner as the original plan.
   (b)   Affordable housing agreement.
   (1)   Affordable housing agreements acceptable to the city manager or
designee and approved as to form by the city attorney shall be recorded against
the residential or nonresidential project prior to approval of any final or
parcel map, or issuance of any building permit, whichever occurs first, unless
the project is required only to pay impact fees.
   (2)   The affordable housing agreement shall specify the number, type,
location, size, and phasing of all affordable units, provisions for income
certification and screening of potential purchasers or renters of units, and
resale control mechanisms, including the financing of ongoing administrative
and monitoring costs, consistent with the approved affordable housing plan and
any affordable housing guidelines, as determined by the city manager or
designee.
   (c)   The city council, by resolution, may establish fees for the ongoing
administration and monitoring of the affordable units, which fees may be
updated periodically, as required.
   (d)   The planning and community environment director may adopt affordable
housing guidelines to implement this chapter, and may update those guidelines
periodically as required.
(Ord. 5408 § 3 (part), 2017)
16.65.100   Affordable housing funds.
   (a)   All housing impact fees or other funds collected under this chapter
shall be deposited into the city's commercial and residential housing funds.
   (b)   The monies in the commercial and residential housing funds and all
earnings from investment of the moneys in the funds shall be expended
exclusively to provide housing affordable to very low income, lower income, and
moderate income households in the city, consistent with the goals and policies
contained in the city's housing element and for administration and compliance
monitoring of the affordable housing program.
(Ord. 5408 § 3 (part), 2017)
16.65.110   Administrative relief.
   (a)   As part of an application for the first approval of a residential or
nonresidential project, a developer may request that the requirements of this
chapter be waived or modified by the city council, based upon a showing that
applying the requirements of this chapter would result in an unconstitutional
taking of property or would result in any other unconstitutional result.
   (b)   The request for a waiver or modification shall set forth in detail the
factual and legal basis for the claim.
   (c)   Any request for a waiver or modification shall be reviewed and
considered at the same time as the project application or any affordable
housing plan.
   (d)   The waiver or modification may be approved only to the extent
necessary to avoid an unconstitutional result, based upon legal advice provided
by or at the behest of the city attorney, after adoption of written findings,
based on legal analysis and substantial evidence. If a waiver or modification
is granted, any change in the project shall invalidate the waiver or
modification, and a new application shall be required for a waiver or
modification under this section.
(Ord. 5408 § 3 (part), 2017)
16.65.120   Enforcement.
   (a)   Penalties. Persons employed in the following designated employee
positions are authorized to exercise the authority provided in the California
Penal Code Section 836.5 and are authorized to issue citation for violations of
this chapter: development services director, director of planning and
development services and their designees.
   (b)   The city attorney shall be authorized to enforce the provisions of
this chapter and all affordable housing agreements, regulatory agreements, and
all other covenants or restrictions placed on affordable units, by civil action
and any other proceeding or method permitted by law.
   (c)   Failure of any official or agency to fulfill the requirements of this
chapter shall not excuse any developer or owner from the requirements of this
chapter. No permit, license, map, or other approval or entitlement for a
residential project shall be issued, including without limitation a final
inspection or certificate of occupancy, until all applicable requirements of
this chapter have been satisfied.
   (d)   The remedies provided for in this section shall be cumulative and not
exclusive and shall not preclude the city from any other remedy or relief to
which it otherwise would be entitled under law or equity.
(Ord. 5494 § 3, 2020: Ord. 5408 § 3 (part), 2017)
Chapter 16.66
HAULED LIQUID WASTE
Sections:
   
16.66.010   Purpose.
   
16.66.020   Definitions.
   
16.66.030   Responsibility of the Director.
   
16.66.040   Discharge of hauled liquid waste.
   
16.66.050   Hauled liquid waste discharge permit required.
   
16.66.060   Hauled liquid waste discharge permit application procedure.
   
16.66.070   Approved vehicles.
   
16.66.080   Waste monitoring.
   
16.66.090   Reporting requirements for waste haulers.
   
16.66.100   Retention of records.
   
16.66.110   Insurance.
   
16.66.120   Hauled liquid waste discharge permit modification.
   
16.66.130   Hauled liquid waste discharge permit suspension or revocation.
   
16.66.140   Hauled liquid waste discharge permit denial, suspension, or
revocation hearing.
   
16.66.150   Personnel orientation.
   
16.66.160   Enforcement and penalties.
   
16.66.170   Charges and fees.
   
16.66.180   Closure of receiving station.
16.66.010   Purpose.
   The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the discharge of hauled liquid
waste at the Palo Alto Regional Water Quality Control Plant (RWQCP).
(Ord. 5673 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.66.020   Definitions.
   The following terms and phrases, whenever used in this chapter, shall be as
defined herein.
   “Chemical toilet waste” means human excrement and deodorizers collected from
a portable chemical toilet.
   “Cesspool” means a lined or partially lined underground pit into which raw
sanitary sewage is discharged.
   “City” means the City of Palo Alto located in the State of California.
   “Director” means the city’s Director of Public Works, his or her designee,
or such other person as may be designated by the city manager.
   “Hauled liquid waste” means sewage collected from a septic tank, seepage
pit, cesspool, chemical toilet, or other similar device.
   “Hauled liquid waste discharge permit” means a permit issued by the
Director, used as a control mechanism, which grants revocable permission and
authorization to discharge hauled liquid waste to the receiving station.
   “Hazardous material” means any material so designated by Title 17 of this
code.
   “Hazardous waste” means a material designated as a hazardous waste by
federal, state, or local regulations.
   “Industrial waste” means any waste so designated by
Chapter 16.09.
   “NPDES permit” means National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Permit
and controls water pollution by regulating point sources that discharge
pollutants into waters of the United States.
   “Person” means any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental
entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents, or
assigns. This definition includes all federal, state, and local government
entities.
   “Publicly Owned Treatment Works” or “POTW” means a treatment works, as
defined by Section 212 of the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. Section 1292), which
is owned by the city. This definition includes any devices or systems used in
the collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage or
industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any conveyances, which convey
wastewater to a treatment plant.
   “Receiving station” means the location that has been identified by the
Director as the authorized discharge point for hauled liquid wastes.
   “RWQCP service area” means the cities of Los Altos, Mountain View, and Palo
Alto; the town of Los Altos Hills; the East Palo Alto Sanitary District; and
the unincorporated area of the County of Santa Clara where the Stanford
University campus is located.
   “Seepage pit” means a device comprised of one or more pits extending into
porous strata, lined with open-jointed masonry or similar walls, capped and
provided with a means of access such as a manhole cover and into which
wastewater disposal system effluent is discharged.
   “Sewage” means any material so designated by
Chapter 16.09.
   “Waste hauler” means any person engaged in the collection and transport of
waste.
(Ord. 5673 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.66.030   Responsibility of the Director.
   Except as otherwise provided herein, the Director shall administer,
implement and enforce the provisions of this chapter. The Director shall be
responsible for promulgating such orders, rules, regulations and requirements
as are necessary to accomplish the purpose of this chapter. Any powers granted
to or duties imposed upon the Director may be delegated by the Director to a
duly authorized city employee.
(Ord. 5673 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.66.040   Discharge of hauled liquid waste.
   (a)   Hauled liquid waste may only be discharged at the receiving station.
   (b)   No waste hauler shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the
receiving station the following pollutants, substances, or wastewater:
      (1)   Commercial or industrial process wastewater, industrial waste,
hazardous materials, or hazardous waste;
      (2)   Stormwater, groundwater, or artesian well water, unless authorized
by the Director;
      (3)   Wastes from soil boring or construction operations;
      (4)   Sludge, biosolids, or any other solid materials from sewage or
water treatment plants;
      (5)   Grease, oil, or waste collected from grease control devices as
defined by
Chapter 16.13;
      (6)   Any waste prohibited by Section
16.09.040 of this code; or
      (7)   Any waste collected from any property or location outside the RWQCP
service area, unless authorized by the Director.
(Ord. 5673 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.66.050   Hauled liquid waste discharge permit required.
   (a)   No person shall deliver or discharge hauled liquid wastes at the
receiving station without first obtaining a hauled liquid waste discharge
permit from the Director.
   (b)   Any violation of the terms and conditions of a hauled liquid waste
discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and shall subject
the permittee to the enforcement provisions set forth in this chapter.
Obtaining a hauled liquid waste discharge permit from the city does not relieve
a permittee of its obligation to comply with all federal, state, or county
waste hauling requirements or with any other applicable provisions of federal,
state, and local law.
   (c)   No hauled liquid waste discharge permit is transferable without prior
written consent of the Director. A change of ownership (including a transfer of
the majority of shares in a corporate discharger) requires submittal of a new
hauled liquid waste discharge permit application and payment of any applicable
fees.
   (d)   The Director may impose terms and conditions or other provisions in
hauled liquid waste discharge permits which the Director deems reasonable or
necessary to carry out the purpose of this chapter.
   (e)   Issuance of a hauled liquid waste discharge permit establishes a
conditional privilege to discharge. Issuance of a hauled liquid waste discharge
permit does not create property rights, nor does it create a vested irrevocable
right or privilege. The Director has the right to refuse any hauled liquid
waste load.
(Ord. 5673 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.66.060   Hauled liquid waste discharge permit application procedure.
   (a)   An applicant for a hauled liquid waste discharge permit shall complete
and submit a hauled liquid waste discharge permit application established by
the Director. The Director may require information in addition to that required
on the hauled liquid waste discharge permit application form as deemed
reasonable or necessary to evaluate the hauled liquid discharge permit
application.
   (b)   Completed hauled liquid waste discharge permit applications shall be
filed by the discharger not less than ten calendar days in advance of
commencing or recommencing discharge. The discharger shall not commence or
recommence discharge prior to obtaining a hauled liquid waste discharge permit
without specific, interim approval from the Director to discharge during the
permitting process.
   (c)   The Director may deny any application for a hauled liquid waste
discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following
reasons:
      (1)   The application contains false or misleading information;
      (2)   The application is not accompanied by the required fee(s);
      (3)   The issuance of the hauled liquid waste discharge permit would
result in the discharge of wastes of such quantity or strength that the public
health, safety, or public or private property are endangered;
      (4)   The issuance of the hauled liquid waste discharge permit would
cause the city to violate any NPDES permit conditions, or any federal, state,
or local laws or regulations;
      (5)   The applicant has not provided adequate information to establish
that its discharge will comply with all requirements of this chapter and with
such other terms and conditions as the Director may deem necessary to include
in the applicant's hauled liquid waste discharge permit;
      (6)   The applicant has failed to pay or has outstanding fees, fines, or
penalties owed to the city related to activities governed by this chapter.
   (d)   If the Director denies the issuance of a hauled liquid waste discharge
permit, any application fees paid shall not be returned to the applicant unless
the Director has ascertained that a hauled liquid waste discharge permit is not
required to discharge the waste for which the hauled liquid waste discharge
permit application is made.
   (e)   Incomplete or inaccurate hauled liquid waste discharge permit
applications will not be processed.
(Ord. 5673 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.66.070   Approved vehicles.
   Access to and use of the receiving station shall be granted only to vehicles
possessing a valid permit issued by the Santa Clara County Department of
Environmental Health in addition to a hauled liquid waste discharge permit
approved by the Director.
(Ord. 5673 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.66.080   Waste monitoring.
   (a)   The Director may conduct all inspection, surveillance, sampling, and
monitoring necessary to assure compliance with applicable federal, state, and
local regulations including this chapter.
   (b)   The city shall have the right by and through its officers, employees,
or other persons engaged by the city to do so, to take such samples of hauled
liquid waste delivered by any person to the receiving station as the city in
its sole discretion may deem appropriate to obtain a representative sample of
each delivery's contents. Such samples may be taken prior to, during, or after
any such delivery or discharge. Without being limited thereto, results of
analyses made of such samples at an accredited laboratory may be used to
determine a permittee's compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (c)   The Director may require a waste hauler to provide representative
sample and/or a representative waste analysis of any load prior to discharge.
(Ord. 5673 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.66.090   Reporting requirements for waste haulers.
   (a)   The Director may require holders of hauled liquid waste discharge
permits to submit reports to demonstrate or document compliance with this
chapter.
   (b)   The Director may require information on a waste hauler’s operations in
addition to that required in the hauled liquid waste discharge permit
application or other reports to evaluate waste hauler compliance with the
provisions of this chapter.
   (c)   The Director may establish an electronic submittal program for
submission of reports, documents and data and require use thereof by holders of
hauled liquid waste discharge permits.
   (d)   Waste haulers that send electronic (digital) documents to the Director
to satisfy the requirements of this section must meet all federal, state, and
local electronic signature requirements. Electronic data shall be in a format
required by the Director. The Director may require reporting in both digital
and traditional format.
   (e)   Nothing in an electronic submittal program established by the Director
limits the use of the electronically submitted reports, documents, or data or
any information contained therein as evidence in enforcement proceedings.
   (f)   Waste haulers shall comply with all reporting requirements established
by the Director. A waste hauler’s failure to submit required reports, documents
or data as required or by the specified submission deadline shall constitute a
violation of the provisions of this chapter. The Director may allow submission
of required reports, documents and/or data on the following business day in
instances where the due date falls on a weekend or legal holiday.
(Ord. 5673 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.66.100   Retention of records.
   Waste haulers subject to the reporting requirements of this chapter shall
retain, and make available for inspection and copying without unreasonable
delay, all records of information obtained pursuant to this chapter including,
but not limited to, any required monitoring activities, any additional records
of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the
discharger independent of such requirements, and documentation associated with
best management practices. This includes electronic data and information
records maintained and/or submitted in accordance with Section
16.66.090 of this chapter. All records required to be maintained by this
chapter shall remain available for a period of at least three years. This
period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any pending
investigation or enforcement of NPDES Permit conditions or where the discharger
has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the Director.
(Ord. 5673 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.66.110   Insurance.
   No person shall deliver or discharge hauled liquid wastes at the receiving
station unless such person, at his or her sole cost and expense, has and
maintains in full force and effect the insurance policies, endorsements,
certificates and/or binders required by the city.
(Ord. 5673 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.66.120   Hauled liquid waste discharge permit modification.
   The Director may modify any hauled liquid waste discharge permit for good
cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons:
   (a)   To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local
requirements;
   (b)   A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent
reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge;
   (c)   Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to
the POTW, city personnel, or the receiving waters;
   (d)   Violation of any terms or conditions of the hauled liquid waste
discharge permit;
   (e)   Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in
the hauled liquid waste discharge permit application or in any required
reporting;
   (f)   To correct typographical or other errors in the hauled liquid waste
discharge permit;
   (g)   To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new
owner or operator; or
   (h)   To implement programs or policies required or requested of the city by
appropriate federal, state, or local regulatory agencies.
(Ord. 5673 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.66.130   Hauled liquid waste discharge permit suspension or revocation.
   (a)   The Director may deny or suspend the use of the receiving station to
any person who fails to comply with the orders, rules, regulations, and
requirements adopted by the Director or the terms and conditions contained in a
hauled liquid waste discharge permit.
   (b)   The Director may suspend or revoke a hauled liquid waste discharge
permit indefinitely for good cause, including, but not limited to, the
following reasons:
      (1)   Failure to complete a hauled liquid waste discharge permit
application;
      (2)   Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts
in the hauled liquid waste discharge permit application;
      (3)   Knowingly or negligently providing false information on any hauled
liquid waste discharge permit application, manifest, document, or other record
submitted to the RWQCP;
      (4)   Falsifying reports and certification statements;
      (5)   Failure to accurately complete reports or other paperwork required
by the Director;
      (6)   Failure to provide a representative sample upon request;
      (7)   Tampering with monitoring equipment;
      (8)   Disposal of wastes originating outside the RWQCP service area
without prior approval from the Director;
      (9)   Disposal of wastes at the receiving station in a manner which
causes or threatens to cause undue mess to the receiving station;
      (10)   Disposal of wastes at any location other than the receiving
station;
      (11)   Failure to pay fees, fines, or penalties;
      (12)   Failure to maintain a valid Environmental Health permit through
the Santa Clara County Department of Environmental Health;
      (13)   Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business
ownership;
      (14)   Violation of any term or condition of the hauled liquid waste
discharge permit or any provision of this chapter; or
      (15)   Failure of the waste hauler to comply with the waste handling,
disposal, and reporting requirements of the Santa Clara County Department of
Environmental Health.
   (c)   All hauled liquid waste discharge permits issued to a discharger are
void upon the issuance of a new hauled liquid waste discharge permit to that
discharger.
(Ord. 5673 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.66.140   Hauled liquid waste discharge permit denial, suspension, or
revocation hearing.
   (a)   An applicant or permit holder shall have at its request, a hearing
before the city manager, or his or her designee, to appeal a decision by the
Director to deny the applicant’s discharge permit application, suspend, or
revoke a discharger’s discharge permit.
    (b)   The Director shall give the applicant or permit holder written notice
of intent to deny the applicant’s discharge permit application, suspend, or
revoke a discharger’s discharge permit. The notice shall set forth specifically
the grounds for the Director’s intention to deny the applicant’s discharge
permit application, suspend, or revoke a discharger’s discharge permit and
shall inform the applicant or permit holder that they have ten calendar days
from the date of receipt of the notice to file a written request for a hearing
with the Director. The application shall be denied or the permit shall be
revoked, or suspended if a hearing request is not received by the Director
within the ten-day period.
   (c)   If the applicant, permit holder, or interested party or parties file
(s) a timely hearing request, the city manager, or his or her designee, shall
within ten calendar days from the receipt of the request, set a time and place
for the hearing. All parties involved shall have the right to offer
testimonial, documentary, and tangible evidence bearing on the issues and to be
represented by counsel. The decision of the city manager, or designee, whether
to deny the applicant’s discharge permit application or to modify, make subject
to additional terms, suspend, or revoke the discharger’s discharge permit shall
be final.
(Ord. 5673 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.66.150   Personnel orientation.
   (a)   Waste haulers shall attend orientation provided by the city prior to
initial discharge but after permit issuance. All waste haulers are responsible
for ensuring new drivers know where the receiving station is and how to use it,
or to arrange for a city-provided orientation prior to discharge.
(Ord. 5673 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.66.160   Enforcement and penalties.
   (a)   Warning. When the Director finds that a user has violated, or
continues to violate, any provision of this chapter or a hauled liquid waste
discharge permit, the Director may issue verbal or written warnings in response
to minor violations of this chapter. Compliance with warnings does not limit
further enforcement action by the city.
   (b)   Notice of violation. When the Director finds that a user has violated,
or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a hauled liquid waste
discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, the Director may serve upon that
discharger a written notice of violation (NOV). The NOV may include a deadline
for the discharger to respond with an explanation of the violation and a plan
for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof. Submission of such a
plan in no way relieves the discharger of liability for any violations
occurring before or after receipt of the NOV. Nothing in this section shall
limit the authority of the Director to take any action, including emergency
actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of
violation.
   (c)   Administrative citation. When the Director finds that a user has
violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter or a hauled
liquid waste discharge permit, the Director may issue an administrative
citation in accordance with the provisions contained in
Chapter 1.12. Issuance of an administrative citation shall not be a bar
against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the person.
   (d)   Emergency suspension. The Director may immediately suspend any
discharge, after informal notice to the user, whenever such suspension is
necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge, which reasonably appears
to present, or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health,
safety, or welfare of persons. The Director may also immediately suspend a
discharger’s discharge that threatens to interfere with the operation of the
POTW, or which presents, or may present, an endangerment to the environment.
Any discharger notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately stop
or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a discharger’s failure to
immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the Director may take
such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW or
endangerment to any persons. The Director may allow the discharger to
recommence its discharge when the discharger has demonstrated to the
satisfaction of the Director that the period of endangerment has passed.
   (e)   Civil penalties.
      (1)   Any person who has violated, or continues to violate any provision
of this chapter or a hauled liquid waste discharge permit shall be liable to
the city for a maximum civil penalty of up to $25,000 per day for each day in
which such violation occurs.
      (2)   The city may petition the Superior Court of California pursuant to
Government Code Section 54740 to recover the sums in subsection (e)(1) of this
section as well as reasonable attorneys’ fees, court costs, and other expenses
associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring
expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the city.
      (3)   Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against a discharger.
   (f)   Criminal penalties. As provided in
Chapter 1.08, violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to
criminal penalties.
   (g)   Remedies nonexclusive. The remedies provided for in this chapter are
cumulative and not exclusive, and shall be in addition to the provisions of
Chapters
1.08,
1.12, and
1.16 of this code, and all other remedies available to the city under federal,
state, or local law. The Director may take any, all, or any combination of
these actions against a noncompliant discharger. The Director is empowered to
take more than one enforcement action against any noncompliant discharger.
Enforcement actions may be taken concurrently.
(Ord. 5673 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.66.170   Charges and fees.
   (a)   The city may adopt reasonable fees for reimbursement of costs of
setting up and operating the city’s hauled liquid waste program, which may
include:
      (1)   Fees for treatment and discharge of hauled liquid waste;
      (2)   Fees for hauled liquid waste discharge permit applications
including the cost of processing such applications;
      (3)   Fees for monitoring, inspection, and surveillance procedures
including the cost of collection and analyzing a waste hauler’s discharge, and
reviewing monitoring reports and certification statements submitted by waste
haulers;
      (4)   Fees for filing appeals;
      (5)   Fees to recover administrative and other costs (not included in
subsection (a)(2) of this section) associated with the enforcement activity
taken by the Director to address discharger noncompliance; and
      (6)   Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the
requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 5673 § 2 (part), 2025)
16.66.180   Closure of receiving station.
   The Director may suspend discharge of hauled liquid waste at the receiving
station for a period of time deemed reasonable or necessary, for good cause
including, but not limited to: RWQCP operational issues, concerns, or
violations; emergencies; natural disasters; power failures; RWQCP maintenance
or repair; excess flow entering the RWQCP; and weather conditions. Hauled
liquid waste discharge permit holders shall have no recourse against the city
for any reason including, but not limited to, economic loss incurred as a
result of receiving station closure.
(Ord. 5673 § 2 (part), 2025)
Title 17 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS STORAGE*
Chapters:
   
17.04   General Provisions
   
17.08   Materials Regulated
   
17.10   Underground Storage Tank Requirements
   
17.12   Containment Standards
   
17.16   Hazardous Materials Management Plan
   
17.20   Hazardous Materials Inventory
   
17.23   Trade Secrets
   
17.24   Responsibility
   
17.28   Inspections and Records
   
17.32   Application for Permit
   
17.34   Reserved
   
17.36   Reserved
   
17.40   Remedial Action
   
17.44   Hearing Procedure
   
17.48   Enforcement
   
17.52   Miscellaneous
   
17.56   Compliance Schedule
Chapter 17.04
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sections:
   
17.04.010   Purpose.
   
17.04.020   General obligation - Safety and care.
   
17.04.030   Specific obligation.
   
17.04.040   Definitions.
   
17.04.050   Professional assistance for city determinations.
17.04.010   Purpose.
   The purpose of this title is the protection of health, life, resources and
property through prevention and control of unauthorized discharges of hazardous
materials.
(Ord. 4002 § 1 (part), 1990: Ord. 3435 § 1 (part), 1983)
17.04.020   General obligation - Safety and care.
   (a)   No person, firm or corporation shall cause, suffer, or permit the
storage of hazardous materials:
   (1)   In a manner which violates a provision of this title or any other
local, federal or state statute, code, rule or regulation relating to hazardous
materials; or
   (2)   In a manner which causes an unauthorized discharge of hazardous
materials or poses a significant risk of such unauthorized discharge.
   (b)   The fire chief shall have discretion to exempt an applicant from any
specific requirement of this title, other than the requirements for underground
storage tanks, set forth in
Chapter 17.10, or to require an applicant to meet additional or modified
requirements, where such action would be appropriate and consistent with
achieving the general obligation of this title for protecting public health,
safety and welfare.
(Ord. 4002 § 1 (part), 1990: Ord. 3435 § 1 (part), 1983)
17.04.030   Specific obligation.
   (a)   Any person, who stores any material regulated by Section
17.08.010 which is not excluded by Section
17.08.020 shall obtain and keep current a hazardous materials storage permit.
   (b)   All such hazardous materials shall be contained in conformity with
Chapter 17.12 or, for underground storage,
Chapter 17.10.
   (c)   The storage of such hazardous materials shall be in conformance with
the approved hazardous materials management plan.
(Ord. 4002 § 1 (part), 1990: Ord. 3496 § 1, 1983: Ord. 3435 § 1 (part), 1983)
17.04.040   Definitions.
   Unless otherwise expressly stated, whenever used in this title, the
following terms shall have the meanings set forth below:
   (a)   "Abandoned," when referring to a storage facility, means out of
service and not safeguarded in compliance with this title.
   (b)   "Acutely hazardous material" means any chemical designated an
extremely hazardous substance which is listed in Appendix A of Part 355 of
Subchapter J of Chapter I of Title 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations.
   (c)   "Facility" means an area, a building or buildings, appurtenant
structures and surrounding land area used by a single business entity at a
single location or site.
   (d)   "Hazard class" means Explosives A, Explosives B, Explosives C,
blasting agents, flammable liquids, combustible liquids, flammable solids,
oxidizers, organic peroxides, corrosive materials, flammable gases,
nonflammable gases, Poisons A, Poisons B, irritating materials, etiologic
agents, radioactive materials, and Other Regulated Materials (ORM) A, B, C, D
and E. For purposes of this title, the U.S. Department of Transportation (DOT)
definitions in 49 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) part 173 as amended, shall
be utilized; however, whenever the definitions in 49 CFR 173 refer to
transportation or hazards associated with transportation, they shall be deemed
to refer to storage or other regulated activity under this title.
   (e)   "Hazardous material" means any material that because of its quantity,
concentration, or physical or chemical characteristics, poses a significant
present or potential hazard to human health and safety or to the environment if
released into the workplace or the environment. "Hazardous materials" include,
but are not limited to, hazardous substances, hazardous wastes, and any
materials which a handler has a reasonable basis for believing would be
injurious to the health and safety or harmful to the environment if released
into the workplace or the environment. For purposes of this title,
chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) shall be considered hazardous materials.
   (f)   "Officer" means the fire chief, officer or employee assigned by the
city to administer this title, or any designee of such officer or employee.
   (g)   "Permit" means any hazardous materials storage permit issued pursuant
to this title, as well as any additional approvals thereto.
   (h)   "Permit quantity limit" means the maximum amount of hazardous material
that can be stored in a storage facility. Separate permit quantity limits will
be set for each storage utility for which a permit is obtained in accordance
with the requirements of this title.
   (i)   "Permittee" means any person to whom a permit is issued pursuant to
this title, and any authorized representative, agent or designee of such
person.
   (j)   "Person" means an individual, trust, firm, joint stock company,
corporation, including a government corporation, partnership, or association.
"Person" also includes any city, county, district, the federal government, to
the extent authorized by federal law, or the state or any department or agency
thereof, including, but not limited to, the campuses of the California
Community Colleges, the California State University, and the University of
California.
   (k)   "Pipe(s)" means pipeline system(s) which are used in connection with
the storage of hazardous materials exclusively within the confines of a
facility and which are not intended to transport hazardous materials in
interstate or intrastate commerce or to transfer hazardous materials in bulk to
or from a marine vessel.
   (l)   "Primary containment" means the first level of containment, such as
the inside portion of that container which comes into immediate contact on its
inner surface with the hazardous material being contained.
   (m)   "Product-tight" means impervious to the hazardous material which is
contained, or is to be contained, so as to prevent the seepage of the hazardous
material from the primary containment.
   To be product-tight, the container shall be made of a material that is not
subject to physical or chemical deterioration by the hazardous material which
it contains over the useful life of the container.
   (n)   "Responsible person(s)" or "persons responsible" means permittees
under this title, owners, managers and persons responsible for the day-to-day
operation of any facility subject to this title.
   (o)   "Secondary containment" means the level of containment external to and
separate from the primary containment.
   (p)   "Single-walled" means construction with walls made of only one
thickness of material. Laminated, coated, or clad materials shall be considered
as single-walled.
   (q)   "Storage facility" means any one or combination of tanks, sumps, wet
floors, waste-treatment facilities, pipes, vaults or other portable or fixed
containers, used, or designed to be used, for the storage of hazardous
materials at a facility or for the transportation of hazardous materials to a
treatment system, for authorized discharge; provided that the provisions of
this title shall not apply to tank cars which meet all requirements of the U.S.
Department of Transportation, while such tank cars are used for the
transportation of hazardous material, as such term is used in the Hazardous
Materials Transportation Act, 49 U.S.C. § 1801 et seq. "Transportation" does
not include the use of tank cars to store regulated materials.
   (r)   "Sump" means a pit or well in which liquids collect or pass through.
   (s)   "Unauthorized discharge" means any release or emission of any
hazardous material which does not conform to the provisions of this title,
unless such release is in accordance with the release regulations of the Bay
Area Air Quality Management District and California Air Resources Board, or
with a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Permit, or with waste
discharge requirements established by the Regional Water Quality Control Board
pursuant to the Porter Cologne Water Quality Act, or with local sewer
pretreatment requirements for publicly owned treatment works.
   (t)   "Wet floor" means a floor which is used to routinely collect, contain
or maintain standing liquids or to transmit standing liquids on a more or less
continuous basis.
(Ord. 4002 § 1 (part), 1990: Ord. 3435 § 1 (part), 1983)
17.04.050   Professional assistance for city determinations.
   Whenever the approval or satisfaction of the city may be required under this
title for a design, monitoring, testing or other technical submittal by an
applicant or permittee, city may, in its discretion, require such applicant or
permittee, at such applicant's or permittee's sole cost and expense, to retain
a suitably qualified independent engineer, or chemist, or other appropriate
professional consultant, acceptable to city, for the purpose of evaluating and
rendering a professional opinion respecting the adequacy of such submittal to
achieve the purposes of this title. The city shall be entitled to rely on such
evaluation and/or opinion of such engineer, chemist or professional consultant
in making the relevant determinations provided for in this title.
(Ord. 4002 § l (part), 1990: Ord. 3435 § l (part), 1983)
Chapter 17.08
MATERIALS REGULATED*
Sections:
   
17.08.010   Materials regulated.
   
17.08.020   Exclusions.
   *   Editor's Note: Section 17.08.030, Underground Tanks, previously codified
herein and containing parts of Ordinance No. 3496 was repealed by Ordinance No.
4002.
17.08.010   Materials regulated.
   The materials regulated by this title shall consist of any material defined
as hazardous material, subject to the exclusions set forth in Section
17.08.020.
(Ord. 4002 § l (part), 1990: Ord. 3435 § l (part), 1983)
17.08.020   Exclusions.
   This title does not apply to the following:
   (a)   Certain Elemental Metals. The following elemental metals included
within the purview of Section
17.08.010 shall not be considered hazardous materials for purposes of this
title unless they are stored in a friable, powdered or finely divided state:
aluminum, beryllium, cadmium, chromium, copper, lead, manganese, molybdenum,
nickel, rhodium, silver, tellurium, tin, and zinc. Regardless of state,
tantalum, titanium, tungsten, and uranium shall be excluded from regulation
under this title.
   (b)   Retail Products. Hazardous materials contained solely in consumer
products packaged for distribution to, and on display only for retail sale and
use by, the general public or commercial products used at the facility solely
for janitorial or minor maintenance purposes such as wax stripper.
   (c)   Feed. Hazardous materials when contained in a substance intended for
use as animal feed.
   (d)   Work Station. Hazardous materials located at a work station in a
quantity reasonably required for use as determined by the fire chief under the
circumstances.
   (e)   Exemption. The fire chief shall exempt any material from the
requirements of this title where it has been demonstrated to the satisfaction
of city that the material in the quantity and/or solution stored does not
present a significant actual or potential hazard to the public health, safety
or welfare.
(Ord. 4002 § 1 (part), 1990: Ord. 3435 § 1 (part), 1983)
Chapter 17.10
UNDERGROUND STORAGE TANK REQUIREMENTS
Sections:
   
17.10.010   General obligation.
   
17.10.020   Definitions.
   
17.10.030   Master list.
   
17.10.040   Permit - Transferred permits.
   
17.10.050   Permit - Term - Inspection - Fee.
   
17.10.060   Application for permit or renewal - Conditions - Storage of
unlisted substances.
   
17.10.070   Fees.
   
17.10.080   Inspection of tank systems.
   
17.10.090   City's authority to inspect.
   
17.10.100   Trade secrets.
   
17.10.110   Containment standards for underground storage tanks installed after
January 1, 1984.
   
17.10.120   Monitoring requirements for underground storage tanks installed on
or before January 1, 1984.
   
17.10.130   Operational requirements.
   
17.10.140   Evidence of financial responsibility.
   
17.10.150   Monitoring of tank system by operator; duties of owners and
operators.
   
17.10.160   Unauthorized release; reports and recordation.
   
17.10.170   Abandonment or closing of underground storage tank.
17.10.010   General obligation.
   Any person who owns or operates an underground storage tank shall comply
with the provisions of this chapter in addition to other provisions of this
title.
(Ord. 4002 § l (part), 1990)
17.10.020   Definitions.
   In addition to the definitions set forth in Section
17.04.040, for purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
   (a)   "Automatic line leak detector" means any method of leak detection, as
determined in regulations adopted by the board, which alerts the owner or
operator of an underground storage tank to the presence of a leak. "Automatic
line leak detector" includes, but is not limited to, any device or mechanism
which alerts the owner or operator of an underground storage tank to the
presence of a leak by restricting or shutting off the flow of hazardous
substance through piping, or by triggering an audible or visual alarm, and
which detects leaks of three gallons or more per hour at 10 pounds per square
inch line pressure within one hour.
   (b)   "Board" means the State Water Resources Control Board. "Regional
board" means a California regional water quality control board.
   (c)   "Department" means the State Department of Health Services.
   (d)   "Facility" means any one, or combination of, underground storage tanks
used by a single business entity at a single location or site.
   (e)   "Federal act" means Subchapter IX (commencing with Section 6991) of
Chapter 82 of Title 42 of the United States Code, as added by the Hazardous and
Solid Waste Amendments of 1984 (P.L. 98-616), or as it may subsequently be
amended or supplemented.
   (f)   "Hazardous substance" means both of the following:
   (1)   All of the following liquid and solid substances, unless the
department, in consultation with the board, determines that the substance could
not adversely affect the quality of the waters of the state:
   (A)   Substances on the list prepared by the Director of Industrial
Relations pursuant to Section 6382 of the California Labor Code.
   (B)   Hazardous substances, as defined in Section 25316 of the California
Health and Safety Code.
   (C)   Any substance or material which is classified by the National Fire
Protection Association (NFPA) as a flammable liquid, a Class II combustible
liquid, or a Class III-A combustible liquid.
   (2)   Any regulated substance, as defined in subsection (2) of Section 6991
of Title 42 of the United State Code, as that section read on January 1, 1989,
or as it may subsequently be amended or supplemented.
   (g)   "Operator" means any person in control of, or having daily
responsibility for, the daily operation of an underground storage tank system.
   (h)   "Owner" means the owner of an underground storage tank.
   (i)   "Pipe" shall have the meaning set forth in subsection
17.04.040(k). In addition, for purposes of this chapter, "pipe" means all parts
of any pipeline or system of pipelines, used in connection with the storage of
hazardous substances, including, but not limited to, valves and other
appurtenances connected to the pipe, pumping units, fabricated assemblies
associated with pumping units, and metering and delivery stations and
fabricated assemblies therein, but does not include any of the following:
   (1)   An interstate pipeline subject to 49 Code of Federal Regulations, part
195.
   (2)   An interstate pipeline subject to Chapter 5.5 (commencing with Section
51010) of part 1 of Division 1 of Title 5 of the California Government Code.
   (3)   Unburied delivery hoses, vapor recovery hoses, and nozzles which are
subject to unobstructed visual inspection for leakage.
   (4)   Vent lines, vapor recovery lines, and fill pipes which are designed to
prevent, and do not hold, standing fluid in the pipes or lines.
   (j)   "Release" means any spilling, leaking, emitting, discharging,
escaping, leaching or disposing from an underground storage tank into or on the
waters of the state, the land, or the subsurface soils.
   (k)   "Special inspector" means a professional engineer, registered pursuant
to Chapter 7 (commencing with Section 6700) of Division 3 of the Business and
Professions Code, who is qualified to attest, at a minimum, to structural
soundness, seismic safety, the compatibility of construction materials with
contents, cathodic protection, and the mechanical compatibility of the
structural elements of underground storage tanks.
   (l)   "Storage" or "store" means the containment, handling, or treatment of
hazardous substances, either on a temporary basis or for a period of years.
"Storage" or "store" does not mean the storage of hazardous wastes in an
underground storage tank if the person operating the tank has been issued a
hazardous waste facilities permit by the California Department of Health
Services pursuant to Section 25200 of the California Health and Safety Code or
granted interim status under Section 25200.5 of the California Health and
Safety Code.
   (m)   "Tank" means a stationary device designed to contain an accumulation
of hazardous substances which is constructed primarily of nonearthen materials
(e.g. wood, concrete, steel, plastic) which provides structural support.
   (n)   "Tank integrity test" means a test method capable of detecting an
unauthorized release from an underground storage tank consistent with the
minimum standards adopted by the board, and with any guidelines adopted by the
city.
   (o)   "Tank tester" means an individual who performs tank integrity tests on
underground storage tanks.
   (p)   "Unauthorized release" means any release of any hazardous substance
which does not conform to this chapter, unless the release is authorized by the
board or a regional board pursuant to Division 7 (commencing with Section
13000) of the California Water Code.
   (q)   "Underground storage tank" means any one or combination of tanks,
including pipes connected thereto, which is used for the storage of hazardous
substances and which is substantially or totally beneath the surface of the
ground. "Underground storage tank" does not include structures such as storm
drains, catch basins, oil field gathering lines, refinery pipelines, lagoons,
evaporation ponds, well cellars, separation sumps, lined and unlined pits,
sumps and lagoons. Sumps which are a part of a monitoring system required under
Sections
17.10.110 or
17.10.120 and sumps or other structures defined as underground storage tanks
under the federal act are not exempted by this section. Structures identified
in this paragraph may be regulated by the board and any regional board pursuant
to the Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act (Division 7 (commencing with
Section 13000) of the California Water Code) to ensure that they do not pose a
threat to water quality.
   (1)   In addition to the exclusions specified in this subsection (q),
"underground storage tank" does not include vent lines, vapor recovery lines,
and fill pipes which are designed to prevent, and do not hold, standing fluid
in the pipes or lines.
   (r)   "Underground tank system" or "tank system" means an underground
storage tank, connected piping, ancillary equipment, and containment system, if
any.
(Ord. 4002 § 1 (part), 1990)
17.10.030   Master list.
   The city and the owners or operators of underground storage tanks shall use
the comprehensive master list or, when adopted, the revised list adopted by the
California Department of Health Services pursuant to California Health and
Safety Code Section 25282, to determine which underground storage tanks require
permits pursuant to this chapter. Hazardous substances included on the list may
be denominated by scientific, common, trade, or brand names.
(Ord. 4002 § 1 (part), 1990)
17.10.040   Permit - Transferred permits.
   (a)   Except as provided in subdivision (c), no person shall own or operate
an underground storage tank unless a permit for its operation has been issued
by the city to the owner.
   (b)   Any person who is to assume the ownership of an underground storage
tank from a previous owner and which new owner is to be transferred the permit
to operate the tank from the prior owners shall complete a form prepared by the
city accepting the obligations of the permit. Such completed form shall be
submitted to the city within thirty days after the ownership of the underground
storage tank is transferred. Upon receiving the completed form, the city may
review and modify the permit, or deny approval or the transfer of the permit to
operate the underground storage tank, pursuant to the criteria specified in
subsection 25245(a) of the California Health and Safety Code and in Section
17.10.050.
   (c)   Any person assuming ownership of an underground storage tank used for
the storage of hazardous substances for which a valid operating permit has been
issued shall have thirty days after the date of assumption of ownership to
apply for an operating permit pursuant to Section
17.10.050 or, if accepting a transferred permit, shall submit to the city the
completed form accepting the obligations of the transferred permit, as
specified in subdivision (b). During the period from the date of application
until the permit is issued or refused, the person shall not be held to be in
violation of this section.
   (d)   A permit issued pursuant to this section shall apply and require
compliance with all applicable regulations adopted by the board pursuant to
Section 25299.3 of the California Health and Safety Code.
   (e)   When, in its judgment, it is appropriate to do so, the city may issue
a single permit to a person for a facility.
(Ord. 4002 § 1 (part), 1990)
17.10.050   Permit - Term - Inspection - Fee.
   A permit to operate issued by the city pursuant to Section
17.10.040 shall be effective for one year. The city shall not issue or renew a
permit to operate an underground storage tank if the city inspects the tank and
determines that the tank does not comply with this chapter. The city shall not
issue or renew a permit to operate an underground storage tank to any person
who has not paid the fee and surcharge required by Section
17.10.070; provided, that the established permit fee shall be due and payable
each year for all facilities for which permits are required, whether or not
application has been made for such permit.
(Ord. 4002 § 1 (part), 1990)
17.10.060   Application for permit or renewal - Conditions - Storage of
unlisted substances.
   (a)   An application for a permit to operate an underground storage tank, or
for renewal of the permit, shall be made, by the owner, on a standardized form
prepared by the board and provided by the city and shall be accompanied by the
appropriate fee, as specified in Section
17.10.070. As a condition of any permit to operate an underground storage tank,
the permittee shall notify the city at least forty-five days in advance of any
changes in the usage of the underground storage tank, including the storage of
new hazardous substances, or changes in monitoring procedures.
   (b)   The application form shall include, but not be limited to, requests
for the following information:
   (1)   A description of the age, size, type, location, uses, and construction
of the underground storage tank or tanks.
   (2)   A list of all the hazardous substances which are or will be stored in
the underground storage tank or tanks, specifying the hazardous substances for
each underground storage tank.
   (3)   A description of the monitoring program for the underground tank
system.
   (4)   The name and address of the person, firm, or corporation which owns
the underground tank system and, if different, the name and address of the
person who operates the underground tank system.
   (5)   The address of the facility at which the underground tank system is
located.
   (6)   The name of the person making the application.
   (7)   The name and twenty-four-hour phone number of the contact person in
the event of an emergency involving the facility.
   (8)   If the owner or operator of the underground storage tank is a public
agency, the application shall include the name of the supervisor of the
division, section, or office which operates the tank.
   (c)   Applications for permits for operation of an underground storage tank
shall be in accordance with other applicable provisions of this title
including, but not limited to, Chapters
17.16 and
17.32.
   (d)   If a permittee stores in an underground storage tank or tanks a new or
different hazardous substance which is not listed in the application, as
required by subsection (b)(2), the permittee shall apply for a new or amended
permit within thirty days after commencing the storage of that new hazardous
substance.
(Ord. 4002 § 1 (part), 1990)
17.10.070   Fees.
   (a)   A fee shall be paid to the city by each person who submits an
application for a permit to operate an underground storage tank or to renew or
amend a permit. The fee payable hereunder shall be as established pursuant to
Section
17.32.120 of this title.
(Ord. 4002 § 1 (part), 1990)
17.10.080   Inspection of tank systems.
   (a)   The city shall inspect every underground tank system within its
jurisdiction at least once every three years. The purpose of the inspection is
to determine whether the tank system complies with the applicable requirements
of this chapter and the regulations adopted by the board pursuant to Section
25299.3 of the California Health and Safety Code, including the design and
construction standards of Sections 25291 or 25292, whichever is applicable;
whether the operator has monitored and tested the tank system as required by
the permit; and whether the tank system is in a safe operating condition. After
an inspection, the city shall prepare a compliance report detailing the
inspection and shall send a copy of the report to the permit holder or person
responsible for the tank.
   (b)   In addition to, or instead of, the inspections specified in
subdivision (a), the city may require the permit holder or responsible person
to employ, periodically, special inspectors to conduct an audit or assessment
of the permit holder's or responsible person's underground tank system to
determine whether the tank system complies with the factors specified in
subsection (a) and to prepare a special inspection report with recommendations
concerning the safe storage of hazardous materials at the tank system. The
report shall contain recommendations consistent with this chapter, where
appropriate. A copy of the report shall be filed with the city at the same time
the inspector submits the report to the permit holder or responsible person.
Within thirty days after receiving this report, the permit holder or
responsible person shall file with the local agency a plan to implement all
recommendations contained in the report or shall demonstrate, to the
satisfaction of the city, why these recommendations should not be implemented.
   (c)   All tank integrity tests required by this chapter shall be performed
only by, or under the direct and personal supervision of, a tank tester with a
currently valid tank testing license issued pursuant to California Health and
Safety Code Section 25284.4.
(Ord. 4002 § 1 (part), 1990)
17.10.090   City's authority to inspect.
   (a)   In order to carry out the purposes of this chapter, any duly
authorized representative of the city, the regional board, or the board has the
authority specified in California Health and Safety Code Section 25185, with
respect to any place where underground tank systems are located, or in which
records relevant to operation of an underground tank system are kept, and as
specified in California Health and Safety Code Section 25185.5, with respect to
real property which is within two thousand feet of any place where underground
tank systems are located. The authority conferred by this subdivision includes
the authority to conduct any monitoring or testing of an underground tank
system.
   (b)   In order to carry out the purposes of this chapter, any authorized
representative of the city, the regional board, or the board may require the
owner or operator of an underground storage tank to, upon request, submit any
information relevant to the compliance with this chapter or the regulations, to
conduct monitoring or testing, and to report the results of that monitoring or
testing under penalty of perjury. The burden of the monitoring, testing, and
reporting, including costs, shall bear a reasonable relationship to the need
for the monitoring, testing, and reporting.
(Ord. 4002 § 1 (part), 1990)
17.10.100   Trade secrets.
   Whenever a person has made a claim pursuant to
Chapter 17.23 that information required by this chapter is a trade secret, the
person shall, notwithstanding the use of any alternative to the listing of a
substance which is a trade secret, provide the identification of the material
directly to the board.
(Ord. 4002 § 1 (part), 1990)
17.10.110   Containment standards for underground storage tanks installed after
January 1, 1984.
   Every underground storage tank installed after January 1, 1984, shall meet
all of the following requirements:
   (a)   The underground storage tank shall be designed and constructed to
provide primary and secondary levels of containment of the hazardous substances
stored in it in accordance with the following performance standards:
   (1)   Primary containment shall be product-tight.
   (2)   Secondary containment shall be constructed to prevent structural
weakening as a result of contact with any released hazardous substances, and
also shall be capable of storing the hazardous substances for the maximum
anticipated period of time necessary for the recovery of any released hazardous
substance.
   (3)   In the case of an installation with one primary container, the
secondary containment shall be large enough to contain at least one hundred
percent of the volume of the primary tank.
   (4)   In the case of multiple primary tanks, the secondary container shall
be large enough to contain one hundred fifty percent of the volume of the
largest primary tank placed in it, or ten percent of the aggregate internal
volume of all primary tanks, whichever is greater.
   (5)   If the facility is open to rainfall, then the secondary containment
shall be able to additionally accommodate the maximum volume of a twenty-four-
hour rainfall as determined by a twenty-five-year storm history.
   (6)   Single-walled containers do not fulfill the requirement of an
underground storage tank providing both a primary and a secondary containment.
However, an underground storage tank with a primary container constructed with
a double complete shell shall be deemed to have met the requirements for
primary and secondary containment set forth in this section if the outer shell
is constructed primarily of nonearthen materials, including, but not limited
to, concrete, steel, and plastic, which provide structural support and a
continuous leak detection system with alarm is located in the space between the
shells; the system is capable of detecting the entry of hazardous substances
from the inner container into the space; and the system is capable of detecting
water intrusion into the space from the outer shell.
   (7)   The design and construction of underground storage tanks for motor
vehicle fuel storage need not meet the requirements of paragraphs (1) to (6),
inclusive, if all of the following conditions exist:
   (A)   The primary containment construction is of glass fiber reinforced
plastic, cathodically protected shell, or steel clad with glass fiber
reinforced plastic.
   (B)   Any alternative primary containment is installed in conjunction with a
system that will intercept and direct a leak from any part of the underground
storage tank to a monitoring well to detect any release of motor vehicle fuels
stored in the tank.
   (C)   The system is designed to provide early leak detection and response,
and to protect the groundwater from releases.
   (D)   The monitoring is in accordance with the alternative method identified
in subsection
17.10.120(b)(5).
   (E)   Pressurized piping systems connected to tanks used for the storage of
motor vehicle fuels and monitored in accordance with subsection
17.10.120(b)(5) also meet the conditions of this subsection (a)(7) if the tank
meets the conditions of subsections (1) to (6), inclusive. However, any pipe
connected to an underground storage tank installed after July 7, 1983, shall be
equipped with secondary containment which complies with subsections (1) to (6),
inclusive.
   (b)   The underground tank system shall be designed and constructed with a
monitoring system capable of detecting the entry of the hazardous substance
stored in the primary containment into the secondary containment.
   (c)   The underground storage tank shall be provided with equipment to
prevent spills and overflows from the primary tank.
   (d)   If different substances are stored in the same tank and in combination
may cause a fire or explosion, or the production of flammable, toxic, or
poisonous gas, or the deterioration of a primary or secondary container, those
substances shall be separated in both the primary and secondary containment so
as to avoid potential intermixing.
   (e)   If water could enter into the secondary containment by precipitation
or infiltration, the facility shall contain a means of monitoring for water
intrusion and for removing the water by the owner or operator. This removal
system shall also prevent uncontrolled removal of this water and provide for a
means of analyzing the removal water for hazardous substance contamination and
a means of disposing of the water, if so contaminated, at an authorized
disposal facility.
   (f)   Underground pressurized piping that conveys a hazardous substance
shall be equipped with an automatic line leak detector and shall be tightness
tested annually.
   (g)   Before the underground storage tank is covered, enclosed, or placed in
use, the standard installation testing for requirements for underground storage
systems specified in Section 2-7 of the Flammable and Combustible Liquids Code,
adopted by the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA 30) as amended and
published in the currently adopted edition of the Uniform Fire Code, shall be
followed.
   (h)   Before the underground storage tank is placed in service, the
underground tank system shall be tested in operating condition using a tank
integrity test.
   (i)   If the underground storage tank is designed to maintain a water level
in the secondary containment, the tank shall be equipped with a safe method of
removing any excess water to a holding facility and the owner or operator shall
inspect the holding facility monthly for the presence of excess water overflow.
If excess water is present in the holding facility, the permit holder shall
provide a means to analyze the water for hazardous substance contamination and
a means to dispose of the water, if so contaminated, at an authorized disposal
facility.
(Ord. 4002 § 1 (part), 1990)
17.10.120   Monitoring requirements for underground storage tanks installed on
or before January 1, 1984.
   For every underground storage tank installed on or before January 1, 1984,
and used for the storage of hazardous substances, the following actions shall
be taken:
   (a)   The owner shall outfit the underground storage tank system with a
monitoring system capable of detecting unauthorized releases of any hazardous
substances stored in the tank system, and thereafter, the operator shall
monitor each tank system, based on materials stored and the type of monitoring
installed.
   (b)   Provide a means for visual inspection of the tank system, wherever
practical, for the purpose of the monitoring required by subsection (a).
Alternative methods of monitoring the tank system on a monthly, or more
frequent basis, may be required by the city, consistent with the regulations of
the board.
   The alternative monitoring methods include, but are not limited to, the
following methods:
   (1)   Tank integrity testing for proving the integrity of an underground
tank system at time intervals specified by the board, and by any guidelines
adopted by the city.
   (2)   A groundwater monitoring well or wells which are downgradient and
adjacent to the underground tank system, vapor analysis within a well where
appropriate, and analysis of soil borings at the time of initial installation
of the well.
   (3)   A continuous aspirating vapor detector, or equivalent.
   (4)   A continuous leak detection and alarm system which is located in
monitoring wells adjacent to an underground tank system and which is approved
by the city.
   (5)   For monitoring tanks containing motor vehicle fuels, daily electronic
gauging and inventory reconciliation by the operator, if all of the following
requirements are met:
   (A)   Inventory records are kept on file for one year and are reviewed
quarterly.
   (B)   The tank system is tested, using the tank integrity test at time
intervals specified by the board and wherever there is a shortage greater than
the amount which the board shall specify by regulation.
   (C)   If a pressurized pump system is connected to the tank system, the
system has a leak detection device to monitor for leaks in the piping. The leak
detection device shall be installed in a manner designed to resist unauthorized
tampering and to clearly show by visual inspection if tampering has occurred.
The leak detection device shall be tested annually, at a minimum, and all
devices found to be not performing in conformance with the manufacturer's leak
detection specifications shall be promptly required or replaced.
   (D)   The fire chief may require monitoring of groundwater or soil around a
tank if potential leakage is indicated.
   (6)   For monitoring underground tank systems which are located on farms and
which store motor vehicle or heating fuels used primarily for agricultural
purposes, alternative monitoring methods include the following:
   (A)   If the tank has a capacity of greater than one thousand one hundred
gallons but of five thousand gallons or less, the tank shall be tested using
the tank integrity test, at least once every three years, and the owner shall
utilize tank gauging on a monthly or more frequent basis, as required by the
city subject to the specifications provided in paragraph (7) of subdivision (c)
of Section 2641 of Title 23 of the California Code of Regulations, as that
section read on August 13, 1985.
   (B)   If the tank has a capacity of more than five thousand gallons, the
tank shall be monitored pursuant to the methods for all other tanks specified
in this subsection.
   (c)   The city, or any other public agency specified by the city, shall
approve the location and number of wells, the depth of wells, and the sampling
frequency, pursuant to the monitoring provisions of this section and of
Chapter 17.12.
   (d)   On or before December 22, 1998, the underground storage tank shall be
replaced or upgraded to prevent releases due to corrosion or spills for the
underground storage tank's operating life; provided, that protection against
overfills shall be ensured, by replacement or upgrading of the tank, on or
before January 1, 1992.
   (e)   All existing underground pressurizing piping shall be equipped with an
automatic line leak detector on or before December 22, 1990, and all
pressurized piping and all motor fuel piping, including suction piping, shall
be retrofitted with secondary containment on or before December 22, 1998;
provided, that underground tank supply piping shall be retrofitted for spill
protection on or before January 1, 1992. Underground pressurized piping shall
be tightness tested annually. This subsection (e) does not apply to existing
pressurized piping containing motor vehicle fuel, if the pipeline is
constructed of glass fiber reinforced plastic, cathodically protected steel, or
steel clad with glass fiber reinforced plastic, is equipped with an automatic
line leak detector, and is tightness tested annually.
(Ord. 4066 § 1, 1992: Ord. 4002 § 1 (part), 1990)
17.10.130   Operational requirements.
   All underground tank systems shall meet the following operational
requirements:
   (a)   The underground tank systems shall be operated to prevent unauthorized
releases, including spills and over fills during the operating life of the
tank.
   (b)   Where equipped with cathodic protection, the underground tank system
shall be operated by a person with sufficient training and experience in
preventing corrosion.
   (c)   The underground tank system shall be structurally sound at the time of
upgrade or repair.
(Ord. 4002 § 1 (part), 1990)
17.10.140   Evidence of financial responsibility.
   (a)   All owners and operators of an underground tank system shall maintain
evidence of financial responsibility for taking corrective action and for
compensating third parties for bodily injury and property damage caused by a
release from the underground tank system, in accordance with regulations
adopted by the board pursuant to Section 25299.3 of the California Health and
Safety Code, or in accordance with Subchapter 89 of the Federal Act, whichever
is deemed applicable by the United States Environmental Protection Agency.
(Ord. 4002 § 1 (part), 1990)
17.10.150   Monitoring of tank system by operator; duties of owners and
operators.
   (a)   The operator of the underground tank system shall monitor the tank
system using the method specified on the permit for the tank system. Records of
monitoring, testing, repairing, and closure shall be kept in sufficient detail
to enable the city to determine whether the underground tank system is in
compliance with the applicable provisions of this chapter, the regulations
adopted by the board pursuant to Section 25299.3 of the California Health and
Safety Code, and the permit issued for the operation of the tank system.
   (b)   If the operator is not the owner, the owner shall provide a copy of
the permit to the operator, enter into a written contract with the operator
which requires the operator to monitor the tank system as set forth in the
permit, and to provide the operator with a copy of Section 25299 of the
California Health and Safety Code, or a summary of this section, in the form
which the board specifies by regulation. The owner shall notify the city of any
change of operator.
(Ord. 4002 § 1 (part), 1990)
17.10.160   Unauthorized release; reports and recordation.
   Any unauthorized release from the primary containment which the operator is
able to clean up within eight hours after the release was detected or should
reasonably have been detected, and which does not escape from the secondary
containment, does not increase the hazard of fire or explosion, and does not
cause any deterioration of the secondary containment of the underground storage
tank, shall be recorded on the operator's monitoring reports, and reported to
the city within twenty-four hours of the occurrence.
   (a)   (1) Any unauthorized release which escapes from the secondary
containment, or from the primary containment, if no secondary containment
exists, increases the hazard of fire or explosion, or causes any deterioration
of the secondary containment of the underground tank system shall be reported
by the operator to the city within twenty-four hours after the release has been
detected or should have been detected. A full written report shall be
transmitted by the owner or operator of the underground tank system within five
working days of the occurrence of the release. The report shall describe the
nature and volume of the unauthorized release, any corrective or remedial
actions undertaken, and any further corrective or remedial actions, including
investigative actions, which will be needed to clean up the unauthorized
release and abate the effects of the release and a time schedule for
implementing these actions.
   (2)   The city shall review the permit whenever there has been an
unauthorized release or a suspected unauthorized release, or when it determines
that the underground tank system is unsafe. In determining whether to modify or
terminate the permit, the city shall consider the age of the tank, the methods
of containment, the methods of monitoring, inconclusive monitoring data, the
concentration of the hazardous substances stored in the tank, the severity of
potential unauthorized releases, and the suitability of any other long-term
preventive measures which would meet the requirements of this chapter.
   (b)   The reporting requirements imposed by this section are in addition to
any requirements which may be imposed by Sections 13271 and 13272 of the
California Water Code.
(Ord. 4002 § 1 (part), 1990)
17.10.170   Abandonment or closing of underground storage tank.
   (a)   No person shall abandon an underground tank system or close or
temporarily cease operating an underground tank system, except as provided in
this section.
   (b)   An underground tank system which is temporarily taken out of service,
but which the operator intends to return to use, shall continue to be subject
to all the permit, inspection, and monitoring requirements of this chapter and
all applicable regulations adopted by the board pursuant to Section 25299.3,
and the Uniform Fire Code, unless the operator complies with subsection (c) for
the period of time the underground tank system is not in use.
   (c)   No person shall close an underground tank system unless the person
undertakes all of the following actions:
   (1)   Demonstrates to the city that all residual amount of the hazardous
substance or hazardous substances which were stored in the tank system prior to
its closure have been removed, properly disposed of, and neutralized.
   (2)   Removes the tank from the ground to the satisfaction of the fire
chief, in accordance with Section 7902.1.7.4 of the Uniform Fire Code, as may
from time to time be amended. If the fire chief determines that removal is not
necessary, the person closing the tank shall adequately seal the tank system to
minimize any threat to the public safety and the possibility of water intrusion
into, or runoff from, the tank system.
   (3)   Provides for, and carries out, the maintenance of the tank system not
removed, as the city determines is necessary for the period of time the city
requires.
   (4)   Demonstrates to the city and any other appropriate agency, which has
jurisdiction over the site, that the site has been investigated to determine if
there are any present, or were past, releases, and if so, that appropriate
corrective or remedial actions have been taken.
(Ord. 4642 § 30, 2000: Ord. 4002 § 1 (part), 1990)
Chapter 17.12
CONTAINMENT STANDARDS
Sections:
   
17.12.010   Containment of hazardous materials.
   
17.12.020   New storage facilities.
   
17.12.030   Existing storage facilities.
   
17.12.040   Out-of-service storage facilities.
   
17.12.050   Monitoring.
   
17.12.060   Maintenance, repair or replacement.
   
17.12.070   Handling.
   
17.12.080   Secured facilities.
   
17.12.090   Emergency equipment.
   
17.12.100   Posting of emergency procedures.
17.12.010   Containment of hazardous materials.
   No person shall store any hazardous materials regulated by this title until
a permit or approval has been issued pursuant to this title. No permit or
approval shall be granted to any person pursuant to this title unless a permit
applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the city, by the submission of
appropriate plans and other information, that the design and construction of
the storage facility will result in a suitable manner of storage for the
hazardous material or materials to be contained therein.
   All installation, construction, repair or modification, closure, and removal
shall be to the satisfaction of city. The fire chief shall have the discretion
to exempt an applicant from any specific requirement relating to above ground
storage of hazardous materials, or to impose reasonable additional or different
requirements in order to better secure the purpose and general obligation of
this title for protection of public health, safety, and welfare. The guidelines
approved pursuant to Section
17.52.020 shall serve as an interpretation of the provisions of this title to
the extent such provisions are addressed in those guidelines. Any variance with
respect to underground tanks must be approved by the State Water Resources
Control Board.
(Ord. 4002 § 1 (part), 1990: Ord. 3496 § 3, 1983: Ord. 3435 § 1 (part), 1983)
17.12.020   New storage facilities.
   (a)   No person shall construct or install any new storage facility until a
permit or approval has been issued pursuant to this title.
   (b)   Monitoring Capability. All new storage facilities intended for the
storage of hazardous materials which are liquids or solids at standard
temperature and pressure (STP) shall be designed and constructed with a
monitoring system capable of detecting that the hazardous material stored in
the primary containment has entered the secondary containment.
   Visual inspection of the primary containment is the preferred method;
however, other means of monitoring may be required by the fire chief. Where
secondary containment may be subject to the intrusion of water, a means of
monitoring for such water shall be provided.
   Whenever monitoring devices are provided, they shall, where applicable, be
connected to attention-getting visual and/or audible alarms.
   (c)   Containment Requirements. Primary and secondary levels of containment
shall be required for all new storage facilities intended for the storage of
hazardous materials which are liquids or solids at standard temperature and
pressure (STP), unless specifically herein exempted by the fire chief.
   (1)   All primary containment shall be product-tight.
   (2)   Secondary Containment:
   (A)   All secondary containment shall be constructed of materials of
sufficient thickness, density, and composition so as not to be structurally
weakened as a result of contact with the discharged hazardous materials and so
as to be capable of containing hazardous materials discharged from a primary
container for a period of time equal to or longer than the maximum anticipated
time sufficient to allow recovery of the discharged hazardous material.
   (B)   In the case of an installation with one primary container, the
secondary containment shall be large enough to contain at least one hundred ten
percent of the volume of the primary container. In addition, the secondary
containment shall contain no outlet that would allow drainage to either the
sanitary sewer system or the storm sewer system, as those terms are defined in
Chapter 16.09 of the Palo Alto Municipal Code.
   (C)   In the case of a storage facility with multiple primary containers,
the secondary containment shall be large enough to contain one hundred fifty
percent of the volume of the largest primary container placed in it, or ten
percent of the aggregate internal volume of all primary containers in the
storage facility, whichever is greater.
   (D)   If the storage facility is open to rainfall, then the secondary
containment must be able to additionally accommodate the volume of a twenty-
four-hour rainfall as determined by a one-hundred-year storm history. Rainwater
shall be removed from the containment area. Removal shall be done by means of
approved systems that cannot be left open when unattended.
   (E)   Secondary containment shall remain free of product from normal use and
shall assist in monitoring efforts. Interior containment shall remain free of
product and water unless water is a part of the monitoring system. Exterior
containment shall remain free of product and water except for rainfall within
twenty-four hours or water which aids in approved monitoring program.
   (3)   Laminated, coated, or clad materials shall be considered single walled
and shall not be construed to fulfill the requirements of both primary and
secondary containment.
(Ord. 4066 § 2, 1992: Ord. 4002 § 1 (part), 1990: Ord. 3496 §§ 4, 9, 1983: Ord.
3435 § 1 (part), 1983)
17.12.030   Existing storage facilities.
   Any storage facility in existence as of July 7, 1983, or any storage
facility for which a building permit was issued prior to July 7, 1983, which
does not meet the standards of Section
17.12.020 may be permitted pursuant to this title as long as it is providing
suitable storage for hazardous materials as determined by the fire chief.
Underground storage tanks installed prior to January 1, 1984, must also meet
the provisions of Section
17.10.120. Suitable storage for hazardous materials and liquids in storage
facilities located aboveground shall include secondary containment which meets
the requirements provided in Section
17.12.020(c). In addition, storage facilities which contain hazardous materials
which are liquids or solids at standard temperature and pressure (STP) must be
monitored in accordance with a plan approved by the fire chief as set forth
herein:
   (a)   A monitoring plan for each such storage facility containing hazardous
materials which are liquids or solids at STP, shall be submitted to city as
part of the hazardous materials management plan.
   (b)   Monitoring under such plan shall include visual inspection of the
primary containment wherever practical; however, if the visual inspection is
not practical, an alternative method of monitoring each storage facility on a
semiannual or more frequent basis may be approved by city. Monitoring for
underground storage tanks shall also be in accordance with
Chapter 17.10.
   (c)   The fire chief may require that an independent expert third party
submit all testing data and certify that the monitoring system is operable and
meets the monitoring plan.
   (d)   Such monitoring devices and methods as approved by city shall be
installed and operating within six months of the issuance of a provisional
permit in accordance with Section
17.32.050 and Section
17.56.010(b)(1). The fire chief may grant an extension of this compliance date;
however, such extension shall not exceed one additional year. The full-term
permit may be issued when compliance with this subsection has been achieved.
   (e)   The continued use of, and permit approval for, existing storage
facilities is subject to review and modification or termination by city
whenever there has been any unauthorized discharge or when the monitoring plan
has not been followed or implemented. The storage facility shall also be
reviewed by the fire chief each time the permit is renewed. In determining
whether continued storage in such storage facility is suitable, the fire chief
shall consider the age of the storage facility, the methods of containment, the
methods of monitoring, the effectiveness of monitoring, the feasibility of the
required retrofit, the concentration of the hazardous materials contained, the
severity of potential unauthorized discharge, and the suitability of other
long-term preventive measures which meet the intent of this title.
   (f)   Existing storage facilities which are not approved in accordance with
this section must be upgraded to comply with this title or be closed in
accordance with Section
17.12.040 within one year of a decision not to issue a full-term permit. An
extension of time for compliance with this subsection, not to exceed one
additional year, may be granted by the fire chief.
(Ord. 4002 § 1 (part), 1990: Ord. 3496 §§ 7, 8, 1993: Ord. 3435 § 1 (part),
1983)
17.12.040   Out-of-service storage facilities.
   (a)   No storage facility shall be abandoned.
   (b)   Storage facilities which are temporarily out of service, and are
intended to be returned to use, must continue to be monitored and inspected.
   (c)   Any storage facility which is not being monitored and inspected in
accordance with this title must be closed or removed in a manner approved by
the fire chief in accordance with Section
17.32.080.
   (d)   Any person having an interest, including a leasehold interest, in real
property and having reason to believe that an abandoned storage facility is
located upon such property shall make a reasonable effort to discover such
storage facility on or before September 5, 1983.
   (e)   Whenever an abandoned storage facility is discovered a plan for the
closing or removing or the upgrading and permitting of such storage facility
shall be filed within ninety days of its discovery. A closure plan shall
conform to the standards for closure specified in Section
17.32.080.
(Ord. 4002 § 1 (part), 1990: Ord. 3435 § 1 (part), 1983)
17.12.050   Monitoring.
   (a)   Monitoring Methods. Monitoring methods shall include at least one
system for detecting leakage from the primary container. A monitoring system
capable of detecting that the hazardous material stored in the primary
containment has entered the secondary containment shall be provided. Visual
inspection of the primary containment is the preferred method; however, other
means of monitoring may be required by the fire chief. Where secondary
containment may be subject to the intrusion of water, a means of monitoring for
such water shall be provided.
   Whenever monitoring devices are provided, they shall, where applicable, be
connected to attention-getting visual and/or audible alarms.
   (b)   Monitoring, Testing and Inspection. Every responsible person under
this title shall provide testing, monitoring (if applicable) and inspections in
compliance with the hazardous materials management plan and shall maintain
records adequate to demonstrate compliance therewith. Whenever visual
monitoring, manual methods of monitoring, or monitoring records are not
maintained, the fire chief may require continuous monitoring devices, a
monitoring program certified by an expert independent third party, or an
approved equivalent monitoring system.
(Ord. 4002 § 1 (part), 1990: Ord. 3435 § l (part), 1983)
17.12.060   Maintenance, repair or replacement.
   (a)   Every responsible person under this title shall carry out maintenance,
ordinary upkeep, and minor repairs in a careful and safe manner. No permit or
other approval will be required for such maintenance and upkeep.
   (b)   Any substantial modification or repair of a storage facility other
than minor repairs or emergency repairs shall be in accordance with plans to be
submitted to the fire chief and approved in accordance with Section
17.32.080 prior to the initiation of such work.
   (c)   Responsible persons may make emergency repairs to a storage facility
in advance of seeking an additional permit approval whenever an immediate
repair is required to prevent or contain an unauthorized discharge or to
protect the integrity of the containment. However, within five working days
after such emergency repairs have been started, the responsible persons shall
seek an additional approval pursuant to Section
17.32.010 by submitting drawings or other information adequate to describe the
repairs to the fire chief.
   (d)   Replacement of any storage facility for hazardous materials which are
liquids or solids at STP, must be in accordance with the new storage facilities
standards of Section
17.12.020.
   (e)   An underground tank from which there has been an unauthorized
discharge may not be repaired, and must be removed or replaced in accordance
with the provisions of Section
17.10.170.
(Ord. 4002 § 1 (part), 1990: Ord. 3435 § 1 (part), 1983)
17.12.070   Handling.
   (a)   Dispensing and mixing of hazardous materials must not be done in such
a manner as to substantially increase the risk of an unauthorized discharge.
   (b)   When hazardous materials are moved into or out of a storage facility,
they shall remain in the travel path only for the time reasonably necessary to
transport the hazardous material and such movement shall be in a manner which
will not substantially increase the risk of an unauthorized discharge.
(Ord. 4002 § 1 (part), 1990: Ord. 3435 § 1 (part), 1983)
17.12.080   Secured facilities.
   Access to the storage facilities shall be secured by means of fences and/or
locks. The storage facilities shall be kept securely locked when unattended.
(Ord. 4002 § 1 (part), 1990: Ord. 3435 § 1 (part), 1983)
17.12.090   Emergency equipment.
   Emergency equipment shall be provided which is reasonable and appropriate
for potential emergencies presented by the stored hazardous materials. Such
equipment shall be regularly tested and adequately maintained.
(Ord. 4002 § 1 (part), 1990: Ord. 3435 § 1 (part), 1983)
17.12.100   Posting of emergency procedures.
   Simplified emergency procedures shall be posted conspicuously in locations
where hazardous materials are stored.
(Ord. 4002 § 1 (part), 1990: Ord. 3435 § 1 (part), 1983)
Chapter 17.16
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS MANAGEMENT PLAN
Sections:
   
17.16.010   Hazardous materials management plan.
   
17.16.020   Standard form HMMP.
   
17.16.025   Supplemental requirements for emergency response plans.
   
17.16.030   Short form HMMP - Minimal storage site.
17.16.010   Hazardous materials management plan.
   Each applicant for a permit, a renewed permit, or an amended permit pursuant
to this title shall file a written plan, for the fire chief's approval, to be
known as a hazardous materials management plan (HMMP), which shall demonstrate
the suitable storage of hazardous materials. The HMMP may be amended at any
time with the consent of the fire chief. The HMMP shall be a public record
except as otherwise specified. Section 18.23.100 in Title 18 identifies
notification requirements of the availability of the HMMP. Approval of the HMMP
shall mean that the HMMP has provided adequate information for the purposes of
evaluating the permit approval. Such approval shall not be understood to mean
that the city has made an independent determination of the adequacy of that
which is described in the HMMP.
(Ord. 5381 § 8, 2016: Ord. 4002 § 1 (part), 1990: Ord. 3435 § 1 (part), 1983)
17.16.020   Standard form HMMP.
   The standard form hazardous materials management plan must be submitted
unless the facility qualifies as a minimal storage site under Section
17.16.030. The HMMP shall include and be subject to the following:
   (a)   General Information. The HMMP shall contain the name and address of
the facility and business phone number of applicant, the name and titles and
emergency phone numbers of the primary response person and an alternate, the
number of employees, number of shifts, hours of operation, and principal
business activity. The city shall take reasonable precautions to ensure the
confidentiality of home telephone numbers of employees listed on the HMMP.
   (b)   General Facility Description. The HMMP shall contain a map drawn at a
legible scale and in a format and detail determined by city. It shall show the
location of all buildings and structures, chemical loading areas, parking lots,
internal roads, storm and sewer drains, and shall specify the uses of adjacent
properties.
   The city may also require information as to the location of wells,
floodplains, earthquake faults, surface water bodies, and/or general land uses
(schools, hospitals, institutions, residential areas) within one mile of the
facility boundaries.
   (c)   Facility Storage Map. The HMMP shall contain a facility storage map at
a legible scale for licensing and enforcement purposes. The information in this
section is provided for purposes of ensuring the suitable and secure storage of
hazardous materials and for the protection and safety of emergency response
personnel of the city. The city shall take reasonable precautions to ensure the
confidentiality of the information provided pursuant to this subsection. The
fire chief may require a facility storage map lock box, which shall be stored
in a location accessible to emergency response personnel. The type of lock box
and its location shall be subject to the approval of the fire chief.
   The facilities storage map shall indicate the location of each hazardous
materials storage facility and access to such storage facilities. In addition,
the map shall indicate the location of emergency equipment related to each
storage facility, and the general purpose of the other areas within each
facility.
   For each storage facility, the map and associated identified storage area
form shall contain information as prescribed below, except that where the
hazardous material being stored is a trade secret, it shall be identified in a
coded manner (and the key shall be provided separately) and not in a manner
which would reveal trade secret information:
   (1)   A floor plan to scale and the permit quantity limit;
   (2)   An identified storage area form shall be provided for each location in
which a hazard class or hazardous material exceeds those quantities specified
in Section
17.20.020(a). Each such location shall be indicated on the facility map. For
each nonwaste hazardous material which is stored in a quantity greater than the
quantities specified in Section
17.20.020(a), the general chemical name, common/trade name, major constituents
for mixtures, United Nations (UN) or North America (NA) number, if available,
and physical state. For each waste hazardous material stored in any quantity
within the storage facility, the presence of wastes shall also be indicated;
   (3)   For all hazardous materials, including wastes, stored in such
identified storage area, the hazard class or classes and the quantity range for
each such class, aggregated within each storage facility, in the following
ranges:
 
Quantity     Range Amounts
Range Number
1            Up to and including 500 pounds for solids, 55 gallons for liquids,
             and 200 cubic feet at STP for compressed gases,
2            Between 500 and 5,000 pounds for solids, 55 and 550 gallons for
             liquids, and 200 and 2,000 cubic feet at STP of compressed gases,
             Between 5,000 and 25,000 pounds for solids, 550 to 2,750 gallons
3            for liquids, and 2,000 to 10,000 cubic feet at STP for compressed
             gases,
             Between 25,000 and 50,000 pounds for solids, 2,750 and 5,500
4            gallons for liquids, and 10,000 and 20,000 cubic feet at STP for
             compressed gases,
5            More than 50,000 pounds for solids, 5,500 gallons for liquids, and
             20,000 cubic feet at STP for compressed gases;
   (4)   For materials not regulated under this title, but regulated under the
Uniform Fire Code, such as radioactives or cryogens, or for materials stored in
storage facilities exempted by Section
17.52.040(a) and (b), the fire chief may require that the hazard class or
classes and the quantity range of each such hazard class, using the quantity
ranges listed in subsection (3) above, be provided;
   (5)   For hazardous materials which are water reactive, the map shall
provide a code for their location;
   (6)   For tanks, the capacity limit of each tank, and the hazardous material
contained in each tank by general chemical name, common/trade name, major
constituents for mixtures, United Nations (UN) or North America (NA) number, if
available, and physical state.
   (7)   Once permit quantity limits are established in accordance with Section
17.32.070, the fire chief may require the posting of such approved limits at
each storage facility.
   (d)   Confidentiality of Facility Storage Map. Due to the threat to the
security of the facility posed by the disclosure of the information in the
facility storage map, this information shall be maintained by city for law
enforcement purposes only and shall not be made public. Public disclosure of
this information could endanger the security of the facility or present a clear
danger to public health and safety. The city shall not disclose this
information to the public without the consent of the permittee or permit
applicant unless ordered to do so by a court of competent jurisdiction.
Permittee or permit applicant shall be deemed a real party in interest in any
such action. Prompt notice of a law suit to compel disclosure shall be given by
city to permittee or permit applicant. However, city shall be under no duty to
prevent disclosures where there has been any unauthorized discharge of
hazardous materials stored in any storage facility shown on such map or where
such disclosure arises out of any official emergency response relating to the
storage facility.
   (e)   Annual Update. The facility storage map shall be updated annually or
whenever an additional approval is required for the facility or whenever the
hazardous materials inventory statement is required to be amended pursuant to
Section
17.20.010.
   (f)   Hazardous Materials Inventory Statement. A hazardous materials
inventory statement shall be filed in accordance with
Chapter 17.20 .
   (g)   Separation of Materials. The HMMP shall contain a description of the
methods to be utilized to ensure separation and protection of stored hazardous
materials from factors which may cause a fire or explosion, or the production
of a flammable, toxic, or poisonous gas, or the deterioration of the primary or
secondary containment.
   (h)   Monitoring Program. The HMMP shall contain a description of the
location, type, manufacturer specifications (if applicable), and suitability of
monitoring methods to be used in each storage facility storing hazardous
materials which are liquids or solids at STP. It shall also specify the
frequency of inspections of storage facilities which will be conducted by the
permittee.
   (i)   Recordkeeping Forms. The HMMP shall contain an inspection checksheet
or log designed to be used in conjunction with routine inspections. The
checksheet or log shall provide for the recording of the date and time of
inspection, and for monitoring activity, the date and time of any corrective
action taken, the name of the inspector, and the countersignature of the
designated safety manager for the facility or the responsible official as
designated in the HMMP.
   (j)   Emergency Equipment. The HMMP shall describe emergency equipment
availability, testing, and maintenance.
   (k)   Variation and Information.
   (1)   Additional information may be required for the HMMP where such
information is reasonably necessary to meet the intent of this title.
   (2)   Whenever permittee has submitted a plan which includes substantially
the same information as is required for any components of the HMMP to any other
public agency regulating hazardous materials, such plan may be submitted to the
fire chief in lieu of such components. The fire chief may give deference to any
approval of such plan by the other public agency.
(Ord. 4002 § 1 (part), 1990: Ord. 3716 § 1, 1986: Ord. 3435 § 1 (part), 1983)
17.16.025   Supplemental requirements for emergency response plans.
   (a)   In addition to the HMMP requirements set forth in this chapter, any
person who handles a hazardous material or a mixture containing a hazardous
material, which has a quantity at any one time during the reporting year equal
to or greater than a total weight of five hundred pounds, or a total volume of
fifty-five gallons, or two hundred cubic feet at standard temperature and
pressure (STP) for compressed gas shall establish and implement a plan for
emergency response to a release or threatened release of a hazardous material
pursuant to this section. Said plan, including the hazardous materials
inventory statement (the "HMIS") described in
Chapter 17.20 of this title, shall comprise the "business plan" for purposes of
Chapter 6.95 of Title 20 of the California Health and Safety Code. Section
18.23.100 in Title 18 identifies notification requirements of the availability
of the business plan.
   (b)   Unless the facility qualifies as a minimal storage site under Section
17.16.030, or is otherwise exempt pursuant to Section
17.08.020, the emergency response plans shall provide the following additional
information:
   (1)   Emergency response plans and procedures in the event of a reportable
release or threatened release (as that phrase is defined in Section 25501(p) of
the California Health and Safety Code) of a hazardous material, which shall
include, but not be limited to, the following:
   (A)   Immediate notification to city and the State Office of Emergency
Services;
   (B)   Procedures for the mitigation of a release or threatened release to
minimize any potential harm or damage to persons, property or the environment;
   (C)   Evacuation plans and procedures for the business site, including
immediate audible notice and warning to all persons on the site;
   (D)   Identification of areas of the facility and mechanical or other
systems that require immediate inspection or isolation because of their
vulnerability to earthquake related ground motion;
   (E)   Procedures to prevent an accidental spill or leak of hazardous
materials from reaching either the sanitary sewer system or the storm sewer
system, as those terms are defined in
Chapter 16.09 of the Palo Alto Municipal Code.
   (c)   Training shall be provided for all new employees, and annual training,
including refresher courses, shall be provided for all employees in safety
procedures to be utilized in the event of a release or threatened release of a
hazardous material. Such training shall include, but not be limited to,
familiarity with the plans and procedures specified above. These training
programs may take into consideration the technical and managerial
responsibilities of each employee.
   (d)   Any business required to file a pipeline operations contingency plan
in accordance with the California Pipeline Safety Act of 1981 (Chapter 5.5
(commencing with Section 5.1010) of Part 3, of Division 1 of Title 5 of the
Government Code) and the regulations of the Department of Transportation, found
in Part 195 of Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations, may file a copy of
those plans with the city instead of filing the emergency response plans
specified in subsection (a) of this section.
   (e)   Any business operating a farm exempted by paragraph (5) of subdivision
(b) of Section 25503.5 of the California Health and Safety Code from filing the
information specified in subsections (e) and (d) of this section shall,
notwithstanding this exemption, provide the training program specified in
subsection (d) of this section.
   (f)   The city shall maintain records of all emergency response plans and
procedures received and shall index them by street address and company name.
Said plans and revisions thereto shall be available for public inspection
during regular working hours except for those portions of such plan, including
any maps of the facility, as described in Section
17.16.020(c), specifying the precise location where hazardous materials are
stored and handled on site. Pursuant to California Health and Safety Code
Section 25506, the city is required to transmit copies of the entire emergency
response plan, or any information contained therein, to any requesting state or
local agency.
(Ord. 5381 § 9, 2016: Ord. 4066 § 3, 1992: Ord. 4002 § 1 (part), 1990: Ord.
3716 § 2 (part), 1986)
17.16.030   Short form HMMP - Minimal storage site.
   (a)   A facility qualifies as a minimal storage site if the quantity of each
hazardous material stored in one or more storage facilities in an aggregate
quantity for the entire facility is five hundred pounds or less for solids,
fifty-five gallons or less for liquids, or two hundred cubic feet or less at
STP for compressed gases.
   (b)   The applicant for a permit for a facility which qualifies as a minimal
storage site may opt to file the short form hazardous material management plan.
Such plan shall include the following components:
   (1)   General application information;
   (2)   A simple line drawing of the facility showing the location of the
storage facilities and indicating the hazard class or classes and physical
state of the hazardous materials being stored, whether any of the material is a
waste, and shall indicate presence and location of hazardous materials which
are water reactive;
   (3)   Information describing that the hazardous materials will be stored in
a suitable manner and will be appropriately contained, separated and monitored;
   (4)   Description of emergency equipment to be maintained;
   (5)   Assurance that the disposal of any hazardous materials will be in an
appropriate manner.
(Ord. 4002 § 1 (part), 1990: Ord. 3435 § 1 (part), 1983)
Chapter 17.20
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS INVENTORY*
Sections:
   
17.20.010   Hazardous materials inventory statement.
   
17.20.020   Information required.
   
17.20.050   Lockboxes for trade secrets.
   *   Editor's Note: Section 17.20.030, Public Records (containing parts of
Ordinance Nos. 3435 and 3716), and Section 17.20.060, Additional Trade Secret
Information Required (also containing parts of Ordinance No. 3435), and both
previously codified herein, were repealed by Ordinance No. 4002.
17.20.010   Hazardous materials inventory statement.
   (a)   A hazardous materials inventory statement (HMIS) shall be filed
annually, by March 1 of each year, with the fire chief, in accordance with this
chapter. Any person who stores or handles any hazardous material in an amount
which is equal to or greater than the quantities specified in Section
17.20.020 is required to file an HMIS.
   (b)   Such person shall amend the HMIS within thirty days of the storage or
handling of any hazardous material not listed thereon but required to be listed
by Section
17.20.020(a) or of any increase of one hundred percent or more in the quantity
of a previously disclosed material or an increase which brings the aggregate
amount of a material above the quantity range listed in accordance with Section
17.20.020(c) or required to be identified in accordance with Section
17.20.020(d), or of a change in the business address, ownership, or business
name.
(Ord. 4002 § 1 (part), 1990: Ord. 3716 § 2 (part), 1986: Ord. 3435 § 1 (part),
1983)
17.20.020   Information required.
   (a)   Information shall be included in the HMIS for each hazardous material
or mixture containing a hazardous material stored or handled in a facility
(aggregated over all such materials stored in one or more storage facilities)
where the aggregate quantity throughout the facility at any one time during the
reporting year is equal to or greater than five hundred pounds in weight for
solids, fifty-five gallons for liquids, or two hundred cubic feet at standard
temperature and pressure (STP) for compressed gases. Additionally, an HMIS also
shall be filed for any "acutely hazardous materials" stored on site above
threshold reporting quantities pursuant to 40 CFR Part 355, Appendix A.
   (b)   The information in the HMIS shall include:
   (1)   For nonwastes: The general chemical name, common/trade name, major
constituents for mixtures, the manufacturer, United Nations (UN) or North
America (NA) number, if available, and the hazard class or classes and the
material safety data sheet (MSDS) or equivalent information as required by
city;
   (2)   For wastes: The three digit state waste number, using the number
listed on the California Department of Health Services Uniform Hazardous Waste
Manifest, DHS form 8022, the total estimated amounts of hazardous waste handled
by the business throughout the year, the general chemical and mineral
composition of the waste listed by probable maximum and minimum concentration,
and the hazard class or classes;
   (3)   For both wastes and nonwastes, the following additional information
shall be required: physical state, physical and health hazards, average daily
amount, maximum capacity of largest container for each material, number of days
on site, storage code (storage container type, pressure and temperature), and
any additional Tier II inventory information required by Section 11022 of Title
42 of the United States Code, as that section may be amended from time to time;
   (4)   A listing of the chemical name and common names of every other
hazardous material or mixture containing a hazardous material handled by the
business which is not otherwise listed pursuant to paragraphs (1) or (2) of
this subsection;
   (5)   The maximum amount of each hazardous waste, hazardous material or
mixture containing a hazardous material disclosed in paragraphs (1), (2) or (3)
of this subsection, which is handled at any one time by the business over the
course of the year;
   (6)   Sufficient information on how and where the hazardous materials
disclosed in paragraphs (1), (2) or (3) of this subsection are handled by the
business to allow fire, safety, health and other appropriate personnel to
prepare adequate emergency responses to potential releases of the hazardous
materials;
   (7)   The standard industrial classification (SIC) code number of the
business, if applicable, nature of the business, and the Dunn and Bradstreet
number of the business;
   (8)   The name and twenty-four-hour phone numbers of the responsible person
who is able to assist emergency personnel in the event of an emergency
involving the business during nonbusiness hours.
   (c)   The HMIS may report the amount of hazardous material under this
section by ranges, rather than a specific amount, pursuant to Section
17.16.020(c)(3), as long as those ranges provide the information necessary to
meet the needs of emergency rescue personnel, to determine the potential hazard
from a release of the materials, and meets the purposes of this title.
(Ord. 5381 § 10, 2016: Ord. 4002 § 1 (part), 1990: Ord. 3716 § 2 (part), 1986:
Ord. 3435 § 1 (part), 1983)
17.20.050   Lockboxes for trade secrets.
   For any hazardous material for which a claim has been made under
Chapter 17.23, the exact name of the trade secret material, its quantity range
by storage facility, and all other information required under Section
17.20.020(b) must, subject to the approval of city, be placed in a double-keyed
lockbox and maintained in at least two locations at the facility. One key shall
be provided to city at the time the permit becomes effective. The other key
shall be maintained on site at all times, and readily accessible to permittee's
designated emergency response person. Such emergency response person shall
cooperate with city in opening the lockbox at any time city responds to an
emergency or unauthorized discharge on the site involving the storage facility
in which the trade secret material is contained. In the event that the
permittee's designated emergency response person is not immediately available
to assist city emergency response personnel to open the lockbox, such city
personnel are authorized to break the lockbox.
(Ord. 4002 § 1 (part), 1990: Ord. 3435 § 1 (part), 1983)
Chapter 17.23
TRADE SECRETS
Sections:
   
17.23.010   Public records.
   
17.23.020   Claim of trade secret.
   
17.23.030   Definition of trade secret.
   
17.23.040   Additional trade secret information required.
17.23.010   Public records.
   All information submitted to the city pursuant to this title is a public
record and shall be available to the public unless otherwise provided by other
provisions of law, and except for information for which a claim of trade secret
has been made in accordance with this chapter.
(Ord. 4002 § 1 (part), 1990)
17.23.020   Claim of trade secret.
   Any person providing information required by this title shall, at the time
of submission, identify all information which the person believes is a trade
secret.
(Ord. 4002 § 1 (part), 1990)
17.23.030   Definition of trade secret.
   "Trade secrets" as used in this chapter shall have the meanings given to it
by Section 6254.7 of the California Government Code and Section 1060 of the
California Evidence Code and includes, but is not limited to, any formula,
plan, pattern, process, tool, mechanism, compound, procedure, production data,
or compilation of information which is not patented, which is known only to
certain individuals within a commercial concern who are using it to fabricate,
produce, or compound an article of trade or a service having commercial value,
and which gives its user an opportunity to obtain a business advantage over
competitors who do not know or use it.
(Ord. 4002 § 1 (part), 1990)
17.23.040   Additional trade secret information required.
   (a)   For any hazardous material for which a claim has been made under this
chapter, in addition to providing the lockboxes for information required under
Section
17.20.020, a responsible person shall provide information to the city under one
of the following alternatives:
   (1)   Alternative One. In lieu of submitting the exact chemical name of said
trade secret material, such person may submit a description of the hazardous
material, including but not limited to, the chemical and physical properties,
hazard class, reactivity characteristics, fire and explosion characteristics of
the trade secret material, at a level of specificity satisfactory to city, and
on a form provided by city. The description must include health hazard
information including remedies and counter-measures appropriate for emergency
response and in case of human exposure to the trade secret material. Such
description must be adequate to enable city to assess the suitability of the
proposed containment and the proposed monitoring plan. The description must be
certified in writing as accurate by a chemist or chemical engineer; or
   (2)   Alternative Two. Instead of submitting the name of the trade secret to
city, the trade secret information, together with all submittals pursuant to
this title, may be submitted to an independent chemical engineer or equivalent
licensed professional, subject to approval by city, who shall certify, in
writing, the suitability of the containment design, the monitoring methods and
plans, and the separation of materials, and the accuracy of the facility
storage map with regard to the information relevant to the trade secret. All
such submittals remain subject to city's review and approval under this title;
or
   (3)   Alternative Three. The trade secret information sought to be
protected, may be submitted to city on a separate form or forms, clearly and
conspicuously marked or labeled as containing trade secret information, and
said form or forms must be submitted only to a city official designated by city
to receive trade secret information. If this method of protecting the trade
secret information is chosen by the responsible person, such party shall also
submit a waiver, relieving city of any and all liability resulting from
disclosure of the trade secret in violation of this section.
   (b)   The city official shall endeavor to protect from disclosure any and
all trade secrets which come into the city's possession pursuant to subsection
(a)(3) of this section. If an action is instituted under California Public
Records Act for the release of such trade secrets, the person claiming the
trade secret shall be deemed a real party in interest in any such action.
Notice of a lawsuit to compel disclosure shall be given by city to such person
promptly upon receipt of such notice by city. The person claiming the trade
secret shall have the option to defend city for any and all attorney's fees,
costs and expenses imposed on or otherwise incurred by city in any proceeding
related to this section, as well as for any judgment imposed pursuant to
California Government Code Section 6259.
   (c)   Any information reported to the city official under subsection (a)(3)
of this section, which is exempt from disclosure pursuant to this chapter,
shall not be disclosed to anyone other than as required by law, except the
following:
   (l)   An officer or employee of the county or city, the state, or the United
States, in connection with the official duties of that officer or employee
under any law for the protection of health, or to contractors with the county
or city and their employees if, in the opinion of the city, disclosure is
necessary and required for the satisfactory performance of a contract, for
performance of work, or to protect the health and safety of the employees of
the contractor.
   (2)   Any physician where the physician certifies in writing to the city
that the information is necessary to the medical treatment of the physician's
patient.
   (d)   Any person who by virtue of employment, contractual relationship or
official position has obtained possession of or has had access to information
the disclosure of which is prohibited by this chapter, and who knowing that
disclosure of the information is prohibited, intentionally or recklessly
discloses the information in any manner to any person not entitled to receive
it, or uses the information for his or her own use or advantage, shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (e)   Information certified by appropriate officials of the United States,
as necessarily kept secret for national defense purposes, shall be accorded the
full protections against disclosure as specified by such official or in
accordance with the laws of the United States.
   (f)   The city council shall, by resolution, adopt a procedure designed to
prevent knowing or negligent disclosure of trade secret information in the
possession of or accessible to city, its agents and employees, by virtue of
this chapter. Such procedure shall identify which officials shall have access
to the information, and the means by which access will be controlled and
monitored. Trade secret information shall be maintained in secured facilities
which are designed to prevent inadvertent or unauthorized access or disclosure.
   (g)   The confidential treatment, pursuant to this chapter, of the identity
of such trade secret disclosed to the city does not apply where there has been
any unauthorized discharge related to such trade secret material which is
reportable in compliance with Section
17.24.010 or where such disclosure arises out of any official emergency
response relating to any storage facility involving such trade secret
information by public safety personnel of city.
(Ord. 4002 § 1 (part), 1990)
Chapter 17.24
RESPONSIBILITY
Sections:
   
17.24.010   Reporting unauthorized discharge.
   
17.24.020   Unconfirmed unauthorized discharge.
   
17.24.040   Gases at STP.
   
17.24.050   Clean-up responsibility.
   
17.24.060   Indemnification.
17.24.010   Reporting unauthorized discharge.
   (a)   Any responsible person or an employee, authorized representative,
agent, or designee of such person shall, upon discovery, immediately report any
release or threatened release of a hazardous material to the fire department
and the Office of Emergency Services (800/852-7550). The responsible person,
the employee, authorized representative, agent, or designee of such person
shall take all necessary steps to ensure the containment and/or cleanup of such
discharge. This section shall not apply to any person engaged in the
transportation of a hazardous material on a highway which is subject to, and in
compliance with the requirements of Sections 2453 and 23112.5 of the Vehicle
Code.
   (b)   The immediate reporting shall include as a minimum:
   (1)   The exact location of the release or threatened release;
   (2)   The name of the person reporting the release or threatened release;
   (3)   The hazardous materials involved in the release or threatened release;
   (4)   An estimate of the quantity of hazardous materials involved; and
   (5)   If known, the potential hazards presented by the hazardous material
involved in the release or threatened release.
   The reporting party shall provide information to the fire chief relating to
the ability of the permittee to contain and dispose of the hazardous material,
the estimated time it will take to complete containment and disposal, and the
degree of hazard created. The fire chief may verify that the hazardous material
is being contained and appropriately disposed. Whenever the fire chief
determines that the permittee is not adequately containing and disposing of
such hazardous material, the fire chief shall have the power and authority to
undertake and direct an emergency response in order to protect the public
health and/or safety.
   (c)   The immediate reporting pursuant to subsection (a) shall not be
required if there is a reasonable belief that the release or threatened release
poses no significant present or potential hazard to human health and safety,
property, or to the environment.
   (d)   If the discharge does not require immediate reporting, but the
discharge meets the following criteria, it must be recorded in the monitoring
log, to be available for inspection by fire department or other agency
inspection:
   (1)   The discharge is from a primary containment to a secondary containment
or to a rigid aboveground surface covering capable of containing the discharge
until clean-up of the hazardous material is completed.
   (2)   The permittee is able to adequately clean up the discharge before it
escapes from such secondary containment or such aboveground surface (but if the
clean-up requires more than eight hours, it becomes immediately reportable).
   (3)   There is no increase in the hazard of fire or explosion, nor is there
any production of a flammable or poisonous gas, nor is there any deterioration
of such secondary containment or such rigid aboveground surface.
   (e)   A discharge of other than the types described in subsections (a) and
(e) need not be recorded or immediately reported if the discharge is not the
result of the deterioration or failure of the primary container and the
quantity discharged is less than one ounce by weight, and can be cleaned up
within fifteen minutes.
(Ord. 4002 § 1 (part), 1990: Ord. 3435 § 1 (part), 1983)
17.24.020   Unconfirmed unauthorized discharge.
   (a)   Indication of Loss in Inventory Records. Whenever a material balance
or other inventory record, employed as a monitoring technique under the HMMP,
indicates a loss of hazardous material, and no unauthorized discharge has been
confirmed by other means, a responsible person shall have five working days to
determine whether or not there has been an unauthorized discharge. If before
the end of such period it is determined that there has been no unauthorized
discharge, an entry explaining the occurrence shall be made in the person's
monitoring records. Where a responsible person has not been able, within such
period, to determine that there has been no unauthorized discharge, an
unauthorized discharge is deemed confirmed and the responsible person shall
proceed in accordance with Section
17.24.010.
   (b)   Test Results. Whenever any test results suggest a possible
unauthorized discharge and no unauthorized discharge has been confirmed by
other means, the responsible person shall have five working days to retest. If
second test results obtained within that period establish that there has been
no unauthorized discharge, the results of both tests shall be recorded in the
person's monitoring records. If it has not been established within such period
that there has been no unauthorized discharge, an unauthorized discharge is
deemed confirmed and the responsible person shall proceed in accordance with
Sections
17.24.010 and
17.24.020.
(Ord. 4066 § 5, 1992: Ord. 4002 § 1 (part), 1990: Ord. 3435 § 1 (part), 1983)
17.24.040   Gases at STP.
   Sections
17.24.010 and
17.24.020 notwithstanding, any responsible person who has knowledge of any
unauthorized discharge of a hazardous material which is a gas at STP, must
immediately report such discharge to the city if such discharge presents a
threat of imminent danger to public health and safety.
(Ord. 4066 § 6, 1992: Ord. 4002 § 1 (part), 1990: Ord. 3435 § 1 (part), 1983)
17.24.050   Clean-up responsibility.
   Responsible persons shall institute and complete all actions necessary to
remedy the effects of any unauthorized discharge, whether sudden or gradual.
City shall undertake actions to remedy the effects of such unauthorized
discharge itself, only if the fire chief determines that it is reasonably
necessary under the circumstances for the city to do so. The responsible person
shall be liable to reimburse city for all costs incurred by city in remedying
the effects of such unauthorized discharge, including the costs of fighting
fires, to the maximum extent allowed by law. This responsibility is not
conditioned upon evidence of willfulness or negligence of the person storing
the hazardous material(s) in causing or allowing such discharge. Any
responsible person who undertakes action to remedy the effects of unauthorized
discharge(s) shall not be barred by the title from seeking to recover
appropriate costs and expenditures from other responsible parties except as
provided by Section
17.24.060 and this section.
(Ord. 4002 § 1 (part), 1990: Ord. 3435 § 1 (part), 1983)
17.24.060   Indemnification.
   Responsible persons subject to this title shall indemnify, hold harmless and
defend the city against any claim, cause of action, disability, loss,
liability, damage, cost or expense, howsoever arising, which occurs by reason
of an unauthorized discharge in connection with such person's operations
subject to this title except as arises from city's sole willful act or sole
active negligence.
(Ord. 4002 § 1 (part), 1990: Ord. 3435 § 1 (part), 1983)
Chapter 17.28
INSPECTIONS AND RECORDS
Sections:
   
17.28.010   Inspections by city.
   
17.28.020   Inspections by responsible persons.
   
17.28.030   Special inspections.
   
17.28.040   Substituted inspections.
   
17.28.050   Maintenance of records.
17.28.010   Inspections by city.
   City may conduct inspections, at its discretion, for the purpose of
ascertaining compliance with this title and causing to be corrected any
conditions which would constitute any violation of this title or of any other
statute, code, rule or regulation affecting the storage of hazardous materials.
   Permittees are not required to disclose the identity of hazardous materials
protected as trade secrets pursuant to
Chapter 17.20 to anyone other than the official designated for that purpose
pursuant to
Chapter 17.20 except in the case of an emergency response or an unauthorized
discharge related to the storage facility in which the trade secret material is
contained. Therefore, permittee may put temporary coverings over the labels of
trade secret materials during the course of city inspections conducted by other
than the city official so designated.
   (a)   Right of Entry. Whenever necessary for the purpose of investigating or
enforcing the provisions of this title, or whenever any enforcement officer has
reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any structure or upon the
premises any condition which constitutes a violation of this title, said
officers may enter such structure or premises at all reasonable times to
inspect the same, or to perform any duty imposed upon any of said respective
officers by law; provided, that if such structure or premises be occupied, the
officer shall first present proper credentials and request entry, and further
provided, that if such structure or premises is unoccupied, the officer shall
first make a reasonable attempt to contact a responsible person and request
entry, except in emergency circumstances. If such entry is refused, the officer
seeking entry shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure
entry.
   (b)   Inspections by City - Discretionary. All inspections specified herein
shall be at the discretion of the city and nothing in this title shall be
construed as requiring the city to conduct any such inspection nor shall any
actual inspection made imply a duty to conduct any other inspection.
Furthermore, nothing in this title shall be construed to hold the city or any
officer, employee or representative of the city responsible for any damage to
persons or property by reason of making an inadequate or negligent inspection
or by reason of any failure to make an inspection or reinspection.
(Ord. 4002 § 1 (part), 1990: Ord. 3435 § 1 (part), 1983)
17.28.020   Inspections by responsible persons.
   Responsible persons shall conduct regular inspections of their own
facilities to assure compliance with this title and shall maintain logs or file
reports in accordance with their hazardous materials management plan (HMMP).
The inspector conducting such inspections shall be qualified to conduct such
inspections.
(Ord. 4002 § 1 (part), 1990: Ord. 3435 § 1 (part), 1983)
17.28.030   Special inspections.
   In addition to the inspections specified above, city may require the
periodic employment of special inspectors to conduct an audit or assessment of
storage facilities to make a hazardous material safety evaluation and to
determine compliance with the provisions of this title.
   (a)   The special inspector shall be a qualified person or firm who shall
demonstrate expertise to the satisfaction of the fire chief.
   (b)   The special inspection report shall include an evaluation of the
facilities and recommendations consistent with the provisions of this title
where appropriate. A copy of the report shall be filed with the fire chief at
the same time that it is submitted to permittee.
   (c)   Responsible persons shall, within thirty days of said report, file
with the fire chief a plan to implement all recommendations, or shall
demonstrate to the satisfaction of the fire chief why such recommendations
shall not be implemented.
(Ord. 4002 § 1 (part), 1990: Ord. 3435 § 1 (part), 1983)
17.28.040   Substituted inspections.
   An inspection by an employee of any other public agency may be deemed by the
fire chief as a substitute for any requirement of the title.
(Ord. 4002 § 1 (part), 1990: Ord. 3435 § 1 (part), 1983)
17.28.050   Maintenance of records.
   All records required by this title shall be maintained by responsible
persons for a period not less than three years. Said records shall be made
available to the fire chief during normal working hours and upon reasonable
notice.
(Ord. 4002 § 1 (part), 1990: Ord. 3435 § 1 (part), 1983)
Chapter 17.32
APPLICATION FOR PERMIT
Sections:
   
17.32.010   Permit.
   
17.32.020   Application for permit.
   
17.32.030   Investigation.
   
17.32.040   Approval of permit.
   
17.32.050   Provisional permit.
   
17.32.060   Temporary permit.
   
17.32.070   Issuance of permits.
   
17.32.080   Additional approvals.
   
17.32.090   Term.
   
17.32.100   Renewal.
   
17.32.110   Determination.
   
17.32.120   Fees.
   
17.32.130   Transfer of permit.
   
17.32.140   Effective date of permit.
   
17.32.150   Denial of application.
   
17.32.160   Grounds for denial.
   
17.32.170   Transmittal of determination.
   
17.32.180   Appeal.
17.32.010   Permit.
   Any person who stores any hazardous material shall obtain and keep current a
hazardous materials storage permit issued pursuant to this title. One or more
such permits shall be issued for a facility according to the administrative
convenience of the fire chief. Additional approvals shall be obtained for any
storage facility thereafter connected, installed, constructed, repaired as
required by Section
17.12.060, substantially modified, replaced, closed, or removed, or for any
change in or addition to hazardous materials stored not in accordance with the
prior approval. Notwithstanding the above, permittee shall have thirty days to
apply for an additional approval for the storing of a new or different
hazardous material with the same hazard class as stated on the existing permit
approvals where such storage does not increase the hazard of fire or explosion
or the hazard of the production of flammable or poisonous gas. Storage of new
or different hazardous materials, not meeting all of these criteria, shall
require the prior additional approval.
(Ord. 4002 § 1 (part), 1990: Ord. 3435 § 1 (part), 1983)
17.32.020   Application for permit.
   Application for a new, amended, or renewed permit or an additional approval
shall be made to the fire chief on the form provided by city. In addition to
the information required by such form, applicant shall submit the hazardous
materials management plan required by Section
17.16.010 and construction plans, if any, in conformity with Section
17.12.010. Applicant shall specify the permit quantity limit requested to be
permitted for each storage facility.
(Ord. 4002 § 1 (part), 1990: Ord. 3435 § 1 (part), 1983)
17.32.030   Investigation.
   The fire chief may make such investigation of the applicant and the proposed
facility or activity as the fire chief deems necessary to carry out the
purposes of this title.
(Ord. 4002 § 1 (part), 1990: Ord. 3435 § 1 (part), 1983)
17.32.040   Approval of permit.
   A permit shall not be approved until the fire chief is satisfied that the
storage approved adequately conforms to the provisions of this title.
(Ord. 4002 § 1 (part), 1990: Ord. 3435 § 1 (part), 1983)
17.32.050   Provisional permit.
   If the fire chief finds that the proposal does not completely conform to the
provisions of this title, the fire chief may approve a provisional permit,
subject to conditions to be imposed by the fire chief, when such a provisional
permit is feasible and does not appear to be detrimental to the public
interest. The applicant must be informed in writing of the reasons why a full-
term permit was not issued.
(Ord. 4002 § 1 (part), 1990: Ord. 3435 § 1 (part), 1983)
17.32.060   Temporary permit.
   A temporary permit for storage may be issued where storage does not exceed
thirty days and occurs no more frequently than every six months. The
containment standards of
Chapter 17.12, the hazardous materials management plan of
Chapter 17.16 and the inspection and records requirements of
Chapter 17.28 may be modified as appropriate under these circumstances for the
storage of hazardous materials on a nonregular temporary basis.
(Ord. 4002 § 1 (part), 1990: Ord. 3435 § 1 (part), 1983)
17.32.070   Issuance of permits.
   (a)   Issuance. Upon the approval of a temporary, provisional, or full-term
permit by the fire chief and upon the payment of any applicable fee, the city
shall issue and deliver the permit to the applicant. Such permit shall contain
the following information:
   (1)   The name and address of the permittee for purposes of notice and
service of process;
   (2)   The address of the facility for which the permit is issued;
   (3)   Authorization of any and all storage facilities approved under the
permit, the permit quantity limit or limits and the approved hazard class or
classes for each storage facility;
   (4)   The date the permit is effective;
   (5)   The date of expiration;
   (6)   When applicable, a designation that the permit is provisional or
temporary;
   (7)   Any special conditions of the permit.
   (b)   Records. The fire chief shall keep a record of all permits issued and
all conditions attached thereto.
(Ord. 4002 § 1 (part), 1990: Ord. 3435 § 1 (part), 1983)
17.32.080   Additional approvals.
   (a)   When a request for an additional approval is filed as required by
Section
17.32.010, the procedures set forth in this title for an application for a
permit shall also apply to such an application for an additional approval. Each
application for an additional approval shall be accompanied by an appropriate
amendment to the HMMP.
   (b)   If the additional approval request is for closure of a storage
facility, permittee shall apply for approval to close such storage facility not
less than thirty days prior to the termination of the storage of hazardous
materials at the storage facility. Such closure shall be in accordance with a
closure plan which describes procedures for terminating the storage of
hazardous materials in each storage facility in a manner that:
   (1)   Minimizes the need for further maintenance; and
   (2)   Controls to the extent that a threat to public health or safety or to
the environment from residual hazardous materials in the storage facility is
minimized or eliminated; and
   (3)   Demonstrates that hazardous materials that were stored in the storage
facility will be removed, disposed of, neutralized, or reused in an appropriate
manner. This thirty-day period may be waived by the city if there are special
circumstances requiring such waiver.
(Ord. 4002 § 1 (part), 1990: Ord. 3435 § 1 (part), 1983)
17.32.090   Term.
   A permit may be issued for a term of one year, excepting provisional permits
which may be issued for any period of time up to one year and temporary permits
which may be issued for no longer than thirty days.
(Ord. 4002 § 1 (part), 1990: Ord. 3435 § 1 (part), 1983)
17.32.100   Renewal.
   Every application for the renewal of a permit or extension of a provisional
permit shall be made at least thirty days prior to the expiration date of such
permit. If a timely application for renewal has been submitted, the permit
shall remain in effect until the fire chief has made a determination pursuant
to Section
17.32.110 and any administrative appeal pursuant to Section
17.32.180 has been exhausted.
(Ord. 4066 § 7, 1992: Ord. 4002 § 1 (part), 1990: Ord. 3435 § 1 (part), 1983)
17.32.110   Determination.
   The fire chief shall make a determination with regard to any application for
a permit, an additional approval, or a renewal, within ninety days from the
date that the application has been completed or compliance with the appropriate
provisions of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) has been
completed, whichever occurs later. This time limit may be further extended by
mutual agreement between the fire chief and applicant.
(Ord. 4002 § 1 (part), 1990: Ord. 3435 § 1 (part), 1983)
17.32.120   Fees.
   The city council, in the municipal fee schedule, shall establish fees
sufficient to recover the city's costs in administering this title, including,
but not limited to, the cost of permitting and inspection responsibilities. The
fees set pursuant to this section may be based on the city's overall direct and
indirect costs of administering this title, and need not reflect any specific
services provided for, or with respect to, any individual person. The
established permit fee(s) shall be due and payable each year for all facilities
for which permits are required, whether or not application has been made for
such permit(s).
   (a)   Delinquent Fees. All permit fees delinquent for thirty days or more
shall be subject to an additional charge to be determined by city which shall
be added to the amount of the fee collected.
   (b)   Refund of Fees. No refund or rebate of a permit fee shall be allowed
by reason of the fact that the permit is denied or the permittee discontinues
the activity or use of a facility prior to the expiration of the term or that
the permit is suspended or revoked prior to the expiration of the term.
(Ord. 4002 § 1 (part), 1990: Ord. 3435 § 1 (part), 1983)
17.32.130   Transfer of permit.
   The permit may be transferred to new owners of the same business only if the
new owners accept responsibility for all obligations under this title at the
time of the transfer of the business and document such transfer on a form
provided by city within thirty days of transfer of ownership of the business.
Such transfer shall be subject to the approval of the fire chief.
(Ord. 4002 § 1 (part), 1990: Ord. 3435 § 1 (part), 1983)
17.32.140   Effective date of permit.
   No permit shall become effective until the permit has been signed and
accepted by the permittee. Where the permittee is a company, firm or
corporation, the acceptance must be signed by a person having the legal
authority to bind the permittee.
(Ord. 4002 § 1 (part), 1990: Ord. 3435 § 1 (part), 1983)
17.32.150   Denial of application.
   If the fire chief has cause to deny the application and determines that it
would not be feasible or in the public interest to approve a temporary or
provisional permit, then the fire chief shall deny the application.
(Ord. 4002 § 1 (part), 1990: Ord. 3793 § 2, 1988)
17.32.160   Grounds for denial.
   A permit shall be denied if the applicant fails to demonstrate adequate
conformity to the provisions of this title. In addition, a permit can be denied
for any of the grounds upon which the permit would be subject to revocation
pursuant to
Chapter 17.40.
(Ord. 4002 § 1 (part), 1990: Ord. 3793 § 3, 1988)
17.32.170   Transmittal of determination.
   The determination of the fire chief to approve or deny the application shall
be mailed to the applicant and to any other person making a written request for
such notice. The written determination shall set forth the findings upon which
the determination is based.
(Ord. 4066 § 8, 1992: Ord. 4002 § 1 (part), 1990: Ord. 3793 § 4, 1988)
17.32.180   Appeal.
   (a)   An appeal may be taken to the city manager or the designee of the city
manager by any person aggrieved or affected by any determination of the fire
chief to approve or deny a permit under this title.
   (b)   An appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed with the city clerk
within ten days after the date of the mailing of the notice of the
determination of the fire chief pursuant to Section
17.32.170. The appeal shall set forth the grounds for the appeal and shall be
accompanied by a fee as prescribed by the municipal fee schedule.
   (c)   Upon the filing of the appeal, the city manager shall set a date for a
public hearing on the appeal, which hearing shall be held within thirty days of
the date of the filing of the appeal. Notice of the hearing shall be given by
first class mail to the appellant and to the applicant and to such other
persons who have filed a written request for such notice with the city clerk.
   (d)   Upon the date set for the hearing, the city manager or the designee of
the city manager shall conduct a public hearing thereon, which may be continued
from time to time. Upon conclusion of the hearing on the appeal, the manager or
designee shall either uphold, in whole or in part, or make modifications to,
the decision of the fire chief, or reverse the determination of the fire chief.
The decision of the city manager or designee shall be final.
   (e)   If approved by the city manager or designee, the permit shall be
effective immediately. Notice of the manager's or designee's decision shall be
mailed to the original applicant, appellant, and to any other person who has
filed a written request for such notice with the city clerk.
(Ord. 4066 § 9, 1992)
Chapter 17.34
RESERVED*
*   Editor's Note: Chapter 17.34, Environmental Review, previously codified
herein, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 4573, effective August
12, 1999. Ordinances previously codified herein, and repealed by Ordinance No.
4573, were parts of Ordinance Nos. 3793, 4002 and Section 10 of Ordinance No.
4066.
Chapter 17.36
RESERVED*
*   Editor's Note: Chapter 17.36, Denial, containing portions of Ordinance No.
3435 was repealed by Ordinance No. 3793.
Chapter 17.40
REMEDIAL ACTION
Sections:
   
17.40.010   Grounds for remedial action.
   
17.40.020   Notice of noncompliance.
   
17.40.030   Notice of hearing.
   
17.40.040   Suspension prior to hearing.
   
17.40.050   Remedial action.
   
17.40.060   Remedies not exclusive.
   
17.40.070   Authority after suspension, revocation or expiration.
   
17.40.080   Return of permit.
17.40.010   Grounds for remedial action.
   A permit may be subjected to remedial action for any of the following
causes, arising from the acts or omissions of the permittee, either before or
after a permit is issued:
   (a)   Fraud, willful misrepresentation, or any willful, inaccurate or false
statement in applying for a new or renewed permit;
   (b)   Fraud, willful misrepresentation, or any willful, inaccurate or false
statement in any report required by this title;
   (c)   Violation of any of the terms or conditions of a permit;
   (d)   Failure to abate, correct or rectify any noncompliance within the time
specified in the notice of noncompliance;
   (e)   Failure to correct conditions constituting an unreasonable risk or an
unauthorized discharge of hazardous materials within a reasonable time after
notice from a governmental entity other than city;
   (f)   Failure to abide by the remedial action imposed by the city;
   (g)   Failure to pay any applicable fees;
   (h)   Failure to apply for or timely obtain a permit required by this title;
   (i)   Failure to report an unauthorized discharge;
   (j)   A change in any condition that requires modification or termination of
the operation of an underground storage tank.
(Ord. 4002 § 1 (part), 1990: Ord. 3435 § 1 (part), 1983)
17.40.020   Notice of noncompliance.
   Unless the fire chief finds that an immediate suspension or other action
under Section
17.40.040 is necessary to protect the public health or safety from imminent
danger, the fire chief shall issue a notice of noncompliance:
   (a)   For failure to comply with the provisions of this title, any permit
conditions or any provisions of the hazardous materials management plan; or
   (b)   Before taking remedial action pursuant to Section
17.40.010(e);
   Such notice shall be given in writing to the responsible person in person or
by mail. If the noncompliance is not abated, corrected, or rectified within the
time specified, remedial action may be taken.
(Ord. 4002 § 1 (part), 1990: Ord. 3435 § 1 (part), 1983)
17.40.030   Notice of hearing.
   A notice of hearing shall be given to the responsible person by the fire
chief in writing, setting forth the time and place of the hearing, the ground
or grounds upon which the remedial action is based, the pertinent code section
or sections, and a brief statement of the factual matters in support thereof.
The notice shall be given at least fifteen days prior to the hearing date.
(Ord. 4002 § 1 (part), 1990: Ord. 3435 § 1 (part), 1983)
17.40.040   Suspension prior to hearing.
   Whenever the fire chief finds that suspension of a permit and/or other
emergency action prior to a hearing for remedial action is necessary to protect
the public health or safety from imminent danger, the fire chief may
immediately suspend any permit and order any and all actions necessary to
protect the public health or safety from imminent danger, pending the hearing
for remedial action. The fire chief shall immediately notify a responsible
person of such suspension or other action by having a written notice of the
suspension or other action personally served on a responsible person. The
responsible person shall have the opportunity for a preliminary hearing with
regard to such prehearing suspension or other action within three working days
of receiving written notice of such action.
(Ord. 4002 § 1 (part), 1990: Ord. 3435 § 1 (part), 1983)
17.40.050   Remedial action.
   If the fire chief, after the hearing, finds that cause exists for remedial
action, the fire chief may impose one or more of the following:
   (a)   An order to correct the particular noncompliance specified in the
notice issued pursuant to Section
17.40.020;
   (b)   A revocation of the permit for the facility or for a storage facility
and approval of a provisional permit;
   (c)   Suspension of the permit for the facility or for a storage facility
for a specified period not to exceed six months;
   (d)   Modification or addition of conditions of the permit;
   (e)   Revocation of the permit with no reapplication permitted for a
specified period not to exceed five years.
   If the grounds for remedial action are based on subsections (c), (d), (e) or
(f) of Section
17.40.010 and if such grounds are limited to one storage facility, the remedial
action taken shall be limited to that storage facility.
   The city shall revoke the permit for an underground storage tank if the
owner or operator is not in compliance with Article 3 (commencing with Section
25299.30) of the California Health and Safety Code on the date three months
after the date on which the owner or operator first becomes subject to said
Article 3.
(Ord. 4002 § 1 (part), 1990: Ord. 3435 § 1 (part), 1983)
17.40.060   Remedies not exclusive.
   Remedial action remedies under this chapter are in addition to and do not
supersede or limit any and all other remedies, civil or criminal.
(Ord. 4002 § 1 (part), 1990: Ord. 3435 § 1 (part), 1983)
17.40.070   Authority after suspension, revocation or expiration.
   The suspension, revocation or expiration of a permit issued under this title
shall not prevent any proceedings to investigate such permit, nor the
instituting of any other proceeding or taking remedial action against such
permittee.
(Ord. 4002 § 1 (part), 1990: Ord. 3435 § 1 (part), 1983)
17.40.080   Return of permit.
   In the event that a permit issued under the provisions of this title is
suspended or revoked, the permittee shall forward it to the fire chief not
later than the end of the third business day after notification of such
suspension or revocation.
(Ord. 4002 § 1 (part), 1990: Ord. 3435 § 1 (part), 1983)
Chapter 17.44
HEARING PROCEDURE
Sections:
   
17.44.010   Hearing rules.
   
17.44.020   Hearing notices.
17.44.010   Hearing rules.
   In any hearing under this title, all parties involved shall have the right
to offer testimonial, documentary, and tangible evidence bearing on the issues
to be represented by counsel, and to confront and cross-examine any witnesses
against them. Any hearing under this title may be continued by the person
conducting the hearing for a reasonable time for the convenience of a party or
a witness.
(Ord. 4002 § 1 (part), 1990: Ord. 3435 § 1 (part), 1983)
17.44.020   Hearing notices.
   All notices required by this chapter shall be sent certified mail, postage
prepaid, to the responsible person at the address given for purposes of notice
on the application or permit, or to the address known to the city, in the case
where no permit has been issued or applied for, or delivered to the responsible
person personally.
(Ord. 4002 § 1 (part), 1990: Ord. 3435 § 1 (part), 1983)
Chapter 17.48
ENFORCEMENT
Sections:
   
17.48.010   Criminal penalties.
   
17.48.015   Violations of state law.
   
17.48.020   Civil penalties.
   
17.48.030   Remedies not exclusive.
   
17.48.040   Civil action for retaliation.
   
17.48.050   Injunctions - Restraining orders or other orders - Proof.
17.48.010   Criminal penalties.
   (a)   As provided under
Chapter 1.08 of Title 1, violations of the provisions of this title shall be
subject to criminal sanctions.
   (b)   The following designated employee positions may enforce the provisions
of this title by the issuance of citations. Persons employed in such positions
are authorized to exercise the authority provided in Penal Code Section 836.5
and are authorized to issue citations for violations of this title. The
designated employee positions are: fire chief, deputy fire chief, fire marshal,
fire protection manager, fire inspector, hazardous materials specialist,
hazardous materials inspector, and the following employee positions, when such
employees are assigned to the rescue unit: captain, apparatus operator and
firefighter.
(Ord. 4574 § 1, 1999: 4066 § 11, 1992: Ord. 4002 § 1 (part), 1990: Ord. 3435 §
1 (part), 1983)
17.48.015   Violations of state law.
   Violations of Chapter 6.95 of Division 20 of the California Health and
Safety Code by any handler shall be punishable as provided therein.
(Ord. 4002 § 1 (part), 1990: Ord. 3716 § 4, 1986)
17.48.020   Civil penalties.
   (a)   Any person who intentionally or negligently violates any provision of
this title, or fails to comply with any order issued thereunder, shall be
liable for a civil penalty of not less than five hundred dollars or more than
five thousand dollars per day for each day of violation which shall be assessed
and recovered in a civil action brought in the name of the people by the city
attorney.
   (b)   Any operator of an underground tank system shall be liable for a civil
penalty of not less than five hundred dollars or more than five thousand
dollars for each underground storage tank for each day of violation for any of
the following violations:
   (1)   Operating an underground tank system which has not been issued a
permit, in violation of this title.
   (2)   Violation of any of the applicable requirements of the permit issued
for the operation of the underground tank system.
   (3)   Failure to maintain records, as required by this title.
   (4)   Failure to report an unauthorized release, as required by Section
17.10.160.
   (5)   Failure to properly close an underground tank system, as required by
Section
17.10.170.
   (6)   Violation of any applicable requirement of this title or any
regulation adopted by the State Water Resources Control Board pursuant to
Section 25299.3 of the California Health and Safety Code.
   (7)   Failure to permit inspection or to perform any monitoring, testing, or
reporting required pursuant to Sections
17.10.080 or
17.10.090.
   (8)   Making any false statement, representation, or certification in any
application, record, report, or other document submitted or required to be
maintained pursuant to this title.
   (c)   Any owner of an underground tank system shall be liable for a civil
penalty of not less than five hundred dollars or more than five thousand
dollars per day for each underground storage tank, for each day of violation,
for any of the following violations:
   (1)   Failure to obtain a permit as specified by this title.
   (2)   Failure to repair or upgrade an underground tank system in accordance
with this title.
   (3)   Abandonment or improper closure of any underground tank system subject
to this title.
   (4)   Knowing failure to take reasonable and necessary steps to assure
compliance with this title by the operator of an underground tank system.
   (5)   Violation of any applicable requirement of the permit issued for
operation of the underground tank system.
   (6)   Violation of any applicable requirement of this title, or any
regulation adopted by the board pursuant to Section 25299.3 of the California
Health and Safety Code.
   (7)   Failure to permit inspection or to perform any monitoring, testing, or
reporting required pursuant to Section
17.10.080 or
17.10.090.
   (8)   Making any false statement, representation, or certification in any
application, record, report, or other document submitted or required to be
maintained pursuant to this title.
   (d)   Any person who intentionally fails to notify the State Water Resources
Control Board or the city when required to do so by this title or who submits
false information in a permit application, amendment, or renewal, is liable for
a civil penalty of not more than five thousand dollars for each underground
storage tank or storage facility for which notification is not given or false
information is submitted.
   (e)   Any person who falsifies any monitoring records required by this
title, or knowingly fails to report an unauthorized release, shall, upon
conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than five thousand dollars or
more than ten thousand dollars, by imprisonment in the county jail for not to
exceed one year, or by both that fine and imprisonment.
   (f)   In determining both the civil and criminal penalties imposed pursuant
to this section, the court shall consider all relevant circumstances,
including, but not limited to, the extent of harm or potential harm caused by
the violation, the nature of the violation and the period of time over which it
occurred, the frequency of past violations, and the corrective action, if any,
taken by the person who holds the permit.
   (g)   In any civil action brought pursuant hereto, in which the city
prevails, the court shall determine and impose reasonable expenses, including
attorneys' fees, incurred by the city in the investigation and prosecution of
the action.
   (h)   Each civil penalty or criminal fine imposed pursuant to this section
for any separate violation shall be separate, and in addition to, any other
civil penalty or criminal fine imposed pursuant to this section or any other
provision of law, and shall be paid to the treasury of the city.
(Ord. 4002 § 1 (part), 1990: Ord. 3435 § 1 (part), 1983)
17.48.030   Remedies not exclusive.
   Remedies under this chapter are in addition to and do not supersede or limit
any and all other remedies, administrative, civil or criminal.
(Ord. 4002 § 1 (part), 1990: Ord. 3435 § 1 (part), 1983)
17.48.040   Civil action for retaliation.
   A civil action may be instituted against any employer by an employee who has
been discharged, demoted, suspended or in any other manner discriminated
against in terms or conditions of employment, or threatened with any such
retaliation, because such employee has, in good faith, made any oral or written
report or complaint related to the enforcement of this title to any company
official, public official or union official, or has testified in any proceeding
in any way related thereto. In addition to any actual damages which may be
awarded, damages shall include costs and attorneys' fees. The court may award
punitive damages in a proper case.
(Ord. 4002 § 1 (part), 1990: Ord. 3435 § 1 (part), 1983)
17.48.050   Injunctions - Restraining orders or other orders - Proof.
   (a)   When any person has engaged in, is engaged in, or is about to engage
in any acts or practices which violate this title, or any rule, regulation,
permit, standard, requirement, or order issued, adopted, or executed pursuant
to this title, the city attorney may apply to the superior court for any order
enjoining these acts or practices, or for any order directing compliance. The
court may grant a permanent or temporary injunction, restraining order, or
other order.
   (b)   In any civil action brought pursuant to this title in which a
temporary restraining order, preliminary injunction, or permanent injunction is
sought, it is not necessary to allege or prove at any state of the proceeding
that irreparable damage will occur should the temporary restraining order,
preliminary injunction, or permanent injunction not be issued or that the
remedy at law is inadequate. The temporary restraining order, preliminary
injunction, or permanent injunction shall be issued without the allegations and
without this proof.
(Ord. 4002 § 1 (part), 1990)
Chapter 17.52
MISCELLANEOUS*
Sections:
   
17.52.010   Disclaimer of liability.
   
17.52.020   Guidelines.
   
17.52.030   Duties are discretionary.
   
17.52.040   Conflict with other laws.
   
17.52.050   Severability.
   *   Editor's Note: Section 17.52.035, Report to State Water Resources
Control Board, previously codified herein and containing parts of Ordinance No.
3496, was repealed by Ordinance No. 4002.
17.52.010   Disclaimer of liability.
   The degree of protection required by this title is considered reasonable for
regulatory purposes. The standards set forth herein are minimal standards and
this title does not imply that compliance will ensure that there will be no
unauthorized discharge of hazardous material. This title shall not create
liability on the part of the city, any officer or employee thereof for any
damages that result from reliance on this title or any administrative decision
lawfully made thereunder. All persons handling, storing, using, processing, and
disposing of hazardous materials within the city should be and are advised to
determine to their own satisfaction the level of protection in addition to that
required by this title necessary or desirable to ensure that there is no
unauthorized discharge of hazardous materials.
(Ord. 4002 § 1 (part), 1990: Ord. 3435 § 1 (part), 1983)
17.52.020   Guidelines.
   Guidelines approved by the fire chief may be issued from time to time and
shall be maintained in the office of the fire chief. Such guidelines, in the
areas addressed therein, shall serve as an advisory interpretation of this
title.
(Ord. 4002 § 1 (part), 1990: Ord. 3435 § 1 (part), 1983)
17.52.030   Duties are discretionary.
   Subject to the limitations of due process, notwithstanding any other
provision of this code, whenever the words "shall" or "must" are used in
establishing a responsibility, or duty of the city, its elected or appointed
officers, employees, or agents, it is the legislative intent that such words
establish a discretionary responsibility or duty requiring the exercise of
judgment and discretion.
(Ord. 4002 § 1 (part), 1990: Ord. 3435 § 1 (part), 1983)
17.52.040   Conflict with other laws.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of this title:
   (a)   A storage facility regulated by any state or federal agency will be
exempted from any conflicting provision of this title, to the extent required
by the conflicting state or federal law under which the facility is being
regulated.
   (b)   If the storage facility is required to have a permit from the
department of health services under Health and Safety Code Section 25100 et
seq., it shall be exempted from any provision of this fire which is preempted
by the above-cited statute or the regulations adopted thereunder.
   (c)   Whenever any provision of this title conflicts with the fire code as
adopted by city, the stricter shall prevail.
(Ord. 4002 § 1 (part), 1990: Ord. 3435 § 1 (part), 1983)
17.52.050   Severability.
   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this title is for
any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a decision of any court of
competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions of the title. The city council declares that it would have
passed this title and each and every section, subsection, sentence, clause, or
phrase not declared invalid or unconstitutional without regard to whether any
portion of the title would be subsequently declared invalid or
unconstitutional.
(Ord. 4002 § 1 (part), 1990: Ord. 3435 § 1 (part), 1983)
Chapter 17.56
COMPLIANCE SCHEDULE
Sections:
   
17.56.010   Timetable for initial compliance.
17.56.010   Timetable for initial compliance.
   (a)   New Storage Facilities.
   (1)   As of July 7, 1983, a hazardous materials storage permit for a
facility must be obtained prior to the installation or use of any new storage
facility unless a building permit for such new storage facility was issued
prior to such date.
   (2)   The hazardous material management plan must be filed at the time of
application for a hazardous material storage permit.
   (b)   Existing Storage Facilities.
   (1)   A facility which has any existing hazardous materials storage
facilities or had obtained a building permit for such a storage facility prior
to July 7, 1983, and to which no new storage facility is added shall have one
year from such date to file a completed application for a hazardous materials
storage permit, including a monitoring plan in accordance with Section
17.12.030. The time limitation for determination specified in Section
17.32.110 shall not apply but the applicant shall be deemed to have a
provisional permit of indefinite term, until city makes such determination.
   (2)   Notwithstanding the above, a hazardous material inventory statement,
if applicable, must be filed on or before October 5, 1983.
(Ord. 4002 § 1 (part), 1990: Ord. 3435 § 1 (part), 1983)
 
 
Title 18
ZONING*
*   For state law providing for the adoption and administration of zoning laws,
ordinances, rules and regulations by cities - See Gov. C.A. §§ 65800 - 65909.5.
Chapters:
   
18.01   Adoption, Purposes, and Enforcement
   
18.04   Definitions
   
18.08   Designation and Establishment of Districts
   
18.09   Accessory Dwelling Units and Junior Accessory Dwelling Units
   
18.10   Low Density Residential (R-E, R-2 and RMD) Districts
   
18.12   R-1 Single-Family Residence District
   
18.13   Multiple Family Residential (RM-20, RM-30 and RM-40) Districts
   
18.14   Housing Incentives
   
18.15   Density Bonus
   
18.16   Neighborhood, Community, and Service Commercial (CN, CC and CS)
Districts
   
18.18   Downtown Commercial (CD) District
   
18.20   Office, Research and Manufacturing (MOR, ROLM, RP and GM) Districts
   
18.24   Contextual Design Criteria and Objective Design Standards
   
18.28   Special Purpose Districts
         · PF Public Facilities District Regulations
         · OS Open Space District Regulations
         · AC Agricultural Conservation District Regulations
   
18.29   North Ventura (NV) District Regulations
   
18.30   Combining Districts
      
18.30(A)   Retail Shopping (R) Combining District Regulations
      
18.30(B)   Pedestrian Shopping (P) Combining District Regulations
      
18.30(C)   Ground Floor (GF) Combining District Regulations
      
18.30(D)   Hotel (H) Combining District Regulations
      
18.30(E)   Landscape (L) Combining District Regulations
      
18.30(F)   Automobile Dealership (AD) Combining District Regulations
      
18.30(G)   Site and Design (D) Review Combining District Regulations
      
18.30(H)   Floodplain (F) District Regulations
      
18.30(I)   Nonconforming Use Amortization (N) Combining District Regulations
      
18.30(J)   (Reserved)
      
18.30(K)   Workforce Housing (WH) Combining District Regulations
   
18.31   CEQA Review
   
18.34   Pedestrian and Transit Oriented Development (PTOD) Combining District
Regulations
   
18.36   Hospital (HD) District
   
18.38   PC Planned Community District Regulations
   
18.40   General Standards and Exceptions
   
18.42   Standards for Special Uses
   
18.44   Green Development Regulations
   
18.46   Requests for Reasonable Accommodation for Accessibility
   
18.52   Parking and Loading Requirements
   
18.54   Parking Facility Design Standards
   
18.60   Alternative Development Standards for Stanford Lands
   
18.62   Special Regulations for Hazardous Waste Facilities
   
18.66   Creation of Easements Through the Execution and Recordation of
Covenants
   
18.70   Nonconforming Uses and Noncomplying Facilities
   
18.76   Permits and Approvals
   
18.77   Processing of Permits and Approvals
   
18.78   Appeals
   
18.79   Development Project Preliminary Review Procedures
   
18.80   Amendments to Zoning Map and Zoning Regulations
Chapter 18.01
ADOPTION, PURPOSES, AND ENFORCEMENT
Sections:
   
18.01.010   Adoption of Zoning Map and Zoning Regulations
   
18.01.020   Purposes
   
18.01.025   Zoning Code Interpretation
   
18.01.030   Compliance with Regulations
   
18.01.040   Regulations Minimal
   
18.01.050   Conflict with Other Regulations
   
18.01.060   Noncompliance a Public Nuisance
   
18.01.070   Remedies Cumulative
   
18.01.080   Violations - Penalties
   
18.01.085   Enforcement - Criminal Enforcement Authority
18.01.010   Adoption of Zoning Map and Zoning Regulations
   This title establishes comprehensive zoning regulations for the city, which
regulations shall consist of the following:
   (a)   A map, or set of maps, known as the zoning map, establishing and
delineating various classes of districts within the incorporated territory of
the city; and
   (b)   Regulations, known as the zoning regulations, governing the use of
land and the placement of buildings and improvements within the various classes
of districts.
   The zoning map and zoning regulations shall govern the use of land,
including the construction, alteration, movement, replacement, or maintenance
of buildings; the conduct of residential, commercial, industrial, and public
service activities; the height, bulk, and placement of buildings and uses on
each site; the provision of open space, amenities, off-street parking and
loading; the relationships between buildings and uses on adjoining sites or
within adjoining classes of districts; and such further aspects of land use and
development as are appropriate to attain the purposes of this title.
(Ord. 3048 (part), 1978)
18.01.020   Purposes
   The purposes of this title shall be to promote and protect the public
health, safety, peace, morals, comfort, convenience, and general welfare,
including the following more particularly specified purposes:
   (a)   To further, promote, and accomplish the objectives, policies, and
programs of the Palo Alto Comprehensive Plan;
   (b)   To lessen congestion and assure convenience of access; to secure
safety from fire, flood, and other dangers; to provide for adequate public
health, sanitation, and general welfare; to provide for adequate light, air,
sunlight, and environmental amenities; to promote and encourage conservation of
scarce resources; to prevent overcrowding of land and undue concentration of
population, to facilitate the creation of a convenient, attractive and
harmonious community; to attain a desirable balance of residential and
employment opportunities; and to expedite the provision of adequate and
essential public services to the community.
(Ord. 3048 (part), 1978)
18.01.025   Zoning Code Interpretation
   Whenever in the opinion of the Planning and Community Environment Director
(PCE Director) there is any question regarding the interpretation of the
Comprehensive Plan or the planning and land use provisions of Titles 16, 18 or
21 to any specific case or situation, the PCE Director shall have the authority
to interpret such planning codes. When in the opinion of the PCE Director a
formal written decision is warranted, the Director shall make the written
decision available to the public by posting on the City’s website. The
interpretation shall become effective fourteen consecutive calendar days from
the date of posting unless appealed under this section. The interpretation
shall become the standard interpretation for future application of that
provision of this Chapter unless changed by the Council on appeal. In
accordance with the provisions of Section
18.77.070(f), any person may appeal the PCE Director’s written interpretation
prior to its effective date. All final written interpretations made under this
section shall be made publicly available on the City’s website. Staff shall
prepare a quarterly Information Report to the Council summarizing all final
interpretations made under this section.
(Ord. 5373 § 5, 2016)
18.01.030   Compliance with Regulations
   No land shall be used, and no facility, structure, or building shall be
erected, constructed, enlarged, altered, moved, or used in any district, as
shown upon the zoning map, except in accord with the regulations established by
this title.
(Ord. 3048 (part), 1978)
18.01.040   Regulations Minimal
   In interpreting and applying the provisions of this title, unless otherwise
stated, the provisions shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the
promotion of the public safety, health, and the general welfare.
(Ord. 3048 (part), 1978)
18.01.050   Conflict with Other Regulations
   Where conflict occurs between the regulations established by this title and
the provisions of any other law, title, ordinance, code or other regulation
effective within the city, including but not limited to Title 16, Building
Regulations, and
Chapter 20.08, Setback Lines, the more restrictive of any such provisions shall
apply.
   It is not intended that this title shall interfere with or abrogate or annul
any easement, covenant, or other agreement now in effect; provided, however,
that where this title imposes a greater restriction than imposed or required by
any other law, title, ordinance, code, or other regulation, or by any easement,
covenant, or agreement, the provisions of this title shall apply.
(Ord. 4642 § 31, 2000: Ord. 3064 § 1 (part), 1978: Ord. 3048 (part), 1978)
18.01.060   Noncompliance a Public Nuisance
   Any building constructed, altered, moved, replaced, or otherwise maintained,
or any use of property in a manner contrary to the provisions of this title, is
unlawful and a public nuisance, and the city attorney shall commence such
action or actions, proceeding or proceedings as may be deemed appropriate by
the city attorney for the abatement, removal, and enjoinment thereof in the
manner provided by law, and shall take such other steps and shall apply to such
court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate and
remove such building or use and restrain and enjoin any person, firm, or
corporation from constructing, altering, moving, replacing, or otherwise
maintaining any building, or using any property in a manner contrary to the
provisions of this title.
(Ord. 3048 (part), 1978)
18.01.070   Remedies Cumulative
   All remedies provided for in this title shall be cumulative and not
exclusive.
(Ord. 3048 (part), 1978)
18.01.080   Violations - Penalties
   It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision or to fail to comply
with any of the requirements of this chapter or any permits, conditions, or
variances granted under this chapter, and shall be subject to any penalty or
penalties authorized by law, including but not limited to: administrative
enforcement pursuant to
Chapters 1.12 and
1.16 of this code; and criminal enforcement pursuant to
Chapter 1.08 of this code. Each separate day or any portion thereof during
which any violation of this chapter occurs or continues shall be deemed to
constitute a separate offense.
   When the code enforcement officer determines that a violation of this
chapter has occurred, he/she may record a notice of pendency of code violation
with the Office of the County Recorder stating the address and owner of the
property involved. When the violation has been corrected, the code enforcement
officer shall issue and record a release of the notice of pendency of code
violation.
(Ord. 5493 § 1, 2020: Ord. 3881 § 10, 1989: Ord. 3048 (part), 1978)
18.01.085   Enforcement - Criminal Enforcement Authority
   The employee positions designated in this section are authorized to exercise
the authority provided in California Penal Code section 836.5 for violations of
this chapter. The designated employee positions are: (1) chief building
official; and (2) code enforcement officer.
 
(Ord. 5493 § 2, 2020: Ord. 3184 § 9, 1980)
Chapter 18.04
DEFINITIONS
Sections:
   
18.04.010   Purpose and Applicability
   
18.04.020   General Rules for Construction of Language
   
18.04.030   Definitions
18.04.010   Purpose and Applicability
   The purpose of this chapter is to promote consistency and precision in the
interpretation of the zoning regulations. The meaning and construction of words
and phrases defined in this chapter shall apply throughout the zoning
regulations, except where the context of such words or phrases clearly
indicates a different meaning or construction.
   Illustrations and graphics in the City of Palo Alto's Zoning Ordinance
Technical Manual for Single Family Residential Zones or in specific chapters of
the Zoning Ordinance provide further understanding of the words and phrases
defined in this chapter, but where there is a conflict in interpretation, the
terms as defined in this chapter shall prevail.
(Ord. 4964 § 6, 2007: Ord. 3048 (part), 1978)
18.04.020   General Rules for Construction of Language
   The following general rules of construction shall apply to the text of the
zoning regulations:
   (a)   The particular shall control the general.
   (b)   In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text
of any provision and any caption or illustration, the text shall control.
   (c)   The word "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary. The word
"may" is discretionary.
   (d)   References in the masculine and feminine genders are interchangeable.
   (e)   Words used in the present tense include the future, and words used in
the singular include the plural, and the plural the singular, unless the
context clearly indicates the contrary.
   (f)   The words "activities" and "facilities" include any part thereof.
   (g)   Unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary, the following
conjunctions shall be interpreted as follows:
      (1)   "And" indicates that all connected items or provisions shall apply.
      (2)   "Or" indicates that the connected items or provisions may apply
singly or in any combination.
      (3)   "Either…or" indicates that the connected items or provisions shall
apply singly but not in combination.
   (h)   "District" means a general district or a combining district
established by this title, unless otherwise indicated by specific reference to
another kind of district.
   (i)   All public officials, bodies, and agencies to which reference is made
are those of the city unless otherwise indicated.
   (j)   "City" means the city of Palo Alto.
(Ord. 3048 (part), 1978)
18.04.030   Definitions
   (a)   Throughout this title the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings ascribed in this section.
      (1)   "Abandon" means to cease or discontinue a use or activity without
intent to resume, but excluding temporary or short-term interruptions to a use
or activity during periods of remodeling, maintaining, or otherwise improving
or rearranging a facility, or during normal periods of vacation or seasonal
closure.
      (2)   "Abutting" means having property or district lines in common.
      (3)   "Accessory building or structure" means a building or structure
which is incidental to and customarily associated with a specific principal use
or facility, and which meets the applicable conditions set forth in Section
18.12.080.
      (4)   “Accessory dwelling unit” means an attached or a detached
residential dwelling unit which provides complete independent living facilities
for one or more persons. It shall include permanent provisions for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation on the same parcel as the single-
family dwelling is situated. An ADU bathroom shall include a shower, toilet,
and sink fixture at a minimum and shall conform to the minimum requirements
specified in the Building Code. An accessory dwelling unit also includes the
following:
         (A)   An efficiency unit, as defined in Section 17958.1 of the Health
and Safety Code.
         (B)   A manufactured home, as defined in Section 18007 of the Health
and Safety Code.
         In some instances this Code uses the term second dwelling unit
interchangeably with accessory dwelling unit. For the purposes of this
definition, in order to provide “complete independent living facilities,” a
dwelling unit shall not have an interior access point to another dwelling unit
(e.g. hotel door or other similar feature/appurtenance).
      (5)   "Addition" means any construction which increases the size of a
building or facility in terms of site coverage, height, length, width, or gross
floor area.
      (6)   "Administrative office services" means offices and service
facilities performing headquarters, regional, or other level management and
administrative services for firms and institutions.
      (7)   "Airport-related use" means a use providing aviation-related
services typically ancillary to operations of an airport including, but not
limited to, aircraft repair and maintenance, flight instruction, and aircraft
chartering.
      (8)   "Alley" means a public or private vehicular way less than twenty-
five feet in width affording a secondary means of vehicular access to abutting
property.
      (9)   Reserved.
      (10)   Reserved.
      (11)   "Alteration" means any construction or physical change in the
internal arrangement of rooms or the supporting members of a building or
structure, or change in relative position of buildings or structures on a site,
or substantial change in appearance of any building or structure.
         (A)   "Incidental alteration" means any alteration to interior
partitions or interior supporting members of a structure which does not
increase the structural strength of the structure; any alteration to
electrical, plumbing, heating, air conditioning, ventilating, or other utility
services, fixtures or appliances; any addition, closing, or change in size of
doors or windows in the exterior walls; or any replacement of a building facade
which does not increase the structural strength of the structure.
         (B)   "Structural alteration" means any alteration not deemed an
incidental alteration.
      (12)   "Animal care" means a use providing grooming, housing, medical
care, or other services to animals, including veterinary services, animal
hospitals, overnight or short-term boarding ancillary to veterinary care,
indoor or outdoor kennels, and similar services.
      (12.5)   "Automobile dealership" means a use primarily engaged in sale,
lease, service, or minor repair of new and used automobiles and trucks. Other
accessory services incidental and supporting auto sales include service bays
for engine, transmission, air conditioning, and minor painting, body and fender
repair, car wash, auto rental, and similar services.
      (12.6)   “Automobile showroom” means a use primarily engaged in the sale
of new and used automobiles and trucks, or the display and demonstration of
automobiles and trucks for the purpose of facilitating sales, but which does
not involve on-site storage of inventory, except as incidental to the showroom
use. Automobile showroom serves primarily pedestrian clientele and is distinct
from automobile dealership.
      (13)   "Automobile service station" means a use providing gasoline, oil,
tires, small parts and accessories, and services incidental thereto, for
automobiles, light trucks, and similar motor vehicles. The sale of food or
grocery items or alcoholic beverages on the same site is prohibited except for
prepackaged soft drinks, cigarettes, and snack foods either from automatic
vending machines or in shelves occupying a floor area not to exceed forty
square feet.
      (14)   "Automotive services" means a use primarily engaged in the rental,
service, or major repair of new or used automobiles, trucks, trailers, boats,
motorcycles, recreational vehicles, or other similar vehicles, including tire
recapping, painting, body and fender repair, smog inspection, car wash and
detailing, and engine, transmission, air conditioning, and glass repair and
replacement, and similar services.
      (15)   "Basement" means that portion of a building between the lowest
floor and the ceiling above, which is fully below grade or partly below and
partly above grade, but so located that the vertical distance from grade to the
floor below is more than the vertical distance from grade to ceiling.
      (15.5)   "Bed and breakfast" lodging means the furnishing of rooms or
groups of rooms equipped regularly to provide lodging by prearrangement and for
compensation for short periods of time and not to exceed six guest rooms. Meals
may or may not be provided, but there is one common kitchen facility.
      (16)   "Below market rate (BMR) housing unit" means any housing unit sold
or rented to very-low, low- or moderate-income households pursuant to the City
of Palo Alto's below market rate program administered by the Palo Alto Housing
Corporation, or a successor organization.
      (17)   "Bicycle parking space" means an area specifically reserved and
intended for parking of a bicycle, accessible to the user independently of any
other bicycle parking space, and including such additional features or
conveniences as specified by this title.
      (18)   "Block" means any lot or group of contiguous lots bounded on all
sides by streets, railroad rights-of-way, or waterways, and not traversed by
any street, railroad right-of-way, or waterway.
      (19)   Reserved.
      (20)   Reserved.
      (21)   "Breezeway" means a building or specific portion thereof, not over
twelve feet in height at the ridge line, which connects two otherwise separate
buildings, and which is not more than fifty percent enclosed at the perimeter,
including the wall surfaces of the buildings so connected.
      (22)   "Building" means any structure used or intended for supporting or
sheltering any use or occupancy.
      (23)   "Business or trade school" means a use, except a college or
university, providing education or training in business, commerce, language, or
other similar activity or pursuit, and not otherwise defined as a home
occupation or private educational facility.
      (23.5)   “Cannabis” means all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa
Linnaeus, Cannabis indica, or Cannabis ruderalis, whether growing or not; the
seeds thereof; the resin, whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of
the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or
preparation of the plant, its seeds, or resin. “Cannabis” also means the
separated resin, whether crude or purified, obtained from cannabis. “Cannabis”
does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the
stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound,
manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks
(except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil, or cake, or the sterilized
seed of the plant which is incapable of germination. For the purpose of this
title, “cannabis” does not mean “industrial hemp” as defined by Section 11018.5
of the Health and Safety Code.
         (A)   “Commercial cannabis activity” includes the cultivation,
possession, manufacture, distribution, processing, storing, laboratory testing,
packaging, labeling, transportation, delivery or sale of cannabis and cannabis
products as provided for in Division 10 of the California Business and
Professions Code. “Commercial cannabis activity” does not include personal uses
allowed by Health and Safety Code Sections 11362.1 and 11362.2 or personal
medicinal uses allowed by Sections 11362.765 and 11362.77, as amended from time
to time.
         (B)   “Cultivation” means any activity involving the planting,
growing, harvesting, drying, curing, grading, or trimming of cannabis.
         (C)   “Medical cannabis dispensary” is a facility where cannabis is
made available for medicinal purposes in accordance with any provision of state
law that authorizes the use of cannabis for medicinal purposes.
      (24)   “Canopy” means any roof-like structure, either attached to another
structure or freestanding, or any extension of a roof line, constructed for the
purpose of protection from the elements in connection with outdoor living.
      (24.5)   “Carport” means a portion of a principal residential building or
an accessory building to a residential use designed to be utilized for the
parking or storage of one or more motor vehicles, which is at least 50% open on
two or more sides, including on the vehicular entry side, and covered with a
solid roof.
      (25)   "Cellar" means that portion of a building between floor and
ceiling which is wholly or partly below grade and so located that the vertical
distance from grade to the floor below is equal to or greater than the vertical
distance from grade to ceiling.
      (26)   "Change of use" means the replacement of an existing use by a new
use, or a change in the nature of an existing use, but not including a change
of ownership, tenancy, or management where the previous nature of the use, line
of business, or other function is substantially unchanged. (See also
subdivisions (A) through (F) of subsection (143) of this Section
18.04.030.)
      (27)   "Church" means a use providing facilities for regular organized
religious worship and religious education incidental thereto, but excluding a
private educational facility. A property tax exemption obtained pursuant to
Section 3(f) of Article XIII of the Constitution of the State of California and
Section 206 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State of California, or
successor legislation, constitutes prima facie evidence that such use is a
church as defined in this section.
      (28)   Reserved.
      (29)   Reserved.
      (30)   Reserved.
      (31)   "College" or "university" means an educational institution of
higher learning which offers a course of studies designed to culminate in the
issuance of a degree as defined by Section 94302 of the Education Code of the
State of California, or successor legislation.
      (32)   "Combining district" means a district established by this title,
which may be applied to a lot or portion thereof only in combination with a
general district. More than one combining district may apply to the same lot or
portion thereof.
      (33)   “Commercial recreation” means a use providing recreation,
amusement, exercise or entertainment services, including theaters, bowling
lanes, billiard parlors, skating arenas, gymnasiums, exercise studios or
facilities, fitness centers, martial arts studios, group movement instruction,
and similar services, operated on a private or for-profit basis, but excluding
uses defined as personal services or outdoor recreation services.
      (34)   “Community center” means a place, structure, area, or other
facility used for and providing religious, fraternal, social and/or
recreational programs generally open to the public and designed to accommodate
and serve significant segments of the community.
      (35)   “Convalescent facility” means a use other than a residential care
home providing inpatient services for persons requiring regular medical
attention, but not providing surgical or emergency medical services.
      (36)   “Corporation yard” is defined in subsection (52).
      (37)   Reserved.
      (38)   “Court” means a space open and unobstructed to the sky, located at
or above grade level on a lot, and bounded on three or more sides by walls of a
building.
      (39)   Reserved.
      (40)   Reserved.
      (41)   “Covered parking” means a carport or garage that provides full
overhead protection from the elements with ordinary roof coverings. Canvas,
lath, fiberglass, and vegetation are not ordinary roof coverings and cannot be
used in providing a covered parking space.
      (42)   “Day care center” means a day care facility licensed by the state
or county for nonmedical daytime care. This term includes, but is not limited
to, nursery schools, preschools and similar facilities.
      (43)   Day Care Home.
         (A)   “Family day care home” means a home licensed by the state or
county which regularly provides care, protection, and supervision for fourteen
or fewer children, in the provider’s own home, for periods of less than twenty-
four hours per day, while the parents or guardians are away and includes the
following:
            (i)   “Large family day care home” means a home which provides
family day care for seven to fourteen children, inclusive, including children
under the age of ten who reside at the home, subject to the requirements of
State Health and Safety Code § 1597.465.
            (i)   “Small family day care home” means a home which provides
family day care for eight or fewer children, including children under the age
of ten who reside at the home, subject to the requirements of State Health and
Safety Code § 1597.44.
         (B)   “Adult day care home” means use of a dwelling unit or portion
thereof, licensed by the state or county, for daytime care and supervision of
twelve or fewer persons, above the age of eighteen, and includes the following:
            (i)   “Large adult day care home” means a home which provides
daytime care of seven to twelve adults.
            (ii)   “Small adult day care home” means a home which provides
daytime care to six or fewer adults.
      (43a)   Deleted. [Ord. 4642 § 32]
      (44)   “Daylight plane” is intended to provide for light and air, and to
limit the impacts of bulk and mass on adjacent properties. “Daylight plane”
means a height limitation that, when combined with the maximum height limit,
defines the building envelope within which all new structures or additions must
be contained. The daylight plane is an inclined plane, beginning at a stated
height above average grade, as depicted in the development standards for each
zone district, and extending into the site at a stated upward angle to the
horizontal up to the maximum height limit. The average grade, for the purpose
of determining the daylight plane, is the average of the grade at the midpoint
of the building and the grade at the closest point on the abutting lot line.
The daylight plane may further limit the height or horizontal extent of the
building at any specific point where the daylight plane is more restrictive
than the height limit applicable at such point on the site. The daylight plane
shall be measured separately for each building on a lot, and separately for
each side of each building.
      (44.5)   “Days” means calendar days, provided, if the last day upon which
an action is to be taken is a weekend or official holiday, or a day upon which
the city clerk’s office is not open to the public, the time for completing the
action shall be extended through the next business day.
      (44.8)   “Director” means the director of planning and development
services, unless indicated otherwise.
      (45)   “Drive-in/drive-through service” means a feature or characteristic
of a use involving sales of products or provision of services to occupants in
vehicles, including drive-in or drive-up windows and drive-through services
such as mechanical automobile washing, pharmacy windows, coffee stands,
automatic teller machines, etc.
      (46)   “Dwelling unit” means a room or group of rooms including living,
sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation/bathing facilities, constituting a
separate and independent housekeeping unit, occupied or intended for occupancy
on a nontransient basis and having not more than one kitchen.
      (47)   “Eating and drinking service” means a use providing preparation
and retail sale of food and beverages with a full menu and providing indoor
seating area. Eating and drinking service include presence of a full commercial
kitchen and commercial dishwasher. For establishments with incidental sale
alcoholic beverages, a minimum of 50% of revenues from an “eating and drinking
service” must be derived from the sale of food. Related definitions are
provided in subsections (45) (Drive-in/drive- through service, (125)(B)
(Intensive retail service) and (136) (Take-out service).
      (48)   Reserved.
      (49)   “Electrification equipment” means one or more devices that use
electric energy to serve a dwelling unit’s needs for heating and cooling, water
heating, cooking, and electric vehicle charging. In addition, ancillary
equipment such as an electric panel, photovoltaic equipment, and energy storage
systems that are deployed to support such devices shall be considered
Electrification Equipment.
      (50)   “Emergency shelter” means a facility or use, which provides
temporary housing (six months or less) for homeless individuals or families and
may involve supplemental services. Supplemental services may include, but are
not limited to, meal preparation, an activities center, day care for homeless
person’s children, vocational rehabilitation and other similar activities.
      (51)   “Enclosed” means a covered space fully surrounded by walls,
including windows, doors, and similar openings or architectural features, or an
open space of less than one hundred square feet fully surrounded by a building
or walls exceeding eight feet in height.
      (51.5)   “Envelope” means the three-dimensional spatial configuration of
a building’s volume and mass.
      (52)   “Equipment yard” means a use providing for maintenance, servicing,
or storage of motor vehicles, equipment, or supplies, or for the dispatching of
service vehicles; or distribution of supplies or construction materials
required in connection with a business activity, public utility service,
transportation service, or similar activity. “Equipment yard” includes a
construction materials yard, corporation yard, vehicular service center or
similar use.
      (53)   “Facility” means a structure, building or other physical
contrivance or object.
         (A)   “Accessory facility” means a facility which is incidental to,
and customarily associated with, a specified principal facility, and which
meets the applicable conditions set forth in Chapters 18.40 and 18.42.
         (B)   “Noncomplying facility” means a facility which is in violation
of (i) any of the site development regulations or other regulations established
by this title, but was lawfully existing on July 20, 1978, or (ii) any
amendments to this title, but was lawfully existing prior to the application of
any district or regulation to the property involved by reason of which adoption
or application the facility became noncomplying. Sometimes this Code
interchangeably refers to “noncomplying facilities’ as “legal noncomplying”,
“grandfathered” or “grandparented” facilities. (For the definition for
“nonconforming use” see subsection (143)(B)).
         (C)   “Principal facilities” means a main building or other facility
which is designed and constructed for or occupied by a principal use.
      (54)   “Family” means an individual or group of persons living together
who constitute a bona fide single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit.
“Family” shall not be construed to include a fraternity, sorority, club, or
other group of persons occupying a hotel, lodginghouse, or institution of any
kind.
      (55)   “Farmers’ market” means a market certified by the state or county
agricultural commission under Title 3, Chapter 3, Article 6.5 of the California
Administrative Code which allows direct retail sale by farms to the public of
such items as fruits, vegetables, nuts, eggs, honey, nursery stock, cut
flowers, live animals and inspected meats and seafood.
      (56)   “Financial service” means a use providing financial services to
individuals, firms, or other entities. The term “financial service” includes
banks, savings and loan institutions, loan and lending institutions, credit
unions and similar services.
         (A)   “Retail finance service” means a financial service use operating
in a retail-oriented manner, offering face-to-face interactions, and convenient
in-person transactions in locations designed for public access. These services
includes retail banks, savings and loan institutions, loan and lending offices,
credit unions, and similar services that prioritize walk-in customers with
access to immediate financial solutions or combined with a publicly accessible
retail component.
      (57)   “Floor area ratio” means the maximum ratio of gross floor area on
a site to the total site area.
      (57.5)   “Footprint” means the two-dimensional configuration of a
building’s perimeter boundaries as measured on a horizontal plane at ground
level.
      (57.6)   “Formula retail business” means an eating and drinking service
that is one of fifty (50) or more business locations in the State of California
required by contractual or other arrangement to maintain any of the following
standardized characteristics: merchandise, menu, services, decor, uniforms,
architecture, facade, color scheme, signs, trademark, or servicemark. For
purposes of this definition:
         (A)   “Standardized merchandise, menu and/or services” means 50% or
more of in- stock merchandise from a single distributor bearing the same or
similar markings; 50% or more of menu items identical in name and presentation
with other locations; or 50% or more of services offered identical in name or
presentation with other locations.
         (B)   “Decor” means the style of interior furnishings, which may
include but is not limited to, style of furniture, wall coverings or permanent
fixtures.
         (C)   “Color Scheme” means the selection of colors used throughout,
such as on the furnishings, permanent fixtures, and wall coverings, or as used
on the facade.
         (D)   “Uniforms” means standardized items of clothing including but
not limited to standardized aprons, pants, shirts, smocks or dresses, hats, and
pins (other than name tags) as well as standardized colors of clothing.
         (E)   “Facade” means the face or front of a building, including
awnings, looking onto a street or an open space.
         (F)   “Trademark” means a word, phrase, symbol or design, or a
combination of words, phrases, symbols or designs that identifies and
distinguishes the source of the goods from one party from those of others.
         (G)   “Servicemark” means a word, phrase, symbol or design, or a
combination of words, phrases, symbols or designs that identifies and
distinguishes the source of a service from one party from those of others.
      (58)   “Full cash value” has the meaning assigned to it in the Revenue
and Taxation Code for property taxation purposes.
      (59)   “Garage, private” means a portion of a principal residential
building or an accessory building to a residential use designed to be utilized
for the parking or storage of one or more motor vehicles, which is enclosed on
three or more sides and covered with a solid roof.
      (60)   Reserved.
      (61)   “General business office” means a use principally providing
services to individuals, firms, or other entities, including but not limited to
real estate, insurance, property management, title companies, investment,
personnel, travel, and similar services.
      (62)   “General district” means a district created by this title
establishing basic regulations governing land use and site development. Not
more than one general district designation shall apply to the same portion of a
lot.
      (63)   “General business service” means a use engaged in sales,
servicing, installation, and repair services, generally intended to support
other businesses, rather than individual consumers. General business services
typically include, but are not limited to, volume printing and photography
services, blueprinting and publishing, commercial bakeries, dry cleaners that
accept laundry from other businesses and are classified as Class IV plants in
Title 15 of the Municipal Code, creameries or catering, cabinetry and furniture
repair, lumber, plumbing, electrical, heating and air conditioning, and other
construction and building materials, and commercial automobile and truck parts
and supplies.
      (64)   Grade.
         (A)   “Grade,” in all districts other than the R-E and R-l residence
districts means the lowest point of adjacent ground elevation, of the finished
surface of the ground, paving, or sidewalk, excluding areas where grade has
been raised by means of a berm, planter box, or similar landscaping feature,
unless required for drainage, within the area between the building and the
property line, or when the property line is more than five feet from the
building, between the building and a line five feet from the building. In
building areas with natural slopes in excess of ten percent, “grade” shall mean
the adjacent ground elevation of the finished or existing grade, whichever is
lower.
         (B)   “Grade” in the R-E and R-1 residence districts, means, for each
building or structure, the lowest point of adjacent ground elevation prior to
grading or fill, if the site has a natural slope of 10% or less. For R-E and R-
1 sites with a natural slope of more than 10% (calculated using the lowest and
highest elevations on the site), “grade” shall mean the adjacent ground
elevation of the finished or existing grade, whichever is lower. The
calculation of “average grade” for the purpose of determining the daylight
plane is described in the definition of “Daylight Plane.”
      (64.5)   “Grandfathered” means a designation established by means of a
“grandfather clause,” exempting a class of uses or structures from the
otherwise currently applicable provisions of this title, because such uses or
structures conformed with earlier applicable provisions of this title, prior to
the enactment of subsequent provisions.
      (65)   “Gross floor area” is defined as follows:
         (A)   Non-residential & Multifamily Inclusions: For all zoning
districts other than the R-E, R-1, R-2 and RMD residence districts, “gross
floor area” means the total area of all floors of a building measured to the
outside surfaces of exterior walls, and including all of the following:
            (i)   Halls;
            (ii)   Stairways measured at each floor;
            (iii)   Elevator shafts measured at each floor;
            (iv)   Service and mechanical equipment rooms;
            (v)   Basement, cellar or attic areas deemed usable by the director
of planning and development services;
            (vi)   Open or roofed porches, arcades, plazas, balconies, courts,
walkways, breezeways or porticos if located above the ground floor and used for
required access;
            (vii)   Permanently roofed, but either partially enclosed or
unenclosed, building features used for sales, service, display, storage or
similar uses; and
            (viii)   In residential districts other than the R-E, R-1, R-2 and
RMD residence districts, all roofed porches, arcades, balconies, porticos,
breezeways or similar features when located above the ground floor and
substantially enclosed by exterior walls.
         (B)   Non-residential & Multifamily Exclusions: For all zoning
districts other than the R-E, R-1, R-2 and RMD residence districts, “gross
floor area” shall not include the following:
            (i)   Parking facilities accessory to a permitted or conditional
use and located on the same site;
            (ii)   Roofed arcades, plazas, walkways, porches, breezeways,
porticos, and similar features not substantially enclosed by exterior walls,
and courts, at or near street level, when accessible to the general public and
not devoted to sales, service, display, storage or similar uses.
            (iii)   In residential districts other than the R-E, R-1, R-2 and
RMD residence districts, all roofed porches, arcades, balconies, porticos,
breezeways or similar features when located above the ground floor and not
substantially enclosed by exterior walls, but not to exceed more than 5% of the
site.
            (iv)   For existing structures, minor additions of floor area
approved by the director of planning and development services for purposes of
resource conservation or code compliance, upon the determination that such
minor additions will increase compliance with environmental health, safety or
other federal, state or local standards. Any additional floor area approved
shall not qualify for grandfathered floor area in the event the building is
later replaced or redeveloped. Such allowable additions may include, but not be
limited to, the following:
               a.   Except in the CD District, areas designed for resource
conservation, such as trash compactors, recycling, and other energy facilities
meeting the criteria outlined in Section
18.42.120 (Resource Conservation Energy Facilities);
               b.   Areas designed and required for hazardous materials storage
facilities, disability related access or seismic upgrades. For the purpose of
this section disability related upgrades are limited to the incremental square
footage necessary to accommodate disability access and shall be subject to the
Director’s approval not to exceed 500 square feet per site. Disability related
upgrades shall only apply to remodels of existing buildings; and
               c.   Areas designed and required for refuse storage, such as
trash, recycling, and compost, when it is the minimum amount needed to comply
with current code requirements. The provisions of this subsection (a)(65)(B)
(iv) are not intended to and do not allow the removal of a previously approved
existing interior refuse storage area.
            (v)   In commercial and industrial districts except in the CD
District and in areas designated as special study areas, additions of floor
area designed and used solely for on-site employee amenities for employees of
the facility, approved by the director of planning and development services,
upon the determination that such additions will facilitate the reduction of
employee vehicle use. Such additions may include, but are not limited to,
recreational facilities, credit unions, cafeterias day care centers, automated
teller machines, convenience stores, and on-site laundry facilities.
            (vi)   In subterranean parking garages: Areas designed and required
for electrical and fire equipment rooms, and other areas designated for similar
purposes that do not increase the intensity of the use of the site; this
exclusion only applies to the minimum area needed for equipment rooms, and
similar purposes to comply with current code requirements.
         (C)   Low Density Residential Inclusions and Conditions: In the RE and
R-1 single- family residence districts and in the R-2 and RMD two-family
residence districts, “gross floor area” means the total covered area of all
floors of a main structure and accessory structures greater than one hundred
and twenty square feet in area, including covered parking and stairways,
measured to the outside of stud walls, including the following:
            (i)   Floor area where the distance between the top of the finished
floor and the roof directly above it measures seventeen feet or more shall be
counted twice;
            (ii)   Floor area where the distance between the top of the lowest
finished floor and the roof directly above it measures twenty-six feet or more
shall be counted three times;
            (iii)   Carports, garages, and below grade parking facilities,
except as excluded in subsection (a)(65)(D)(viii), shall be included in gross
floor area;
            (iv)   The entire floor area of a vaulted entry feature that
extends above 12 feet measured from grade, whether enclosed or unenclosed,
shall be counted twice in the calculation of gross floor area;
            (v)   The footprint of a fireplace shall be included in the gross
floor area, but is only counted one time;
            (vi)   All roofed porches, arcades, balconies, porticos, breezeways
or similar features when located above the ground floor and more than 50%
covered by a roof or more than 50% enclosed shall be included in the
calculation.
            (vii)   Recessed porches on the ground floor extending in height
above the first floor shall be included once in the calculation.
         (D)   Low Density Residential Exclusions: In the RE and R-1 single-
family residence districts and in the R-2 and RMD two-family residence
districts, “gross floor area” shall not include the following:
            (i)   Basements where the finished level of the first floor is not
more than three feet above the grade around the perimeter of the building
foundation, shall be excluded from the calculation of gross floor area,
provided that lightwells, stairwells and other excavated features comply with
the provisions of Section
18.12.070;
            (ii)   Areas on floors above the first floor where the height from
the floor level to the underside of the rafter or finished roof surface is less
than 5 feet shall be excluded from the calculation of gross floor area;
            (iii)   Two hundred square feet of unusable third floor equivalent,
such as attic space, shall be excluded from the calculation of gross floor
area. Provided, there shall be no exclusion of floor area if any portion of the
unusable third floor equivalent area has a roof slope of less than 4:12;
            (iv)   Bay windows shall be excluded from gross floor area if the
bay structure is located at least eighteen inches above the interior finished
floor level, projects no more than two feet from the main building wall and
more than 50% of the bay area is covered by windows;
            (v)   Open or partially enclosed (less than 50% enclosed) porches,
whether recessed or protruding, located on the first floor, and for R-1 zones
porches reaching a height of less than 12 feet measured from grade as set forth
in Section
18.12.040(b), shall be excluded from gross floor area, whether covered or
uncovered. Recessed porches located on the first floor with a depth of less
than 10 feet shall be excluded from the calculation if the exterior side(s) of
the porch is open.
            (vi)   Porte-cocheres shall be excluded from the calculation of
gross floor area.
            (vii)   For residences designated on the city’s Historic Inventory
as a Category 1 through 4 historic structure as defined in Section
16.49.020 any contributing structure within a locally designated historic
district, or if individually listed on the National Register of Historic Places
or California Register of Historical Resources, the following gross floor area
exclusions apply.
               a.   New or existing basement area, including where the existing
finished level of the first floor is three feet or more above grade around the
perimeter of the building foundation walls; and
               b.   Up to 500 square feet of unusable attic space in excess of
five feet in height from the floor to the roof above.
               All exterior alterations to historic structures shall be subject
to the provisions of
Chapter 16.49 (Historic Preservation). Additionally, if the structure includes
a second story or second story addition, the project shall be subject to the
provisions of Section
18.12.110 (Single Family Individual Review).
            (viii)   Below-grade parking facilities that: (1) are accessory to
nonresidential uses; (2) are located on a parcel that is six acres or greater;
and (3) are located on a parcel that contains a listed historic resource; and
(4) do not provide more than 50 percent of the base required on-site vehicle
parking shall be excluded from the calculation of gross floor area; however,
such facilities shall be considered "square footage" for purposes of
calculating development impact fees under Title 16. A below grade parking
facility that does not meet all of these criteria shall be included in the
calculation of gross floor area in its entirety.
            (ix)   Accessory structures equal to or less than one hundred and
twenty square feet in area shall not contribute to floor area provided that any
attached porches, patios, or similar features are substantially open;
         (E)   In all districts, gross floor area shall be calculated to the
nearest 1000th decimal point and represented and rounded on plans to the
nearest 100th decimal point (e.g. 123.456 sf shall be rounded to 123.46 sf).
Standard rounding shall apply such that a number of four or less shall be
rounded down and a number of five or more shall be rounded up.
      (65.5)   “Ground floor” means the first floor which is above grade.
      (66)   “Hazardous Materials”
         (A)   “Hazardous Materials Tier” means a manufacturing or processing
use that utilizes, handles, and/or stores particular types and quantities of
hazardous materials as follows:
            (i)   “Tier 1" means uses with quantities of hazardous materials
that are not defined as Toxic or Highly Toxic hazardous materials and that are
both above the threshold quantities in Health and Safety Code Division 20,
Chapter 6.95 and below the Title 19 thresholds of the California Code of
Regulations.
            (ii)   “Tier 2" means uses with quantities of Toxic or Highly Toxic
hazardous materials that are both above the threshold quantities in Health and
Safety Code Division 20, Chapter 6.95 and below the Title 19 thresholds of the
California Code of Regulations.
            (iii)   “Tier 3" means uses with quantities of hazardous materials
above the Title 19 thresholds of the California Code of Regulations.
         (B)   “Toxic and Highly Toxic hazardous materials” means substances
defined in the California Fire Code Chapter 2, as amended, and as adopted and
amended by Title 17 of the City Municipal Code, and subject to requirements of
“High-hazard Group H-4" of the State Building Code, as buildings that use,
handle, or store hazardous materials that are considered health hazards.
      (67)   “Height” means, for all districts other than the R-E and R-
1 residence district, the vertical distance above grade to the highest point of
the coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof or to the
average height of the highest gable of a pitched or hipped roof, except that in
the R-2 and RMD districts the height of a pitched or hipped roof shall be
measured to the height of the peak or highest ridge line. In the R-E and R-
1 single family residence districts, height shall be measured from the highest
point of the structure’s roof, including wall parapets, to the grade. The
height of a stepped or terraced building is the maximum height of any segment
of the building.
      (68)   Reserved.
      (69)   Reserved.
      (70)   Reserved.
      (71)   “Home occupation” means an accessory activity conducted in a
dwelling unit solely by the occupants thereof, in a manner incidental to
residential occupancy, in accord with the provisions of this title. (For
further provisions, see regulations for home occupations in Section 18.88.130.)
      (72)   “Hospital” means a facility providing medical, psychiatric, or
surgical services for sick or injured persons primarily on an in-patient basis,
and including ancillary facilities for outpatient and emergency treatment,
diagnostic services, training, research, administration, and services to
patients, employees, or visitors.
      (73)   “Hotel” means a facility containing rooms or groups of rooms,
generally without individual kitchen facilities, used or intended to be used
for use by temporary overnight occupants, whether on a transient or residential
occupancy basis, and whether or not eating facilities are available on the
premises. “Hotel” includes a motel, motor hotel, tourist court, or similar use,
but does not include mobile home parks or similar use.
      (73.5)   “Housing development project” means a proposed development
meeting the definition set forth in California Government Code section 65589.5,
subdivision (h)(2).
      (74)   “Impervious area” means the portion of land on a lot that is
covered by structures, paved surfaces, uncovered porches or similar cover and
is incapable of being penetrated by water under normal circumstances.
      (74.5)   “Junior accessory dwelling unit” means a unit that is no more
than 500 square feet in size and contained entirely within an existing single-
family structure. A junior accessory dwelling unit may include separate
sanitation facilities, or may share sanitation facilities with the existing
structure.
   (75)   “Kitchen” means a room designed, intended or used for cooking and the
preparation of food and dishwashing. Kitchen facilities include the presence of
major appliances, utility connections, sink, counter, for storing, preparing,
cooking, and cleaning.
      (A)   For ADUs, a kitchen must have permanent provisions for eating,
cooking, and sanitation as required by Government Code Section 66313 and
Section 17958.1 of the Health and Safety Code.
      (75.5)   “Landscape/open space coverage” means permanently maintained
open space that includes all usable open space (see subsection 142), landscape,
and other uncovered areas, but excluding parking facilities, driveways, utility
or service areas, or areas with mechanical equipment.
   (76)   “Landscaping” means an area devoted to or developed and maintained
with native or exotic plantings, lawn, ground cover, gardens, trees, shrubs,
and other plant materials, decorative outdoor landscape elements, pools,
fountains, water features, paved or decorated surfaces of rock, stone, brick,
block, or similar material (excluding driveways, parking, loading, or storage
areas), and sculptural elements.
   (77)   “Liquor store” means a use requiring a State of California “off-sale
general license” (sale for off-site consumption of wine, beer, and/or hard
liquor) and having fifty percent or more of total dollar sales accounted for by
beverages covered under the off-sale general license.
   (78)   Reserved.
   (79)   Reserved.
   (80)   Reserved.
   (81)   “Loading space” means an area used for loading or unloading of goods
from a vehicle in connection with the use of the site on which such space is
located.
   (82)   Deleted. [Ord. 4869 § 20]
   (83)   “Lodging unit” means a room or group of rooms not including a
kitchen, used or intended for use by overnight occupants as a single unit,
whether located in a hotel, motel or a bed and breakfast providing lodging.
Where designed or used for occupancy by more than two persons, each two-person
capacity shall be deemed a separate lodging unit.
   (84)   “Lot” or “site” means a parcel of land consisting of a single lot of
record, used or intended for use under the regulations of this title as one
site for a use or group of uses.
      (A)   “Corner lot” means a lot abutting two or more streets having an
angle of intersection of one hundred thirty-five degrees or less. A lot
abutting on a curved street or streets shall be considered a corner lot if
straight lines drawn from the intersections of the side lot lines with the
street lines to the midpoint of the street frontage meet at an interior angle
of one hundred thirty-five degrees or less.
      (B)   “Flag lot” means an interior lot that is either a landlocked parcel
which has a driveway easement across another lot abutting a street, or a lot
having limited frontage providing only enough width for a driveway to reach the
buildable area of the lot which is located behind another lot abutting a
street.
      (C)   “Interior lot” means a lot abutting one street.
      (D)   “Through lot” means a lot other than a corner lot abutting more
than one street.
   (85)   “Lot area” means the area of a lot measured horizontally between
bounding lot lines, but excluding any portion of a flag lot providing access to
a street and lying between a front lot line and the street, and excluding any
portion of a lot within the lines of any natural watercourse, river, stream,
creek, waterway, channel, or flood control or drainage easement and excluding
any portion of a lot within a public or private street right-of-way whether
acquired in fee, easement, or otherwise.
   (86)   “Lot coverage” encompasses the following definitions:
      (A)   “Single-family residential use” means the total land area within a
site that is covered by buildings, including all projections except the
exterior or outermost four feet of any eave or roof overhang, but excluding
ground level paving, landscaping features, and open recreational facilities.
      (B)   “All other uses except single-family residential” means the total
land area within a site that is covered by buildings, excluding all
projections, ground level paving, landscaping features, and open recreational
facilities.
      (C)   Except in the CD District and areas designated as special study
areas, the director of planning and development services may permit minor
additions of floor area to facilities that exceed lot coverage limits, for
purposes of resource conservation or code compliance, upon the determination
that such minor additions will increase site compliance with environmental
health and safety standards. Such additions may include, but not be limited to,
the following:
         (i)   Area designed for resource conservation, such as trash
compactors, recycling and thermal storage facilities;
         (ii)   Area designed and required for hazardous materials storage
facilities, handicapped access and seismic upgrades.
      (D)   In commercial and industrial districts except in the CD District
and in areas designated as special study areas, the director of planning and
development services may permit additions of floor area that exceed lot
coverage limits upon the determination that such additions are designed and
used solely for providing on-site employee amenities for employees of the
facility and will facilitate the reduction of employee vehicle use. Such
additions may include, but not be limited to, recreational facilities, credit
unions, cafeterias and day care facilities.
   (87)   “Lot depth” means the horizontal distance from the midpoint of the
front lot line to the midpoint of the rear lot line, or to the most distant
point on any other lot line where there is no rear lot line.
   (88)   Reserved.
   (89)   Reserved.
   (90)   Reserved.
   (91)   “Lot line” means any boundary of a lot.
      (A)   “Front lot line” means, on an interior lot, the lot line abutting a
street, or, on a corner lot, the shorter lot line abutting a street, or, on a
through lot, the lot line abutting the street providing the primary access to
the lot, or, on a flag lot, the interior lot line most parallel to and nearest
the street from which access is obtained.
      (B)   “Interior lot line” means any lot line not abutting a street.
      (C)   “Rear lot line” means the lot line not intersecting a front lot
line which is most distant from and most closely parallel to the front lot
line. A lot bounded by only three lot lines will not have a rear lot line.
      (D)   “Side lot line” means any lot line which is not a front or rear lot
line.
      (E)   “Street lot line” means any lot line abutting a street.
   (92)   “Lot of record” means a lot which is part of a subdivision recorded
in the office of the county recorder, or a lot or parcel described by metes and
bounds which has been so recorded.
   (93)   “Lot width” means the horizontal distance between side lot lines,
measured at the required front setback line.
   (94)   “Manufacturing” means a use engaged in the manufacture, predominantly
from previously prepared materials, of finished products or parts, including
processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment, and packaging of such products,
and incidental storage, sales, and distribution of such products, but excluding
basic industrial processing of extracted or raw materials, processes utilizing
flammable or explosive materials (i.e., materials which ignite easily under
normal manufacturing conditions) in excess of the exempt quantities listed in
Title 15 of the Municipal Code, and processes which create hazardous or
commonly recognized offensive materials or conditions other than properly
stored and handled hazardous waste or byproducts incidental to the
manufacturing process. Examples of manufacturing uses typically include, but
are not limited to, industrial laundries and industrial dry cleaning plants
classified as Class II, IIB, or IIIA in Title 15 of the Municipal Code, machine
shops, electronics assembly, food and beverage product manufacturing, and
furniture manufacturing. Manufacturing may also include the storage of
hazardous materials necessary to the manufacturing process in excess of the
exempt quantities listed in Title 15 of the Municipal Code when stored in an
approved exterior storage area, accessory room or structure. Related
administrative uses such as finance, marketing, sales, accounting, purchasing,
or corporate offices; provisions of services to others on or off-site; and
related educational uses may also be included provided they remain ancillary to
the primary uses of “manufacturing” and are part of the same manufacturing
firm.
      (94.5)   “Cannabis” means all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa
Linnaeus, Cannabis indica, or Cannabis ruderalis, whether growing or not; the
seeds thereof; the resin, whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of
the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or
preparation of the plant, its seeds, or resin. “Cannabis” also means the
separated resin, whether crude or purified, obtained from cannabis. “Cannabis”
does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the
stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound,
manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks
(except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil, or cake, or the sterilized
seed of the plant which is incapable of germination. For the purpose of this
Title, “cannabis” does not mean “industrial hemp” as defined by Section 11018.5
of the Health and Safety Code.
         (A)   “Commercial cannabis activity” includes the cultivation,
possession, manufacture, distribution, processing, storing, laboratory testing,
packaging, labeling, transportation, delivery or sale of cannabis and cannabis
products as provided for in Division 10 of the California Business and
Professions Code. “Commercial cannabis activity” does not include personal uses
allowed by Health and Safety Code sections 11362.1 and 11362.2 or personal
medicinal uses allowed by sections 11362.765 and 11362.77, as amended from time
to time.
         (B)   “Cultivation” means any activity involving the planting,
growing, harvesting, drying, curing, grading, or trimming of cannabis.
         (C)   “Medical cannabis dispensary” is a facility where cannabis is
made available for medicinal purposes in accordance with any provision of state
law that authorizes the use of cannabis for medicinal purposes.
      (94.7)   "Maximum house size" means, for the primary residential unit
within a single-family residential zone, the maximum allowable amount of total
gross floor area, regardless of lot size.
   (95)   “Medical office” means a use providing consultation, diagnosis,
therapeutic, preventive, or corrective personal treatment services by doctors,
dentists, medical and dental laboratories, and similar practitioners of medical
and healing arts for humans, licensed for such practice by the state of
California. Incidental medical and/or dental research within the office is
considered part of the office use, where it supports the on-site patient
services. Medical office use does not include the storage or use of hazardous
materials in excess of the permit quantities as defined in Title 15 of the
Municipal Code. Medical gas storage or use shall be allowed up to 1,008 cubic
feet per gas type and flammable liquids storage and use shall be allowed up to
20 gallons total (including waste).
      (95.1)   “Medical research” means a use related to medical and/or dental
research, testing and analysis, including but not limited to trial and clinical
research. Biomedical and pharmaceutical research and development facilities are
not included in this definition. Medical Research does not include the storage
or use of quantities of hazardous materials above the exempt quantities listed
in Title 15 of the Municipal Code nor any toxic gas regulated by Title 15.
Additionally, Medical Research may include storage and use of etiological
(biological) agents up to and including Risk Group 2 or Bio Safety Level 2
(Center for Disease Control).
      (95.2)   “Medical support retail” means a retail use providing sales,
rental, service, or repair of medical products and services to consumers or
businesses, and whose location near hospitals or medical offices facilitates
the provision of medical care or medical research. Examples of medical retail
uses typically include, but are not limited to, pharmacies, sale of
prosthetics, and sale of eyeglasses or other eye care products.
      (95.3)   “Medical support service” means a use providing administrative
support functions for healthcare providers or facilities, intended to support
the operations of hospitals or of medical and dental office uses, and whose
location near those medical facilities enhances the interaction between medical
providers and/or facilitates the provision of medical care or medical research.
Examples of medical support service uses typically include, but are not limited
to, administration and billing services, public relations, training, and
fundraising. Hospitals and ambulance services are not included in this
definition.
   (96)   “Mobile home (manufactured housing)” means a structure, transportable
in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to
be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to
the required utilities, and including the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning,
and electrical systems contained therein.
   (97)   “Mobile home park” means a residential facility arranged or equipped
for the accommodation of two or more mobile homes, with spaces for such mobile
homes available for rent, lease, or purchase, and providing utility services
and other facilities either separately or in common to mobile home spaces
therein.
   (98)   Reserved.
   (99)   Reserved.
   (100)   Reserved.
   (101)   “Motel” is defined in subsection (73).
   (102)   “Multiple-family (residential) use” means the use of a site for
three or more dwelling units, which may be in the same building or in separate
buildings on the same site. A single-family or two-family use with one or more
accessory dwelling units shall not be considered a multiple-family use.
      (102.5)   “Neighborhood business service” means a use occupying two
thousand five hundred square feet or less, which is engaged in sales,
servicing, installation and repair service, excluding vehicular repair and
service, which does not generate noise, fumes or truck traffic greater than
that normally associated with neighborhood-serving uses, or the performance of
activities and services of the general nature described in this section. Such
uses may include, but not be limited to, reproduction and copying, catering,
cleaning, laundry services, home repair and remodeling supplies and sales,
cabinetry and furniture repair.
   (103)   “Neighborhood recreational center” means a privately owned or
operated use providing, primarily for residents of the surrounding area,
facilities for recreational or cultural activities, including lessons and
instructions incidental thereto.
   (104)   “Net floor area” means the net enclosed floor area used or capable
of use for any activity, excluding walls, stairways, elevator shafts, service
and mechanical equipment rooms, corridors or halls providing common access to
more than one use, and unenclosed porches or balconies.
   (105)   “Open” means a space on the ground or on the roof of a structure,
uncovered and unenclosed.
   (106)   “Opposite,” as used with respect to relative location of two sites,
means property which is separated less than one hundred feet by a street,
alley, creek, drainageway, or other separately owned right-of-way, and which
would be considered abutting based on projection of side lot lines to the
centerline of such separating right-of-way.
   (107)   “Outdoor recreation service” means a privately owned or operated use
providing facilities for outdoor recreation activities, including golf, tennis,
swimming, riding, or other outdoor sport or recreation, operated predominantly
in the open, except for accessory or incidental enclosed services or
facilities.
   (108)   Reserved.
   (109)   Reserved.
   (110)   “Parking as a principal use” means a use providing parking and
storage of motor vehicles on a profit or nonprofit basis, as a principal use
and not accessory to a permitted or conditional use.
   (111)   “Parking facility” means an area on a lot or within a building, or
both, including one or more parking spaces, together with driveways, aisles,
turning and maneuvering areas, clearances, and similar features, and meeting
the requirements established by this title. “Parking facility” includes parking
lots, garages, and parking structures.
      (A)   “Temporary parking facility” means parking lots which are not
required under this chapter and which are intended as interim improvements of
property subject to removal at a later date.
   (112)   “Parking space” means an area on a lot or within a building used or
intended for use for parking of a motor vehicle, having permanent means of
access to and from a public street or alley independently of any other parking
space, and located in a parking facility meeting the requirements established
by this title. “Parking space” is equivalent to the term “parking stall” and
does not include driveways, aisles, or other features comprising a parking
facility as defined in this chapter.
      (112.1)   “Parklet” means a fixed encroachment placed within a public
right-of-way with appropriate safety installations and constructed in
accordance with established standards with approval of a permit per PAMC
Chapter 12.11.
   (113)   “Patio cover” is defined in subsection (24), Canopy.
      (113.1)   “Porch” means a roofed open area, attached to or part of the
building and with direct access to the residence. Please see definition for
“vaulted entry feature” for similar structures greater than 12 feet in height.
   (114)   “Personal service” means a use providing services of a personal
convenience nature, and cleaning, repair or sales incidental thereto,
including:
      (A)   Beauty shops, nail salons, day spas, and barbershops;
      (B)   Self-service laundry and cleaning services; laundry and cleaning
pick-up stations where all cleaning or servicing for the particular station is
done elsewhere; and laundry and cleaning stations where the cleaning or
servicing for the particular station is done on site, utilizing equipment
meeting any applicable Bay Area Air Quality Management District requirements,
so long as no cleaning for any other station is done on the same site, provided
that the amount of hazardous materials stored does not at any time exceed the
threshold which would require a permit under Title 17 (Hazardous Materials
Storage) of this code;
      (C)   Repair and fitting of clothes, shoes, and personal accessories;
      (D)   Quick printing and copying services where printing or copying for
the particular service is done on site, so long as no quick printing or copying
for any off-site printing or copying service is done on the same site;
      (E)   Internet and other consumer electronics services;
      (F)   Film, data and video processing shops, including shops where
processing for the particular shop is done on site, so long as no processing
for any other shop is done on the same site;
      (G)   Art, dance or music studios intended for an individual or small
group of persons in a class (see “commercial recreation” for other activities);
and
      (H)   Fitness and exercise studios, or similar uses, in a space having
5,000 square feet or fewer of gross floor area (see “commercial recreation” for
uses exceeding 5,000 square feet).
      (I)   Learning centers intended for individual or small group settings,
including tutoring, standardized test preparation, language classes, after-
school programs, cooking classes, and similar uses.
         (114.2)   “Porte-cochere” means a covered structure attached to a
residence or adjacent to a residence and erected over a driveway, which is open
on three or more sides and used for the temporary unloading and loading of
vehicles.
         (114.3)   “Privacy” means a reasonable expectation that personal
activities conducted within and around one’s home will not be subject to casual
or involuntary observation by others. Complete or absolute privacy is not a
realistic expectation.
   (115)   “Private educational facility” means a privately owned school,
including schools owned and operated by religious organizations, offering
instruction in the several branches of learning and study required to be taught
in the public schools by the Education Code of the State of California.
   (116)   “Professional office” means a use providing professional or
consulting services in the fields of law, architecture and architectural
design, engineering, accounting, and similar professions, including associated
product testing and prototype development, but excluding product manufacturing
or assembly and excluding the storage or use of hazardous materials in excess
of permit quantities prescribed in Title 15 of the Municipal Code.
   (117)   “Projection” means architectural elements, not part of the main
building support, that cantilever from a single building wall or roof,
involving no supports to the ground other than the one building wall from which
the element projects.
   (118)   “Property” means real property which includes the land, that which
is affixed to the land, and that which is incidental or appurtenant to the
land, as defined in Civil Code Sections 658 – 662.
   (119)   “Queue line” means an area for parking and lining of motor vehicles
while awaiting a service or other activity.
   (120)   “Recreational vehicle” means a vehicle towed or self-propelled on
its own chassis or attached to the chassis of another vehicle and designed or
used for temporary dwelling, recreational or sporting purposes. The term
“recreational vehicle” includes, but is not limited to, travel trailers, pickup
campers, camping trailers, motor coach homes, converted trucks and buses and
boats and boat trailers.
   (121)   “Recycling center” means facilities appurtenant and exterior to an
otherwise allowed use, which are utilized for collection of recyclable
materials such as metal, glass, plastic, and paper stored in mobile vehicles or
trailers, permanent storage units, or in bulk reverse vending machines
exceeding fifty cubic feet in size.
   (122)   “Religious institution” means a seminary, retreat, monastery,
conference center, or similar use for the conduct of religious activities,
including accessory housing incidental thereto, but excluding a private
educational facility. Any such use for which a property tax exemption has been
obtained pursuant to Section 3(f) of Article XIII of the Constitution of the
State of California, and Section 206 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the
State of California. or successor legislation, or which is used in connection
with any church which has received such an exemption, shall be prima facie
presumed to be a religious institution.
   (123)   “Research and development” means a use engaged in the study,
testing, engineering, product design, analysis and development of devices,
products, processes, or services related to current or new technologies.
Research and development may include limited manufacturing, fabricating,
processing, assembling or storage of prototypes, devices, compounds, products
or materials, or similar related activities, where such activities are
incidental to research, development or evaluation. Examples of “research and
development” uses include, but are not limited to, computer software and
hardware firms, computer peripherals and related products, electronic research
firms, biotechnical and biomedical firms, instrument analysis, genomics,
robotics and pharmaceutical research laboratories, and related educational
development. Research and development may include the storage or use of
hazardous materials in excess of the exempt quantities listed in Title 15 of
the Municipal Code, or etiological (biological) agents up to and including Risk
Group 3 or Bio Safety Level 3 classifications as defined by the National
Institute of Health (NIH) or the Center for Disease Control (CDC). Higher
classification levels of etiological (biological) agents are not allowed
without express permission of the City Manager, Fire Chief, and Police Chief.
   Related administrative uses such as finance, legal, human resources,
management, marketing, sales, accounting, purchasing, or corporate offices;
provisions of services to others on or off-site; and related educational uses
may also be included provided they remain primarily supportive of the primary
uses of “research and development” and are part of the same research and
development firm.
   (124)   Residential care home” means use of a dwelling unit or portion
thereof licensed by the state of California or county of Santa Clara, for care
of up to six persons, including overnight occupancy or care for extended time
periods, and including all uses defined in Sections 5115 and 5116 of the
California Welfare and Institutions Code, or successor legislation.
   (125)   “Retail service” means a use open to the public during typical
business hours and predominantly engaged in providing retail sale, rental,
service, processing, or repair of items primarily intended for consumer or
household use.
      (A)   “Extensive retail service,” as used with respect to parking
requirements, means a retail sales use having more than seventy-five percent of
the gross floor area used for display, sales, and related storage of bulky
commodities, including household furniture and appliances, lumber and building
materials, carpeting and floor covering, air conditioning and heating
equipment, and similar goods, which uses have demonstrably low parking demand
generation per square foot of gross floor area.
      (B)   “Intensive retail service” as used with respect to parking
requirements, means any retail service use not defined as extensive retail
service and including limited food service (i.e. 'ready-to-eat' food and/or
beverage shops without a full commercial kitchen, where food and/or beverages
are ready to consume at the time of sale and any seating area is limited;
examples include sandwiches, frozen desserts, non-alcoholic beverages, and
baked items).
      (125.1)   “Retail-like use” means a use generally open to the public
during typical business hours and predominantly engaged in providing services
closely related to retail services, including but not limited to:
         (A)   Eating and drinking services, as defined in subsection (47);
         (B)   Hotels, as defined in subsection (73);
         (C)   Personal services, as defined in subsection (114);
         (D)   Theaters;
         (E)   Travel agencies;
         (F)   Commercial recreation, as defined in subsection (33);
         (G)   Commercial nurseries;
         (H)   Automobile showrooms, as defined in subsection (12.6); and
         (I)   Day care centers, as defined in subsection (42);
         (J)   Retail financial services, as defined in subsection (56)(A);
         (K)   Other commercial uses, services, or activities determined by the
Director of Planning and Development Services to be accessible to the general
public, generate walk-in pedestrian clientele, and contribute to a high level
of pedestrian activity.
   (126)   “Reverse vending machine” means a mechanical device which accepts
one or more types of empty beverage containers and issues a cash refund or
credit slip.
   (127)   “Screened” means shielded, concealed and effectively hidden from
view at an elevation up to eight feet above ground level on adjoining sites, or
from adjoining streets, within ten feet of the lot line, by a fence, wall,
hedge, berm, or similar structure, architectural or landscape feature, or
combination thereof. “Partially screened” means that the direct view of an
identified object is interrupted as viewed from a specifically referenced
vantage point.
      (127.5)   “Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for Historic
Rehabilitation” means the Secretary of the United States Department of the
Interior’s Standards for Rehabilitation of Historic Buildings, issued by the
National Park Service (36 Code of Federal Regulations Part 67), together with
the accompanying interpretive Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings,
as they may be amended from time to time.
      (127.7)   “Sensitive Receptors” means land uses such as residences,
schools, daycare centers and homes, homes for the elderly, convalescent homes
and similar uses whose occupants may be more susceptible than the general
population to the adverse effects of exposure to toxic chemicals and other
pollutants.
   (128)   “Setback line” means a line within a lot parallel to a corresponding
lot line, which is the boundary of any specified front, side or rear yard, or
the boundary of any public right-of-way whether acquired in fee, easement, or
otherwise, or a line otherwise established to govern the location of buildings,
structures, or uses. Where no minimum front, side or rear yards are specified,
the setback line shall be coterminous with the corresponding lot line. (See
Chapter 20.08 of the Palo Alto Municipal Code for setback map regulations.)
   (129)   Reserved.
   (130)   Reserved.
   (131)   “Shopping center” means a group of commercial establishments,
planned, developed, owned, or managed as a unit, with off-street parking
provided on the site, and having a total gross floor area of not less than one
million square feet and a total site area of not less than fifty acres.
   (132)   “Single-family use” means the use of a site for only one dwelling
unit and, where permitted, an accessory dwelling unit or a junior accessory
dwelling unit.
   (133)   “Site” is defined in subsection (84).
   (134)   “Structure” means anything that is constructed or erected, the use
of which requires the location on or in the ground or attached to something
located on the ground, including but not limited to buildings, swimming pools,
tennis courts, but excluding patios, sidewalks, driveways, or parking spaces.
   (135)   “Studio dwelling unit, efficiency dwelling unit” means a dwelling
unit consisting of a single habitable room for living and sleeping purposes,
plus ancillary kitchen and bath facilities.
      (135.5)   “Supportive housing” means housing with no limit on length of
stay, that is occupied by target populations, as defined by Section 53260(d) of
the California Health and Safety Code, and that is linked to on- or off-site
services that assist the supportive housing residents in retaining the housing,
improving his or her health status, and maximizing his or her ability to live
and, when possible, work in the community. Supportive housing shall be
considered a residential use of property and shall be subject only to those
restrictions that apply to other dwellings of the same type in the same zone.
Supportive housing programs may use residential care homes wholly or as a part
of their overall facilities.
   (136)   “Take-out service” means a characteristic of an eating or drinking
service which encourages, on a regular basis, consumption of food or beverages,
such as prepared or prepackaged items, outside of a building, in outdoor
seating areas where regular table service is not provided, in vehicles parked
on the premises, or off-site. Take-out service does not include intensive
retail service uses, as defined in subsection (125)(B).
   (137)   “Transportation terminal” means a depot, terminal, or transfer
facility for passenger transportation services.
   (138)   “Transitional housing” means buildings configured as rental housing
developments, but operated under program requirements that call for termination
of assistance and recirculation of the assisted units to another eligible
program recipient at some predetermined future point in time, which shall be no
less than six months. Support services may include meals, counseling, and other
services, as well as common areas for residents of the facility. Transitional
housing shall be considered a residential use of property and shall be only
subject to those restrictions that apply to other residential dwellings of the
same type in the same zone. Transitional housing programs may use residential
care homes wholly or as part of their overall facilities.
   (139)   Reserved.
   (140)   Reserved.
   (141)   “Two-family use” means the use of a site for two dwelling units,
which may be within the same building or separate buildings.
   (142)   “Usable open space” means outdoor or unenclosed area on the ground,
or on a roof, balcony, deck, porch, patio or terrace, designed and accessible
for outdoor living, recreation, or pedestrian access, but excluding parking
facilities, driveways, utility or service areas, or areas with mechanical
equipment. Usable open space includes common open spaces, such as courtyards
and park spaces, and/or private open spaces, such as balconies and patios,
depending on the requirements of the zoning district. Usable open space may be
covered if at least 50% open on the sides. Usable open space shall be sited and
designed to accommodate all groups including children, seniors, and other
adults, different activities including active and passive recreation and uses,
and should be located convenient to the intended users (e.g., residents,
employees, or public). Any usable open space that is not landscaped shall be
developed to encourage outdoor recreational use and shall include elements such
as decks, seating, decorative paved areas and walkways which do not serve as an
entrance walkway. Usable open space shall be screened from utility or service
areas, and areas with mechanical equipment. Parking, driveways and required
parking lot landscaping shall not be counted as usable open space.
   (143)   “Use” means the conduct of an activity, or the performance of a
function or operation on a site or in a building or facility.
      (A)   “Accessory use” means a use which is incidental to, and customarily
associated with a specified principal use, and which meets the applicable
conditions set forth in
Chapters 18.40 and
18.42.
      (B)   “Nonconforming use” means a use which is not a permitted use or
conditional use authorized within the district in which it is located, but
which was lawfully existing on July 20, 1978, or the date of any amendments
hereto, or the application of any district to the property involved, by reason
of which adoption or application the use became nonconforming. (For further
provisions, see the definition of “noncomplying facility” in subsection (53).)
      (C)   “Principal use” means a use which fulfills a primary function of a
household, establishment, institution, or other entity.
      (D)   “Permitted use” means a use listed by the regulations of any
particular district as a permitted use within that district, and permitted
therein as a matter of right when conducted in accord with the regulations
established by this title.
      (E)   “Conditional use” means a use, listed by the regulations of any
particular district as a conditional use within that district and allowable
therein, solely on a discretionary and conditional basis, subject to issuance
of a conditional use permit, and to all other regulations established by this
title.
      (F)   “Change of use” is defined in subsection (26).
       (143.5)   “Vaulted entry feature” means a roofed but open structure
greater than 12 feet in height attached to or part of the building and with
direct access to the residence. The height shall be measured from grade to the
top of the roof or, if there is a second floor above the feature, then to the
underside of the floor above.
   (144)   “Warehousing” and “distribution” means a use engaged in storage,
wholesale, and distribution of manufactured products, supplies, and equipment,
but excluding bulk storage of materials which are inflammable or explosive or
which create hazardous or commonly recognized offensive conditions.
   (145)   “Watercourse bank” means the side of a watercourse the top of which
shall be the topographic line roughly parallel to stream centerline where the
side slopes intersect the plane of the ground traversed by the watercourse.
Where banks do not distinguishably end, the surrounding country being an
extension of the banks, the top of such banks shall be defined as determined by
the building official.
   (146)   “Yard” means an area within a lot, adjoining a lot line, and
measured horizontally, and perpendicular to the lot line for a specified
distance, open and unobstructed except for activities and facilities allowed
therein by this title.
      (A)   “Front yard” means a yard measured into a lot from the front lot
line, extending the full width of the lot between side lot lines intersecting
the front lot line.
      (B)   “Interior yard” means a yard adjoining an interior lot line.
      (C)   “Rear yard” means a yard measured into a lot from the rear lot
line, extending between the side yards; provided, that for lots having no
defined rear lot line, the rear yard shall be measured into the lot from the
rearmost point of the lot depth to a line parallel to the front lot line.
      (D)   “Side yard” means a yard measured into a lot from a side lot line,
extending between the front yard and rear lot line.
      (E)   “Street yard” means a yard adjoining a street lot line, other than
the front lot line.
   (147)   “Youth club” means a recreational use, operated on a profit or
nonprofit basis, for supervised youth involving dancing or social gathering as
a principal activity but prohibiting sale or consumption of alcoholic
beverages.
(Ord. 5656 § 3, 2025: Ord. 5642 § 2, 2024: Ord. 5637 § 2, 2024: Ord. 5594 § 3,
2024: Ord. 5601 § 1, 2023: Ord. 5585 § 3, 2023: Ord. 5556 § 1, 2022: Ord. 5554
§ 1, 2022: Ord. 5517 § 2, 2021: Ord. 5512 § 2, 2020: Ord. 5507 § 5, 2020: Ord.
5494 § 3, 2020: Ord. 5493 § 3, 2020: Ord. 5489 § 2, 2020: Ord. 5460 § 2, 2019:
Ord. 5432, § 4, 2018: Ord. 5419 § 4, 2017: Ord. 5412 § 2, 2017: Ord. 5407 § 2,
2017: Ord. 5406 § 1, 2017: Ord. 5381 § 2, 2016: Ord. 5373 § 6, 2016: Ord. 5358
§ 2, 2015: Ord. 5230 §§ 2, 3, 4, 2014: Ord. 5059 § 3, 2009: Ord. 4964 §§ 5, 7,
2007: Ord. 4891 §§ 2, 3, 2006: Ord. 4883 §§ 2, 3, 2005: Ord. 4881 §§ 2 - 6,
2005: Ord. 4869 §§ 4 – 31, 2005: Ord. 4845 § 2, 2004: Ord. 4826 § 24, 2004:
Ord. 4730 § 2, 2002: Ord. 4716 §§ 2, 3, 4, 2001: Ord. 4642 §§ 32, 33, 2000:
Ord. 4472 § 2, 1998: Ord. 4140 §§ 2, 3, 4, 1993: Ord. 4081 § 4, 1992: Ord. 4043
§ 1, 1991: Ord. 4016 §§ 2-6, 1991: Ord. 3905 §§ 2, 3, 4, 1989: Ord. 3896 §§ 1,
2, 3, 1989: Ord. 3890 § 1, 1989: Ord. 3850 § 5, 1989: Ord. 3807 § 16, 1988:
Ord. 3783 § 1, 1987: Ord. 3757 §§ 1 – 4, 1987: Ord. 3735 §§ 1, 23, 24, 1987:
Ord. 3703 §§ 1 – 5, 9, 1986: Ord. 3683 § 1, 1986: Ord. 3632 §§ 1, 2, 1985: Ord.
3584 § 1, 1984: Ord. 3583 §§ 27 – 28, 1984: Ord. 3536 §§ 1, 2, 27 – 30, 1984:
Ord. 3465 §§ 29, 30, 1983: Ord. 3349 § 1, 1982: Ord. 3345 §§ 1, 5, 9, 10, 11,
19, 20, 1982: Ord. 3340 §§ 1, 2, 6, 7, 1982: Ord. 3291 § 1, 1981: Ord. 3255 §§
1 and 3, 1981: Ord. 3187 §§ 7, 8, 9, 10, 1980: Ord. 3130 §§ 1 (part), 15
(part), 23, 25 (part), 1979: Ord. 3108 §§ 3, 13, 14, 16, 1979: Ord. 3103 § 1,
1979: Ord. 3064 § 1 (part), 1978: Ord. 3048 (part), 1978)
Chapter 18.08
DESIGNATION AND ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS
Sections:
   
18.08.010   Designation of General Districts
   
18.08.020   Designation of Combining Districts
   
18.08.030   References to Districts
   
18.08.040   Zoning Map and District Boundaries
   
18.08.050   Areas Not Shown on Zoning Map
   
18.08.060   Use and Interpretation of Zoning Map
   
18.08.070   Application of Regulations to Sites Divided by Zone Boundaries
   
18.08.080   Interpretation of Land Use Classifications
18.08.010   Designation of General Districts
   The several classes of general districts into which the city is divided are
designated as follows:
Map Designation Zoning District Name Chapter Number
Map Designation Zoning District Name                            Chapter Number
R-E             Residential estate district                     18.10
R-2             Two-family residence district                   18.10
RMD             Two unit multiple-family residence district     18.10
R-1             Single-family residence district                18.12
RM-20           Low density multiple-family residence district  18.13
RM-30           Medium density multiple-family residence        18.13
                district
RM-40           High density multiple-family residence district 18.13
CN              Neighborhood commercial district                18.16
CC              Community commercial district                   18.16
CS              Service commercial district                     18.16
CD              Downtown commercial district                    18.18
MOR             Medical office and medical research district    18.20
ROLM            Research, office and limited manufacturing      18.20
                district
RP              Research park district                          18.20
GM              General manufacturing district                  18.20
PF              Public facilities district                      18.28
OS              Open space district                             18.28
AC              Agricultural conservation district              18.28
PC              Planned community district                      18.38
HD              Hospital district                               18.36
(Ord. 5460 § 15, 2019: Ord. 5123 § 4, 2011: Ord. 4964 § 8 (part), 2007: Ord.
4642 § 34, 2000: Ord. 3890 § 2, 1989: Ord. 3663 § 4, 1986: Ord. 3536 § 42,
1984: Ord. 3519 § 1, 1984: Ord. 3512 § 1, 1984: Ord. 3048 (part), 1978)
18.08.020   Designation of Combining Districts
   In addition to the classes of general districts set forth in Section
18.08.010, the following combining districts are established and designated:
Map Designation Zoning District Name Chapter Number
Map Designation Zoning District Name                        Chapter Number
R               Retail shopping combining district          18.30(A)
P               Pedestrian shopping combining district      18.30(B)
GF              Ground floor combining district             18.30(C)
H               Hotel combining district                    18.30(D)
L               Landscape combining district                18.30(E)
AD              Automobile dealership combining district    18.30(F)
D               Site and design review combining district   18.30(G)
D               Floodplain district regulations             18.30(H)
S               Single-story height combining district      Section
                                                            18.12.100
N               Nonconforming use amortization combining    18.30(I)
                district
PTOD            Pedestrian and transit oriented development 18.34
                combining district
 
(Ord. 4964 § 8 (part), 2007: Ord. 4869 § 32, 2005: Ord. 4642 §§ 35, 40, 2000:
Ord. 4016 § 7, 1991: Ord. 3905 § 5, 1989: Ord. 3890 § 3, 1989: Ord. 3497 § 1,
1983: Ord. 3048 (part), 1978)
18.08.030   References to Districts
   Reference within this title to residential districts generally and as a
grouping, includes all districts identified in this section. Where references
are made to more restrictive or less restrictive residential districts, such
references shall apply sequentially between the most restrictive and the least
restrictive.
Residential District Restrictive Reference
Residential District Restrictive Reference
RE
R-1 (20,000)
R-1 10,000)
R-1 (8,000)          Most Restrictive
R-1 (7,000)          [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
R-1                  32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/IMAGES/0-0-0-
R-2                  8791.jpg]
RMD                  Least Restrictive
RM-20
RM-30
RM-40
 
(Ord. 5554 § 2, 2022: Ord. 5548 § 2, 2022: Ord. 5460 § 15, 2019: Ord. 4869 §
33, 2005: Ord. 3905 § 6, 1989: Ord. 3890 § 4, 1989: Ord. 3048 (part), 1978)
18.08.040   Zoning Map and District Boundaries
   (a)   The boundaries of districts established by this title shall be shown
upon the zoning map. The zoning map, and all amendments, changes, and
extensions thereof, and all legends, symbols, notations, references, and other
matters shown thereon, shall be a part of this title.
   (b)   The zoning map, as currently effective, and a record of all
amendments, changes, and extensions thereof, shall be maintained as public
record in the office of the building official.
   (c)   The boundaries of each district as shown upon the zoning map, or
amendments thereto, are adopted by the ordinance codified in this title, and
the specific regulations established in this title for each general district
and combining district, and all other regulations applicable therein as set
forth in this title are established and declared to be in effect upon all lands
included within the boundaries of each and every district as shown upon the
zoning map.
(Ord. 3048 (part), 1978)
18.08.050   Areas Not Shown on Zoning Map
   All lands now or hereafter included within the incorporated territory of the
city, which lands are not included within a general district shown on the
zoning map of the city or are not shown as prezoned to a general district in
accord with applicable provisions of this title, shall constitute R-1 single-
family residence districts.
(Ord. 3048 (part), 1978)
18.08.060   Use and Interpretation of Zoning Map
   The following rules shall apply in the determination of the boundaries of
any district shown on the zoning map.
   (a)   Where boundaries are indicated as approximately following street and
alley lines, or other identifiable boundary lines, such lines shall be
construed to be the district boundary. Where such boundaries are indicated as
within street and alley lines, or within identifiable rights-of-way or creeks,
the centerline thereof shall be construed to be the district boundary.
   (b)   In unsubdivided property, and where a district boundary divides a lot,
the location of the district boundary, unless the same is indicated by
dimensions, shall be determined by use of the scale appearing on the zoning
map.
   (c)   A symbol, or symbols, indicating the classification of property on the
zoning map shall in each instance apply to the whole of the area within the
district boundaries.
   (d)   Where a public street, alley, or right-of-way is officially vacated or
abandoned, the regulations applicable to abutting property shall apply equally
to each half of such vacated or abandoned street, alley, or right-of-way.
   (e)   Should any uncertainty remain as to the location or meaning of a
boundary or other feature indicated upon the zoning map, said location or
meaning shall be determined by the building official.
(Ord. 3048 (part), 1978)
18.08.070   Application of Regulations to Sites Divided by Zone Boundaries
   Wherever it is found, pursuant to Section
18.08.060, that a lot or site is divided by the boundary between districts, the
provisions of the zoning regulations applicable within each district shall
apply to each portion of the site situated in a separate district.
(Ord. 3048 (part), 1978)
18.08.080   Interpretation of Land Use Classifications
   The PCE Director shall have the authority to interpret whether a land use is
similar to other permitted or conditionally permitted land uses listed in any
Zoning District. Such interpretations may be appealed in accordance with
Section
18.77.070(f). Staff shall prepare a quarterly information Report to the Council
summarizing all final interpretations made under this section.
(Ord. 5373 § 7, 2016)
Chapter 18.09
Accessory Dwelling Units and Junior Accessory Dwelling Units
Sections:
   
18.09.010   Purpose
   
18.09.020   Applicable Zoning Districts
   
18.09.030   Units Exempt from Generally Applicable Local Regulations
   
18.09.040   Units Subject to Local Standards
   
18.09.050   Additional Requirements for JADUs
18.09.010   Purpose.
   The intent of this chapter is to provide regulations to accommodate
accessory and junior accessory dwelling units (ADU/JADU), in order to provide
for variety to the city's housing stock and additional affordable housing
opportunities. These units shall be separate, self-contained living units, with
separate entrances from the main residence, whether attached or detached. The
standards below are provided to minimize the impacts of units on nearby
residents and throughout the city, and to assure that the size and location of
such dwellings is compatible with the existing or proposed residence(s) on the
site and with other structures in the area.
(Ord. 5656 § 2 (part), 2025: Ord. 5574 § 2 (part), 2023: Ord. 5507 § 3 (part),
2020)
18.09.020   Applicable Zoning Districts.
The establishment of an accessory dwelling unit is permitted in zoning
districts when single-family or multi-family residential is a permitted land
use. The development of a single-family home, ADU, and/or a JADU on a lot that
allows for single-family development shall not be considered a multi- family
development pursuant to PAMC Section
18.04.030, nor shall they require architectural review pursuant to other
sections of Chapter 18.
(Ord. 5656 § 2 (part), 2025: Ord. 5574 § 2 (part), 2023: Ord. 5507 § 3 (part),
2020)
18.09.030   Units Exempt from Generally Applicable Local Regulations.
   (a)   Government Code section 66323 provides that certain units shall be
approved notwithstanding state or local regulations that may otherwise apply.
The following types of units shall be governed by the standards in this
section. In the event of a conflict between this section and Government Code
section 66323, the Government Code shall prevail.
   1.   An ADU and JADU within the existing space of a single-family dwelling
or an ADU within the existing space of an accessory structure (i.e. conversion
without substantial addition).
   2.   An ADU and JADU within the proposed space of a single-family dwelling.
   3.   A detached, new construction ADU on a lot with a proposed or existing
single-family dwelling, provided the ADU does not exceed 800 square feet, four-
foot side and rear (i.e. interior) setbacks, or the maximum height described in
subparagraph (A), (B), or (C) of paragraph (4) of subdivision (b) of Government
Code Section 66321, as applicable.
   4.   ADUs created by conversion of portions of existing multi-family
dwellings not used as livable space.
   5.   Up to eight detached ADUs on a lot with an existing multi-family
dwelling, provided that the number of ADUs does not exceed the number of
existing units on the lot.
   6.   Up to two detached ADUs on a lot with a proposed multi-family dwelling.
   (b)   The Development Standards for units governed by this section are
summarized in Table 1. Regulations set forth in section
18.09.040 do not apply to units created under
18.09.030. The minimum and maximum sizes indicated in Table 1 do not prohibit
units that are greater than 800 square feet. These sizes simply serve to
distinguish when a unit transitions from regulations set forth in Table 1 and
section
18.09.030 to regulations set forth in Table 2 and section
18.09.040.
Table 1: Development Standards for Units Described in Government Code Section
66323
 Single-Family                          Multi-Family
 Conversion                             Conversion   Conversion   Conversion or
 of Space     Construction              of Non-      or           Construction
 Within the   of Attached  New          Habitable    Construction of Detached
 Existing     ADU Within   Construction Space Within of Detached  (4) ADU on a
 Space of a   the Proposed of Detached  Existing     (4) ADU on a site with
 Single-      Space of a   ADU          Multi-family site with    Proposed
 Family Home  Single-                   Dwelling     Existing     Multi-family
 or Accessory Family Home               Structure    Multi-family Structure
 Structure                                           Structure
          Single-Family                        Multi-Family
          Conversion                           Conversion Conversion   Conversion
          of Space   Construction              of Non-    or           or
          Within the of Attached               Habitable  Construction Construction
          Existing   ADU Within   New          Space      of Detached  of Detached
          Space of a the Proposed Construction Within     (4) ADU on a (4) ADU on a
          Single-    Space of a   of Detached  Existing   site with    site with
          Family     Single-      ADU          Multi-     Existing     Proposed
          Home or    Family Home               family     Multi-family Multi-family
          Accessory                            Dwelling   Structure    Structure
          Structure                            Structure
                                                          Up to 8 (not
Number of                                      25% of the to exceed
Units     1 Attached ADU, 1 Detached ADU, and  existing   the number   2
Allowed   1 JADU                               units (at  of existing
                                               least one) units on the
                                                          lot)
Minimum   150 sf
size1
Maximum   N/A2                    800 sf       N/A
size1
                     Underlying                                        4 feet from
          N/A, if    zone                                              side and
          condition  standard for 4 feet from                          rear lot
Setbacks  is         Single       side and     N/A                     lines;
          sufficient Family Home  rear lot                             underlying
          for fire   (ADU must be lines                                zoning for
          and safety within                                            front
                     allowable                                         setback
Daylight  N/A        space of     N/A
Plane                Single-Famil
Maximum   N/A        y Home)      165          N/A                     165, 6
Height3
Parking   None
State Law 66323(a)   66323(a)(1)  66323(a)(2)  66323(a)(3)             66323(a)(4)
Reference (1)
 
(1)   Lofts where the height from the floor level to the underside of the
rafter or finished roof surface is 5' or greater shall count towards the unit's
floor area.
(2)   The maximum size of a JADU is 500 square feet. See PAMC 18.09.030(h) for
additional information.
(3)   Units built in a flood zone are not entitled to any height extensions
granted to the primary dwelling.
(4)   Units must be detached from primary dwellings but may be attached to each
other.
(5)   A height of 18 feet for a detached ADU on a lot with an existing or
proposed single-family or multi-family dwelling unit that is within one-half of
one mile walking distance of a major transit stop or a high-quality transit
corridor, as those terms are defined in Section 21155 of the Public Resources
Code. An additional two feet in height shall be provided to accommodate a roof
pitch on an ADU that is aligned with the roof pitch of the primary dwelling
unit.
(6)   A height of 18 feet for a detached ADU on a lot with an existing or
proposed multi-family, multistory dwelling.
   (c)   Development standards stated elsewhere in this Section or Title 18,
including standards related to FAR, lot coverage, and privacy, are not
applicable to ADUs or JADUs that qualify for approval under this section. When
there is an ADU or JADU attached to an existing or proposed primary dwelling,
the shared wall between these units shall contribute to the maximum allowable
Floor Area, Lot Coverage, and Maximum House Size of the primary unit. For a
single-family home, this measurement shall be taken to the outside stud wall in
accordance with Section
18.04.030(a)(65)(D). For a multi-family dwelling, this measurement shall be
taken to the outside surface of exterior walls in accordance with Section
18.04.030(a)(65)(B) and (C).
   (d)   The establishment of accessory dwelling units and junior accessory
dwelling units pursuant to this section shall not be conditioned on the
correction of non-conforming zoning conditions; provided, however, that nothing
in this section shall limit the authority of the Chief Building Official to
require correction of building standards relating to health and safety. Upon
request of the owner for a delay in enforcement, the Chief Building Official
shall delay enforcement of a building standard, subject to compliance with
Section 17980.12 of the Health and Safety Code.
   (e)   The installation of fire sprinklers shall not be required in an
accessory dwelling unit if sprinklers are not required for the primary
residence. The construction of an accessory dwelling unit shall not trigger a
requirement for fire sprinklers to be installed in the existing multifamily
dwelling. Nothing in this section shall preclude the Fire Marshal from
accepting fire sprinklers as an alternative means of compliance with generally
applicable fire protection requirements.
   (f)   Rental of any unit created pursuant to this section shall be for a
term of 30 days or more.
   (g)   Attached units shall have independent exterior access from a proposed
or existing single-family dwelling. Except for JADUs, attached units shall not
have an interior access point to the primary dwelling (e.g. hotel door or other
similar feature/appurtenance). If a permitted JADU does not include a separate
bathroom, the permitted JADU shall include a separate entrance from the main
entrance to the structure, with an interior entry to the main living area.
   (h)   Conversion of an existing accessory structure pursuant to Government
Code section 66314(d)(7) may include reconstruction in-place of a non-
conforming structure, so long as the renovation or reconstruction does not
increase the degree of non-compliance, such as increased height, envelope, or
further intrusion into required setbacks. An expansion of not more than 150
square feet beyond the same physical dimensions as the existing accessory
structure may be provided to accommodate ingress and egress. Any addition to
the existing accessory structure that is not limited to providing for ingress
and egress to the unit, and that exceeds the envelope of the existing accessory
structure shall be subject to Section
18.09.040.
   (i)   Street addresses shall be assigned to all units prior to building
permit final to assist in emergency response.
   (j)   The unit shall not be sold separately from the primary residence,
except as allowed under Government Code Section 66341.
   (k)   Replacement parking is not required when an off-street parking space
is converted to, or demolished in conjunction with the construction of, an ADU.
   (l)   JADUs shall comply with the requirements of Section
18.09.050.
(Ord. 5656 § 2 (part), 2025: Ord. 5585 § 2 (part), 2023: Ord. 5574 § 2 (part),
2023: Ord. 5507 § 3 (part), 2020)
18.09.040   Units Subject to Local Standards.
   (a)   This section shall govern applications for ADUs that do not qualify
for approval under Section
18.09.030 and for which the city may impose local standards pursuant to
Government Code section 66314. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to
prohibit an ADU of up to 800 square feet, at the heights stated in Table 2,
with a four foot side and rear setbacks.
   (b)   The Development Standards for units governed by this section are
provided in Table 2. These regulations do not limit the height of existing
structures converted into ADUs unless the envelope of the building is proposed
to be modified beyond any existing legal, non-conforming condition.
Table 2: All other Units
 Attached Detached
                           Attached                   Detached
Number of Units Allowed1   1
Minimum size               150 sf
                           900 sf (1,000 sf for two
Maximum size               or more bedrooms); no more 900 sf (1,000 sf for two
                           than 50% of the size of    or more bedrooms)
                           the single-family home
Setbacks                   4 feet from side and rear lot lines
Daylight Plane             Underlying zone standard   N/A
                           per footnote (7)
Maximum Height3
   Res. Estate (RE)     30 feet
   Open Space (OS)      25 feet
   All other eligible   16 feet(5), (6), (7)
zones
Parking                    None
Square Footage Exemption
when in conjunction with a Up to 800 sf
single family home(4)
 
(1)   An attached and detached ADU may be built in conjunction with a JADU on a
lot with an existing or proposed single-family home. One attached or detached
ADU may be built in conjunction with an existing or proposed multi-family
building.
(2)   Lofts where the height from the floor level to the underside of the
rafter or finished roof surface is 5' or greater shall count towards the unit's
floor area.
(3)   Units built in a flood zone are not entitled to any height extensions
granted to the primary dwelling.
(4)   Lots with both an attached and detached ADU may exempt a maximum combined
total of 800 square feet of both the ADUs from FAR, Lot Coverage, and Maximum
House Size calculations. Any square footage that exceeds this exemption shall
contribute to the FAR, Lot Coverage, and (if attached) Maximum House Size
calculations for the subject property. This exemption is not afforded to lots
with existing or proposed multifamily dwellings.
(5)   A height of 18 feet for a detached ADU on a lot with an existing or
proposed single-family or multi-family dwelling unit that is within one-half of
one mile walking distance of a major transit stop or a high-quality transit
corridor, as those terms are defined in Section 21155 of the Public Resources
Code. An additional two feet in height shall be provided to accommodate a roof
pitch on an ADU that is aligned with the roof pitch of the primary dwelling
unit.
(6)   A height of 18 feet for a detached ADU on a lot with an existing or
proposed multi-family, multistory dwelling.
(7)   A height of 25 feet or the height limitation in the underlying zone
district that applies to the primary dwelling, whichever is lower, for an ADU
that is attached to a primary dwelling. These ADUs shall not exceed two stories
in height.
   (c)   A single-family or multi-family dwelling shall exist on the lot or
shall be constructed on the lot in conjunction with the construction of an ADU.
   (d)   ADU square footage shall not be included in FAR, lot coverage, and
maximum house size calculations for a lot with an existing or proposed single
family home, up to the amounts stated in Table 2. ADU square footage in excess
of the exemptions provided in Table 2 shall be included in FAR, lot coverage,
and maximum house size calculations for the lot.
   (e)   When there is an ADU attached to an existing or proposed primary
dwelling, the shared wall between these units shall contribute to the maximum
allowable Floor Area, Lot Coverage, and Maximum House Size of the primary unit.
For a single-family home, this measurement shall be taken to the outside stud
wall in accordance with Section
18.04.030(a)(65)(D). For a multi-family dwelling, this measurement shall be
taken to the outside surface of exterior walls in accordance with Section
18.04.030(a)(65)(B) and (C).
   (f)   Attached units shall have independent exterior access from a proposed
or existing single-family dwelling. Attached units shall not have an interior
access point to the primary dwelling (e.g. hotel door or other similar feature/
appurtenance).
   (g)   Reserved.
   (h)   For properties listed in the California Register of Historical
Resources, compliance with the appropriate Secretary of Interior's Standards
for the Treatment of Historic Properties shall be required.
   (i)   Noise-producing equipment such as air conditioners, water heaters, and
similar service equipment that exclusively serves an ADU may be located
anywhere on the site, provided they maintain the underlying front yard setback
requirements of the property and, if the property is a corner lot, a 10-foot
street-side setback. All such equipment shall be insulated and housed, except
that the Director may permit installation without housing and insulation,
provided that a combination of technical noise specifications, location of
equipment, and/or other screening or buffering will assure compliance with the
city's Noise Ordinance at the nearest property line. All service equipment must
meet the city's Noise Ordinance in
Chapter 9.10 of the Municipal Code.
   (j)   Setbacks
      1.   Detached units shall maintain a minimum three-foot distance from the
primary unit, measured from the exterior walls of structures.
      2.   A basement or other subterranean portion that serves an ADU may
encroach into a setback required for the primary dwelling provided the
following conditions are met:
         (A)   Newly constructed basement walls are no closer than four feet to
an adjacent interior side or rear property line.
         (B)   A new lightwell associated with a basement shall not be placed
closer than four feet to an adjacent interior property line. When visible from
the right of way, these facilities shall be screened from view with vegetation.
         (C)   Habitable ADU basements shall contribute toward the unit’s total
allowable floor area. Any floor area in excess of the exemptions provided in
this Section shall contribute to the total allowable limits for the site.
      3.   Projections, including but not limited to windows, doors, mechanical
equipment, venting or exhaust systems, are not permitted to encroach into the
required setbacks, with the exception of a roof eave of up to two feet.
      4.   For corner lots developed as a single-family home, when an existing
or proposed primary dwelling unit is expanded or constructed simultaneously
with the construction of a new ADU, the homeowner may elect to build all
structures to a 10-foot street-side setback and a 16-foot front yard setback,
regardless of the presence of a more restrictive special setback, unless a fire
or life-safety regulation requires a greater setback. Pursuant to Government
Code section 66321(b)(3), a street-side setback may not preclude the
development of an 800 square foot unit.
      5.   When an existing, legal, nonconforming structure is converted or
reconstructed to create an ADU, any portion of the ADU that is in the same
location and falls within the building envelope of the original structure shall
not be subject to the development standards stated in this Section. Any portion
of the ADU that is in a different location or exceeds the envelope of the
original structure shall comply with the development standards stated in this
Section.
      6.   Notwithstanding the development standards stated in Table 2 and
paragraph (5) above, when an existing, legal, non-conforming structure is
converted in place to an ADU, the envelope of the structure may be modified to
encroach further into a setback or daylight plane as follows:
         (A)   The height of the existing structure may be increased by no more
than one linear foot in height commensurate to the existing roofline of the
structure provided the height of the addition does not exceed 12 feet from
grade. The roofline shall not be changed to a style other than what currently
exists on the structure.
         (B)   Each non-conforming wall may be expanded by no more than six
inches in thickness based on its existing location and configuration, as
measured to exterior surface of the material, to provide for greater insulation
and energy requirements provided that a minimum of one foot is maintained
between the addition and an adjacent interior property line. An existing wall
of a structure that does not currently have a separation of one foot from a
parallel property line shall not be expanded outward.
         (C)   All other additions not specified here shall follow the standard
setbacks for the ADU identified in Table 2.
   (k)   Design
      1.   Except on corner lots, where feasible, the unit shall not have an
entranceway facing the same lot line (property line) as the entranceway to the
main dwelling unit unless the entranceway to the accessory unit is located in
the rear half of the lot. Exterior staircases to second floor units shall be
located toward the interior side or rear yard of the property.
      2.   Privacy
         (A)   Second story doors and decks shall not face a neighboring
property line. Second story decks and balconies shall utilize screening
barriers to prevent views towards an adjacent interior property line. These
barriers shall be a minimum five-foot, six-inch height, from the floor level of
the deck or balcony and shall not include perforations of any kind that would
allow visibility between properties.
         (B)   Windows on a second floor, loft, or equivalent elevated space,
excluding those required for egress, shall have a five-foot sill height as
measured from the second-finished floor level, or utilize opaque glazing on the
entirety of any window that faces an adjacent interior property line.
         (C)   Windows on a second finished floor, loft, or equivalent elevated
space, shall be offset from neighbor's windows to maximize privacy.
         (D)   Where feasible, egress windows on the first and second finished
floor of an ADU shall not face towards an adjacent interior property line. If
this is not feasible, then these windows shall utilize opaque glazing on the
whole window.
         (E)   If the first finished floor of an ADU is two feet or more above
grade, then first floor windows shall include the following:
            i.   Non-egress, operable windows facing an adjacent interior
property line shall have a windowsill(s) that start five feet above the first
finished floor for the unit;
            ii.   Non-egress, non-operable windows facing an adjacent interior
property line shall have the lower half of window(s) (minimum of five feet
above the first finished floor) utilize opaque glazing.
         (F)   Where feasible, the use of skylights (whether operable or not)
shall be used in lieu of operable windows that face adjacent interior
properties.
         (G)   No exterior lighting shall be mounted above seven feet. All
lighting mounted on walls shall be directed downwards and shall not direct
light towards adjacent interior property lines. Any ground lighting shall not
direct light upwards to the building or sky.
   (l)   Parking
      1.   Replacement parking is not required when a garage, carport, covered
parking structure, or uncovered parking space is converted to, or demolished in
conjunction with the construction of, an ADU.
      2.   When parking is provided, the unit shall have street access from a
driveway in common with the main residence in order to prevent new curb cuts,
excessive paving, and elimination of street trees, unless separate driveway
access will result in fewer environmental impacts such as paving, grading or
tree removal.
      3.   When a single-family dwelling unit is permitted simultaneously with
the construction of new ADUs, the primary unit’s covered parking requirements
identified in
Chapter 18.10 and
18.12 do not need to be provided. Two uncovered parking spaces shall be
provided in any configuration on the lot including within the front or street-
side setback for the property.
      4.   If covered parking for a unit is provided in any district, the
maximum size of the covered parking area for the accessory dwelling unit is 220
square feet. This space shall count towards the total floor area for the site
but does not contribute to the maximum size of the unit. Any attached garage
shall not have an interior access point to the ADU (e.g. hotel door or other
similar feature/appurtenance).
   (m)   Landscape
      1.   For the purposes of this subsection (m), “protected tree” means:
         (A)   Any locally native tree of the species Acer macrophyllum
(Bigleaf Maple), Calocedrus decurrens (California Incense Cedar), Quercus
agrifolia (Coast Live Oak), Quercus douglasii (Blue Oak), Quercus kelloggii
(California Black Oak), or Quercus lobata (Valley Oak) which is eleven and one-
half inches in diameter (thirty-six inches in circumference) or more when
measured four and one-half feet (fifty-four inches) above natural grade.
         (B)   Any Coast Redwood tree (species Sequoia sempervirens) that is
eighteen inches in diameter (fifty-seven inches in circumference) or more when
measured four and one-half feet (fifty-four inches) above natural grade.
         (C)   Any tree of any species, other than a Coast Redwood Tree,
fifteen inches in diameter (forty-seven inches in circumference) or more when
measured four and one-half feet (fifty-four inches) above natural grade. A
“protected tree” does not include a tree of any species on the Exempt Species
List put forth by the Department of Urban Forestry and available on the City’s
website.
         (D)   Any tree designated for protection during review and approval of
a current or previously completed development project.
         (E)   Any tree designated for carbon sequestration and storage and/or
environmental mitigation purposes as identified in an agreement between the
property owner and a responsible government agency or recorded as a deed
restriction.
         (F)   Any heritage tree previously designated by the city council.
         (G)   Any tree previously planted as a replacement mitigation tree.
      2.   Except as provided in subsection (3) below, the construction of an
ADU shall not impact any protected tree, on the subject property or any
adjacent lot by requiring:
         (A)   Removal of more than twenty-five percent of the functioning
leaf, stem, or root area of a tree in any twenty-four-month period; or
         (B)   Removal of more than fifteen percent of the functioning root
area of any Quercus (oak) species in any thirty-six-month period; or
         (C)   Trenching, excavating, altering the grade, or paving within the
tree protection zone of a tree in a way that foreseeably leads to the death of
the tree. For the purposes of this subsection (m), "tree protection zone" means
the area defined by a circle with a radius ten times the diameter of the trunk
when measured four and one-half feet (fifty-four inches) above natural grade.
      3.   If an action prohibited by section
18.09.040(m)(2) is necessary to allow the construction of an ADU that meets the
minimum standards set forth in state law, the tree shall be replaced according
to the objective requirements identified in the Tree Canopy Replacement Table
of the Palo Alto Tree and Landscape Technical Manual.
      4.   The construction of an ADU must comply with applicable objective
standards and specifications in the Tree and Landscape Technical Manual for the
protection of trees during construction. Compliance with this subsection (4)
shall not delay or cause the denial of an ADU or JADU building permit or use
permit.
   (n)   Miscellaneous requirements
      1.   Street addresses shall be assigned to all units prior to building
permit final to assist in emergency response.
      2.   The unit shall not be sold separately from the primary residence
except as allowed under Government Code Section 66341.
      3.   Rental of any unit created pursuant to this section shall be for a
term of 30 days or more.
      4.   The installation of fire sprinklers shall not be required in an
accessory dwelling unit if sprinklers are not required for the primary
residence. Nothing in this section shall preclude the Fire Marshal from
accepting fire sprinklers as an alternative means of compliance with generally
applicable fire protection requirements.
(Ord. 5656 § 2 (part), 2025: Ord. 5585 § 2 (part), 2023: Ord. 5574 § 2 (part),
2023: Ord. 5557 § 6, 2022: Ord. 5507 § 3 (part), 2020)
18.09.050   Additional Requirements for JADUs.
   (a)   A JADU may be created on a lot in a single-family residential zone
with an existing or proposed single family residence. A JADU shall be attached
to or created within the walls of an existing or proposed primary dwelling,
including enclosed uses within the residence, such as an attached garage.
   (b)   The JADU shall include an efficiency kitchen, requiring the following
components: A cooking facility with appliances, and; food preparation counter
and storage cabinets that are of reasonable size in relation to the size of the
junior accessory dwelling unit.
      1.   JADUs may share sanitation facilities (bathrooms, laundry
facilities, etc.) with the primary unit. If a permitted JADU does not include a
separate bathroom, the permitted junior accessory dwelling unit shall include a
separate entrance from the main entrance to the structure, with an interior
entry to the main living area. In this instance, the floor area and lot
coverage associated with shared space shall count towards the primary unit’s
maximum allowances only. The combined sanitation facilities between the units
shall include shower, toilet, and sink fixtures at a minimum and shall conform
to the minimum requirements specified in the Building Code.
   (c)   For the purposes of any fire or life protection ordinance or
regulation or for the purposes of providing service for water, sewer, or power,
a JADU shall not be considered a separate or new unit.
   (d)   The owner of a parcel proposed for a JADU shall occupy as a primary
residence either the primary dwelling or the JADU. Owner-occupancy is not
required if the owner is a governmental agency, land trust, or housing
organization.
   (e)   Prior to the issuance of a building permit for a JADU, the owner shall
record a deed restriction in a form approved by the city that includes a
prohibition on the sale of the junior accessory dwelling unit separate from the
sale of the single-family residence, requires owner-occupancy consistent with
subsection (d) above, and restricts the size and attributes of the JADU to
those that conform with this section.
   (f)   JADU incentive. The existing or proposed primary dwelling unit shall
be afforded bonus square footage equal to the square footage of a proposed JADU
when a JADU is constructed on site, provided the JADU meets the following
requirements:
      1.   The JADU must conform to the underlying zoning district’s
development standards for single family homes.
      2.   The maximum number of units on site shall not exceed four (two ADUs,
one JADU, and one primary home).
      3.   The maximum size of the JADU shall not exceed 500 square feet.
      4.   The total maximum bonus/exempt floor area provided for the site
under Section
18.09.040 and
18.09.050 may not exceed 800 square feet.
      5.   The exterior entryway to the JADU shall not face the same direction
as the entrance to the primary home.
      6.   All egress windows which face an adjacent residential property must
utilize opaque glazing on the whole window.
      7.   All non-egress windows which face an adjacent residential property
must have a windowsill(s) that start five feet above the first finished floor
for the unit.
      8.   All noise producing equipment associated with the JADU must comply
with the noise regulations in PAMC
9.10.
(Ord. 5656 § 2 (part), 2025: Ord. 5585 § 2 (part), 2023: Ord. 5574 § 2 (part),
2023: Ord. 5507 § 3 (part), 2020)
Chapter 18.10
LOW-DENSITY RESIDENTIAL (RE, R-2 and RMD) DISTRICTS
Sections:
   
18.10.010   Purposes
   
18.10.020   Applicable Regulations
   
18.10.030   Land Uses
   
18.10.040   Development Standards
   
18.10.050   Permitted Encroachments, Projections and Exceptions
   
18.10.060   Parking
   
18.10.070   Accessory and Junior Accessory Dwelling Units
   
18.10.080   Accessory Uses and Facilities
   
18.10.090   Basements
   
18.10.100   Standards for Agricultural Uses
   
18.10.110   Home Improvement Exceptions
   
18.10.120   Architectural Review
   
18.10.130   Historical Review
   
18.10.140   Neighborhood Preservation Combining District (NP) Standards
   
18.10.150   Grandfathered Uses
18.10.010   Purposes
   Three low-density residential districts are defined in this chapter.
Requirements for the single-family residential (R-1) district and related
subdistricts and combining districts are included in
Chapter 18.12. The specific purpose of each low-density residential district is
stated below:
   (a)   Residential Estate District [RE]
   The RE residential estate district is intended to create and maintain
single-family living areas characterized by compatibility with the natural
terrain and native vegetation. The RE district provides locations for
residential, limited agricultural, and open space activities most suitably
located in areas of very low density or rural qualities. Accessory dwelling
unit(s) and accessory structures or buildings are appropriate where consistent
with the site and neighborhood character. Community uses and facilities should
be limited unless no net loss of housing units would result.
   (b)   Two Family Residential District [R-2]
   The R-2 two-family residence district is intended to allow a second dwelling
unit under the same ownership as the initial dwelling unit on appropriate sites
in areas designated for single-family use by the Palo Alto Comprehensive Plan,
under regulations that preserve the essential character of single-family use.
Community uses and facilities should be limited unless no net loss of housing
would result.
   (c)   Two Unit Multiple-Family Residential District [RMD]
   The RMD two-unit multiple-family residence district is intended to allow a
second dwelling unit under the same ownership as the initial dwelling unit on
appropriate sites in areas designated for multiple-family use by the Palo Alto
Comprehensive Plan. The RMD district is intended to minimize incentives to
replace existing single-family dwellings, maintain existing neighborhood
character and increase the variety of housing opportunities available within
the community. The maximum density in this zone shall not exceed seventeen
dwelling units per acre.
(Ord. 5412 § 3, 2017: Ord. 4875 § 2 (part), 2005)
18.10.020   Applicable Regulations
   The specific regulations of this chapter and the additional regulations and
procedures established by Chapters
18.52 to
18.80 inclusive shall apply to all low-density residential districts. Such
regulations shall apply to construction of two units on an RE-zoned lot
pursuant to California Government Code Section 65852.21 (SB 9, 2021), except as
modified by Section
18.42.180.
(Ord. 5542 § 2, 2022: Ord. 5538 § 2, 2021: Ord. 4875 § 2 (part), 2005)
18.10.030   Land Uses
   Table 1 shows the permitted and conditionally permitted uses for the low-
density residential districts.
   TABLE 1
PERMITTED AND CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED LOW-DENSITY RESIDENTIAL USES
[P = Permitted Use -- CUP = Conditional Use Permit Required]
 R-E R-2 RMD Subject to Regulations in:
                                    R-E   R-2  RMD  Subject to Regulations in:
ACCESSORY AND SUPPORT USES
Accessory facilities and uses
customarily incidental to permitted P     P    P    18.10.080
uses (no limit on number of
plumbing fixtures)
Home Occupations, when accessory to P     P    P    18.42.060
permitted residential uses.
Horticulture, gardening, and
growing of food products for        P     P    P     
consumption by occupants of the
site.
Sale of agricultural products       P             18.10.110
produced on the premises (1)
Accessory Dwelling Units            P     P    P    18.09
Junior Accessory Dwelling Units     P     P(2) P(2) 18.09
AGRICULTURE AND OPEN SPACE USES
Agriculture                         P             18.10.110
EDUCATIONAL, RELIGIOUS, AND ASSEMBLY USES
Private Educational Facilities      CUP   CUP  CUP   
Religious Congregations and         CUP   CUP  CUP   
Institutions
PUBLIC/QUASI-PUBLIC USES
Community Centers                   CUP   CUP  CUP   
Utility Facilities essential to
provision of utility services to
the neighborhood, but excluding     CUP   CUP  CUP   
business offices, construction or
storage yards, maintenance
facilities, or corporation yards.
RECREATION USES
Neighborhood Recreational Centers            CUP   
Outdoor Recreation Services         CUP   CUP       
RESIDENTIAL USES
Single-Family                       P     P    P     
Two-Family use, under one ownership P (4) P    P     
Mobile Homes                        P     P    P    18.42.100
Residential Care Homes              P     P    P     
RETAIL USES                                       
Cemeteries                          CUP            
Commercial Plant Nurseries          CUP            
SERVICE USES                                      
Convalescent Facilities             CUP            
Day Care Centers                    CUP   CUP  CUP   
Small Adult Day Care Homes          P     P    P     
Large Adult Day Care Homes          CUP   CUP  CUP   
Small Family Day Care Homes         P     P    P     
Large Family Day Care Homes         P     P    P     
Bed & Breakfast Inns                         P(3)  
P = Permitted Use                         CUP = Conditional Use Permit Required
 
   (1)   Sale of Agricultural Products: No permanent commercial structures for
the sale or processing of agricultural products are permitted.
   (2)   Junior Accessory Dwelling Units in R-2 and RMD Zones: A Junior
Accessory Dwelling Unit is permitted only in conjunction with a single-family
residence, subject to the provisions of
Chapter 18.09.
   (3)   Bed and Breakfast Inns: Bed and breakfast inns are limited to no more
than 4 units (including the owner/resident's unit) in the RMD district.
   (4)   Two Unit Development Pursuant to California Government Code Section
65852.21 (SB 9, 2021): Construction of two units is permitted on an RE-zoned
lot, subject to the regulations in Section
18.42.180.
(Ord. 5587 § 4, 2023: Ord. 5574 § 3, 2023: Ord. 5542 § 3, 2022: Ord. 5538 § 3,
2021: Ord. 5412 § 4, 2017: Ord. 4875 § 2 (part), 2005)
18.10.040   Development Standards
(a)   Site Specifications, Building Size, Height and Bulk, and Residential
Density
   The development standards for the low-density residential districts are
shown in Table 2:
   TABLE 2
LOW-DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
 R-E (6) R-2 RMD Subject to Regulations in:
                      R-E (6)  R-2      RMD                 Subject to
                                                            Regulations in:
Minimum Site                                              
Specifications
Site Area (ft 2 )                                         
All lots except flag  1 acre   6,000    5,000               18.10.040(c)
lots(1)
Flag lots             As established by Section 21.20.301
                      (Subdivision Ord.)
Site Width (ft)       100      60       50                   
Site Depth (ft)       100      100      100                  
Maximum Lot Size Lot  None     11,999   9,999               18.10.040(g)
Area (square feet)
                      Setback lines imposed by a special
Minimum Setbacks      setback map pursuant to Chapter 20.08 18.10.050
                      of this code may also apply.
Front Yard (ft)       30       20       20                   
Rear Yard (ft)        30       20       20                   
Interior Side Yard    15       6        6                    
(ft)
Street Side Yard (ft) 24       16       16                   
Maximum Height
(as measured to the   30       30 (2)   35                  18.04.030(67)
peak of the roof)                                           18.10.050
(ft)
Side Daylight Plane                                      18.04.030(44);
(Side lot lines)                                            18.10.050
Initial Height (ft)   10       10       15                   
Angle (degrees)       45       45       45                   
Front Daylight Plane                                     18.10.050
(Front setback line)
Initial Height (ft)   16       16(3)                        
Angle (degrees)       60       60                           
Rear Daylight Plane                                      18.10.050
(Rear setback line)
Initial Height (ft)   16       16(3)    15                   
Angle (degrees)       60       60       45                   
Maximum Site                                             18.04.030 (86A)
Coverage:
Single story          25%      40%      40%                  
development
Multiple story        25%      35%      40%                  
development
Additional area
permitted to be               5%                           
covered by a patio or
overhang
Maximum Floor Area                                       18.04.030(65)
Ratio (FAR) 2
First 5,000 square    .45      .45      .50                  
feet
Square footage in
excess of 5,000       .30      .30      .50                  
square feet
Additional floor area
permitted for                 200(4)   200(4)               
covering of one
parking space (ft 2 )
Maximum House Size    6,000(5) 6,000(5) 6,000(5)             
(ft 2 )
Minimum Usable Open                   450 sf per unit      
Space (ft 2 )
Residential Density                                         For second unit re-
Minimum site area     1 acre   7,500    5,000               quirements, see
permitting two units                                        18.10.070
Parking               See Sec. 18.10.060 (Parking)          Chs. 18.52,18.54
 
(1)   Minimum Lot Size: Any lot less than the minimum lot size may be used in
accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 18.40.
(2)   R-2 Floodzone Heights: Provided, in a special flood hazard area as
defined in
Chapter 16.52, the maximum heights are increased by one-half of the increase in
elevation required to reach base flood elevation, up to a maximum building
height of 33 feet.
(3)   R-2 Floodzone Daylight Plane: Provided, if the site is in a special flood
hazard area and is entitled to an increase in the maximum height, the heights
for the daylight planes shall be adjusted by the same amount.
(4)   Exemption from Floor Area for Covered Parking Required for Two-Family
Uses: In the R-2 and RMD districts, for two-family uses, floor area limits may
be exceeded by a maximum of two hundred square feet, for purposes of providing
one required covered parking space.
(5)   Maximum House Size: The gross floor area of attached garages are included
in the calculation of maximum house size. If there is no garage attached to the
house, then the square footage of one detached covered parking space shall be
included in the calculation. This provision applies only to single-family
residences, not to duplexes allowed in the R-2 and RMD districts.
(6)   Two Unit Development Pursuant to California Government Code Section
65852.21 (SB9, 2021): Construction of two units on an RE-zoned lot shall be
subject to the development standards in this Section
18.10.040, except as modified by Section
18.42.180.
(b)   Substandard and Flag Lots in R-2 Districts
   The following site development regulations shall apply to all new
construction on substandard and flag lots within the R-2 district in lieu of
comparable provisions in subsection (a).
   (1)   Substandard Lots
      (A)   For the purposes of this subsection (c), a substandard lot shall be
a lot with a width of less than 50 feet or a depth of less than 83 feet and an
area less than 83% of the minimum area required by the zoning of the parcel.
      (B)   Development Standards
         (i)   The maximum height shall be 17 feet, as measured to the peak of
the roof.
         (ii)   There shall be a limit of one habitable floor. Habitable floors
include lofts, mezzanines, and similar area with interior heights of five feet
(5) or more from the roof to the floor, but exclude basements and exclude
attics that have no stairway or built-in access. The chief building official
shall make the final determination as to whether a floor is habitable.
         (iii)   For lots less than 50 feet in width, the required street side
setback shall be 10 feet.
      (C)   Nothing in this subsection (c) shall affect or otherwise redefine
the provisions of Section
18.40.080 as to whether a substandard lot may be used as a lot under this
title.
   (2)   Flag Lots
      (A)   A flag lot shall be defined as set forth in Section
18.04.030(84)(B).
      (B)   Flag Lot Development Standards:
         (i)   The maximum height shall be 17 feet, as measured to the peak of
the roof.
         (ii)   There shall be a limit of one habitable floor. Habitable floors
include lofts, mezzanines, and similar areas with interior heights of five feet
(5') or more from the roof to the floor, but exclude basements and exclude
attics that have no stairway or built-in access. The chief building official
shall make the final determination as to whether a floor is habitable.
         (iii)   Front Setback: 10 feet. Flag lots are not subject to
contextual front setback requirements.
         (iv)   Flag lots are not subject to contextual garage placement
requirements.
(c)   Maximum Lot Sizes in R-2 and RMD Districts
   This provision limits the potential for lot combinations with a net loss of
housing stock and resultant homes that would be out of scale with homes in the
surrounding neighborhood. In the R-2 and RMD districts, no new lot shall be
created equal to or exceeding two times the minimum lot size prescribed for the
district, as prescribed in Table 2. Lots larger than the prescribed maximum
size are permitted only under the following circumstances: (i) where a Village
Residential land use is approved concurrent with the new lot, resulting in no
net loss of housing on the site(s); (ii) where underlying lots must be merged
to eliminate nonconformities and no net loss of housing units would result; and
(iii) where an adjacent substandard lot of less than 25 feet in width is
combined with another lot, resulting in no net loss of housing units on the
site.
(d)   Garage Doors in R-2 District
   In the R-2 district, for garages located within 50 feet from a street
frontage, on lots less than 75 feet in width, the total combined width of
garage doors which are parallel to the street shall not exceed 20 feet.
(e)   Special Setbacks
   Where applicable, setback lines imposed by a special setback map pursuant to
Chapter 20.08 of this code shall be followed for the purpose of determining
legal setback requirements.
(f)   Certification of Daylight Plane Compliance
   Upon request by the building official, any person building or making
improvements to a structure in the low density residential districts shall
provide a certification that the structure, as built, complies with the
daylight plane provisions in subsection (a). Such certification shall be
prepared by a licensed engineer, architect, or surveyor, and shall be provided
prior to frame inspection.
(g)   Lighting in R-2 District
   In the R-2 district, recreational and security lighting shall be permitted
only so long as the lighting is shielded so that the direct light does not
extend beyond the property where it is located. Free- standing recreational and
security lighting installed on or later than March 11, 1991, shall be
restricted to twelve feet (12') in height.
(h)   Location of Noise-Producing Equipment and Electrification Equipment
   (1)   Electrification Equipment and any associated housing, screening,
insulation, or bollards necessary to enable compliance with the applicable
regulations, including
Chapter 9.10 of this Code, shall provide a minimum three foot interior side and
rear yard setback and a minimum ten foot street sideyard setback. Except as
otherwise provided in this Title EVSE and energy storage systems,
Electrification Equipment shall not be located in the required front yard
setback and shall at all times provide sufficient clearance for fire safety
purposes. All other noise-producing equipment, such as gas powered generators,
commercial kitchen fans, and similar service equipment, shall be located
outside of the front, rear and side yard setbacks. Such equipment may, however,
be located up to 6 feet into the street sideyard setback. All noise-producing
equipment, including Electrification Equipment, shall be insulated and housed,
except where doing so would interfere with the operation of the equipment. The
Planning Director may also permit installation without housing and insulation,
provided that a combination of technical noise specifications, location of
equipment, and/or other screening or buffering will assure compliance with the
City’s Noise Ordinance at the nearest property line. All service equipment must
meet the City Noise Ordinance in
Chapter 9.10 of this code.
   (2)   Where existing improvements comply with front setback requirements,
EVSE may encroach up to four feet into the required front setback. Where
existing improvements do not comply with front setback requirements, EVSE may
encroach into the otherwise required front setback by two feet beyond the
existing improvement. EVSE and energy storage systems and associated equipment
and safety bollards may be located within required on-site parking spaces, as
further described in PAMC Chapter 18.54 Section
18.54.020.
   (3)   The Planning Director may publish administrative regulations to
further implement this subsection (h), including a list of equipment or
technologies that may presumptively be installed without housing and insulation
due to noise generation below applicable maximums.
(i)   Individual Review
   The Individual Review provisions of Section
18.12.110 of the Zoning Ordinance shall be applied to any single-family or two-
family residence in the R-2 or RMD districts to those sides of a site that
share an interior side lot line with the interior side or rear lot line of a
property zoned for or used for single-family or two-family dwellings. The
individual review criteria shall be applied only to the project’s effects on
adjacent single-family and two-family uses. A project that complies with the
objective standards for two-story development adopted by the City Council shall
not be subject to individual review.
(Ord. 5656 § 5, 2025: Ord. 5645 § 9, 2025: Ord. 5641 § 9, 2024: Ord. 5601 § 2,
2023: Ord. 5587 § 5, 2023: Ord. 5542 § 4, 2022: Ord. 5538 § 4, 2021: Ord. 5412
§ 5, 2017: Ord. 5373 § 8 (part), 2016; Ord. 4964 § 9, 2007: Ord. 4875 § 2
(part), 2005)
18.10.050   Permitted Encroachments, Projections and Exceptions
   The following projections and encroachments into required yards, daylight
plane and height are permitted, provided a projection shall not be permitted to
encroach into a special setback, as established by the setback map pursuant to
Chapter 20.08 of the Palo Alto Municipal Code, except as noted in (a)(1)(D)
below.
   (a)   Setback/Yard Encroachments and Projections
      (1)   Horizontal Additions
         In the R-2 district and the RMD district, where a single-family
dwelling legally constructed according to existing yard and setback regulations
at the time of construction encroaches upon present required yards, one
encroaching side (first floor wall) of the existing structure at a height not
to exceed 12 feet may be extended in accord with this section. Only one such
extension shall be permitted for the life of such building. This subsection
shall not be construed to allow the further extension of an encroachment by any
building which is the result of the granting of a variance, either before or
after such property became part of the city.
         (A)   Front Yard. In cases where the existing setback is less than 20
feet, but at least 14 feet, the existing encroachment may be extended for a
distance of not more than 100% of the length of the encroaching wall to be
extended; provided, that the total length of the existing encroaching wall and
the additional wall shall together not exceed one-half the maximum existing
width of such building.
         (B)   Interior Side Yard. In cases where the existing setback is less
than 8 feet, but at least 5 feet, the existing encroachment may be extended for
a distance of not more than 100% of the length of the encroaching wall to be
extended, but not to exceed 20 additional feet.
         (C)   Street Side Yard. In cases where the existing setback is less
than 16 feet, but at least 10 feet, the existing encroachment may be extended
for a distance of not more than 100% of the length of the encroaching wall to
be extended, but not to exceed 20 feet.
         (D)   Special Setbacks. In cases where a Special Setback is prescribed
pursuant to
Chapter 20.08 of the Municipal Code, and the existing setback is less than the
Special Setback distance, but is at least 14 feet for the front setback or at
least 10 feet for the street side yard setback, the existing encroachment may
be extended for a distance of not more than 100% of the length of the
encroaching wall to be extended, provided that the total length of the existing
encroaching wall and the additional wall shall together not exceed one-half the
maximum existing width of such building.
      (2)   Rear Yard Encroachments for Portions of Homes
         A portion of a main building that is less than half the maximum width
of the building may extend into the required rear yard no more than six feet
and with a height of no more than one story, except that a corner lot having a
common rear property line with an adjoining corner lot may extend into the
required rear yard not more than ten feet with a height of no more than one
story.
      (3)   Allowed Projections
         (A)   Cornices, Eaves, Fireplaces, and Similar Architectural Features
            For cornices, eaves, fireplaces, and similar architectural
features, excluding flat or continuous walls or enclosures of usable interior
space, the following projections are permitted:
            (i)   A maximum of two feet into a required side yard. Fireplaces
in a required side yard may not exceed five feet in width. Fireplaces not
exceeding five feet in width may project into a required side yard no more than
two feet.
            (ii)   A maximum of four feet into a required front yard
            (iii)   A maximum of four feet into a required rear yard
         (B)   Window Surfaces
            Window surfaces, such as bay windows or greenhouse windows, may
extend into a required side or rear yard a distance not to exceed two feet, or
into a required front yard a distance not exceeding three feet. The window
surface may not extend into any yard above a first story.
         (C)   Detached Storage Structures
            In addition to the provisions for location of accessory structures
under Section
18.12.080(b), the following further projections are permitted. For structures
not over six feet in height or twenty-five square feet in floor area, used
exclusively for storage purposes, the following projections are permitted:
            (i)   A maximum of two feet into a required side yard.
            (ii)   A maximum of four feet into a required front yard.
            (iii)   A maximum of four feet into a required rear yard.
         (D)   Patios, Decks, Stairways, Landings, Balconies, or Fire Escapes
            For uncovered porches (less than 30 inches above grade), patios,
decks, stairways, landings, balconies, or fire escapes the following
projections are permitted, provided these projections are not permitted above
the first story:
            (i)   A maximum of three feet into a required side yard.
            (ii)   A maximum of six feet into a required front yard.
            (iii)   A maximum of six feet into a required rear yard.
         (E)   Canopy or Patio Cover
            A canopy or patio cover may be located in the required rear yard or
that portion of the interior side yard, which is more than 75 feet from the
street lot line measured along the common lot line. Such canopies shall be
subject to the following conditions:
            (i)   A canopy or patio cover shall not be more than 12 feet in
height.
            (ii)   The canopy or patio cover shall be included in the
computation of building coverage.
            (iii)   The canopy or patio cover and other structures shall not
occupy more than 50 percent of the required rear yard.
            (iv)   The canopy or patio cover shall not be enclosed on more than
two sides.
         (F)   Pools, Spas, and Hot Tubs
            (i)   Pools, spas, and hot tubs may extend into a required rear
yard a distance not to exceed fourteen feet, provided that a minimum setback of
six feet from the property line shall be maintained.
            (ii)   No swimming pool, hot tub, spa, or similar accessory
facility shall be located in any portion of a required front or street side
yard.
            (iii) No swimming pool, hot tub, spa, or similar accessory facility
shall be located closer than six feet from an interior side yard property line.
   (b)   Height Exceptions
      The following features may exceed the height limit established by the
specified districts:
      (1)   RE and R-2 Districts: In the RE and R-2 districts, flues, chimneys,
and antennas may exceed the established height limit by not more than 15 feet.
      (2)   RMD District: In the RMD district, flues, chimneys, exhaust fans or
air conditioning equipment, elevator equipment, cooling towers, antennas, and
similar architectural, utility, or mechanical features may exceed the height
limit established in any district by not more than 15 feet, provided that no
such feature or structure in excess of the height limit shall be used for
habitable space, or for any commercial or advertising purposes.
   (c)   Daylight Plane Exceptions
      The following features may extend beyond the daylight plane established
by the applicable district, provided that such features do not exceed the
height limit for the district unless permitted to do so by subsection (b):
      (1)   RE and R-2 districts:
         (A)   Television and radio antennas;
         (B)   Chimneys and flues, provided that chimneys do not extend past
the required daylight plane a distance exceeding the minimum allowed pursuant
to
Chapter 16.04 of this code;
         (C)   Dormers, roof decks, gables, or similar architectural features,
provided that
            (i)   the sum of the horizontal lengths of all such features shall
not exceed 15 feet on each side; and
            (ii)   the height of such features does not exceed 24 feet.
         (D)   Cornices, eaves, and similar architectural features, excluding
flat or continuous walls or enclosures of usable interior space, provided such
features do not extend past the daylight plane more than 2 feet.
      (2)   RMD District:
         (A)   Television and radio antennas; and
         (B)   Chimneys and flues.
(Ord. 4875 § 2 (part), 2005)
18.10.060   Parking
   Off-street parking and loading facilities shall be required for all
permitted and conditional uses in accord with Chapters
18.52 and
18.54 of this title. The following parking requirements apply in the R-E, R-2,
and RMD districts. These requirements are included for reference purposes only,
and in the event of a conflict between this Section
18.10.060 and any requirement of Chapters
18.52 and
18.54, Chapters
18.52 and
18.54 shall apply, except in the case of parcels created pursuant to section
18.10.130(c) (subdivision incentive for historic preservation).
   (a)   Parking Requirements for Specific Uses
   Table 3 shows the minimum off-street automobile parking requirements for
specific uses.
   TABLE 3
PARKING REQUIREMENTS FOR R-E, R-2 AND RMD USES
 
Use                                     Minimum Off-Street Parking Requirement
Single-family residential use           2 spaces per unit, of which one must be
(excluding accessory dwelling units)    covered
                                        1 space per unit. No spaces required if
Two family in the RE district, pursuant located within one-half mile walking
to California Government Code Section   distance of either a high-quality
65852.21 (SB 9, 2021)                   transit corridor or a major transit
                                        stop, or located within one block of a
                                        car share vehicle.
Two family (R2 & RMD districts)         3 spaces total, of which at least two
                                        must be covered
Accessory dwelling unit, attached or    No parking required
detached:
Junior accessory dwelling unit          No parking required
Other Uses                              See
                                        Chapter 18.40
 
   (b)   Parking and Driveway Surfaces
   Parking and driveway surfaces may have either permeable or impermeable
paving. Materials shall be those acceptable to public works department
standards. Gravel and similar loose materials shall not be used for driveway or
parking surfaces within 10 feet of the public right of way.
   (c)   Parking in Yards
      (1)   No required parking space shall be located in a required front
yard.
      (2)   No required parking space shall be located in the first ten feet
adjoining the property line of a required street side yard.
   (d)   Tandem Parking
   Tandem parking shall be permitted for single-family uses and for single-
family uses with a permitted second dwelling unit. Tandem parking is permitted
for two-family uses where both spaces in tandem (front space and tandem space)
are designated for use by the same unit.
   (e)   Bicycle Parking
   For two family uses, at least one Class I bicycle parking space shall be
required.
   (f)   Design of Parking Areas
   Parking facilities shall comply with all applicable regulations of
Chapter 18.54 (Parking Facility Design Standards).
   (g)   Parking Facilities on Lots Created Pursuant to Section
18.10.130(c) (subdivision incentive for historic preservation)
   Legal non-conforming parking facilities existing prior to the subdivision of
a parcel having a historic residence(s) may be maintained as existing non-
complying facilities or may be improved to greater compliance with parking
requirements, as approved by the Director of Planning and Development Services
or his/her designee. Preservation covenants may allow non-historic residences
to be remodeled; however, floor area expansions shall be subject to the
Director’s discretionary action regarding improvements to on-site parking
conditions associated with such increased floor area and when floor area over
400 square feet is proposed to be added to a non-historic residence having
legal non-complying parking facilities prior to subdivision, parking facilities
shall be brought into greater compliance with
Chapter 18.52, wherever feasible. A subdivided property having no existing on-
site parking facilities prior to subdivision may be permitted to continue as
such as long as preservation covenants allowing for this continuance and any
associated access easements have been recorded.
(Ord. 5587 § 6, 2023: Ord. 5542 § 5, 2022: Ord. 5538 § 5, 2021: Ord. 5494 § 3,
2020: Ord. 5412 § 6, 2017: Ord. 5373 § 8 (part), 2016; Ord. 5051 § 3, 2009:
Ord. 4875 § 2 (part), 2005)
18.10.070   Accessory and Junior Accessory Dwelling Units
Accessory Dwelling Units and Junior Accessory Dwelling Units are subject to the
regulations set forth in
Chapter 18.09.
(Ord. 5587 § 7, 2023: Ord. 5542 § 6, 2022: Ord. 5538 § 6, 2021: Ord. 5412 § 7,
2017)
18.10.080   Accessory Uses and Facilities
   Accessory uses and facilities, as referenced in Section
18.10.030, shall be permitted when incidental to and associated with a
permitted use or facility in the R-E, R-2, or RMD districts, or when incidental
to and associated with an allowable and authorized conditional use therein,
subject to the provisions below and of Chapters
18.40 and
18.42.
   (a)   Types of Accessory Uses
   Accessory uses and facilities include, but are not limited to, the following
list of examples; provided that each accessory use or facility shall comply
with the provisions of this title:
      (1)   Residential garages, carports, and parking facilities, together
with access and circulation elements necessary thereto;
      (2)   Facilities for storage incidental to a permitted use; and
      (3)   Recreational uses and facilities for the use and convenience of
occupants or employees, or guests thereof, of a principal use or facility;
   (b)   Location and Development Standards
   Except as otherwise provided in this section, accessory buildings shall at
all times be located in conformance with requirements for principal buildings,
and shall not be located in any required front, side, or rear yard. See Section
18.10.050(a)(3)(C) for allowed encroachments for small storage structures.
Accessory buildings may be located in a required interior yard subject to the
following limitations:
      (1)   An accessory building shall not be used for living and/or sleeping
purposes unless the building was legally constructed for or was legally
converted to living and/or sleeping purposes prior to October 13, 1983.
      (2)   An accessory building shall not be located in a required front
yard, required street yard, or required rear yard of a through lot.
      (3)   An accessory building shall not be located in a required interior
side or rear yard unless the building is at least seventy-five feet from any
property line adjacent to a street, measured along the respective lot line.
Provided, on corner lots, accessory buildings including detached garages and
carports may be located in the rear yard if located at least 75 feet from the
front street and at least 20 feet from the side street property lines.
      (4)   Accessory buildings located within a required interior yard as
permitted by this section shall be subject to a maximum height established by a
daylight plane beginning at a height of eight feet at the property line and
increasing at a slope of one foot for every three feet of distance from the
property line, to a maximum height of twelve feet.
      (5)   No accessory building shall have more than two plumbing fixtures.
Accessory buildings shall not be allowed to be turned into habitable space nor
shall these structures be allowed to have showers (indoor or outdoor), gas
lines, washer/dryers, and/or cooking facilities to be provided inside or
attached to the structure, unless the structure is proposed as an ADU/JADU that
satisfies all requirements of the Palo Alto Municipal Code.
      (6)   Accessory buildings located within a required interior yard, as
permitted by this section, shall not individually or cumulatively occupy an
area exceeding fifty percent of the required rear yard.
      (7)   The minimum distance between separate buildings located on the same
site shall be as required by Title 16; provided, accessory buildings in the
Residential Estate (RE) district shall be separated from the principal building
by at least three feet.
      (8)   A principal building and an accessory building, meeting the
requirements of Title 16 and each located on a site as otherwise permitted for
principal building and accessory buildings, may be connected by a structure
meeting the definition of a breezeway. Such structure, or breezeway, shall be a
part of the accessory building.
(Ord. 5585 § 4, 2023: Ord. 4875 § 2 (part), 2005)
18.10.090   Basements
   Basements shall be permitted in areas that are not designated as special
flood hazard areas, as defined in
Chapter 16.52, subject to the following regulations:
   (a)   Permitted Basement Area
   Basements may not extend beyond the building footprint and basements are not
allowed below any portion of a structure that extends into required setbacks,
except to the extent that the main residence is permitted to extend into the
rear yard setback by other provisions of this code. Basements which serve the
primary unit may not extend under an attached ADU or JADU to the extent those
secondary units utilize the bonus floor area, lot coverage, and/or maximum
house size exemptions identified in Section 18.09.
   (b)   Inclusion as Gross Floor Area
   Basements shall not be included in the calculation of gross floor area,
provided that:
      (1)   basement area is not deemed to be habitable space, such as a
crawlspace; or
      (2)   basement area is deemed to be habitable space but the finished
level of the first floor is no more than three feet above the grade around the
perimeter of the building foundation. Grade is measured at the lowest point of
adjacent ground elevation prior to grading or fill, or finished grade,
whichever is lower; or
      (3)   basement area is associated with a historic property as described
in Section
18.04.030(a)(65)(D)(vii).
   (c)   Lightwells, Stairwells and Other Excavated Features
   Excavated features shall not affect the measurement of the grade for the
purposes of determining gross floor area, so long as such features meet the
following provisions:
      (1)   Lightwells, stairwells and similar excavated features along the
perimeter of the basement shall not affect the measurement of grade, provided
that:
         (A)   such features are not located in the front of the building;
         (B)   such features shall not exceed 3 feet in width;
         (C)   the cumulative length of all such features does not exceed 30%
of the perimeter of the basement;
         (D)   such features do not extend more than 3 feet into a required
side yard nor more than 4 feet into a required rear yard, but where a side yard
is less than 6 feet in width, the features shall not encroach closer than 3
feet from the adjacent side property line;
         (E)   the cumulative length of any features or portions of features
that extend into a required side or rear yard does not exceed 15 feet in
length;
         (F)   the owner provides satisfactory evidence to the planning
division prior to issuance of a building permit that any features or portions
of features that extend into a required side or rear yard will not be harmful
to any mature trees on the subject property or on abutting properties; and
         (G)   such features have either a drainage system that meets the
requirements of the public works department or are substantially sheltered from
the rain by a roof overhang or canopy of a permanent nature.
      (2)   Below-grade patios, sunken gardens or similar excavated areas along
the perimeter of the basement that exceed the dimensions set forth in
subsection (1), are permitted and shall not affect the measurement of grade,
provided that:
         (A)   such areas are not located in the front of the building;
         (B)   All such areas combined do not exceed 2% of the area of the lot
or 200 square feet, whichever is greater; that each such area does not exceed
200 square feet, and that each such area is separated from another by a
distance of at least 10 feet. Area devoted to required stairway access shall
not be included in the 200 square foot limitation.
         (C)   the cumulative length of any excavated area or portion thereof
that extends into a required side or rear yard does not exceed 15 feet;
         (D)   such features do not extend more than 2 feet into a required
side yard nor more than 4 feet into a required rear yard;
         (E)   the owner provides satisfactory evidence to the planning
director prior to issuance of a building permit that any features or portions
of features that extend into a required side or rear yard will not be harmful
to any mature trees on the subject property or on abutting properties;
         (F)   such features have either a drainage system that meets the
requirements of the public works department or are substantially sheltered from
the rain by a roof overhang or canopy of a permanent nature;
         (G)   any roof overhang or canopy installed pursuant to subsection (F)
is within and is counted toward the site coverage requirements established in
Section
18.10.040;
         (H)   such areas are architecturally compatible with the residence;
and
         (I)   such areas are screened to off site views by means of
landscaping and/or fencing as determined appropriate by the planning director.
(Ord. 5585 § 7, 2023: Ord. 5432 § 5, 2018: Ord. 4964 § 10, 2007: Ord. 4875 § 2
(part), 2005)
18.10.100   Standards for Agricultural Uses
   In the RE district, agricultural use shall be allowed subject to the
following regulations:
   (a)   Keeping and Raising of Livestock
   Keeping and raising of livestock, poultry, or other animals may be conducted
accessory to a residential use, and raising of animals for commercial purposes
is prohibited.
   (b)   Required Site Area for Keeping of Livestock
      (1)   At least 21,528 square feet (0.5 acre) of site area shall be
required for each horse, mule, donkey, cow, steer or similar livestock.
      (2)   At least 21,528 square feet (0.5 acre) of site area shall be
required for each three goats, hogs, sheep, or similar livestock.
   (c)   Location of Livestock Facilities
   Barns, stables, sheds, chicken houses, and other similar facilities for the
shelter and feeding of animals, exclusive of domestic household pets, shall be
located a minimum of 40 feet from any lot line (property line).
(Ord. 4875 § 2 (part), 2005)
18.10.110   Home Improvement Exceptions
   Home improvement exceptions may be granted for existing single-family
residences in the R-E, R-2, and RMD districts, pursuant to the provisions of
Section
18.12.120 (R-1 Residential District, Home Improvement Exceptions).
(Ord. 4875 § 2 (part), 2005)
18.10.120   Architectural Review
   Architectural review, as required in Section
18.76.020, is required in the R-E, R-2, and RMD districts whenever three or
more adjacent residential units are intended to be developed concurrently,
whether through subdivision or individual applications.
(Ord. 5412 § 8, 2017: Ord. 4875 § 2 (part), 2005)
18.10.130   Historical Review and Incentives
   (a)   Historic home review, as required in
Chapter 16.49 of Title 16 of the Municipal Code, is required in the R-E, R-2,
and RMD low density residential districts for alterations or modifications to
any residence designated on the City’s Historic Inventory as a Category 1 or
Category 2 historic structure as defined in Section
16.49.020 of this code or any contributing structure located within a locally
designated historic district.
   (b)   Exemptions to gross floor area requirements are available for historic
residences pursuant to the definition of gross floor area in Section
18.04.030(65)(D)(vii). Home improvement exceptions provide for additional
square footage and certain other exceptions for historic homes pursuant to
Section
18.12.120 (R-1 Chapter).
   (c)   Notwithstanding other provisions of this chapter, existing parcels in
the R-2 or RMD districts containing two residences may be subdivided into two
ownerships, where all of the following circumstances exist:
      (1)   At least one residence is designated on the City’s Historic
Inventory as a Category 1, Category 2, Category 3, or Category 4 historic
structure as defined in Section
16.49.020 of this code or are contributing structures located within a locally
designated historic district or are eligible for listing on the California or
National Registers; and
      (2)   No increase in the total number of residences on the site is
proposed; and
      (3)   Separate lots are proposed to be created, each with a minimum lot
size not less than 4,000 square feet if only one residence is historic; if both
residences are historic and subject to a covenant, the allowable minimum lot
size is 2,000 square feet; and
      (4)   The resultant parcel lines may create less than minimum lot size
(no less than the area stated in item (3) of this section), site width and
depth, setback and daylight plane encroachments, floor area and site coverage
exceeding the maximum allowable for existing development with respect to each
new parcel, without the need for approval of a Variance or Home Improvement
Exception, but would not generally increase any existing non-complying building
features; however, minor additions for functional improvements may be allowed
at the discretion of the Director of Planning and Development Services; and
      (5)   The Historic Resources Board has determined that at least one
existing residence on the property has historic integrity and qualifies for
listing on the City’s Historic Inventory.
      (6)   A covenant is recorded to run with the land in perpetuity, assuring
that the historic residence(s) will be preserved and maintained consistent with
the Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for Historic Rehabilitation through
compliance with Historic Resources Board review and recommendations. The
covenant will stipulate that HRB review is required for all major projects on
the site including significant changes to any non-historic residence. Any
modifications to a non-historic residence must be compatible with the historic
residence and satisfy the Secretary of Interior’s Standards for Historic
Compatibility.
      (7)   The two residences on the property were in existence as of January
28, 2009.
      (8)   Application of the state Historic Building Code is available for
use on any eligible building.
      (9)   Residences subject to a covenant must meet all government health,
life and safety codes.
(Ord. 5494 § 3, 2020: Ord. 5051 § 2, 2009: Ord. 4875 § 2 (part), 2005)
18.10.140   Neighborhood Preservation Combining District (NP)
   (a)   Purpose and Applicability
      The neighborhood preservation combining district is intended to modify
the regulations of the RMD two unit multiple-family residential district areas
where it is deemed essential to maintain the visual and historic character of
existing neighborhoods. The combining district is intended to foster retention
of existing single-family structures, to foster additions to existing
properties without demolition of sound residential structures, and to assure
compatibility of design of new residential units with existing structures on
the same or surrounding properties.
      Properties in the (NP) combining district are subject to the following
regulations:
   (b)   Design Review
      (1)   Purposes
         The purpose of design review of properties in an (NP) combining
district is to achieve compatibility of scale, silhouette, façade articulation,
and materials of new construction with existing structure on the same property
or on surrounding properties within a combining district.
      (2)   Design Review Required
         For properties on which two or more residential units are developed or
modified, design review and approval shall be required by the architectural
review board in compliance with procedures established in Section
18.76.020 for any new development or modification to any structure on the
property and for site amenities. No design review is required for construction
of or modifications to single-family structures that constitute the only
principal structure on a parcel of land or for accessory dwelling units or
junior accessory units.
      (3)   Design Review Guidelines
         The architectural review board shall, at its discretion, develop
specific design review guidelines for each specific area to which this
combining district is applied.
   (c)   Exceptions to Development Standards
      (1)   Applicability
         Subject to the provisions of Section
18.76.040 and the general purposes of this title to foster retention of
existing single-family structures and to maintain the existing historic and
general character of the neighborhood, the planning director may grant
exceptions to site development regulations (except limitations on residential
density), parking regulations, and from the special setback requirements of
Title 20 applicable to the underlying zone district where combined with the
neighborhood preservation (NP) combining district. This exception procedure is
the exclusive procedure for procuring an exception to development standards in
the NP combining district. It is not necessary for the property owner to obtain
a variance.
      (2)   Findings
         The director may only grant an (NP) District Exception if, from the
application or the facts presented at the public hearing, he finds:
         (A)   The granting of the exception will facilitate the preservation
of an existing residential structure on the same property and will be of
benefit in maintaining the existing historic and general character of the
surrounding neighborhood, and
         (B)   The granting of the application will not be detrimental or
injurious to property or improvements in the vicinity and will not be
detrimental to the public health, safety, general welfare, or convenience.
      (3)   Conditions
         In granting NP District Exceptions, reasonable conditions or
restrictions may be imposed as deemed appropriate or necessary to protect the
public health, safety, general welfare, or convenience, and to secure the
purposes of this title.
      (4)   Procedures
   Please refer to Chapters
18.76 and
18.77 for further information regarding the procedures applicable to requests
for exceptions.
(Ord. 5412 § 9, 2017: Ord. 4875 § 2 (part), 2005)
18.10.150   Grandfathered Uses
   (a)   Applicability
      The uses specified in subsection (b) may remain as grandfathered uses
provided that those uses:
      (1)   are located in the specified district;
      (2)   existed on the specified date;
      (3)   on that date, were lawful permitted uses or conditional uses
operating subject to a conditional use permit; and
      (4)   on that date, were conforming uses.
   (b)   Grandfathered Uses
      (1)   R-2 district:
         (A)   Professional and medical office uses (except product testing and
analysis, and prototype development), existing on July 20, 1978 or such uses
which were, prior to July 20, 1978, located in an R-2 district which was
imposed by reason of annexation of the property to the city without benefit of
prezoning and which, prior to the date of annexation, were lawful conforming
permitted uses or conditional uses operating subject to a conditional use
permit.
         (B)   Two-family uses, except where one of the units is a legal
nonconforming detached single-family dwelling on a substandard lot size, and
multiple-family uses existing on July 20, 1978 or such uses which were, prior
to July 20, 1978, located in an R-2 district which was imposed by reason of
annexation of the property to the city without benefit of prezoning and which,
prior to the date of annexation, were lawful conforming permitted uses or
conditional uses operating subject to a conditional use permit.
      (2)   RMD district:
         (A)   Professional and medical office uses (except product testing and
analysis, and prototype development), existing on July 20, 1978.
         (B)   Multiple-family uses existing on July 20, 1978.
   (c)   Permitted Changes
      The following regulations shall apply to the grandfathered uses specified
in subsection (b):
      (1)   Such uses shall be permitted to remodel, improve, or replace site
improvements on the same site, for continual use and occupancy by the same use,
provided that
         (A)   such remodeling, improvement or replacement shall not:
            (i)   result in increased floor area;
            (ii)   result in an increase in the number of offices, in the case
of professional or medical office uses, or dwellings, in the case of
residential uses;
            (iii)   result in shifting of building footprint;
            (iv)   increase the height, length, building envelope, or size of
the improvement,
            (v)   increase the existing degree of noncompliance, except through
the granting of a design enhancement exception pursuant to Chapter 18.76.
      (2)   If a grandfathered use ceases and thereafter remains discontinued
for twelve consecutive months, it shall be considered abandoned and may be
replaced only by a conforming use.
      (3)   A grandfathered use which is changed to or replaced by a conforming
use shall not be reestablished, and any portion of a site or any portion of a
building, the use of which changes from a grandfathered use to a conforming
use, shall not thereafter be used except to accommodate a conforming use.
      (4)   The following additional regulations shall apply to grandfathered
professional or medical office uses:
         (A)   Any remodeling, improvement, or replacement of any building
designed and constructed for residential use shall be subject to the issuance
of a conditional use permit in accord with
Chapter 18.76.
         (B)   In the event of redevelopment of all or a portion of the site
for permitted residential uses, professional and medical office uses may not be
incorporated in the redevelopment, except that this provision shall not apply
to permanent conversion to residential use of space within an existing
structure now used for professional and medical office uses.
   (d)   (Reserved)
   (e)   (Reserved)
   (f)   Existing Homes on Substandard Lots
      In the R-2 district, single-family and two-family homes on substandard
lots, as defined in Section
18.10.040(b), and flag lots existing on August 1, 1991 and which prior to that
date were lawful, complying structures, may remain and be remodeled, improved,
or replaced without complying with the height and habitable floor limitations
for substandard lots specified in Section
18.10.040, provided that:
      (1)   any such remodeling, improvement, or replacement does not result in
a height above seventeen feet or any additional habitable floor area above a
first habitable floor, except that any structure damaged or destroyed by a
natural disaster (such as fire, flood or earthquake) may be replaced to its
previous size without regard to the height and habitable floor limitations
imposed by this section; and
      (2)   in the case of a conflict between the provisions of this section
and the provisions of
Chapter 18.70, this section shall control.
(Ord. 5656 § 6, 2025: Ord. 5412 § 10, 2017: Ord. 4875 § 2 (part), 2005)
Chapter 18.12
R-1 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT*
Sections:
   
18.12.010   Purposes
   
18.12.020   Applicable Regulations
   
18.12.030   Land Uses
   
18.12.040   Site Development Standards
   
18.12.050   Permitted Encroachments, Projections and Exceptions
   
18.12.060   Parking
   
18.12.070   Accessory and Junior Accessory Dwelling Units
   
18.12.080   Accessory Uses and Facilities
   
18.12.090   Basements
   
18.12.100   Regulations for the Single Story Overlay (S) Combining District
   
18.12.110   Single Family Individual Review
   
18.12.120   Home Improvement Exceptions
   
18.12.130   Architectural Review
   
18.12.140   Historical Review
   
18.12.150   Grandfathered Uses
   *   Editor's Note: This chapter was revised in its entirety by Ordinance
4869. Ordinances formerly codified in this chapter, and not specifically
repealed by adoption of Ordinance 4869, include Ords. 3048, 3064, 3070, 3130,
3255, 3291, 3345, 3378, 3465, 3475, 3489, 3536, 3577, 3583, 3662, 3683, 3735,
3741, 3850, 3861, 3905, 4016, 4043, 4081, 4140, 4642, 4643, 4716, 4794 and
4826.
18.12.010   Purposes
   Provisions related to the single-family residential (R-1) district, four
residential R-1 subdistricts, and the single-story (S) combining district are
outlined in this chapter. Requirements for the R-E, R-2 and RMD are included in
Chapter 18.10. The specific purposes of each residential district are stated
below:
   (a)   Single Family Residential District [R-1]
      The R-1 single family residential district is intended to create,
preserve, and enhance areas suitable for detached dwellings with a strong
presence of nature and with open area affording maximum privacy and
opportunities for outdoor living and children’s play. Minimum site area
requirements are established to create and preserve variety among
neighborhoods, to provide adequate open area, and to encourage quality design.
Accessory dwelling units, junior accessory dwelling units and accessory
structures or buildings are appropriate. Community uses and facilities, such as
churches and schools, should be limited unless no net loss of housing would
result.
   (b)   Special Residential Building Site R-1 Subdistricts (7,000), (8,000),
(10,000), (20,000)1
      The special residential building site R-1 subdistricts are intended to
modify the site development regulations of the R-1 single family residence
district, where applied in combination with the R-1 district, to create and
maintain single-family living areas of varying site size and development
characteristics, to reflect and preserve the character of existing
neighborhoods.
      1.   Subdistricts may be reflected on the Zoning Map as R-1(650), R-1
(743), R-1(929) and R-1(1,858), respectively, reflecting the minimum lot size
in square meters rather than in square feet.
   (c)   Single-Story Combining District (S)
      The single-story height combining district is intended to modify the site
development regulations of the R-1 single-family residence district, to
preserve and maintain single-family living areas of predominantly single-story
character. An area proposed for a single story combining district should be of
a prevailing single story character, thus limiting the number of structures
rendered noncomplying by the (S) combining district. It is intended that
neighborhoods currently subject to single story deed restrictions be developed
in a manner consistent with those deed restrictions. Furthermore, it is
desirable that homes be similar in age, design and character, ensuring that
residents of an area proposed for rezoning possess like desires for
neighborhood preservation and face common home remodeling constraints.
(Ord. 5412 § 11, 2017: Ord. 4869 § 14 (Exh. A [part]), 2005)
18.12.020   Applicable Regulations
   The specific regulations of this chapter and the additional regulations and
procedures established by
Chapters 18.52 to
18.80 inclusive shall apply to the R-1 district including the R-1 subdistricts.
Such regulations shall apply to construction of two units on an R1-zoned lot
pursuant to California Government Code Section 65852.21 (SB 9), except as
modified by Section
18.42.180.
(Ord. 5587 § 8, 2023: Ord. 5542 § 7, 2022: Ord. 5538 § 7, 2021: Ord. 4869 § 14
(Exh. A [part]), 2005)
18.12.030   Land Uses
   The permitted and conditionally permitted uses for the single family
residential districts are shown in Table 1:
               Table 1
PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL R-1 RESIDENTIAL USES
 R-1 and all R-1 Subdistricts Subject to Regulations in:
                            R-1 and all R- Subject to Regulations in:
                            1 Subdistricts
ACCESSORY AND SUPPORT USES
Accessory facilities and
uses customarily incidental
to permitted uses with no
more than two plumbing      P              18.04.030(a)(3)
fixtures and no kitchen                    18.12.080
facility, or of a size less
than or equal to 200 square
feet
Accessory facilities and
uses customarily incidental
to permitted uses with more
than two plumbing fixtures  CUP            18.12.080
(but with no kitchen), and
in excess of 200 square
feet in size, but excluding
second dwelling units
Home occupations, when
accessory to permitted      P              18.42.060
residential uses
Horticulture, gardening,
and growing of food         P               
products for consumption by
occupants of the site
Accessory Dwelling Units    P(1)           18.09
Junior Accessory Dwelling   P(1)           18.09
Unit
Safe Parking                              18.42.160
EDUCATIONAL, RELIGIOUS AND ASSEMBLY USES
Private Educational         CUP             
Facilities
Churches and Religious      CUP             
Institutions
PUBLIC/QUASI PUBLIC USES
Community Centers           CUP             
Utility Facilities
essential to provision of
utility services to the
neighborhood, but excluding
business offices,           CUP             
construction or storage
yards, maintenance
facilities, or corporation
yards
RECREATlON USES                            
Outdoor Recreation Services CUP             
RESIDENTIAL USES                           
Single-Family               P               
Two-Family use, under one   P              18.42.180
ownership
Mobile Homes                P              18.42.100
Multiple-Family             P(2)           18.14.020
Residential Care Homes      P               
SERVICE USES                               
Day Care Centers            CUP             
Small Adult Day Care Homes  P               
Large Adult Day Care Homes  CUP             
Small Family Day Care Homes P               
Large Family Day Care Homes P               
P = Permitted Use CUP = Conditional Use Permit Required
 
(1)   An Accessory Dwelling Unit or a Junior Accessory Dwelling Unit associated
with a single-family residence on a lot is permitted, subject to the provisions
of
Chapter 18.09.
(2)   Housing Element opportunity sites (faith-based institutions) only.
(Ord. 5587 § 9, 2023: Ord. 5574 § 4, 2023: Ord. 5542 § 8, 2022: Ord. 5538 § 8,
2021: Ord. 5490 § 2, 2020: Ord. 5412 § 12, 2017: Ord. 4869 § 14 (Exh. A
[part]), 2005: Ord. 5608 § 3, 2024)
18.12.040   Site Development Standards
   (a)   Site Specifications, Building Size, Height and Bulk, and Residential
Density
   The development standards for the R-1 district and the R-1 subdistricts are
shown in Table 2,except:
   (1)   To the extend such standards may be modified by Section
18.42.180 for two-family uses pursuant to California Government Code Section
65852.21 (SB 9, 2021):
   (2)   On Housing Element opportunity sites (faith-based institutions):
development standards for Multiple-Family uses are identified in Section
18.14.020, which states that sites shall meet the development standards for the
RM-30 zoning district, except that Maximum FAR shall be 1.25.
TABLE 2
R-1 RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
     R-1 Subdistricts                                      Subject to
 R-1 R-1 (7,000)* R-1 (8,000)* R-1 (10,000)* R-1 (20,000)* Regulations in
     * Subdistricts based on minimum lot size (sq. ft)     Chapter:
                                 R-1 Subdistricts
                                 R-1      R-1      R-1       R-1       Subject to
                           R-1   (7,000)* (8,000)* (10,000)* (20,000)* Regulations
                                 * Subdistricts based on minimum lot   in Chapter:
                                 size (sq. ft)
Minimum Site
Specifications
Site area (sq. ft.)
All lots except flag lots  6,000 7,000    8,000    10,000    20,000
(1)
Flag lots                  As established by Section 21.20.301
                           (Subdivision Ordinance)
Site Width (ft)            60
Site Depth (ft)            100
Maximum Lot Size
Lot area (sq. ft.)         9,999 13,999   15,999   19,999    39,999    18.12.040
                                                                       (d)
                           Setback lines imposed by a special setback
Minimum Setbacks           map pursuant to Chapter 20.08 of this code
                           may also apply                              18.12.040
Front Yard (ft.)           Contextual                                  (e)
Rear Yard (ft.)            20                                          18.12.050
Interior Side Yard (ft.)   6     8
Street Side Yard (ft.)     16
Maximum Height
(as measured to the peak
of the roof) (ft.)                                                     18.04.030
Standard                   30 (3)                                      (a)(67)
Maximum Height for                                                     18.12.050
buildings with a roof      33 (3)
pitch of 12:12 or greater
With (S) Combining         17 feet; limited to one habitable floor     18.12.100
                           (4,5)
Side Yard Daylight Plane 
(Excludes street side                                                  18.04.030
yards)                                                                 (44)
Initial Height             10 feet at interior side lot line (6)       18.12.050
Angle (Degrees)            45 (6)

Rear Yard Daylight Plane
Initial Height             16 feet at rear setback line (6)            18.12.050
Angle (Degrees)            60 (6)
Maximum Site Coverage:
Single story development   Equivalent to maximum allowable floor area
                           ratio (7)
With (S) Combining         Equivalent to maximum allowable floor area  18.04.030
                           ratio (7)                                   (a)(86A)
Multiple story development 35% (7)
Additional area permitted
to be covered by a patio   5%
or overhang
Maximum Floor Area Ratio
(FAR)                                                                  Table 3
First 5,000 sq. ft. of lot .45                                         18.04.030
size                                                                   (a)(65C)
Square footage of lot size                                             18.12.040
in excess of 5,000 sq. ft. .30                                         (b)

Maximum House Size (sq.    6,000 (8)                                    
ft.)
Residential Density        One unit, except as provided in Section      
                           18.12.090
                           See Residential Parking, Section            Chs.
Parking                    18.12.060                                   18.52,
                                                                       18.54
 
* Subdistricts may be reflected on the Zoning Map as R-1(650), R-l(743), R-l
(929) and R-1(1,858), respectively, reflecting the minimum lot size in square
meters rather than in square feet.
Notes to Table 2:
   (1)   Minimum Lot Size: Any lot less than the minimum lot size may be used
in accordance with the provisions of Section
18.40.080.
   (2)   Contextual Front Setbacks: See Section
18.12.040(e) for application of contextual front setbacks.
   (3)   R-1 Floodzone Heights: Provided, in a special flood hazard area as
defined in
Chapter 16.52, the maximum heights are increased by one-half of the increase in
elevation required to reach base flood elevation, up to a maximum building
height of 33 feet.
   (4)   R-1 (S) Height Limitations: Habitable floors include lofts,
mezzanines, and similar areas with interior heights of five feet (5') or more
from the roof to the floor, but shall exclude finished basements and shall
exclude attics that have no stairway or built-in access.
   (5)   R-1 (S) Floodzone Heights: Provided, in a special flood hazard area as
defined in
Chapter 16.52, the maximum height is increased by one-half of the increase in
elevation required to reach base flood elevations, up to a maximum building
height of 20 feet.
   (6)   R-1 Floodzone Daylight Plane: Provided, if the site is in a special
flood hazard area and is entitled to an increase in the maximum height, the
heights for the daylight planes shall be adjusted by the same amount.
   (7)   Site Coverage: The covering of a court is exempt from the calculation
of site coverage provided that the court existed prior to July 20, 1978.
   (8)   Maximum House Size: The gross floor area of attached garages are
included in the calculation of maximum house size. If there is no garage
attached to the house, then the square footage of one detached covered parking
space shall be included in the calculation.
   (b)   Gross Floor Area Summary
   The following table summarizes how "gross floor area" is counted, for the
purpose of compliance with floor area ratio limits outlined in Table 2. "Gross
floor area" means the total covered area of all floors of a main structure and
accessory structures greater than one hundred twenty square feet in area,
including covered parking and stairways, measured to the outside surface of
stud walls, subject to the following inclusions, conditions, and exclusions.
For exact language, refer to Section
18.04.030(a)(65), Gross Floor Area definition.
TABLE 3
SUMMARY OF GROSS FLOOR AREA FOR SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Description Included In GFA Excluded from GFA
Description                   Included In GFA             Excluded from GFA
Accessory structures greater  *                            
than 120 sq. ft.
Second floor equivalent;      * (counted twice)            
areas with heights >17'
Third floor equivalent: areas * (counted three times)      
with heights > 26'
Third floor equivalent, where                            * up to 200 sq.ft. of
roof pitch is > 4:12                                      unusable space
Garages and carports          *                            
Porte cocheres                                           *
Entry feature < 12' in
height, if not substantially  * (counted once)             
enclosed and not recessed
Vaulted entry > 12' in height * (footprint counted twice)  
Fireplace footprint           * (counted once)             
First floor roofed or                                    *
unenclosed porches
First floor recessed porches
<10' in depth and open on                                *
exterior side
Second floor roofed or
enclosed porches, arcades,    *                            
balconies, porticos, breeze-
ways
Basements (complying with
patio & lightwell
requirements described in                                *
Section
18.12.090)
Areas on floors above the
first floor where the height
from the floor level to the   *                            
underside of the rafter or
finished roof surface is 5'
or greater
Bay windows (if at least 18"
above interior floor, does
not project more than 2', and                            *
more than 50% is covered by
windows)
Basement area for Category 1
- 4 Historic Homes or
contributing structure within
a historic district, and
individually listed homes on
the National Register of                                 *
Historic Places or California
Register of Historic
Resources (even if the
finished level of the first
floor is greater than 3'
above grade)
Usable attic space for
Category 1- 4 Historic Homes
or contributing structure
within a historic district,
and individually listed homes                            * (up to 500 sq.ft.)
on the National Register of
Historic Places or California
Register of Historical
Resources
 
   (c)   Substandard and Flag Lots
   The following site development regulations shall apply to all new
construction on substandard and flag lots in lieu of comparable provisions in
subsection (a).
      (1)   Substandard Lots
         (A)   For the purposes of this subsection (c), a substandard lot shall
be a lot with a width of less than 50 feet or a depth of less than 83 feet and
an area less than 83% of the minimum area required by the zoning of the parcel.
         (B)   Development standards:
            (i)   The maximum height shall be 17 feet, as measured to the peak
of the roof.
            (ii)   There shall be a limit of one habitable floor. Habitable
floors include loft, mezzanines, and similar areas with interior heights of
five feet (5') or more from the roof to the floor, but exclude basements and
exclude attics that have no stairway or built-in access. The chief building
official shall make the final determination as to whether a floor is habitable.
            (iii)   For lots less than 50 feet in width, the required street
side setback shall be 10 feet.
            (iv)   Substandard lots shall not be subject to the R-1 contextual
garage placement requirement.
         (C)   Nothing in this subsection (c) shall affect or otherwise
redefine the provisions of Section
18.40.080(a) as to whether a substandard lot may be used as a lot under this
title.
      (2)   Flag Lots
         (A)   A flag lot shall be defined as set forth in Section
18.04.0
30(a)(84)(B).
         (B)   Flag Lot Development Standards:
            (i)   The maximum height shall be 17 feet, as measured to the peak
of the roof.
            (ii)   There shall be a limit of one habitable floor. Habitable
floors include lofts, mezzanines, and similar areas with interior heights of
five feet (5') or more from the roof to the floor, but exclude basements and
exclude attics that have no stairway or built-in access. The chief building
official shall make the final determination as to whether a floor is habitable.
            (iii)   Front Setback: 10 feet. Flag lots are not subject to
contextual front setback requirements.
   (d)   Maximum Lot Sizes in R-1 District and R-1 Subdistricts
   This provision limits the potential for lot combinations with a net loss of
housing stock and resultant homes that would be out of scale with homes in the
surrounding neighborhood. In the R-1 district and all R-1 subdistricts, no new
lot shall be created equal to or exceeding two times the minimum lot size
prescribed for the district, except that where 6,000 minimum square foot lots
are required in an R-1 district, no new lot shall exceed a maximum lot size of
9,999 square feet, as prescribed in Table 2. Lots larger than the prescribed
maximum size are permitted only under the following circumstances: (i) where a
village residential land use is approved concurrent with the new lot, resulting
in no net loss of housing units on the site(s); (ii) where underlying lots must
be merged to eliminate nonconformities and no net loss of housing units would
result; (iii) where an adjacent substandard lot of less than 25 feet in width
is combined with another lot, resulting in no net loss of housing units on the
site(s); or (iv) where the number of resultant lots increases or stays the same
and results in no net loss of housing units.
   (e)   Contextual Front Setbacks
   The minimum front yard (“setback”) shall be the greater of twenty feet (20')
or the average setback, if the average front setback is 30 feet or more.
“Average setback” means the average distance between the front property line
and the first main structural element, including covered porches, on sites on
the same side of the block, including existing structures on the subject
parcel. This calculation shall exclude flag lots and existing multifamily
developments of three units or more. For calculation purposes, if five (5) or
more properties on the block are counted, the single greatest and the single
least setbacks shall be excluded. The street sideyard setback of corner lots
that have the front side of their parcel (the narrowest street-facing lot line)
facing another street shall be excluded from the calculations. For blocks
longer than 600 feet, the average setback shall be based on no more than ten
sites located on the same side of the street and nearest to the subject
property, plus the subject site, and for a distance no greater than 600 feet.
Blocks with three (3) or fewer eligible parcels are not subject to contextual
setbacks. Structures on the site in no case may be located closer than twenty
feet (20') from the front property line.
   (f)   Contextual Garage and Carport Placement
   If the predominant neighborhood pattern is of garages or carports located
within the rear half of the site, or with no garage or carport present,
attached garages/carports shall be located in the rear half of the house
footprint. Otherwise, an attached garage/carport may be located in the front
half of the house footprint. “Predominant neighborhood pattern” means the
existing garage/carport placement pattern for more than half of the houses on
the same side of the block, including the subject site. This calculation shall
exclude flag lots, corner lots and existing multifamily developments of three
or more units. For blocks longer than 600 feet, the calculations shall be based
on the 10 homes located nearest to and on the same side of the block as the
subject property, plus the subject site, but for a distance no greater than 600
feet. Detached garages/carports shall be located in the rear half of the site
and, if within a rear or side setback, at least 75 feet from the front property
line. Detached garages/carports on lots of less than 95 feet in depth, however,
may be placed in a required interior side or rear yard if located in the rear
half of the lot. Access shall be provided from a rear alley if the existing
development pattern provides for alley access. For the calculation of corner
lots, the “predominant pattern” shall be established for the street where the
new garage/carport fronts.
   (g)   Garage Doors
   For garages located within 50 feet from a street frontage, on lots less than
75 feet in width, the total combined width of garage doors that are parallel to
the street shall not exceed 20 feet.
   (h)   Minimum Permeable Surface in Front Yard
   A minimum of 60% of the required front yard shall have a permeable surface
that permits water absorption directly into the soil. Provided, all sites may
have an impervious 16' x 20' driveway and an impervious 4' x 20' walkway within
the front yard setback.
   (i)   Special Setbacks
   Where applicable, setback lines imposed by a special setback map pursuant to
Chapter 20.08 of this code shall be followed for the purpose of determining
legal setback requirements.
   (j)   Certification of Daylight Plane Compliance
   Upon request by the building official, any person building or making
improvements to a structure shall provide a certification that the structure,
as built, complies with the daylight plane provisions in subsection (a). Such
certification shall be prepared by a licensed engineer, architect, or surveyor,
and shall be provided prior to frame inspection.
   (k)   Lighting
   Recreational and security lighting shall be permitted only so long as the
lighting is shielded so that the direct light does not extend beyond the
property where it is located. Free-standing recreational and security lighting
installed on or later than March 11, 1991 shall be restricted to twelve feet
(12') in height. Direct light from outdoor fixtures shall only fall on the
walls, eaves, and yard areas of the site on which it is located. Outdoor
fixtures shall have lens covers or reflectors that direct the light away from
the neighboring properties.
   (l)   Location of Noise-Producing Equipment and Electrification Equipment
      (1)   Electrification Equipment and any associated housing, screening,
insulation, or bollards necessary to enable compliance with the applicable
regulations, including
Chapter 9.10 of this Code, shall provide a minimum three foot interior side and
rear yard setback and a minimum ten foot street sideyard setback. Except as
otherwise provided in this Title for EVSE and energy storage systems,
Electrification Equipment shall not be located in the required front yard
setback and shall at all times provide sufficient clearance for fire safety
purposes. All other noise-producing equipment, such as gas powered generators,
commercial kitchen fans, and similar service equipment, shall be located
outside of the front, rear and side yard setbacks. Such equipment may, however,
be located up to six feet into a street sideyard setback. All noise-producing
equipment, including Electrification Equipment, shall be insulated and housed,
except where doing so would interfere with the recommended operation of the
equipment. The planning director may also permit installation without housing
and insulation, provided that a combination of technical noise specifications,
location of equipment, and/or other screening or buffering will assure
compliance with the city’s Noise Ordinance at the nearest property line. All
service equipment must meet the city’s Noise Ordinance in
Chapter 9.10 of the Municipal Code.
      (2)   Where existing improvements comply with front setback requirements,
EVSE may encroach up to four feet into the required front setback. Where
existing improvements do not comply with front setback requirements, EVSE may
encroach into the otherwise required front setback by two feet beyond the
existing improvement. EVSE and energy storage systems and associated equipment
and safety bollards may be located within required on-siteparking spaces, as
further described in PAMC
Chapter 18.54 Section
18.54.020.
      (3)   The Planning Director may publish administrative regulations to
further implement this subsection (l), including a list of equipment or
technologies that may presumptively be installed without housing and insulation
due to noise generation below applicable maximums.
   (m)   In addition to the standards contained in and referenced in this
Chapter, single-family residential development, including the development of a
primary residence and one or more accessory dwelling units and development
pursuant to California Government Code Sections 65852.21 and 66411.7 shall
comply with the objective standards for two-story development adopted by the
City Council. However, an applicant seeking to deviate from the objective
standards may submit an application for single family individual review
pursuant to Section
18.12.110.
(Ord. 5656 § 7, 2025: Ord. 5645 § 10, 2025: Ord. 5641 § 10, 2024: Ord. 5601 § 3
(part), 2023: Ord. 5587 § 10, 2023: Ord. 5542 § 9, 2022: Ord. 5538 § 9, 2021:
Ord. 5432 § 6 (part), 2018: Ord. 5412 § 13, 2017: Ord. 5373 § 9 (part), 2016:
Ord. 4964 §§ 11 - 13, 2007: Ord. 4891 § 4, 2006: Ord. 4869 § 14 (Exh. A
[part]), 2005: Ord. 5608 § 4, 2024)
18.12.050   Permitted Encroachments, Projections and Exceptions
   The following projections and encroachments into required yards, daylight
plane and height are permitted, provided a projection shall not be permitted to
encroach into a special setback, as established by the setback map pursuant to
Chapter 20.08 of the Palo Alto Municipal Code, except as noted in subsection
(a)(1)(D) below.
   (a)   Setback/Yard Encroachments and Projections
      (1)   Horizontal Additions
   Where a single-family dwelling legally constructed according to existing
yard and setback regulations at the time of construction encroaches upon
present required yards, one encroaching side (first floor wall) of the existing
structure, at a height not to exceed 12 feet, may be extended in accord with
this section. Only one such extension shall be permitted for the life of such
building. This subsection shall not be construed to allow the further extension
of an encroachment by any building that is the result of the granting of a
variance, either before or after such property became part of the city.
         (A)   Front Yard. In cases where the existing setback is less than 20
feet, but at least 14 feet, the existing encroachment may be extended for a
distance of not more than 100% of the length of the encroaching wall to be
extended; provided, that the total length of the existing encroaching wall and
the additional wall shall together not exceed one-half the maximum existing
width of such building.
         (B)   Interior Side Yard. In cases where the existing setback is less
than 8 feet, but at least 5 feet, the existing encroachment may be extended for
a distance of not more than 100% of the length of the encroaching wall to be
extended but not to exceed 20 additional feet.
         (C)   Street Side Yard. In cases where the existing setback is less
than 16 feet, but at least 10 feet, the existing encroachment may be extended
for a distance of not more than 100% of the length of the encroaching wall to
be extended, but not to exceed 20 feet.
         (D)   Special Setbacks. In cases where a special setback is prescribed
pursuant to
Chapter 20.08 of the Municipal Code, and the existing setback is less than the
special setback distance, and at least 14 feet for the front setback or at
least 10 feet for the street side yard setback, the exiting encroachment may be
extended for a distance of not more than 100% of the length of the encroaching
wall to be extended, provided that the total length of the existing encroaching
wall and the additional wall shall together not exceed one-half the maximum
existing width of such building.
      (2)   Rear Yard Encroachments for Portions of Homes
      A portion of a main building that is less than half the maximum width of
the building may extend into the required rear yard no more than six feet and
with a height of no more than one story, except that for a corner lot having a
common rear property line with an adjoining corner lot, the building may extend
into the required rear yard not more than ten feet with a height of no more
than one story.
      (3)   Allowed Projections
         (A)   Cornices, Eaves, Fireplaces, and Similar Architectural Features
   For cornices, eaves, fireplaces, and similar architectural features,
excluding flat or continuous walls or enclosures of usable interior space, the
following projections are permitted:
            (i)   A maximum of two feet into a required side yard. Fireplaces
in a required side yard may not exceed five feet in width. Fireplaces not
exceeding five feet in width may project into a required side yard no more than
two feet.
            (ii)   A maximum of four feet into a required front yard.
            (iii)   A maximum of four feet into a required rear yard.
         (B)   Window Surfaces
            (i)   Window surfaces, such as bay windows or greenhouse windows,
may extend into a required rear yard a distance not to exceed two feet, into a
required street side setback a distance not to exceed three feet, or into a
required front yard a distance not to exceed three feet.
            (ii)   Window surfaces may not extend into required interior side
yards, with the exception that one greenhouse window with a maximum width of
six feet, framed into a wall, may project into the interior side yard no more
than two feet. The window surface may not extend into any yard above a first
story.
         (C)   Storage Structures
   Storage structures not over six feet in height or twenty-five square feet in
floor area may be located in interior side yards and rear yards according to
the provisions of Section
18.12.080(b) for accessory structures. Where the provisions of Section
18.12.080(b) for front and/or street side yard setbacks are not met, the
following projections are permitted for such structures:
            (i)   A maximum of two feet into a required side yard.
            (ii)   A maximum of four feet into a required front yard.
            (iii)   A maximum of four feet into a required rear yard.
         (D)   Patios, Decks, Stairways, Landings, Balconies, or Fire Escapes
   For uncovered porches (less than 30 inches above grade), patios, decks,
stairways, landings, balconies, or fire escapes the following projections are
permitted, provided these projections are not permitted above the first story:
            (i)   A maximum of three feet into a required side yard.
            (ii)   A maximum of six feet into a required front yard.
            (iii)   A maximum of six feet into a required rear yard.
         (E)   Canopy or Patio Cover
   A canopy or patio cover may be located in the required rear yard or that
portion of the interior side yard, which is more than 75 feet from the street
lot line measured along the common lot line. Such canopies shall be subject to
the following conditions:
            (i)   A canopy or patio cover shall not be more than 12 feet in
height.
            (ii)   The canopy or patio cover shall be included in the
computation of building coverage.
            (iii)   The canopy or patio cover and other structures shall not
occupy more than fifty percent of the required rear yard.
            (iv)   The canopy or patio cover shall not be enclosed on more than
two sides.
         (F)   Pools, Spas, and Hot Tubs and Associated Electrification
Equipment
            (i)   Pools, spas, and hot tubs may extend into a required rear
yard a distance not to exceed fourteen feet, provided that a minimum setback of
six feet from the property line shall be maintained.
            (ii)   No swimming pool, hot tub, spa, or similar accessory
facility shall be located in any portion of a required front or street side
yard.
            (iii)   Electrification Equipment for pools, spas, hot tubs, and
swimming pools subject to meeting the standards set forth in Table 1 of Section
9.10.030.
   (b)   Height and Daylight Plane Exceptions
      (1)   Height Exceptions
   Flues, chimneys, and antennas may exceed the established height limit by not
more than 15 feet.
      (2)   Daylight Plane Exceptions
   The following features may extend beyond the daylight plane established by
the applicable district, provided that such features do not exceed the height
limit for the district unless permitted to do so by subsection (b)(1) above:
         (A)   Television and radio antennas;
         (B)   Chimneys and flues that do not exceed 5 feet in width, provided
that chimneys do not extend past the required daylight plane a distance
exceeding the minimum allowed pursuant to
Chapter 16.04 of this code.
         (C)   Dormers, roof decks, gables, or similar architectural features,
provided that:
            (i)   the sum of the horizontal lengths of all such features shall
not exceed 15 feet on each side; and
            (ii)   the height of such features does not exceed 24 feet;
            (iii)   no single feature exceeds 7.5 feet in length; and
            (iv)   there is a minimum 5 foot separation between each feature.
         (D)   Cornices, eaves, and similar architectural features, excluding
flat or continuous walls or enclosures of usable interior space, provided such
features do not extend past the daylight plane more than 2 feet.
(Ord. 5601 § 3 (part), 2023: Ord. 5373 § 9 (part), 2016; Ord. 4964 § 14, 2007:
Ord. 4869 § 14 (Exh. A [part]), 2005)
18.12.060   Parking
   Off-street parking and loading facilities shall be required for all
permitted and conditional uses in accord with Chapters
18.52 and
18.54 of this title. The following parking requirements apply in the R- 1
districts. These requirements are included for reference purposes only, and in
the event of a conflict between this Section
18.12.060 and any requirement of Chapters
18.52 and
18.54, Chapters
18.52 and
18.54 shall apply, except in the case of parcels created pursuant to Section
18.10.140(c) (subdivision incentive for historic preservation).
   (a)   Parking Requirements for Specific Uses
   Table 4 shows the minimum off-street automobile parking requirements for
specific uses within the R-1 district.
   Table 4 shows the minimum off-street automobile parking requirements for
specific uses.*
* Editor’s Note: As set forth in Ord. 5051 § 5, 2009. Future legislation will
correct the text if needed.
Table 4
Parking Requirements for Specific R-1 Uses
Use Minimum Off-Street Parking Requirement
Table 4
Parking Requirements for Specific R-1 Uses
Use                                     Minimum Off-Street Parking Requirement
Single-family residential use           2 spaces per unit, of which one must be
(excluding accessory dwelling units)    covered.
                                        1 space per unit. No spaces required if
Two family use pursuant to California   located within one-half mile walking
Government Code Section 65852.21 (SB 9, distance of either a high-quality
2021)                                   transit corridor or a major transit
                                        stop, or located within one block of a
                                        car share vehicle.
Accessory dwelling unit, attached or    No parking required
detached
Junior accessory dwelling unit          No parking required
Other Uses                              See Chs. 18.52 and 18.54
 
   (b)   Parking and Driveway Surfaces
      Parking and driveway surfaces may have either permeable or impermeable
paving. Materials shall be those acceptable to public works department
standards. Gravel and similar loose materials shall not be used for driveway or
parking surfaces within 10 feet of the public right of way.
   (c)   Parking in Yards
      (1)   No required parking space shall be located in a required front
yard.
      (2)   No required parking space shall be located in the first ten feet
adjoining the property line of a required street side yard.
   (d)   Tandem Parking
      Tandem parking shall be permitted for single-family uses and for single-
family uses with a permitted second dwelling unit.
   (e)   Underground Parking
      Underground parking is prohibited for single-family uses, except pursuant
to a variance granted in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 18.76, in which case the area of the underground garage shall be
counted in determining the floor area ratio for the site.
   (f)   Design of Parking Areas
      Parking facilities shall comply with all applicable regulations of
Chapter 18.54 (Parking Facility Design Standards).
(Ord. 5587 § 11, 2023: Ord. 5542 § 10, 2022: Ord. 5538 § 10, 2021: Ord. 5412 §
14, 2017: Ord. 5373 § 9 (part), 2016; Ord. 5051 § 5, 2009: Ord. 4869 § 14 (Exh.
A [part]), 2005)
18.12.070   Accessory and Junior Accessory Dwelling Units
   Accessory Dwelling Units and Junior Accessory Dwelling Units are subject to
the regulations set forth in
Chapter 18.09.
(Ord. 5587 § 12, 2023: Ord. 5542 § 11, 2022: Ord. 5538 § 11, 2021: Ord. 5412 §
15, 2017)
18.12.080   Accessory Uses and Facilities
   Accessory uses and facilities, as allowed in Section
18.12.030, shall be permitted when incidental to and associated with a
permitted use or facility in the R-1 district or R-1 subdistricts, or when
incidental to and associated with an allowable and authorized conditional use
therein, subject to the provisions of subsection (a), below (Types of Accessory
Uses).
   (a)   Types of Accessory Uses
   Accessory uses and facilities include, but are not limited to, the following
list of examples; provided that each accessory use or facility shall comply
with the provisions of this title:
      (1)   Residential garages, carports, and parking facilities, together
with access and circulation elements necessary thereto;
      (2)   Facilities for storage incidental to a permitted use; and
      (3)   Recreational uses and facilities for the use and convenience of
occupants or employees, or guests thereof, of a principal use or facility.
   (b)   Location and Development Standards
   Except as otherwise provided in this section, accessory buildings shall at
all times be located in conformance with requirements for principal buildings,
and shall not be located in any required front, side, or rear yard. See Section
18.12.050(a)(3)(C) for allowed encroachments for small storage structures.
Accessory buildings may be located in a required interior yard subject to the
following limitations:
      (1)   An accessory building shall not be used for living and/or sleeping
purposes unless the building was legally constructed for or was legally
converted to living and/or sleeping purposes prior to October 13, 1983.
      (2)   An accessory building shall not be located in a required front
yard, required street yard, or required rear yard of a through lot.
      (3)   An accessory building shall not be located in a required interior
side or rear yard unless the building is placed at least seventy-five feet from
the front lot line and for corner lots at least twenty feet from the street
side lot line. Additionally, on lots of less than 95 feet in depth, detached
garages and carports may be located in a required interior side or rear yard if
placed in the rear half of the lot.
      (4)   Accessory buildings located within a required interior yard as
permitted by this section shall be subject to a maximum height established by a
daylight plane beginning at a height of eight feet at the property line and
increasing at a slope of one foot for every three feet of distance from the
property line, to a maximum height of twelve feet.
      (5)   No accessory building greater than 200 square feet in size shall
have more than two plumbing fixtures. Accessory buildings shall not be allowed
to be turned into habitable space nor shall these structures be allowed to have
showers (indoor or outdoor), gas lines, washer/dryers, and/or cooking
facilities to be provided inside or attached to the structure, unless the
structure is proposed as an ADU/JADU that satisfies all requirements of the
Palo Alto Municipal Code.
      (6)   Accessory buildings located within a required interior yard, as
permitted by this section, shall not individually or cumulatively occupy an
area exceeding fifty percent of the required rear yard.
      (7)   The minimum distance between separate buildings located on the same
site shall be as required by Title 16; provided, accessory buildings in the
single-family residential (R-1) district shall be separated from the principal
building by at least three feet.
      (8)   A principal building and an accessory building, meeting the
requirements of Title 16 and each located on a site as otherwise permitted for
the principal building and accessory buildings, may be connected by a structure
meeting the definition of a breezeway. Such structure, or breezeway, shall be a
part of the accessory building.
(Ord. 5585 § 5, 2023: Ord. 4869 § 14 (Exh. A [part]), 2005)
18.12.090   Basements
   Basements shall be permitted in areas that are not designated as special
flood hazard areas as defined in
Chapter 16.52, and are subject to the following regulations:
   (a)   Permitted Basement Area
      Basements may not extend beyond the building footprint and basements are
not allowed below any portion of a structure that extends into required
setbacks, except to the extent that the main residence is permitted to extend
into the rear yard setback by other provisions of this code. Basements which
serve the primary unit may not extend under an attached ADU or JADU to the
extent those secondary units utilize the bonus floor area, lot coverage, and/or
maximum house size exemptions identified in
Chapter 18.09.
   (b)   Inclusion as Gross Floor Area
      Basements shall not be included in the calculation of gross floor area,
provided that:
      (1)   basement area is not deemed to be habitable space, such as
crawlspace; or
      (2)   basement area is deemed to be habitable space but the finished
level of the first floor is no more than three feet above the grade around the
perimeter of the building foundation; or
      (3)   basement area is associated with a historic property as described
in Section
18.04.030(a)(65)(D)(vii).
   (c)   Lightwells, Stairwells, Below Grade Patios and other Excavated
Features
      (1)   Lightwells, stairwells, and similar excavated features along the
perimeter of the basement shall not affect the measurement of grade for the
purposes of determining gross floor area, provided that the following criteria
are met:
         (A)   such features are not located in the front of the building;
         (B)   such features shall not exceed 3 feet in width;
         (C)   the cumulative length of all such features does not exceed 30%
of the perimeter of the basement;
         (D)   such features do not extend more than 3 feet into a required
side yard nor more than 4 feet into a required rear yard, but where a side yard
is less than 6 feet in width, the features shall not encroach closer than 3
feet from the adjacent side property line;
         (E)   the cumulative length of any features or portions of features
that extend into a required side or rear yard does not exceed 15 feet in
length;
         (F)   the owner provides satisfactory evidence to the planning
division prior to issuance of a building permit that any features or portions
of features that extend into a required side or rear yard will not be harmful
to any mature trees on the subject property or on abutting properties; and
         (G)   such features have either a drainage system that meets the
requirements of the public works department or are substantially sheltered from
the rain by a roof overhang or canopy of a permanent nature.
      (2)   Below-grade patios, sunken gardens, or similar excavated areas
along the perimeter of the basement that exceed the dimensions set forth in
subsection (1), are permitted and shall not affect the measurement of grade for
the purposes of determining gross floor area, provided that:
         (A)   such areas are not located in the front of the building;
         (B)   all such areas combined do not exceed 2% of the area of the lot
or 200 square feet, whichever is greater; that each such area does not exceed
200 square feet; and that each such area is separated from another by a
distance of at least 10 feet. Area devoted to required stairway access shall
not be included in the 200 square foot limitation.
         (C)   such features do not extend more than 2 feet into a required
side yard nor more than 4 feet into a required rear yard;
         (D)   the cumulative length of any excavated area or portion thereof
that extends into a required side or rear yard does not exceed 15 feet;
         (E)   the owner provides satisfactory evidence to the planning
director prior to issuance of a building permit that any features or portions
of features that extend into a required side or rear yard will not be harmful
to any mature trees on the subject property or on abutting properties;
         (F)   such features have either a drainage system that meets the
requirements of the public works department or are substantially sheltered from
the rain by a roof overhang or canopy of a permanent nature;
         (G)   any roof overhang or canopy installed pursuant to subsection (F)
is within and is counted toward the site coverage requirements established in
Section
18.12.040;
         (H)   such areas are architecturally compatible with the residence;
and
         (I)   such areas are screened to off-site views by means of
landscaping and/or fencing as determined appropriate by the planning director.
(Ord. 5585 § 8, 2023: Ord. 5432 § 6 (part), 2018: Ord. 5412 § 16, 2017: Ord.
4869 § 14 (Exh. A [part]), 2005)
18.12.100   Regulations for the Single Story Overlay (S) Combining District
   (a)   Applicability of District
   The single-story height combining district may be combined with the R-
1 single family residence district or with any R-1 subdistrict. Where so
combined, the regulations established by this section shall apply in lieu of
the comparable provisions established by Section
18.12.040. All applicable provisions of that section shall otherwise govern
development in the combining district.
   (b)   Site Development Regulations
   For sites within the single-story height combining district, the following
site development regulations shall apply in lieu of the otherwise applicable
site development regulations of Section
18.12.040:
      (1)   The maximum height shall be 17 feet, as measured to the peak of the
roof; provided, in a special flood hazard area as defined in
Chapter 16.52, the maximum height is increased by one-half of the increase in
elevation required to reach base flood elevation, up to a maximum building
height of 20 feet.
      (2)   There shall be a limit of one habitable floor. Habitable floors
include lofts, mezzanines and similar areas but exclude basements and exclude
attics that have no stairway or built-in access. Lofts and mezzanines include
any space above the first floor in excess of five feet (5') from the floor to
the roof above.
   (c)   Application for a Single Story (S) Combining District
      (1)   Application to create or remove a single-story overlay district may
be made by an owner of record of property located in the single-story overlay
district to be created or removed.
      (2)   Application shall be made to the director on a form prescribed by
the director, and shall contain all of the following:
         (A)   A written statement setting forth the reasons for the
application and all facts relied upon by the applicant in support thereof.
         (B)   A map of the district to be created or removed that includes the
address location of those owners whose properties are subject to the zoning
request. Boundaries shall correspond with certain natural or man-made features
(including, but not limited to, roadways, waterways, tract boundaries and
similar features) to define an identifiable neighborhood or development. For
creation of a single-story overlay district, the area shall be of a prevailing
single story character, such that a minimum of 80% of existing homes within the
boundaries are single story.
         (C)   For creating a single-story overlay district, a list of
signatures evidencing support by: (i) 70% of included properties; or (ii) 60%
of included properties where all included properties are subject to recorded
deed restrictions intended to limit building height to a single story, whether
or not such restrictions have been enforced. For the removal of a single-story
overlay district, a list of signatures evidencing support by 70% of included
properties, whether or not deed restrictions intended to limit the building
height to single story apply. "Included properties" means all those properties
inside the boundaries of the district proposed to be created or removed. The
written statement or statements accompanying the signatures must state that the
signer is indicating support for a zone map amendment that affects his or her
property. One signature is permitted for each included property, and a
signature evidencing support of an included property must be by an owner of
record of that property.
         (D)   Such additional information as the director may deem pertinent
and essential to the application.
      (3)   An application for creation or removal of a single-story (S)
overlay district made in accordance with this subsection (c) shall be processed
in accordance with
Chapter 18.98.
(Ord. 5373 § 9 (part), 2016; Ord. 4869 § 14 (Exh. A [part]), 2005)
18.12.110   Single Family Individual Review
   (a)   Purpose
   The goals and purposes of this chapter are to:
      (1)   Preserve the unique character of Palo Alto neighborhoods;
      (2)   Promote new construction that is compatible with existing
residential neighborhoods;
      (3)   Encourage respect for the surrounding context in which residential
construction and alteration takes place;
      (4)   Foster consideration of neighbors' concerns with respect to
privacy, scale and massing, and streetscape; and
      (5)   Enable the emergence of new neighborhood design patterns that
reflect awareness of each property's effect upon neighboring properties.
   This program is intended only to mitigate the effects of second story
construction on neighboring homes, and should not be construed to prohibit
second story construction when this title would otherwise permit it.
   (b)   Applicability
   The provisions of this Section
18.12.110 apply to the construction that does not comply with the objective
standards for two-story development adopted by the City Council. Such projects
include construction of a new singly developed two-story structure; the
construction of a new second story; or the expansion of an existing second
story by more than 150 square feet in the R-1 single family residential
district. All second-story additions on a site after November 19, 2001 shall be
included in calculating whether an addition is over 150 square feet.
   (c)   Individual Review Guidelines
   The director of planning and development services shall issue guidelines to
direct staff and project applicants in implementing the goals and purposes and
other provisions of this chapter. Guidelines establishing substantive review
standards for second story development shall be presented to the planning and
transportation commission for their comment prior to adoption or amendment by
the director.
   (d)   Findings
   Neither the director, nor the city council on appeal, shall grant an
individual review approval, unless it is found that the application is
consistent with the individual review guidelines.
   (e)   Conditions
   In granting individual review approvals, reasonable conditions or
restrictions may be imposed if appropriate or necessary to protect the public
health, safety, general welfare, or convenience, and to secure the purposes of
this title (Zoning).
   (f)   Application Review and Action
   Applications for individual review approval shall be reviewed and acted upon
as set forth in Section
18.77.075.
   (g)   Preliminary Meeting with Planning Staff
   Project applicants are strongly encouraged, before applying for individual
review of a project, to meet with planning staff to discuss designing a project
that promotes the goals of this chapter and the individual review guidelines,
and to discuss the proposed plans with their neighbors.
   (h)   Changes to Approved Projects
   The director may approve changes to a previously approved individual review
project without following the procedure set forth in Section
18.77.075 if those changes do not affect compliance with the individual review
guidelines. Examples of such changes include:
      (1)   Reductions in window or door size, or reductions in the number of
windows.
      (2)   Changes to aspects of the project not reviewed under individual
review, such as materials or non-street-facing first story windows.
      (3)   Changes that do not affect privacy/streetscape.
      (4)   Increases in setbacks.
      (5)   Reductions in second floor mass that do not affect privacy or
streetscape.
(Ord. 5645 § 11, 2025: Ord. 5641 § 11, 2024: Ord. 5494 § 3, 2020: Ord. 4869 §
14 (Exh. A [part]), 2005)
18.12.120   Home Improvement Exceptions
   (a)   Purpose
   A home improvement exception ("HIE") enables a home improvement or minor
addition to an existing single-family or two-family home, or accessory
structure, or both, to be consistent with the existing architectural style of
the house or neighborhood, to accommodate a significant or protected tree, or
to protect the integrity of a historic structure in conformance with the
Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Historic Rehabilitation. By enabling
adaptive reuse of existing buildings, the home improvement exception promotes
retention of existing houses within the city.
   (b)   Applicability
   A home improvement exception may be granted as part of a proposed
improvement or addition to an existing single-family or two-family structure,
or accessory structure, or both, in the RE, R-1, RMD, or R-2 district, as
limited in subsection (c). A home improvement exception may be granted as
described in subsections (1) through (16) of subsection (c), but may not exceed
the limits set forth in those subsections. In order to qualify for a home
improvement exception, the project must retain at least 75% of the existing
exterior walls, including exterior finishes such as siding or cladding.
   (c)   Limits of the Home Improvement Exception
   A home improvement exception may be granted only for one or more of the
following, not to exceed the specified limits:
      (1)   To allow up to 100 square feet of floor area more than the maximum
square footage allowed on the site by the applicable zoning district
regulations except when an exception is granted under subsection (c)(10) for
residences designated as historic structures.
      (2)   To allow the primary building to encroach up to 4 feet into a
required front yard setback.
      (3)   To allow the primary building to encroach up to 3 feet into a
required rear yard setback.
      (4)   To allow the primary building to encroach up to 2 feet into a
required interior side yard setback.
      (5)   To allow the primary building to encroach up to 6 feet into a
required street side yard setback (no closer than 10 feet to the property
line).
      (6)   To allow a basement to encroach, along with above grade floor area,
as set forth in items 2, 3, 4, or 5.
      (7)   To allow an encroaching dormer, roof deck, gable, or similar
architectural feature to exceed 24 feet in height by up to three feet.
      (8)   To allow a single dormer, roof deck, gable, or similar
architectural feature that encroaches into the rear daylight plane to exceed
7.5 feet in length. In no event shall the maximum length exceed 15 feet.
      (9)   To permit a site with an existing two-story structure to exceed lot
coverage requirements in order to locate remaining available FAR for the site
on the first floor.
      (10)   For any residence designated on the city's Historic Inventory as a
Category 1 through 4 historic structure as defined in Section
16.49.020 of the Palo Alto Municipal Code or any contributing structure within
a locally designated historic district, to allow up to 250 square feet of floor
area in excess of that allowed on the site, provided that any requested
addition or exterior modifications associated with the HIE shall be in
substantial conformance with the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for
Historic Rehabilitation. The property owner who is granted a home improvement
exception under this subsection (10) shall be required to sign and record a
covenant against the property, acceptable to the city attorney, which requires
that the property be maintained in accordance with the Secretary of the
Interior's Standards for Historic Rehabilitation.
      (11)   To allow a legal non-conforming building wall that is between 3.5
and 5 feet from the side lot line to be extended up to one-quarter of the
length of the existing wall or ten feet, whichever is shorter.
      (12)   To allow a horizontal extension (pursuant to Section
18.12.050(a) (Setback/Yard Encroachments and Projections) of a portion of an
existing legal nonconforming building wall that is more than twelve feet above
grade. Such horizontal extensions must remain within the height and daylight
plane limits for the district unless an HIE or variance for a height or
daylight plane encroachment is granted.
      (13)   To allow an increase in the height of an existing legally non-
conforming building wall that encroaches into a setback. Such vertical
extensions must remain within the height and daylight plane limits for the
district unless an HIE or variance for a height or daylight plane encroachment
is granted.
      (14)   To allow, for single-story accessory structures within rear and/or
side setbacks, one or more of the following:
         (A)   On a corner lot, a detached accessory structure may be as close
as ten feet from the street side property line. For detached garages and
carports, the exception may be granted as long as a minimum dimension of 18
feet remains between the back of sidewalk and face of the garage or carport
supports.
         (B)   Four feet additional height above the twelve foot maximum
height, as long as the side daylight plane is met.
         (C)   A rear daylight plane encroachment of up to three feet.
      (15)   To allow similar minor exceptions, when determined by the director
to be similar in magnitude and scope to those listed in subsections (1) through
(14) above. Provided, under no circumstances may such exceptions exceed the
limits established in subsections (1) through (14) above.
      (16)   To allow Electrification Equipment to exceed the noise ordinance
standards set forth in Section
9.10.030(c).
   (d)   Findings
   Neither the director, nor the city council on appeal, shall grant a home
improvement exception unless it is found that:
      (1)   The granting of the application is desirable for the preservation
of an existing architectural style, neighborhood character, protected tree as
defined in
Chapter 8.10, or other significant tree, or of a residence that is designated
on the city's Historic Inventory as a Category 1 or Category 2 historic
structure as defined in Section
16.49.020 of the Palo Alto Municipal Code, or any contributing structure within
a locally designated historic district, which would not otherwise be
accomplished through the strict application of the regulations; and
      (2)   The granting of the application will not be detrimental or
injurious to property or improvements in the vicinity and will not be
detrimental to the public health, safety, general welfare, or convenience; and
      (3)   The exception is being granted based on characteristics of the
property and improvements on the property, rather than the personal
circumstances of the applicant, and is the minimum exception necessary for the
project to fulfill the purposes of subsection (a).
   (e)   Conditions
   In granting home improvement exceptions, reasonable conditions or
restrictions may be imposed if appropriate or necessary to protect the public
health, safety, general welfare, or convenience, and to secure the purposes of
this title (Zoning).
   (f)   Application Review and Action
   Applications for home improvement exceptions shall be reviewed and acted
upon as set forth in Section
18.77.075.
(Ord. 5601 § 3 (part), 2023: Ord. 5432 § 6 (part), 2018: Ord. 5373 § 9 (part),
2016; Ord. 4869 § 14 (Exh. A [part]), 2005)
18.12.130   Architectural Review
   Architectural review, as required in Chapters
18.76 and
18.77 of the Zoning Ordinance, is required in the R-1 district and R-
1 subdistricts whenever three or more adjacent single family residences or
duplexes are intended to be developed concurrently, whether through subdivision
or individual applications. In addition to the existing ARB findings contained
in Chapters
18.76 and
18.77, the single family individual review guidelines shall be used by the ARB
in its review of such applications.
(Ord. 4869 § 14 (Exh. A [part]), 2005)
18.12.140   Historical Review and Incentives
   (a)   Historic residence review, as required in
Chapter 16.49 of Title 16 of the Palo Alto Municipal Code, is required in the
R-1 district and R-1 subdistricts for alterations or modifications to any
residence designated on the city’s Historic Inventory as Category 1 or Category
2 historic structure as defined in Section
16.49.020 of this code or any contributing structure located within a locally
designated historic district. The Category 1 or Category 2 designation process
for becoming a historic structure is contained in
Chapter 16.49 of Title 16 of the Municipal Code.
   (b)   Exemptions to gross floor area requirements are available for historic
residences pursuant to the definition of gross floor area in Section
18.04.030(65)(C)(ii). Home improvement exceptions provide for additional square
footage and certain other exceptions for historic homes pursuant to Section
18.12.120.
   (c)   Notwithstanding other provisions of this chapter, existing parcels
containing two residences may be subdivided into more than one ownership, where
all of the following circumstances exist:
      (1)   At least one residence is designated on the City’s Historic
Inventory as a Category 1, Category 2, Category 3, or Category 4 historic
structure as defined in Section
16.49.020 of this code or are contributing structures located within a locally
designated historic district or are eligible for the National or California
Registers; and
      (2)   No increase in the total number of residences on the site is
proposed; and
      (3)   Separate lots are proposed to be created, each with a minimum lot
size not less than 4,000 square feet in the R-1 district if only one residence
is historic or 80% of the minimum lot size for the R-1 subdistricts; if both
residences are historic and subject to a covenant, the allowable minimum lot
size is 2,000 square feet; and
      (4)   The resultant parcel lines may create less than minimum lot size
(no less than the area stated in item (3) of this section), site width and
depth, setback and daylight plane encroachments, floor area and site coverage
exceeding the maximum allowable for existing development with respect to each
new parcel, without the need for approval of a Variance or Home Improvement
Exception, but would not generally increase any existing noncomplying building
features; however, minor additions for functional improvements may be allowed
at the discretion of the Director of Planning and Development Services; and
      (5)   The Historic Resources Board has determined that at least one
existing residence on the property has historic integrity and qualifies for
listing on the City’s Historic Inventory.
      (6)   A covenant is recorded to run with the land in perpetuity, assuring
that the historic residences will be preserved and maintained consistent with
the Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for Historic Rehabilitation through
compliance with Historic Resources Board review and recommendations. The
covenant will stipulate that HRB review is required for all major projects on
the site including significant changes to any non-historic residence. Any
modifications to a non-historic residence must be compatible with the historic
residence and satisfy the Secretary of Interior’s Standards for Historic
Compatibility.
      (7)   The two residences on the property were in existence as of January
28, 2009.
      (8)   Application of the state Historic Building Code is available for
use on any eligible building.
      (9)   Residences subject to a covenant must meet all government health,
life and safety codes.
(Ord. 5494 § 3, 2020: Ord. 5051 § 4, 2009: Ord. 4869 § 14 (Exh. A [part]),
2005)
18.12.150   Grandfathered Uses
   (a)   Applicability
   The uses specified in subsection (b) of this section may remain as
grandfathered uses provided that those uses:
      (1)   are located in the specified district;
      (2)   existed on the specified date;
      (3)   on that date, were lawful permitted uses or conditional uses
operating subject to a conditional use permit; and
      (4)   on that date were conforming uses.
   (b)   Grandfathered Uses
      (1)   Professional and medical office uses (except product testing and
analysis, and prototype development), existing on July 20, 1978 or such uses
which were, prior to July 20, 1978, located in an R-1 district which was
imposed by reason of annexation of the property to the city without benefit of
prezoning and which, prior to the date of annexation, were lawful conforming
permitted uses or conditional uses operating subject to a conditional use
permit.
      (2)   Two family uses, except where one of the units is a legal
nonconforming detached single-family dwelling on a substandard lot size, and
multiple family uses existing on July 20, 1978 or such uses which were, prior
to July 20, 1978, located in an R-1 district which was imposed by reason of
annexation of the property to the city without benefit of prezoning and which,
prior to the date of annexation, were lawful, conforming permitted uses or
conditional uses operating subject to a conditional use permit.
   (c)   Permitted Changes
   The following regulations shall apply to the grandfathered uses specified in
subsection (b):
      (1)   Such uses shall be permitted to remodel, improve, or replace site
improvements on the same site, for continual use and occupancy by the same use,
provided that:
         (A)   such remodeling, improvement or replacement shall not:
            (i)   result in increased floor area;
            (ii)   result in an increase in the number of offices, in the case
of professional or medical office uses, or dwellings, in the case of
residential uses;
            (iii)   result in shifting of building footprint;
            (iv)   increase the height, length, building envelope, or size of
the improvement; and
            (v)   increase the existing degree of noncompliance, except through
the granting of a design enhancement exception pursuant to
Chapter 18.76.
      (2)   If a grandfathered use ceases and thereafter remains discontinued
for twelve consecutive months, it shall be considered abandoned and may be
replaced only by a conforming use.
      (3)   A grandfathered use that is changed to or replaced by a conforming
use shall not be reestablished, and any portion of a site or any portion of a
building, the use of which changes from a grandfathered use to a conforming
use, shall not thereafter be used except to accommodate a conforming use.
      (4)   The following additional regulations shall apply to grandfathered
professional or medical office uses:
         (A)   Any remodeling, improvement, or replacement of any building
designed and constructed for residential use shall be subject to the issuance
of a conditional use permit in accord with
Chapter 18.76.
         (B)   In the event of redevelopment of all or a portion of the site
for permitted residential uses, professional and medical office uses may not be
incorporated in the redevelopment; except that
         (C)   This provision shall not apply to permanent conversion to
residential use of space within an existing structure now used for professional
and medical office uses.
   (d)   (Reserved)
   (e)   Existing Homes on Substandard Lots.
   In the R-1 district and all R-1 subdistricts, single-family and two-family
homes on substandard lots, as defined in Subsection
18.12.040(c)(1), and flag lots existing on August 1, 1991 and which prior to
that date were lawful, complying structures, may remain and be remodeled,
improved, or replaced without complying with the height and habitable floor
limitations for substandard lots specified in Section
18.12.030, provided that:
      (1)   any such remodeling, improvement, or replacement does not result in
a height above seventeen feet or any additional habitable floor area above a
first habitable floor, except that any structure damaged or destroyed by a
natural disaster (such as fire, flood or earthquake) may be replaced to its
previous size without regard to the height and habitable floor limitations
imposed by this section; and
      (2)   in the case of a conflict between the provisions of this section
and the provisions of
Chapter 18.70, this section shall control.
(Ord. 5412 § 17, 2017: Ord. 4869 § 14 (Exh. A [part]), 2005)
Chapter 18.13
MULTIPLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL
(RM-20, RM-30 AND RM-40) DISTRICTS
Sections:
   
18.13.010   Purposes
   
18.13.020   Applicable Regulations
   
18.13.030   Land Uses
   
18.13.040   Development Standards
   
18.13.045   Increased Floor Area for Housing Developments of 3-10 Units
   
18.13.050   Village Residential Development
   
18.13.055   General Standards, Exceptions, and Performance Criteria
   
18.13.060   Multiple Family Context-Based Design Criteria and Objective Design
Standards
   
18.13.070   Grandfathered Uses
18.13.010   Purposes
   This section specifies regulations for three multiple family residential
districts.
   (a)   RM-20 Low Density Multiple-Family Residence District [RM-20]
      The RM-20 low-density multiple-family residence district is intended to
create, preserve and enhance areas for a mixture of single-family and multiple-
family housing which is compatible with lower density and residential districts
nearby, including single-family residence districts. The RM-20 residence
district also serves as a transition to moderate density multiple-family
districts or districts with nonresidential uses. Permitted densities in the RM-
20 residence district range from eight to twenty dwelling units per acre.
   (b)   RM-30 Medium Density Multiple-Family Residence District [RM-30]
      The RM-30 medium density multiple-family residence district is intended
to create, preserve and enhance neighborhoods for multiple-family housing with
site development standards and visual characteristics intended to mitigate
impacts on nearby lower density residential districts. Projects at this density
are intended for larger parcels that will enable developments to provide their
own parking spaces and to meet their open space needs in the form of garden
apartments or cluster developments. Permitted densities in the RM-30 residence
district range from sixteen to thirty dwelling units per acre.
   (c)   RM-40 High Density Multiple-Family Residence District [RM-40]
      The RM-40 high density multiple-family residence district is intended to
create, preserve and enhance locations for apartment living at the highest
density deemed appropriate for Palo Alto. The most suitable locations for this
district are in the downtown area, in select sites in the California Avenue
area and along major transportation corridors which are close to mass
transportation facilities and major employment and service centers. Permitted
densities in the RM-40 residence district range from thirty-one to forty
dwelling units per acre.
(Ord. 5460 § 4 (part), 2019: Ord. 5373 § 10 (part), 2016: Ord. 4964 § 2 (part),
2007)
18.13.020   Applicable Regulations
   The specific regulations of this chapter and the additional regulations and
procedures established by other pertinent chapters in Title 18 shall apply to
all multiple-family residence districts.
(Ord. 4964 § 2 (part), 2007)
18.13.030   Land Uses
   Table 1 specifies the permitted and conditionally permitted land uses in the
multiple-family residence districts.
Table 1
Multiple Family Residential Uses
[P = Permitted Use • CUP = Conditional Use Permit Required]
 RM-20 RM-30 RM-40 Subject to Regulations in:
                                   RM-20 RM-30 RM-40 Subject to Regulations in:
ACCESSORY AND SUPPORT USES
Accessory Facilities and uses
customarily incidental to          P     P     P     Chapter 18.40
permitted uses
Accessory Dwelling Unit when       P     P     P)    18.09
accessory to permitted residence
Home Occupations, when accessory   P     P     P     Chapter 18.42
to permitted residential uses
Horticulture, Gardening, and
Growing of food products for       P     P     P
consumption by occupants of a site
Surface Parking Facilities located
on abandoned railroad rights-of-         CUP   CUP
way
Safe Parking                                      18.42.160
EDUCATIONAL, RELIGIOUS, AND ASSEMBLY USES
Churches and Religious             CUP   CUP   CUP
Institutions
Private Clubs, Lodges, or
Fraternal Organizations, excluding             CUP
any such facility operated as a
business for profit
Private Educational Facilities     CUP   CUP   CUP
PUBLIC/QUASI-PUBLIC USES
Community Centers                  CUP   CUP   CUP
Utility Facilities essential to
provision of utility services but
excluding construction or storage  CUP   CUP   CUP
yards, maintenance facilities, or
corporation yards.
RECREATION USES
Neighborhood Recreational Centers  CUP   CUP   CUP
RESIDENTIAL USES
Single-Family                      P (1) P (1) P (2)
Two-Family                         P (1) P (1) P (1)
Multiple-Family                    P     P     P
Village Residential                P     (3)   (3)   18.13.050
Mobile Homes                       P     P     P
Residential Care Homes             P     P     P
SERVICE AND RETAIL USES
Convalescent Facilities                        CUP
Day Care Centers                   CUP   CUP   P     18.40.160
Small Family Day Care Homes        P     P     P
Large Family Day Care Homes        P     P     P
Small Adult Day Care Homes         P     P     P
Large Adult Day Care Homes         CUP   CUP   CUP
Eating and Drinking Services,                        18.13.040(f),
except drive-in and take-out             CUP   CUP   18.40.160
services
Personal Services and Retail                         18.13.040(f),
Services of a neighborhood-serving       CUP   CUP   18.40.160
nature
TEMPORARY USES
Temporary Uses, subject to         CUP   CUP   CUP   18.42.050
regulations in Chapter 18.42
P = Permitted Use                  CUP = Conditional Use Permit Required
 
   (1)   Permitted use only on lots less than 8,500 square feet in size.
   (2)   Permitted use only on lots less than 6,000 square feet in size.
   (3)   Permitted use only if lot is substandard in size, e.g., less than
8,500 square feet or less than 70 feet in width, or at the perimeter of a site
in excess of one acre where used as a transition to low-density residential
area.
(Ord. 5574 § 5, 2023: Ord. 5490 § 3, 2020: Ord. 5460 § 15, 2019: Ord. 5430 § 2,
2018: Ord. 5407 § 7, 2017: Ord. 4964 § 2 (part), 2007)
18.13.040   Development Standards
   (a)   Site Specifications, Building Size and Bulk, and Residential Density
   The site development regulations in Table 2 shall apply in the multiple-
family residence districts, provided that more restrictive regulations may be
recommended by the Architectural Review Board and approved by the Director of
Planning and Development Services, pursuant to the regulations set forth in
Chapter 18.76, and the objective design standards set forth in
Chapter 18.24. Sites designated as Housing Element Opportunity Sites shall meet
the development standards specified in Section
18.14.020 and projects utilizing the Housing Incentive Program or Affordable
Housing Incentive Program shall meet the development standards specified in
Sections
18.14.030 and
18.14.040, respectively.
Table 2
Multiple Family Residential Development Table
 RM-20 RM-30 RM-40 Subject to regulations in:
                                                                                                Subject to
                                                                              RM-20 RM-30 RM-40 regulations
                                                                                                in:
Minimum Site Specifications                                                                   
Site Area (ft2)                                                               8,500              
Site Width (ft)                                                               70                 
Site Depth (ft)                                                               100                
Substandard Lot Specifications                                                                   
Site Area (ft2)                                                               Less than 8,500
                                                                              square feet and/
Site Width (ft)                                                               or less than 70
                                                                              feet in width

                                                                              Setback lines
                                                                              imposed by a
                                                                              special setback
Minimum Setbacks                                                              map pursuant to    
                                                                              Chapter 20.08 of
                                                                              this code may
                                                                              apply
Front Yard (ft)                                                               20    20    20
                                                                                          (2)   18.13.040
On arterial roadways, expressways, and freeways(1)                            20    20    25    (b)
                                                                              (1,2) (1,2) (1,2)
Interior Side Yards (ft)                                                                 
For lots with width of 70 feet or greater                                     10    10    10    18.13.040
For lots with width of less than 70 feet                                         6 feet      (b)
Interior Rear Yards (ft)3                                                     10    10    10
Street Side and Street Rear Yards (ft)                                        16    16    16(2)
Maximum Height (ft)                                                           30    35    40     
Portions of a site within 50 feet of a more restrictive residential district            35    18.08.030
or a site containing a residential use in a nonresidential district(9)
Daylight Planes(7)                                                                               
• Daylight Plane for side and rear lot lines for sites abutting any R-1, R-2,
RMD, or RM-20 district or abutting a site containing a single-family or two-                     
family residential use in a nonresidential district:
Initial Height (ft)                                                              10           
Angle (degrees)                                                                  45           
• Daylight Plane for side and rear lot lines for sites abutting a RM-30, RM-
40, Planned Community, or nonresidential district that does not contain a                        
single-family or two-family residential use:
For lots with width of 70 feet or greater                                        None         
For lots with width of less than 70 feet, limited to the first 10 feet from                      
the property line (no daylight plane beyond 10 feet):
Initial Height (ft)                                                              10           
Angle (degrees)                                                                  45           
Maximum Site Coverage:                                                                           
Base                                                                          35%   40%   45%    
 
Additional area permitted to be covered by
covered patios or overhangs otherwise in   5%    5%    5%      
compliance with all applicable laws
Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR)(4)          0.5:1 0.6:1 1.0:1   
Residential Density (units)                                 
Maximum number of units per acre(3)        20    30    40     18.13.040(g)
                                                              18.14.020
Minimum number of units per acre(8)        11    16    21     18.14.020
Minimum Landscape/Open Space Coverage(5)   35    30    20     18.13.040(e)
(percent)                                                     18.14.020
Minimum Usable Open Space (sf per unit)(5) 150   150   150     
Minimum common open space (sf per unit)    75    75    75     18.13.040(e)
Minimum private open space (sf per unit)   50    50    50      
Landscape Requirements                                     18.40.130
Parking(6)                                 See provisions of  Ch.
                                           Chapter 18.52      18.52
 
   (1)   Arterial roadways, expressways, and freeways are identified in Map T-
5 of the Comprehensive Plan and do not include residential arterials.
   (2)   Lesser setbacks may be allowed by the Planning Director, upon
recommendation by the Architectural Review Board pursuant to criteria set forth
in
Chapter 18.76 and the context-based criteria outlined in Section
18.13.060. Special setbacks may not be reduced except upon approval of a design
enhancement exception or variance.
   (3)   Provided that, for any lot of 5,000 square feet or greater, two units
are allowed, subject to compliance with all other development regulations.
   (4)   Covered parking is not included as floor area in multi-family
development, up to a maximum of 230 square feet per required parking space that
is covered. Covered parking spaces in excess of required parking spaces count
as floor area.
   (5)   Usable open space is included as part of the minimum landscape/open
space coverage; required usable open space in excess of the minimum required
for common and private open space may be used as either common or private
usable open space; landscaping may count towards total landscape/open space
coverage after usable open space requirements are met.
   (6)   (Reserved)
   (7)   Each daylight plane applies specifically and separately to each
property line according to the adjacent use.
   (8)   The minimum density for a site may be reduced by the Director if,
after the proposal is reviewed by the Architectural Review Board, the Director
finds that existing site improvements or other parcel constraints, preclude the
development from meeting the minimum density. A site with an existing single-
family use or two-family use may be redeveloped at the existing density, either
single-family or two-family as applicable. An existing or replaced single-
family or two-family residence shall not be considered a nonconforming use, and
the provisions of
Chapter 18.70 shall not apply, solely based on the minimum density requirement.
   (9)   Distance shall be measured from the property line of the subject site.
   (b)   Setbacks, Daylight Planes and Height - Additional Requirements and
Exceptions
      (1)   Setbacks
         (A)   Required parking spaces shall not be located in a required front
yard, nor in the first ten feet (10') adjoining the street property line of a
required street side yard.
         (B)   Projections into yards are permitted only to the extent allowed
by Section
18.40.070 of this code.
         (C)   Electrification Equipment and any associated housing, screening,
insulation, or bollards necessary to enable compliance with the applicable
regulations, including
Chapter 9.10 of this Code, shall provide a minimum three foot interior side and
rear yard setback and a minimum ten foot street sideyard setback. Except as
otherwise provided in this Title for EVSE and energy storage systems,
Electrification Equipment shall not be located in the required front yard
setback and shall at all times provide sufficient clearance for fire safety
purposes. All Electrification Equipment must meet the City Noise Ordinance in
Chapter 9.10 of this code.
         (D)   Where existing improvements comply with front setback
requirements, EVSE may encroach up to four feet into the required front
setback. Where existing improvements do not comply with front setback
requirements, EVSE may encroach into the otherwise required front setback by
two feet beyond the existing improvement.
         (E)   The Planning Director may publish administrative regulations to
further implement subsection (b)(1)(C), including a list of equipment or
technologies that may presumptively be installed within setbacks without
housing and insulation due to noise generation below applicable maximums.
      (2)   Height and Daylight Planes
         (A)   Exceptions to maximum height limitations are permitted only to
the extent allowed by Section
18.40.090 of this code.
         (B)   The following features may extend beyond the daylight plane
established by the applicable district, provided that such features do not
exceed the height limit for the district unless permitted to by Section
18.40.090 of this code:
            i.   Television and radio antennas;
            ii.   Chimneys and flues that do not exceed 5 feet in width,
provided that chimneys do not extend past the required daylight plane a
distance exceeding the minimum allowed pursuant to
Chapter 16.04 of this code.
            iii.   Cornices and eaves, excluding flat or continuous walls or
enclosures of usable interior space, provided such features do not extend past
the daylight plane more than 4 feet, and so long as they do not encroach into
the side setback greater than 2 feet.
   (c)   Single-Family and Two-Family Uses
      (1)   The regulations in
Chapter 18.12 that apply to the R-1 district shall apply to sites in single-
family use in the multiple-family residence districts. The regulations in
Chapter 18.10 that apply to the R-2 district may be applied, at the applicant's
discretion, to sites in two-family use in the multiple-family residence
districts, in lieu of the multi-family standards.
      (2)   The Individual Review provisions of Section
18.12.110 of the Zoning Ordinance shall be applied to any single-family or two-
family residence in the multi-family districts, to those sides of a site that
share an interior side lot line with the interior side or rear lot line of a
property zoned for or used for single-family or two-family dwellings. The
Individual Review shall not be applied to adjacent uses other than single-
family and two-family uses.
      (3)   Notwithstanding other provisions of this chapter, existing two-
family residential development in multiple family residential districts may be
divided into two separate ownership parcels where all of the following
circumstances exist:
         (A)   At least one residence is designated on the City’s Historic
Inventory as a Category 1, Category 2, Category 3, or Category 4 historic
structure as defined in Section
16.49.020 of this code or are contributing structures located within a locally
designated historic district or are eligible for the National or California
Registers; and
         (B)   No increase in the total number of residences on the site is
proposed; and
         (C)   Separate lots are proposed to be created, each with a minimum
lot size not less than 4,000 square feet if only one residence is historic; if
both residences are historic and subject to a covenant, the allowable minimum
lot size is 2,000 square feet and
         (D)   The resultant parcel lines may create less than minimum lot size
(no less than the area stated in item (C) of this section), site width and
depth, setback and daylight plane encroachments, floor area and site coverage
exceeding the maximum allowable for existing development with respect to each
new parcel, without the need for approval of a Variance or Home Improvement
Exception, but would not generally increase any existing non-complying building
features; however, minor additions for functional improvements may be allowed
at the discretion of the Director of Planning and Development Services; and
         (E)   The Historic Resources Board has determined that at least one
existing residence on the property has historic integrity and qualities for
listing on the City’s Historic Inventory.
         (F)   A covenant is recorded to run with the land in perpetuity,
assuring that the historic residences will be maintained consistent with the
Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for Historic Rehabilitation through
compliance with Historic Resources Board review and recommendation. The
covenant will stipulate that HRB review is required for all major projects on
the site including significant changes to any non-historic residence. Any
modifications to a non-historic residence must be compatible with the historic
residence and satisfy the Secretary of Interior’s Standards for Historic
Compatibility.
         (G)   The two residences on the property were in existence as of
January 28, 2009.
         (H)   Application of the state Historic Building Code is available for
use on any eligible building.
         (I)   Residences subject to a covenant must meet all government
health, life and safety codes.
   (d)   Substandard Lots
   Substandard lots in the multiple family zoning districts are those that are:
1) less than the minimum 8,500 square feet in size, or 2) less than 70 feet in
width. These lots may be developed pursuant to the regulations outlined in
Table 2 or may be developed according to the regulations provided for Village
Residential development, as outlined in Section
18.13.050. Single-family and two-family development on these lots shall be
developed as outlined in subsection (c) above.
   (e)   (Reserved)
   (f)   Personal Services, Retail Services, and Eating and Drinking Services
in the RM-30 and RM-40 Districts
   Within a single residential development containing not less than 40 dwelling
units, personal services, retail services, and eating and drinking services
solely of a neighborhood-serving nature to residents in the development or in
the general vicinity of the project may be allowed upon approval of a
conditional use permit, subject to the following limitations and to such
additional conditions as may be established by the conditional use permit:
      (1)   Total gross floor area of all such uses shall not exceed 5,000
square feet or three percent of the gross residential floor area within the
development, whichever is smaller, and may not occupy any level other than the
ground level or below grade levels.
      (2)   A maximum of 2,500 square feet of retail and/or service and/or
eating and drinking uses shall be allowed per establishment.
      (3)   Personal services, retail services, and eating and drinking
services provided in accordance with this section shall not be included in the
gross floor area for the site.
      (4)   The conditional use permit for the project may preclude certain
uses and shall include conditions that are appropriate to limit impacts of
noise, lighting, odors, parking and trash disposal from the operation of the
commercial establishment. The hours of operation shall be limited to assure
compatibility with the residential use and surrounding residential uses.
      (5)   Allowable Neighborhood-Serving Uses. A neighborhood-serving use
primarily serves individual consumers and households, not businesses, is
generally pedestrian oriented in design, and does not generate noise, fumes or
truck traffic greater than that typically expected for uses with a local
customer base. A neighborhood-serving use is also one to which a significant
number of local customers and clients can walk, bicycle or travel short
distances, rather than relying primarily on automobile access or the provider
of the goods or services traveling off-site. Allowable neighborhood-serving
personal services, retail services and eating and drinking services may
include, but are not limited to, "agent" dry cleaners, flower shops,
convenience grocery stores (excluding liquor stores), delicatessens, cafes,
fitness facilities, day care facilities, and similar uses found by the Planning
Director to be compatible with the intent of this provision.
      (6)   For any project, other than a 100% affordable housing project,
containing forty (40) or greater units and located more than 500 feet from
neighborhood commercial services, as determined by the Director, a minimum of
1,500 square feet of neighborhood serving retail, personal service, and/or
eating or drinking uses shall be provided, subject to the above limitations. No
conditional use permit is required, but the commercial use shall be reviewed by
the Architectural Review Board as part of the architectural review approval. A
minimum of one parking space for each employee working or expected to be
working at the same time shall be provided. A "100% affordable housing project"
as used herein means a multiple-family housing project consisting entirely of
affordable units, as defined in Section
16.65.020 of this code, available only to households with income levels at or
below 120% of the area median income for Santa Clara County, as defined in
Chapter 16.65, and where the average household income does not exceed 80% of
the area median income level, except for a building manager's unit.
   (g)   Redevelopment of Sites with Non-complying Density
   For a parcel with a residential use that exceeds the maximum unit density of
the applicable zoning district, the Director may grant an exception to the
maximum unit density standard and allow the parcel to be redeveloped to replace
the legally established residential units at the existing density, subject to
all of the following:
      (1)   The applicant must make the request for exception under this
provision at the time of project application;
      (2)   The project is a residential rental project;
      (3)   The project complies with all other applicable development
standards; and
      (4)   The project shall not be eligible for a density bonus under
Chapter 18.15 (Density Bonus). The applicant must elect whether to utilize
state density bonus law or the exception described herein as an alternative to
state density bonus law.
   (h)   Performance Criteria
      In addition to all other provisions of this chapter, all multi-family
development shall comply with applicable provisions of
Chapter 18.40 (General Standards and Exceptions).
(Ord. 5650 § 4, 2025: Ord. 5601 § 4, 2023: Ord. 5587 § 18, 2023: Ord. 5554 § 3,
2022: Ord. 5548 § 3, 2022: Ord. 5542 § 17, 2022: Ord. 5494 § 3, 2020: Ord. 5460
§ 4 (part), 2019: Ord. 5051 § 6, 2009: Ord. 4964 § 2 (part), 2007: Ord. 5608 §
5, 2024)
18.13.045   Increased Floor Area for Housing Developments of 3-10 Units
    (a)   A housing development project, as defined in California Government
Code Section 65589.5, that is in an RM-20, RM-30 or RM-40 District shall be
allowed to increase its floor area ratio as follows:
      (i)   A housing development project of three to seven units shall have a
maximum floor area ratio of 1.0:1.
      (ii)   A housing development project of eight to ten units shall have a
maximum floor area ratio of 1.25:1.
   (b)   This section shall not apply within a historic district or property
included on the State Historic Resources Inventory, as defined in California
Public Resources Code Section5020.1, or within a site that is designated or
listed on the City’s historic inventory.
(Ord. 5587 § 19, 2023: Ord. 5542 § 18, 2022)
18.13.050   Village Residential Development
   (a)   Purpose
   Village Residential multiple-family development is intended to create,
preserve and enhance areas for a mixture of single-family and multiple-family
housing that is compatible with lower density and residential districts nearby,
including single-family residence districts. Housing types may include but are
not limited to single family houses on small lots, attached rowhouse/townhouse,
and cottage clusters. Village Residential development also serves as a
transition to moderate density multiple-family districts or districts with
nonresidential uses. Permitted densities range from eight to twelve dwelling
units per acre. Village Residential housing also provides a means to
accommodate home ownership options in multiple-family zones.
   (b)   Applicability of Regulations
   Village Residential development standards may be applied to RM-20 multiple-
family residence district sites, as well as to substandard RM-30 and RM-40
multiple-family residence sites. It may also be applied to the perimeter of RM-
30 and RM-40 sites larger than one acre in size where a transition to a lower-
density adjacent use is desired. The Director may require the submittal of
Covenants, Conditions and Restrictions (CC&Rs), maintenance agreements,
easements, and/or other legal instruments to document and disclose conditions
of the project approval.
   (c)   Development Standards
   Table 3 specifies the development standards for new Village Residential
developments that provide for individual lots established for sale of one
housing unit on a lot. These developments shall be designed and constructed in
compliance with the following requirements and the objective design standards
in
Chapter 18.24, provided that more restrictive regulations may be recommended by
the architectural review board and approved by the director of planning and
development services, pursuant to Section
18.76.020:
Table 3
Village Residential Development Table
                          Village Residential        Subject to regulations in:
Minimum Site
Specifications
Site Area (ft2)           6,000
Site Width (ft)           50
Site Depth (ft)           100
                          RM-20 development
Minimum Setbacks          standards apply to
                          perimeter of site
Minimum Lot
Specifications (1)
Lot Area (ft2), Attached  1,500
Units
Lot Area (ft2), Detached  2,500
Units
Maximum Lot Area (ft 2)   4,000
Front lot setback (ft)    5
Rear lot setback (ft)     3
Side lot setback (ft)     0
Distance between detached 3
units (ft)
Maximum House Size (ft2)  2,500 (2)
Maximum Height (ft)       30
                          RM-20 development
Daylight Planes           standards apply to
                          perimeter of site
                          RM-20 development
Maximum Site Coverage     standards apply to entire
                          site
Maximum Floor Area Ratio  0.5:1 applied to entire
(FAR) (3)                 site
Maximum Residential
Density (units)
Maximum number of units   12
per acre
Minimum Landscape/Open    35% of entire site         18.13.060
Space Coverage (4)        18.13.040
Minimum Usable Open Space 300 sq. ft.
(per unit) (4)
Minimum Common Open Space No requirement             18.13.040(e)
(per unit)
Minimum Private Open      100 sq. ft.
Space (per unit)
Landscape Requirements                               18.40.130
                          See provisions of Chapters Ch. 18.52 and
Parking                   18.52 and                  18.54 
                          18.54 
 
   (1)   Individual lots are created by subdividing the development site to
create one for-sale lot per dwelling unit. Overall development intensity (FAR,
site coverage, landscape/open space) shall be calculated across the entire site
to comply with RM-20 zone standards, and setbacks and daylight planes at the
perimeter of the site shall comply with RM-20 setbacks and daylight planes. For
common-ownership developments such as condominiums and apartments, the
underlying multiple-family zone district development standards shall apply.
   (2)   Covered parking that is attached to the residence shall be included in
the maximum house size.
   (3)   Covered parking is not included as floor area in multi-family
development, up to a maximum of 230 square feet per required parking space that
is covered. Covered parking spaces in excess of required parking spaces count
as floor area.
   (4)   Subject to the limitations of Section
18.13.040(e). Usable open space is included as part of the minimum landscape/
open space coverage; required usable open space in excess of the minimum
required for common and private open space may be used as either common or
private usable open space; landscaping may count towards total landscape/open
space coverage after usable open space requirements are met.
   (d)   Design for Entire Site
   The entire development plan for a Village Residential project, including
subdivision of the site into individual lots and design of buildings, streets,
driveways, parking, and open space shall be submitted and reviewed at one time.
Design for individual lots may not be phased for subsequent approval.
   (e)   Post-Construction Modifications
      (1)   Modifications to completed units, such as additions to dwelling
units, changes in circulation or parking, exterior building design features,
and provisions for open space, must be submitted as an amendment to the Village
Residential development, unless an alternate review process is outlined in the
initial project approval. The Director may require the submittal of Covenants,
Conditions and Restrictions (CC&Rs) and/or other legal instruments to document
and disclose the post-construction approval process.
      (2)   An amendment to the Village Residential approval may only be
submitted by the owner of the entire site or by an entity (such as a homeowners
association) representing the property owners. The amendment shall be reviewed
in the same manner as the original approval and must demonstrate compliance
with the applicable standards for the entire site. Minor architectural review
may be approved by staff, pursuant to the process outlined in Section
18.76.020 for exterior architectural or site modifications deemed minor by the
Director.
(Ord. 5554 § 4, 2022: Ord. 5494 § 3, 2020: Ord. 5460 § 15, 2019: Ord. 5373 § 10
(part), 2016; Ord. 4964 § 2 (part), 2007)
18.13.055   General Standards, Exceptions, and Performance Criteria
   In addition to all other provisions of this chapter, all multi-family
development shall comply with applicable provisions of
Chapter 18.40 General Standards and Exceptions.
(Ord. 5554 § 5, 2022)
18.13.060   Multiple Family Context-Based Design Criteria and Objective Design
Standards
   In addition to the standards for development prescribed above, all Housing
Development Projects in the RM districts shall comply with the objective design
standards outlined in
Chapter 18.24 , as defined therein. All other developments, and Housing
Development Projects that elect to deviate from one or more objective design
standards in
Chapter 18.24 , shall meet the Context Based Design Criteria, as determined by
the Director pursuant to the Architectural Review process.
   (a)   Contextual and Compatibility Criteria
   Development in a multiple-family residential district shall be responsible
to its context and compatible with adjacent development.
      (1)   Context
         (A)   Context as used in this section is intended to indicate
relationships between the site's development to adjacent street types,
surrounding land uses, and on-site or nearby natural features, such as creeks
or trees. Effective transitions to these adjacent uses and features are
strongly reinforced by Comprehensive Plan policies.
         (B)   The word "context" should not be construed as a desire to
replicate existing surroundings, but rather to provide appropriate transitions
to those surroundings. "Context" is also not specific to architectural style or
design, though in some instances relationships may be reinforced by an
architectural response.
      (2)   Compatibility
         (A)   Compatibility is achieved when the apparent scale and mass of
new buildings share general characteristics and establishes design linkages
with the overall pattern of buildings so that the visual unity of the
neighborhood or street is maintained. For active streetscapes, compatibility is
achieved when the scale and mass of new buildings are consistent with the
pattern of achieving a pedestrian oriented design.
         (B)   Compatibility goals may be accomplished through various means,
including but not limited to:
            (i)   the siting, scale, massing, and materials;
            (ii)   the rhythmic pattern of the street established by the
general width of the buildings and the spacing between them;
            (iii)   the pattern of roof lines and projections;
            (iv)   the sizes, proportions, and orientations of windows, bays
and doorways;
            (v)   the location and treatment of entryways;
            (vi)   the shadow patterns from massing and decorative features;
            (vii)   the siting and treatment of parking; and
            (viii)   the treatment of landscaping.
   (b)   Context-Based Design Considerations and Findings
   In addition to the findings for Architectural Review contained in Section
18.76.020(d) of the Zoning Ordinance, the following additional findings are
applicable in the RM-20, RM-30, and RM-40 districts, as further illustrated on
the accompanying diagrams:
      (1)   Massing and Building Facades
   Massing and building facades shall be designed to create a residential scale
in keeping with Palo Alto neighborhoods, and to provide a relationship with
street(s) through elements such as:
   A.   Articulation, setbacks, and materials that minimize massing, break down
the scale of buildings, and provide visual interest (
Figure 1-1);
   B.   Rooflines that emphasize and accentuate significant elements of the
building such as entries, bays, and balconies (
Figure 1-1);
   C.   Placement and orientation of doorways, windows, and landscape elements
to create a relationship with the street (
Figure 1-1);
   D.   Facades that include projecting eaves and overhangs, porches, and other
architectural elements that provide human scale and help break up building mass
(
Figure 1-1);
Figure 1-1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5612.jpg]
 
   E.   Entries that are clearly defined features of front facades, and that
have a scale that is in proportion to the size and type of the building and
number of units being accessed; larger buildings should have a more prominent
building entrance, while maintaining a pedestrian scale;
   F.   Residential units that have a presence on the street and are not
walled-off or oriented exclusively inward;
   G.   Elements that signal habitation such as entrances, stairs, porches,
bays and balconies that are visible to people on the street (
Figure 1-2);
Figure 1-2
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5615.jpg]
 
   H.   All exposed sides of a building designed with the same level of care
and integrity (
Figure 1-2).
      (2)   Low-Density Residential Transitions
   Where new projects are built abutting existing lower-scale residential
development, care shall be taken to respect the scale and privacy of
neighboring properties through:
   A.   Transitions of development intensity from higher density development
building types to building types that are compatible with the lower intensity
surrounding uses, such as small-lot units and rowhouses (
Figure 2-1);
Figure 2-1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5618.jpg]
 
   B.   Massing and orientation of buildings that respect and mirror the
massing of neighboring structures by stepping back upper stories to transition
to smaller scale buildings, including setbacks and daylight planes that match
abutting R-1 and R-2 zone requirements (
Figure 2-2);
Figure 2-2
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5621.jpg]
 
   C.   Respecting privacy of neighboring structures, with windows and upper
floor balconies positioned so they minimize views into neighboring properties (
Figure 2-3);
   D.   Minimizing sight lines into and from neighboring properties (
Figure 2-3);
Figure 2-3
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5624.jpg]
 
   E.   Limiting sun and shade impacts on abutting properties; and
   F.   Providing pedestrian paseos and mews to create separation between uses.
      (3)   Project Open Space
   Private and public open space shall be provided so that it is usable for the
residents and visitors of a site.
   A.   The type and design of the usable private open space shall be
appropriate to the character of the building(s), and shall consider dimensions,
solar access, wind protection, views, and privacy;
   B.   Open space should be sited and designed to accommodate different
activities, groups, active and passive uses, and should be located convenient
to the residents.
   C.   Common open spaces should connect to the pedestrian pathways and
existing natural amenities of the site and its surroundings (
Figure 3-1);
Figure 3-1  
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5627.jpg]
 
   D.   Usable open space may be any combination of private and common spaces;
   E.   Open space should be located to activate the street facade and increase
"eyes on the street" when possible (
Figure 3-2);
Figure 3-2  
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5630.jpg]
 
   F.   Usable open space does not need to be located on the ground and may be
located in porches, decks, balconies and/or podiums (
Figure 3-3);
   G.   Both private and common open space areas should be buffered from noise
where feasible through landscaping and building placement;
   H.   Open space situated over a structural slab/podium or on a rooftop shall
have a combination of landscaping and high quality paving materials, including
elements such as planters, mature trees, and use of textured and/or colored
paved surfaces (
Figure 3-3); and
   I.   Parking may not be counted as open space.
Figure 3-3  
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5633.jpg]
 
      (4)   Parking Design
   Parking needs shall be accommodated but shall not be allowed to overwhelm
the character of the project or detract from the pedestrian environment, such
that:
   A.   Parking is located behind buildings, below grade or, where those
options are not feasible, screened by landscaping, low walls, garages and
carports, etc.;
   B.   Structured parking is fronted or wrapped with habitable uses when
possible (
Figure 4-1);
Figure 4-1  
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5636.jpg]
 
   C.   Parking that is semi-depressed is screened with architectural elements
that enhance the streetscape such as stoops, balcony overhangs, and/or art (
Figure 4-2);
   D.   Landscaping such as trees, shrubs, vines, or groundcover is
incorporated into surface parking lots (
Figure 4-2);
Figure 4-2  
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5639.jpg]
 
   E.   For properties with parking access from the rear of the site (such as a
rear alley or driveway) landscaping shall provide a visual buffer between
vehicle circulation areas and abutting properties (
Figure 4-3);
Figure 4-3  
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5642.jpg]
 
   F.   Street parking is utilized for visitor or customer parking and is
designed in a manner to enhance traffic calming;
   G.   Parking is accessed from side streets or alleys when possible.
      (5)   Large (multi-acre) Sites
   Large (in excess of one acre) sites shall be designed so that street, block,
and building patterns are consistent with those of the surrounding
neighborhood, and such that:
   A.   New development of large sites maintains and enhances connectivity with
a hierarchy of public streets, private streets, walks and bike paths
(integrated with Palo Alto's Bicycle Master Plan, when applicable);
   B.   The diversity of building types increases with increased lot size
(e.g., <1 acre = minimum 1 building type; 1-2 acres = minimum 2 housing types;
greater than 2 acres = minimum 3 housing types) (Figures
5-1 through
5-3); and
Figure 5-1  
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5645.jpg]
 
   C.   Where a site includes more than one housing type, each building type
should respond to its immediate context in terms of scale, massing, and design
(e.g., small lot units or rowhouse building types facing or abutting existing
single-family residences) (
Figures 5-2 and
5-3).
Figure 5-2
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5648.jpg]
 
Figure 5-3
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5651.jpg]
 
      (6)   Housing Variety and Units on Individual Lots
   Multifamily projects may include a variety of unit types such as small-lot
detached units (
Figure 6-1), attached rowhouses/townhouses (
Figure 6-2), and cottage clusters in order to achieve variety and create
transitions to adjacent existing development, provided that:
Figure 6-1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5654.jpg]
 
Figure 6-2  
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5657.jpg]
 
   A.   Setbacks and daylight planes along the perimeter of the site shall
conform to RM-20 zone standards;
   B.   Overall development intensity (FAR, landscape coverage, open space)
shall be calculated across the entire site to comply with the RM-20 zone
standards;
   C.   Individual detached units shall be spaced a minimum of 3 feet apart;
   D.   For units on individual "fee simple" lots, units may be situated along
the property line of the individual parcel (i.e., zero-lot line) to allow
usable open space in the opposite side setback;
   E.   Each detached unit shall have at least one usable side yard between the
house and fence to provide outdoor passage between the front and rear yards;
   F.   Spaces between buildings shall be landscaped and/or shall provide for
usable hardscape (patios, decks, etc.);
   G.   Sidewall windows should be designed with privacy features such as
obscure glass or glass block;
   H.   Windows on sidewalls opposite each other should be above eye level or
should be offset to prevent views into adjacent units; and
   I.   Architectural treatment shall be carried along the sidewalls of
detached units, particularly sidewalls facing streets and pathways.
      (7)   Sustainability and Green Building Design
   Project design and materials to achieve sustainability and green building
design shall be incorporated into the project. Green building design considers
the environment during design and construction. Green building design aims for
compatibility with the local environment: to protect, respect and benefit from
it. In general, sustainable buildings are energy efficient, water conserving,
durable and nontoxic, with high-quality spaces and high recycled content
materials. The following considerations should be included in site and building
design:
   A.   Optimize building orientation for heat gain, shading, daylighting, and
natural ventilation (
Figure 7-1);
Figure 7-1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5660.jpg]
 
   B.   Design landscaping to create comfortable micro-climates and reduce heat
island effects (
Figure 7-2);
Figure 7-2  
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5663.jpg]
 
   C.   Design for easy pedestrian, bicycle, and transit access;
   D.   Maximize onsite stormwater management through landscaping and permeable
pavement (
Figure 7-3);
Figure 7-3  
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5666.jpg]
 
   E.   Use sustainable building materials.
   F.   Design lighting, plumbing and equipment for efficient energy use;
   G.   Create healthy indoor environments;
   H.   Use creativity and innovation to build more sustainable environments.
One example is establishing gardens with edible fruits, vegetables or other
plants to satisfy a portion of project open space requirements (
Figure 7-2); and
   I.   Provide protection for creeks and riparian vegetation and integrate
stormwater management measures and open space to minimize water quality and
erosion impacts to the creek environment.
(Ord. 5554 § 6, 2022: Ord. 5460 § 15, 2019: Ord. 4964 § 2 (part), 2007)
18.13.070   Grandfathered Uses
   (a)   Grandfathered Uses
   The following uses may remain as grandfathered uses and shall not be subject
to the provisions of
Chapter 18.70:
      (1)   RM-20 district:
         (A)   Professional and medical office uses existing on July 20, 1978
and which, prior to that date, were lawful conforming permitted uses or
conditional uses operating subject to a conditional use permit, or which uses
were, prior to July 20, 1978, located in an RM-1 or RM-2 district, which was
imposed by reason of annexation of the property to the city without benefit of
prezoning and which, prior to the date of annexation, were lawful conforming
permitted uses or conditional uses operating subject to a conditional use
permit.
         (B)   Two-family uses and multiple-family uses existing on July 20,
1978 and which, prior to that date, were lawful conforming permitted uses or
conditional uses operating pursuant to a conditional use permit, or which uses
were, prior to July 20, 1978, located in an RM-1 or RM-2 district, which was
imposed by reason of annexation of the property to the city without benefit of
prezoning and which, prior to the date of annexation, were lawful conforming
permitted uses or conditional uses operating subject to a conditional use
permit.
         (C)   Motel uses existing on July 20, 1978, and which, prior to that
date, were lawful conforming permitted uses or conditional uses subject to a
conditional use permit.
      (2)   RM-30 district:
         (A)   Professional and medical office uses existing on July 20, 1978
and which, prior to that date, were lawful conforming permitted uses or
conditional uses operating subject to a conditional use permit, or which uses
were, prior to July 20, 1978, located in an RM-3 or RM-4 district, which was
imposed by reason of annexation of the property to the city without benefit of
prezoning and which, prior to the date of annexation, were lawful conforming
permitted uses or conditional uses operating subject to a conditional use
permit
         (B)   Two-family uses and multiple-family uses existing on July 20,
1978 and which, prior to that date, were lawful conforming permitted uses or
conditional uses operating pursuant to a conditional use permit, or which uses
were, prior to July 20, 1978, located in an RM-3 or RM-4 district, which was
imposed by reason of annexation of the property to the city without benefit of
prezoning and which, prior to the date of annexation, were lawful conforming
permitted uses or conditional uses operating subject to a conditional use
permit.
         (C)   Motel uses existing on July 20, 1978, and which, prior to that
date, were lawful conforming permitted uses or conditional uses subject to a
conditional use permit.
      (3)   RM-40 district:
         (A)   Professional and medical office uses existing on July 20, 1978
and which, prior to that date, were lawful conforming permitted uses or
conditional uses operating subject to a conditional use permit, or which uses
were, prior to July 20, 1978, located in an RM-5 district, which was imposed by
reason of annexation of the property to the city without benefit of prezoning
and which, prior to the date of annexation, were lawful conforming permitted
uses or conditional uses operating subject to a conditional use permit
         (B)   Two-family uses and multiple-family uses existing on July 20,
1978 and which, prior to that date, were lawful conforming permitted uses or
conditional uses operating pursuant to a conditional use permit, or which uses
were, prior to July 20, 1978, located in an RM-5 district, which was imposed by
reason of annexation of the property to the city without benefit of prezoning
and which, prior to the date of annexation, were lawful conforming permitted
uses or conditional uses operating subject to a conditional use permit.
         (C)   Motel uses existing on July 20, 1978, and which, prior to that
date, were lawful conforming permitted uses or conditional uses subject to a
conditional use permit
   (b)   Permitted Changes
   The following regulations shall apply to the grandfathered uses specified in
subsection (a):
      (1)   Such uses shall be permitted to remodel, improve, or replace site
improvements on the same site, for continual use and occupancy by the same use,
provided that such remodeling, improvement or replacement:
         (A)   shall not result in increased floor area;
         (B)   shall not result in an increase in the number of offices, in the
case of professional or medical office uses, or dwelling units, in the case of
residential or motel uses;
         (C)   shall not result in shifting of building footprint;
         (D)   shall not increase the height, length, building envelope, or
size of the improvement,
         (E)   shall not increase the existing degree of noncompliance, except
through the granting of a design enhancement exception pursuant to
Chapter 18.76, with respect to multiple-family, professional and medical
office, and motel uses, or a home improvement exception pursuant to
Chapter 18.76, with respect to two-family use.
         (F)   in the RM-20 district, such remodeling, improvement, or
replacement shall be for continual use and occupancy by the same use.
      (2)   If a grandfathered use ceases and thereafter remains discontinued
for twelve consecutive months, it shall be considered abandoned and may be
replaced only by a conforming use.
      (3)   A grandfathered use which is changed to or replaced by a conforming
use shall not be reestablished, and any portion of a site or any portion of a
building, the use of which changes from a grandfathered use to a conforming
use, shall not thereafter be used except to accommodate a conforming use.
      (4)   The following additional regulations shall apply to grandfathered
professional or medical office uses:
         (A)   Any remodeling, improvement, or replacement of any building
designed and constructed for residential use shall be subject to the issuance
of a conditional use permit in accord with
Chapter 18.76.
         (B)   In the event of redevelopment of all or a portion of the site
for permitted residential uses, professional and medical office uses may not be
incorporated in the redevelopment, except that this provision shall not apply
to permanent conversion to residential use of space within an existing
structure now used for professional and medical office uses.
(Ord. 5460 § 15, 2019: Ord. 4964 § 2 (part), 2007)
Chapter 18.14
HOUSING INCENTIVES
Sections:
   
18.14.010   Purpose.
   
18.14.020   Housing Element Opportunity Sites and Focus Areas.
   
18.14.030   Housing Incentive Program.
   
18.14.040   Affordable Housing Incentive Program.
   
18.14.050   By Right Status of Qualifying Projects on Specified Housing
Opportunity Sites.
   
18.14.060   By Right Affordable Housing and Supportive Housing Projects.
18.14.010   Purpose
   This chapter implements the regional housing needs strategy (RHNA) of the
City's Comprehensive Plan Housing Element to rezone opportunity sites;
facilitates housing production; affirmatively furthers fair housing; and
provides incentives for housing development, especially below-market rate
housing.
(Ord. 5608 § 2 (part), 2024)
18.14.020   Housing Element Opportunity Sites and Focus Areas
This section implements the rezoning required to meet the RHNA in the 2023-2031
Housing Element, pursuant to Appendix D. Regulations identified in Table 1 and
Table 2 modify and replace development standards provided in base zoning
district and applicable combining district regulations. This section
additionally provides regulations for Housing Focus Areas in portions of El
Camino Real and in the GM/ROLM districts that further the goals of the Housing
Element.
   (a)   Applicability: This subsection applies to Housing Development
Projects, as defined in Cal. Gov’t Code § 65589.5, on Housing Element
opportunity sites listed in Appendix D and on sites within the GM/ROLM and El
Camino Real Focus Areas depicted in Figure 1 and Figure 3.
   (b)   Permitted Uses: Refer to the base zoning district and applicable
combining districts for allowed uses, except:
      (i)   Exclusively residential uses are permitted on all Housing Element
opportunity sites.
      (ii)   Combining district use regulations shall not apply to exclusively
residential projects on housing opportunity sites designated in Appendix D of
the Housing Element to accommodate lower income households.
      (iii)   Sites zoned to allow mixed use development and are identified in
Appendix D of the Housing Element as suitable for lower income households, must
be developed with a minimum of two-thirds residential floor area.
   (c)   Development Standards: Refer to base zoning district and applicable
combining districts for development standards except:
      (i)   Residential uses on R-1 zoned sites (faith-based institutions)
shall be subject to the development standards for the RM-30 zoning district,
pursuant to Chapter
18.13.040, except that Maximum FAR shall be 1.25 and minimum density shall be
20 units per acre.
      (ii)   RM-20, RM-30, RM-40, CN, CS, CC, CC(2), CD-C, and CD-N zoned sites
as modified by Table 1.
      (iii)   GM, ROLM, and RP zoned sites as modified by Table 2.
      (iv)   PF zoned sites shall meet the following development standards:
         (A)   Downtown sites: CD-C standards, pursuant to Table 1 below.
         (B)   California Avenue sites: CC(2) standards, pursuant to Table 1
below.
      (v)   Specific Stanford University-owned sites and El Camino Real Focus
Area sites may, as an alternative to State Density Bonus Law, meet base
district regulations as modified by Table 3. Housing Development Projects that
utilize State Density Bonus Law shall be subject to base district standards or
standards provided in Tables 1 and 2, as applicable. Additionally, El Camino
Real Focus Area sites shall:
         (A)   Complete Major Architectural Review pursuant to Section
18.77.020 or Streamlined Housing Development Project Review pursuant to Section
18.77.073, as applicable.
         (B)   Except as provided in paragraph (C) below, provide at least 20%
of total units as on-site below-market rate housing affordable to households
earning up to 80% of AMI. This requirement shall apply in place of the basic
requirements set forth in Sections
16.65.030 and
16.65.040. The below-market rate units affordable to lower income households
and/or their square footage shall be exempt from payment of development impact
fees.
         (C)   Projects proposed on a site for which the Director determines a
valid, pending application meets the definition of a “builder’s remedy project”
may provide on-site below-market rate housing consistent with “housing for very
low, low-, or moderate-income households,” as those terms are defined in
Government Code Section 65589.5. This requirement shall apply in place of the
enhanced requirements set forth in subdivision (c)(v)(B) above and shall be
credited toward fulfillment of the basic requirements set forth in Sections
16.65.030 and
16.65.040. The below-market rate units provided pursuant to this paragraph (C)
shall be subject to payment of development impact fees as set forth in Title 16
of this code.
      (vi)   Combining district design and development standards shall not
apply to exclusively residential projects on housing opportunity sites
designated in Appendix D of the Housing Element to accommodate lower income
households.
   Table 1
   Housing Element Opportunity Site Development Standards
   (Residential and Commercial Mixed Use Districts)
            Maximum Far(1)              Residential Density (du/
Base Zoning                   Minimum   ac)(4)                   Other
District                      Landscape                          Development
            Residential Total Coverage  Minimum Maximum          Standards
              Maximum Far(1)                Residential Density
Base Zoning                       Minimum   (du/ac)(4)            Other
District                          Landscape                       Development
              Residential Total   Coverage  Minimum Maximum       Standards

CC(2)         1.5         2.0     (3)       20      See base
CC            1.25        1.25    (3)       20      district
CS (El Camino                                       regulations:
Real)         1.25        1.25    (3)       20      18.16.060
                                                                  See base
CS (Other     1.25        1.25    (3)       20      See HE        district
                                                    Appendix D    regulations:
                                                    See base      18.16.060
CN (El Camino 1.25        1.25    30%(3)    20      district
Real)                                               regulations:
                                                    18.16.060
CN (Other)    1.25        1.25    30%(3)    20      See HE
                                                    Appendix D
                                                    See base
CD-C          2.0         2.0 (2) (3)       20      district
                                                    regulations:  See base
                                                    18.18.060     district
                                                                  regulations:
CD-N          1.5         1.5     (3)       20      See HE        18.18.060
                                                    Appendix D

                                                    None; 40 du/  See base
RP            1.25        1.25    (3)       25      ac            district
                                                    anticipated   regulations:
                                                                  18.20.040
RM-40         1.5         1.5     (3)       31                    See base
RM-30         1.25        1.25    (3)       20      See HE        district
                                  See               Appendix D    regulations:
RM-20         1.25        1.25    18.13.040 20                    18.13.040

              See base district regulations: 18.29.060, except that maximum
NV-R3         height shall be 50', maximum lot coverage shall be 70%, and
              minimum density shall be 25 du/ac.
Notes:
   (1)   Nothing in this table increases the non-residential floor area
permitted in any district.
   (2)   FAR may be increased with transfer of development rights; see
Chapter 18.18 for details.
   (3)   Landscape coverage may be provided above the ground-floor. If standard
is not specified, refer to base district regulations.
   (4)   Where no maximum density is provided in terms of du/ac, maximum
density shall be determined by estimating the realistic development capacity of
the site based on the objective development standards applicable to the
project. Where noted, refer to Housing Element Appendix D: Sites Inventory for
specified densities.
   Table 2
   GM/ROLM Focus Area Development Standards for Housing Development Projects
Only
 
                                         Residential
         Max. FAR          Min.          Density (du/             Min.
Base                       Land-  Max.   ac)(2)                   Resi-   Other
Zoning                     scape  Lot                   Max.      dential Develop-
District             Total Covera Covera                Height    Parking ment
         Residential (3)   ge     ge     Min. Max.                Ratios  Standards


                                                                  1 space
GM                                                                per
(Focus                                        None; 90            studio/
Area,    2.5         2.5   20%(1) 70%    40   du/ac     60        1-bed;
Figure                                        antici-             1.5
1)                                            pated               spaces
                                                                  per
                                                                  2-bed+
                                              None; see
GM                                            HE
(Other                                        Appendi x See       No
Opportun 1.5         1.5   30%(1) 70%    25   D for     18.20.040 change  See base
ity                                           antici-                     district
Sites)                                        pated                       regulatio
                                              densities                   ns:
                                                                  1 space 18.20.040
ROLM                                                              per
(Focus                                        None;90             studio/
Area,    2.5         2.5   20%(1) 70%    40   du/ac     60        1-bed;
Figure                                        antici-             1.5
1)                                            pated               spaces
                                                                  per
                                                                  2-bed+
ROLM                                          None; 50
(Other                                        du/ac               No
Opportun 1.5         1.5   (1)    70%    25   antici-   45        change
ity                                           pated
Sites)
Notes:
   (1)   Landscape coverage may be provided above the ground-floor. If standard
is not specified, refer to base district regulations.
   (2)   These sites do not provide a maximum density in terms of du/ac;
however, anticipated densities have been determined by estimating the realistic
development capacity of the site based on the objective development standards
applicable to the project. Where referenced, the densities specified in Housing
Element Appendix D: Sites Inventory represent anticipated densities based on
realistic development capacities.
   (3)   Nothing in this table increases the non-residential floor area
permitted in any district.
 
   Figure 1: GM/ROLM Housing Element Focus Area
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9597.png]
 
   Table 3
   Site-Specific Development Standards (Stanford-Owned Sites & El Camino Real
Focus Area)
Location Pasteur Dr. & 1100 Welch Rd. (1)(3) El Camino Real Focus Area (1)
         (Figure 2)                          (Figure 3)
                              Pasteur Dr.
Location                      & 1100 Welch El Camino Real Focus Area (1)
                              Rd. (1)(3)   (Figure 3)
                              (Figure 2)
Minimum Setbacks (feet)
                             Setback lines imposed by a special setback map pursuant to Chapter 20.08 of this code may
                              apply.
   Front (7)               15 feet      15 feet 0' - 10' to create a 12' effective sidewalk width
                                           Abutting low density residential (RE, R2, NV-R2, RMD), R1, or NV-R1 zone
                              See base     district: 20’
   Rear and Interior Side (district     Abutting other residential zone district: 10’
                              regulations: Abutting non-residential zone district: 10’ for residential use; none for non-
                              18.13.040    residential use
   Street Side (7)                      5'
Maximum FAR (Total)           3.5 (Total)  Lot size => 10,000 sq. ft.: 4.0 (Total)
                                           Lot size < 10,000 sq. ft.: 3.0 (Total)
                              See base     See base district regulations, except:
                              district     1.   An additional 5,000 square feet of retail and retail-like uses may be
Maximum FAR (Non-Residential) regulations: permitted, subject to Total FAR limits.
                              18.13.040    2.   Hotel uses may exceed the base district non-residential FAR provided the
                                           project is a Housing Development Project and subject to Total FAR limits.
                              See base
Minimum Landscape/Open Space  district     See base district regulations (2)
Coverage                      regulations
                              (2)
Maximum Lot Coverage          60%          Lot size => 10,000 sq. ft.: 80%
                                           Lot size < 10,000 sq. ft.: 70%
Maximum Density (du/ac)       None         None
Maximum Height (6) (feet) for 85           Lot size => 10,000 sq. ft.: 85
residential portion                        Lot size < 10,000 sq. ft.: 65
Maximum Height (6) (feet) for 50           50, except Hotel uses may reach 85 feet
non-residential portion
                              Sand Hill
                              Rd. frontage
                              only:
                              initial
                              height 60    For lot lines abutting an R1 or NV-R1 zoning district:
Daylight Plane                feet above   Initial height: 16 feet, measured at the property line
                              grade at the Slope: 45 degrees
                              Sand Hill    Other locations: See base district regulations
                              Rd. setback
                              line and a
                              45-degree
                              angle
                                           El Camino Real frontage above 55 feet in height: minimum 10 foot step-back from
Upper Story Step Back         None         lower facade, for a minimum 70% of the facade length.
                                           See Figure 4.
                              100 sq. ft./
                              unit (any
Minimum Usable Open Space     combination  100 sq. ft./unit (any combination of common and/or private) (2)
                              of common
                              and/or
                              private)
Minimum Residential Parking   0.5 spaces/  1 space/unit
(5)                           unit         (Per AB2097: 0 space/unit within ½ mile of Caltrain)
                              See base
Other Development Standards   district     See base district regulations
                              regulations:
                              18.13.040
                              Compliance
                              with         Streamlined Housing Development Project Review and compliance with Objective
                              Objective    Design Standards pursuant to Chapter
Design Criteria/Standards     Design       18.24 or Architectural Review and compliance with Context-Based Design Criteria
                              Standards    pursuant to base district regulations(4).
                              pursuant to
                              18.24(4)
 
Notes:
   (1)   Site locations as defined in the 2023-2031 Housing Element.
   (2)   Landscape/open space may be provided above the ground-floor. For sites
containing a naturalized creek, up to 50% of the landscape/open space and
minimum usable open space requirements may be satisfied by open space within
the creek area (as defined by the top of bank).
   (3)   Housing may be developed in phases and individual phases may not meet
all standards. However, upon completion the project as a whole must conform to
these standards. Individual parcels shall be deed restricted to address
standards that are met in aggregate, but not on a parcel-by-parcel basis. In
addition, for each phase, the applicant shall demonstrate, to the satisfaction
of the Director, that the overall site is capable of meeting all standards upon
completion of the project as a whole.
   (4)   Except, the following objective design standards shall be modified to
meet the realistic capacity identified in the Housing Element:
      (a)   
18.24.050(b)(5): Diversity of Housing Types shall not apply.
      (b)   
18.24.060(b)(7): Parking/Loading/Utilities, shall be replaced with the
following standard: Above grade structured parking levels facing a public
right-of-way or publicly accessible open space/path with the exception of
vehicular alleys, shall compose no more than 50% of any public frontage. Garage
facades fronting on public right-of-way shall be screened with decorative
architectural screening (e.g. perforated metal panels, murals), lined with
habitable uses, or screened with landscaping (e.g., green wall, climbing
vines).
      (c)   
18.24.050(b)(1): Upper Floor Step Backs & Daylight Planes shall not apply.
   (5)   Projects providing fewer than 50% of the parking spaces that would be
required under Section
18.52.040 shall develop and implement a transportation demand management plan
containing, at a minimum: free transit passes for residents; and provision of
outlets appropriate spaced for e-bike charging at 20% of bicycle parking
spaces.
   (6)   Railings and parapets shall be excluded from height calculations in
this Table 3 only to the extent they are required for health and safety
standards in Titles 15 and 16 of this code.
   (7)   For the purposes of this development standards table, the following
definitions apply:
      “Abutting” refers to parcels that share a property line, exclusive of
parcels with intersecting corners, parcels separated by a street, or parcels
under common ownership.
      “Lot Size” refers to the total lot area of a proposed project, which may
be composed of one or more parcels, generally under common ownership, which may
include parcels developed in phases over time.
      “Front Setback” for properties on El Camino Real means the setback from
El Camino Real.
      “Street Side Setback” for properties on El Camino Real means the setback
from a street that intersects El Camino Real.
   (8)   Below-grade encroachment into rear and interior side setbacks is
permitted for the site at 3300 El Camino Real.
   Figure 2: Pasteur Drive Focus Area
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9604.png]
 
   Figure 3: El Camino Real Focus Area 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9770.png]
 
   Figure 4: Upper Story Step Back (El Camino Real Focus Area)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9772.png]
 
(Ord. 5657 § 2, 2025: Ord. 5634 § 3, 2024: Ord. 5608 § 2 (part), 2024)
18.14.030   Housing Incentive Program
(a)   Purpose
   The housing incentive program modifies base zoning district standards and
streamlines review to encourage higher-density multi-family housing production.
The program is a local alternative to State Density Bonus Law.
(b)   Applicability
   The housing incentive program shall apply to the following zoning districts
or locations:
   (1)   
Chapter 18.13: RM-20, RM-30, RM-40
   (2)   Section
18.14.020: GM/ROLM Focus Area (see Figure 1)
   (3)   
Chapter 18.16: CC(2), except the sites at 156-164 California Avenue; CN or CS-
zoned sites on El Camino Real, except sites in the Automobile Dealership (AD)
Combining District; CS sites on San Antonio Road between Middlefield Road and
East Charleston Road
   (4)   
Chapter 18.18: CD(C)
   (5)   
Chapter 18.29: NV-R3, NV-R4, NV-MXL, NV-MXM, NV-MXH, NV-PF
(c)   Procedures
   The regulations established by this section provide increases in development
standards for eligible projects electing to take advantage of the Housing
Incentive Program. A property owner may elect to use the site consistent with
the underlying zoning district.
   The Housing Incentive Program provides flexibility in development standards
that allow for a density increase that would in most cases exceed density
bonuses under state density bonus law (Government Code Section 65915).
Therefore, a project applicant may utilize the provisions of this section as an
alternative to use of the state density bonus law implemented through
Chapter 18.15 (Density Bonus) of this Title, but may not utilize both this
section and state density bonus law. If an applicant utilizes state density
bonus law, the provisions of this section shall not apply.
(d)   Permitted Uses
   The following uses shall be permitted to use the housing incentive program:
   (1)   Multiple-Family Residential.
   (2)   In conjunction with a Multiple-Family Residential use, any uses
permitted in the underlying district, provided the uses are limited to the
ground floor.
(e)   Development Standards
   For all eligible zoning districts, the housing incentive program shall
modify underlying zoning district standards as shown in Table 5. Floor area
ratio (FAR) and building height standards are specified in Table 6; unlike the
standards in Table 5, these standards vary by zoning district and whether or
not a site is classified as an opportunity site listed in Appendix D of the
Housing Element.
Table 5
Housing Incentive Program Development Standards
Minimum Site   Standards for All Eligible Subject to regulations in:
Specifications Zoning Districts
                                                                  Standards for  Subject to
Minimum Site Specifications                                       All Eligible   regulations
                                                                  Zoning         in:
                                                                  Districts
Minimum Setbacks                                                                 
                                                                  Same as
                                                                  underlying
   Front Yard (ft)                                             district or 10
                                                                  ft. (whichever Setback lines
                                                                  is less)       imposed by a
                                                                  Same as        special
   Rear Yard (ft)                                              underlying     setback map
                                                                  district       pursuant to
                                                                  Same as        Chapter 20.08
   Rear Yard abutting residential zoning district (ft)         underlying     of this code
                                                                  district       or imposed to
   Interior Side Yard if abutting residential zoning district  Same as        create
(ft)                                                              underlying     required
                                                                  district       effective
                                                                  Same as        sidewalk
                                                                  underlying     widths apply.
   Street Side Yard (ft)                                       district or 8
                                                                  ft. (whichever
                                                                  is less)
                                                                  100%
                                                                  (commercial
                                                                  districts and
Maximum Site Coverage                                             GM/ROLM Focus   
                                                                  Area)
                                                                  70%
                                                                  (residential
                                                                  districts)
                                                                                 See
                                                                                 18.14.020 for
                                                                                 modified
                                                                  Same as        standards
Minimum Landscape/Open Space Coverage                             underlying     applicable to
                                                                  district       Housing
                                                                                 Element
                                                                                 Opportunity
                                                                                 Sites
                                                                  Same as
Minimum Usable Open Space                                         underlying      
                                                                  district
                                                                  See Table 6
Maximum Height (ft)                                               for standards,  
                                                                  by zoning
                                                                  district
Portions of a site within 50 ft of a low density residential      35 ft(1)        
district (RE, R1, NV-R1, R2, NV-R2, RMD)
                                                                  Unless the
                                                                  underlying
                                                                  zoning
                                                                  district
                                                                  standard is
                                                                  more
                                                                  permissive,
Daylight Plane for lot lines abutting a low density residential   the daylight
district (RE, R1, NV-R1, R2, NV-R2, RMD)                          plane shall be  
                                                                  as follows:
                                                                  Initial
                                                                  height: 16
                                                                  feet, measured
                                                                  at the
                                                                  property line
                                                                  Slope: 45
                                                                  degrees
                                                                  RM-20 Zone
                                                                  (Non-Housing
                                                                  Element
                                                                  Opportunity
                                                                  Site): 40 du/
                                                                  ac
                                                                  All other RM
Maximum Residential Density (net)                                 Zones: 60 du/   
                                                                  ac, except no
                                                                  density limit
                                                                  if at least
                                                                  10% of units
                                                                  are 3+
                                                                  bedrooms
                                                                  All other
                                                                  zones: None.
                                                                  Same as        See Section
Minimum Commercial FAR                                            underlying     18.40.180
                                                                  district       (retail
                                                                                 preservation)
                                                                  See Table 6
Maximum Total FAR                                                 for standards,  
                                                                  by zoning
                                                                  district
                                                                                 Additional
                                                                                 adjustments
                                                                  1 space per    to the
                                                                  studio/1-bed   required
Minimum Vehicle Parking                                           1.5 spaces per ratios may be
                                                                  2-bed+         considered
                                                                                 per
                                                                                 Chapter 18.52
                                                                                 (Parking).
                                                                  Projects
                                                                  providing
                                                                  fewer than 50%
                                                                  of the parking
                                                                  spaces that
                                                                  would be
                                                                  required under
                                                                  Section
                                                                  18.52.040
                                                                  shall develop
                                                                  and implement
                                                                  a
                                                                  transportation
                                                                  demand
                                                                  management
                                                                  plan
                                                                  containing, at
                                                                  a minimum:
                                                                  (1) Free
                                                                  transit passes
                                                                  for residents
                                                                  (one per/
                                                                  unit);
                                                                  (2) At least
                                                                  one on-site    See Chapter
                                                                  short-term     18.52.050(d)
                                                                  residential    for
TDM Plan                                                          loading space; additional
                                                                  (3) Bike       TDM that may
                                                                  repair         be required.
                                                                  station;
                                                                  (4) Allocation
                                                                  of 5% of
                                                                  required bike
                                                                  parking spaces
                                                                  to cargo
                                                                  bikes;
                                                                  (5) Provision
                                                                  of outlets
                                                                  appropriate
                                                                  spaced for e-
                                                                  bike charging
                                                                  at 20% of
                                                                  required
                                                                  bicycle
                                                                  parking
                                                                  spaces; and
                                                                  (6) A
                                                                  micromobility
                                                                  program with a
                                                                  fleet equal to
                                                                  5% of the
                                                                  number of
                                                                  proposed
                                                                  units.
Notes:
(1) Distance shall be measured from the property line of the subject site.
 
Table 6
FAR and Building Height Standards, by Eligible Zoning District
 Housing Incentive Program Standards
 Maximum FAR(1)                                  Maximum Building Height
 Non-Housing Element Housing Element Opportunity
 Opportunity Sites   Sites
                     Housing Incentive Program Standards
                     Maximum FAR(1)                        Maximum Building
                                                           Height
                     Non-Housing Element Housing Element
                     Opportunity Sites   Opportunity Sites
CC(2)                2.6                 3.5               60 ft.
CS (El Camino Real)  2.85                3.5               60 ft.
CS (San Antonio Road
between Middlefield  2.0                 2.0               50 ft.
Road and East
Charleston Road)
CN (El Camino Real)  2.5                 3.25              50 ft.
CD(C)                3.0(2)              3.0(2)            50 ft.
RM-40                3.0                                   50 ft.
RM-30                2.5                                   40 ft.
RM-20                2.0                                   40 ft.
GM/ROLM Focus Area)  3.5                                   No change
Notes:
(1) Nothing in this section increases the non-residential floor area
permitted in any district. Maximum Floor Area Ratio shall be increased by
0.5:1 for projects in which at least 10% of all units contain three or more
bedrooms.
(2) The use of transferable development rights under Section
18.18.080 shall not cause the site to exceed a FAR of 3.0.
 
(f)   Review Process
   Housing Development Projects that comply with objective design standards
pursuant to
Chapter 18.24 (Contextual Design Criteria and Objective Design Standards) shall
be subject to streamlined review pursuant to Section
18.77.073. All other projects shall be subject to architectural review as
provided in Section
18.76.020. Projects shall not be subject to the requirements of site and design
review in
Chapter 18.30(G).
(Ord. 5657 § 4, 2025: Ord. 5650 § 2, 2025)
18.14.040   Affordable Housing Incentive Program
(a)   Purpose
   The affordable housing incentive program is intended to promote the
development of 100% affordable rental housing projects by providing flexible
development standards, modifying allowed uses, and streamlining the project
review process.
(b)   Applicability
   The affordable housing incentive program shall apply to 100% affordable
housing projects in the following zoning districts or locations:
   (1)   Housing Element Opportunity Sites listed in Appendix D of the Housing
Element; or
   (2)   Properties located within one-half mile of a major transit stop or
one-quarter mile of a high-quality transit corridor and zoned CD, CN, CS, and
CC, set forth in Chapters
18.16 and
18.18 of this Title, in accord with
Chapter 18.08 and
Chapter 18.80, but excluding the Town and Country Village Shopping Center,
Midtown Shopping Center, and Charleston Shopping Center (unless otherwise
allowed by subsection (i)).
   (3)   Sites eligible for the Housing Incentive Program pursuant to Section
18.14.030(b).
   The regulations established by this chapter shall apply for 100% affordable
housing projects in lieu of the uses allowed and development standards and
procedures applied in the underlying district. A property owner may elect to
use the site consistent with the underlying zoning district.
   The affordable housing incentive program provides flexibility in development
standards that allow for a density increase that would in most cases exceed
density bonuses under state density bonus law (Government Code Section 65915).
Therefore, a project applicant may utilize the affordable housing incentive
program and the provisions of this section as an alternative to use of the
state density bonus law implemented through
Chapter 18.15 (Density Bonus) of this Title, but may not utilize both the
affordable housing incentive program and state density bonuses law. If an
applicant utilizes state density bonus law, the regulations in this section
shall not apply.
(c)   Definitions
   For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply.
   (1)   "100% affordable housing project" means a multiple-family housing
project consisting entirely of for-rent affordable units, as defined in Section
16.65.020 of this code, except for a building manager's unit, and available
only to households with income levels at or below 120% of the area median
income for Santa Clara County, as defined in
Chapter 16.65, and where the average monthly rent, inclusive of a reasonable
utilities allowance, does not exceed one-twelfth of 30% of the area median
income (100% AMI) for the appropriate household size.
   (2)   “Major transit stop” and “high-quality transit corridor” as defined in
subdivision (b) of Section 21155 of the Public Resources Code.
(d)   Review Process
   Housing Development Projects that comply with objective design standards
pursuant to
Chapter 18.24 (Contextual Design Criteria and Objective Design Standards) shall
be subject to streamlined review pursuant to Section
18.77.073 (Streamlined Housing Development Project Review). All other projects
shall be subject to architectural review as provided in Section
18.76.020. Projects shall not be subject to the requirements of site and design
review in
Chapter 18.30(G).
(e)   Conformance to Other Combining Districts and Retail Preservation
   The following requirements shall apply to projects in the AH affordable
housing incentive program:
   (1)   Where applicable, the requirements of
Chapter 18.30(A) (Retail Shopping (R) Combining District Regulations),
Chapter 18.30(B) (Pedestrian Shopping (P) Combining District Regulations), and
Chapter 18.30(C) (Ground Floor (GF) Combining District Regulations), and
Pedestrian Shopping (P) Combining Districts shall apply.
   (2)   Where applicable, the retail preservation requirements of Section
18.40.180 shall apply.
   (3)   Projects shall not be subject to the requirements of site and design
review in
Chapter 18.30(G).
(f)   Permitted Uses
   The following uses shall be permitted to use the AH affordable housing
incentive program:
   (1)   100% affordable housing projects;
   (2)   In conjunction with a 100% affordable housing project, provided the
uses are limited to the ground floor:
      (A)   Business or trade school.
      (B)   Adult day care home.
      (C)   Office less than 5,000 square feet when deed-restricted for use by
a not-for-profit organization.
      (D)   Any uses permitted in the underlying district.
(g)   Conditional Uses
   All uses conditionally permitted in the applicable underlying zoning
district may be established in a project utilizing the AH affordable housing
incentive program: (1) In conjunction with an 100% affordable housing project;
(2) subject to issuance of a conditional use permit in accord with
Chapter 18.76 (Permits and Approvals); and (3) provided that the uses are
limited to the ground floor.
(h)   Development Standards
   The following development standards shall apply to projects subject to the
AH affordable housing incentive program in lieu of the development standards
for the underlying zoning district, except where noted below:
Table 1
Development Standards
AH Incentive Program(1)
Minimum Site Specifications  Subject to regulations in:
AH Incentive Program(1)
Minimum Site                                         Subject to regulations in:
Specifications
Site Area (ft 2)
Site Width (ft)           None required
Site Depth (ft)
                                                     Setback lines imposed by a
                                                     special setback map
                                                     pursuant to
Minimum Setbacks                                     Chapter 20.08 of this code
                                                     or imposed to create
                                                     required effective
                                                     sidewalk widths apply
                          Same as underlying
Front Yard (ft)           district or 10 ft.          
                          (whichever is less)
Rear Yard (ft)            Same as underlying          
                          district
Rear Yard abutting        Same as underlying
residential zoning        district                    
district (ft)
Interior Side Yard if     Same as underlying
abutting residential      district                    
zoning district (ft)
                          Same as underlying
Street Side Yard (ft)     district or 8 ft.           
                          (whichever is less)
Build-to-Lines            Same as underlying          
                          district
Permitted Setback         Same as underlying          
Encroachments             district
   Maximum Site CoveragNone Required               
   Minimum Landscape/Op20%(2)                      
   Space Coverage
                          25 sq ft per unit for 5 or
   Minimum Usable Open fewer units(2), 50 sq ft    
Space                     per unit for 6 units or
                          more(2)
   Maximum Height (ft)
General Standard          50'(4)                      
(Projects income
restricted <120% of AMI)
Lower Income Standard
(Projects income          60’(3)(4)                 
restricted <60% of AMI)
Portions of a site within
50 ft of a residential
district (other than an   35'(5)                     18.08.030
RM-40 or PC zone) R1, R-
2, RMD, RM-20, or RM-30
zoned property
                          Unless the underlying
                          zoning district standard
Daylight Plane for lot    is more permissive, the
lines abutting a low      daylight plane shall be as
density residential       follows:                    
district (RE, R1, NV-R1,  Initial height: 16 feet,
R2, NV-R2, RMD)           measured at the property
                          line
                             Slope: 45 degrees
Maximum Residential       None Required(3)            
Density (net)
Maximum Residential Floor
Area Ratio (FAR) -        2.4:1(3)                    
Residential Portion of a
Project
Maximum Non-Residential   0.4:1                       
FAR
Maximum Total FAR         2.4:1(3)                    
                          None, within one-half mile
                          of a major transit stop or
                          one-quarter mile of a
                          high- quality transit
                          corridor. 0.5 per unit,
                          all other locations.
                          The Director may modify
                          this standard based on
                          findings from a parking
                          study that show fewer      Adjustments to the
Minimum Vehicle Parking   spaces are needed for the  required ratios shall be
                          project. The required      considered per
                          parking ratio for special  Chapter 18.52 (Parking).
                          needs housing units, as
                          defined in Section 51312
                          of the Health and Safety
                          Code shall not exceed 0.3
                          spaces per unit.
                          For Commercial Uses, See
                          Chapters 18.52 and
                          18.54 (Parking).

                          A transportation demand
                          management (TDM) plan
                          shall be required pursuant
TDM Plan                  to Section                 18.52.050(d)
                          18.52.050(d) and
                          associated administrative
                          guidelines
Notes:
(1) These developments shall be designed and constructed in compliance with the
objective design standards in Section
18.24 and meet the performance criteria, general standards, and exceptions
outlined in
Chapter 18.40. Developments that elect to deviate from one or more objective
standards in
Chapter 18.24 shall meet the context-based design criteria outlined in Section
18.13.060 for residential-only projects and projects in residential, public
facilities, and office, research, and manufacturing zones, Section
18.16.090 for mixed use projects in the CN, CC, and CS districts, and Section
18.18.110 for mixed use projects in the CD district.
(2) Landscape coverage is the total area of the site covered with landscaping
as defined in
Chapter 18.04. For the purposes of this Chapter, areas provided for usable open
space may be counted towards the landscape site coverage requirement. Landscape
and open space areas may be located on or above the ground level, and may
include balconies, terraces, and rooftop gardens.
(3) Except on R-1 opportunity sites (owned by faith-based institutions) where
maximum FAR of 2.0; maximum residential density of 50 du/ac; and maximum
building height of 50 feet apply, regardless of income level.
(4) Mixed-use projects that include ground-floor retail or retail-like uses
shall receive an additional 5 feet of building height.
(5) Distance shall be measured from the property line of the subject site. The
Planning Director may recommend a waiver from the transitional height standard.
 
(Ord. 5650 § 3, 2025)
18.14.050   By Right Status of Qualifying Projects on Specified Housing
Opportunity Sites.
(a)   Multi-family residential projects on housing opportunity sites shall be a
“use by right,” subject to all of the following requirements:
   (i)   The site is designated in Appendix D of the Housing Element to
accommodate lower income households and it is either:
      (A)   A nonvacant site included in one prior housing element; or
      (B)   A vacant site that has been included in two or more consecutive,
prior housing elements;
   (ii)   The site was not previously approved to develop a portion of the
city’s regional housing need allocation;
   (iii)   The project restricts at least twenty percent of the units to rents
or sales prices affordable to lower income households; and
   (iv)   The site has sufficient water, sewer, and other dry utilities
available and accessible.
(b)   “Use by right” shall have the same meaning as provided in Government Code
section 65583.2, subdivision (i).
(c)   “Lower income households” shall have the same meaning as provided in
Health and Safety Code section 50079.5.
(d)   Qualifying projects shall be reviewed pursuant to Section
18.77.074.
(Ord. 5615 § 2, 2024: Ord. 5613 § 2, 2024)
18.14.060   By Right Affordable Housing and Supportive Housing Projects.
(a)   Affordable Housing on Higher Education and Religious Lands
   (1)   Notwithstanding any conflicting provision of this Title 18 or the
Comprehensive Plan, a qualifying housing development project under California
Government Code Section 65913.16 shall be a use by right.
   (2)   Housing development projects utilizing this section in the R-1 Single-
Family Residential District and the Low-Density Residential Districts shall be
subject to the development standards for the RM-30 zoning district, except that
the maximum floor area ratio (FAR) shall be 1.25.
   (3)   All housing development projects utilizing this section shall comply
with
Chapter 18.24 (Contextual Design Criteria and Objective Design Standards).
(b)   Supportive Housing in Multi-family and Mixed-use Zones.
   (1)   Supportive housing shall be a use by-right in zones where multi-family
and mixed uses are permitted, including nonresidential zones permitting multi-
family uses, if the proposed housing development satisfies all of the
requirements of California Government Code Sections 65650-65656.
   (2)   All housing development projects utilizing this section shall comply
with
Chapter 18.24 (Contextual Design Criteria and Objective Design Standards).
(c)   Provided they comply with the city's objective standards, by-right
projects under this section shall not be subject to any discretionary review
nor environmental review under the California Environmental Quality Act. By-
right projects under this section shall be processed in accordance with Section
18.77.074.
(Ord. 5651 § 5, 2025: Ord. 5646 § 5, 2025)
Chapter 18.15
DENSITY BONUS
Sections:
   
18.15.010   Purpose and Applicability
   
18.15.020   Definitions
   
18.15.030   Density Bonuses
   
18.15.035   Additional Density Bonus
   
18.15.040   Development Standards for Affordable Units
   
18.15.050   Development Concessions and Incentives
   
18.15.060   Waiver/Modification of Development Standards
   
18.15.070   Child Care Facilities
   
18.15.080   Application Requirements
   
18.15.090   Review Procedures
   
18.15.100   Regulatory Agreement
18.15.010    Purpose and Applicability
   (a)   The purpose of this chapter is to:
      (1)   Comply with the state density bonus law under California Government
Code Section 65915. To the extent this chapter conflicts with California
Government Code Section 65915, the provisions of Section 65915 shall prevail.
      (2)   Establish procedures for implementing state density bonus
requirements as set forth in California Government Code Section 65915, as
amended.
      (3)   Facilitate the development of affordable housing consistent with
the goals, objectives, and policies of the City’s Comprehensive Plan Housing
Element.
   (b)   This chapter applies to all development applications, as defined
herein, except:
      (1)   Developments proposed in conjunction with a rezoning to the Planned
Community zone district, which shall be entitled to densities and specific
development plans approved as part of the rezoning and shall not be entitled to
a density bonus in addition to the units entitled by the rezone.
      (2)   Developments proposed in conjunction with a development agreement,
pursuant to Government Code Section 65864 - 65869.5, where the development
agreement specifies the densities and/or development standards permitted
thereunder.
   (c)   Utilization of the benefits afforded by this chapter will preclude an
applicant from taking advantage of some local alternatives to state density
bonus law, such as the Housing Incentive Program or El Camino Real Focus Area
standards set forth in Chapter
18.14.
(Ord. 5623 § 2 (part), 2024: Ord. 5231 § 2 (part), 2014)
18.15.020    Definitions
Whenever the following terms are used in this chapter, they shall have the
meaning established by this section. To the extent these terms are defined in
California Government Code Section 65915, the definitions provided therein
shall govern and the following definitions are provided for convenience only:
(a)   “Affordable rent” means monthly rent, including a reasonable allowance
for utilities and all fees for housing services, for rental restricted
affordable units reserved for very low or lower income households, as further
defined in the California Health and Safety Code Section 50053.
(b)   “Affordable sales price” means the maximum sales price at which very low,
lower and moderate income households can qualify for the purchase of restricted
affordable units as set forth in the City of Palo Alto’s Below Market Rate
Housing Program. The sales price shall be considered affordable only if it is
based on a reasonable down payment, and monthly housing payments (including
interest, principal, mortgage insurance, property taxes and assessments, fire
and casualty insurance, homeowners association fees, property maintenance and
repairs, and a reasonable allowance for utilities), all as determined by the
city, that are equal to or less than the monthly housing costs provided in
Health and Safety Code Section 50052.5.
(c)   “Applicant” means any person, firm, partnership, association, joint
venture, corporation, or any entity or combination of entities who seeks
development permits or approvals from the City of Palo Alto.
(d)   “Approval authority” means the person or body that is authorized to
approve a development as specified in the City of Palo Alto Municipal Code.
(e)   “Below market rate housing program” means Chapter
16.65 of the Palo Alto Municipal Code and the Administrative Guidelines adopted
thereunder.
(f)   “Child care facility” means a child day care facility other than a family
day care home, including, but not limited to, infant centers, preschools,
extended day care facilities, and school age child care centers.
(g)   “Concession or incentive” as used interchangeably means such regulatory
concessions as specified in Government Code Section 65915(k) to include:
   (1)   A reduction of site development standards or architectural design
requirements which exceed the minimum applicable building standards approved by
the State Building Standards Commission pursuant to Part 2.5 (commencing with
Section 18901) of Division 13 of the Health and Safety Code, including, but not
limited to, a reduction in setback, coverage, and/or parking requirements which
result in identifiable and actual cost reductions;
   (2)   Allowing mixed use development in conjunction with the proposed
residential development, if nonresidential land uses will reduce the cost of
the residential project and the nonresidential land uses are compatible with
the residential project and existing or planned development in the area where
the development will be located; and
   (3)   Other regulatory concessions proposed by the applicant or the city
which result in identifiable and actual cost reductions.
(h)   “Density bonus” means a density increase, granted pursuant to Government
Code Section 65915 and this ordinance, over the otherwise maximum allowable
gross residential density as of the date of application, or, if elected by the
applicant, a lesser percentage of density increase, including, but not limited
to, no increase in density.
(i)   “Density bonus units” means those dwelling units granted pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter which exceed the otherwise maximum allowable gross
residential density for the development site.
(j)   “Development” means all developments pursuant to a single application to
construct or place five (5) or more dwelling units on a lot or contiguous lots
including, without limitation, a planned unit development, site plan,
subdivision, conversion of a non-residential building to dwelling units, or
substantial rehabilitation of an existing multifamily building where the result
of the rehabilitation would be a net increase in available residential units.
(k)   “Development standard” means a site or construction condition, other than
a control on maximum density, such as a height limitation, a setback, a floor-
area ratio, an onsite open-space requirement, a minimum lot area per unit
requirement, or a parking ratio that applies to a development pursuant to any
ordinance, general plan element, specific plan, charter, or other city
condition, law, policy, resolution, or regulation, including regulations
enacted by the electorate exercising the local initiative or referendum power.
In zones lacking a dwelling-units-per-acre standard, Floor Area Ratio or FAR
acts as a limitation on density and is therefore not considered a development
standard subject to waiver, incentive, or concession.
(l)   “Discretionary permit” means any permit issued for the development which
requires the exercise of judgment or deliberation from the Approval Authority,
including but not limited to conditional use permits, variances, site plans,
design review, planned development permits, general and specific plan approvals
and amendments, zoning amendments, and tentative and parcel maps.
(m)   “Lower, very low, or moderate income” means annual income of a household
that does not exceed the maximum income limits for the income category, as
adjusted for household size, applicable to Santa Clara County, as published and
periodically updated by the State Department of Housing and Community
Development pursuant to Sections 50079.5, 50105, or 50093 of the California
Health and Safety Code.
(n)   "Lower income student" means a student who has a household income and
asset level that does not exceed the level for Cal Grant A or Cal Grant B award
recipients as set forth in Section 69432.7(k) of the Education Code. The
eligibility of a unit for lower income students under this section shall be
verified by an affidavit, award letter, or letter of eligibility provided by
the institution of higher education in which the student is enrolled or by the
California Student Aid Commission that the student receives or is eligible for
financial aid, including an institutional grant or fee waiver from the college
or university, the California Student Aid Commission, or the federal
government.
(o)   "Major transit stop" has the same meaning as defined in subdivision (b)
of Section 21155 of the California Public Resources Code.
   (1)   "Located within one-half mile of a major transit stop" means that any
point on a proposed development is within one-half mile of any point on the
property on which a major transit stop is located, including any parking lot
owned by the transit authority or other local agency operating the major
transit stop.
(p)   “Maximum allowable residential density” or “base density” means the
greatest number of dwelling units permitted in the development by the city’s
Comprehensive Plan Land Use Element, a specific plan, an area plan, or Zoning
Ordinance at the time of application, excluding the provisions of this chapter.
If a range of density is permitted, the greatest number of units allowed by the
specific zoning range, specific plan, or Comprehensive Plan Land Use Element
shall apply. However, if the applicable zoning ordinance, specific plan, or
land use element does not provide a dwelling-units-per- acre standard for
density, then the maximum allowable residential density shall be calculated by:
      (1)   Estimating the realistic development capacity of the site based on
the objective development standards applicable to the project, including, but
not limited to, floor area ratio, site coverage, maximum building height and
number of stories, building setbacks and stepbacks, public and private open-
space requirements, minimum percentage or square footage of any nonresidential
component, and parking requirements, unless not required for the base project.
Parking requirements shall include considerations regarding number of spaces,
location, design, type, and circulation. A developer may provide a base density
study and the local agency shall accept it, provided that it includes all
applicable objective development standards.
      (2)   Maintaining the same average unit size and other project details
relevant to the base density study, excepting those that may be modified by
waiver or concession to accommodate the bonus units, in the proposed project as
in the study.
(q)   “Non-restricted unit” means all dwelling units within a development
excluding the restricted affordable units.
(r)   “Qualifying mobilehome park” means a mobilehome park that limits
residency based on age requirements for housing older persons pursuant to
Section 798.76 and 799.5 of the Civil Code.
(s)   “Qualifying resident” means senior citizens or other persons eligible to
reside in a senior citizen housing development or qualifying mobilehome park.
(t)   “Regulatory agreement” means a recorded and legally binding agreement
between an applicant and the city to ensure that the requirements of this
chapter are satisfied. The regulatory agreement, among other things, shall
establish: the number of restricted affordable units, their size, location,
terms and conditions of affordability, and production schedule.
(u)   “Replace” means either of the following:
   (1)   If any dwelling units described in Section
18.15.030(i) are occupied on the date that the application is submitted to the
City, the proposed housing development shall provide at least the same number
of units of equivalent size to be made available at affordable rent or
affordable housing cost to, and occupied by, persons and families in the same
or lower income category as those households in occupancy. For unoccupied
dwelling units described in Section
18.15.030(i) in a development with occupied units, the proposed housing
development shall provide units of equivalent size or type, or both, to be made
available at affordable rent or affordable housing cost to, and occupied by,
persons and families in the same or lower income category as the last household
in occupancy. If the income category of the (last) household in occupancy is
not known, it shall be rebuttably presumed that lower income renter households
occupied these units in the same proportion of lower income renter households
to all renter households within the jurisdiction, as determined by the most
recently available data from the United States Department of Housing and Urban
Development’s Comprehensive Housing Affordability Strategy database. All
replacement calculations resulting in fractional units shall be rounded up to
the next whole number. If the replacement units will be rental dwelling units,
these units shall be subject to a recorded affordability restriction for at
least 55 years. If the proposed development is for-sale units, the units
replaced shall be subject to California Government Code Section 65915(c)(2).
For purposes of this subsection (u) of Section
18.15.020, “equivalent size” means that the replacement units contain at least
the same total number of bedrooms as the units being replaced.
   (2)   If all dwelling units described in Section
18.15.030(i) have been vacated or demolished within the five-year period
preceding the application, the proposed housing development shall provide at
least the same number of units of equivalent size, as existed at the highpoint
of those units in the five-year period preceding the application to be made
available at affordable rent or affordable housing cost to, and occupied by,
persons and families in the same or lower income category as those persons and
families in occupancy at that time, if known. If the incomes of the persons and
families in occupancy at the highpoint is not known, it shall be rebuttably
presumed that low-income and very low income renter households occupied these
units in the same proportion of low-income and very low income renter
households to all renter households within the jurisdiction, as determined by
the most recently available data from the United States Department of Housing
and Urban Development’s Comprehensive Housing Affordability Strategy database.
All replacement calculations resulting in fractional units shall be rounded up
to the next whole number. If the replacement units will be rental dwelling
units, these units shall be subject to a recorded affordability restriction for
at least 55 years. If the proposed development is for-sale units, the units
replaced shall be subject to California Government Code Section 65915(c)(2).
(v)   “Restricted affordable unit” means a dwelling unit within a development
which will be available at an affordable rent or affordable sales price for
sale or rent to very low, lower or moderate income households.
(w)   “Senior citizen housing development” means a Development consistent with
the California Fair Employment and Housing Act (Government Code Section 12900
et. seq., including 12955.9 in particular), which has been “designed to meet
the physical and social needs of senior citizens,” and which otherwise
qualifies as “housing for older persons” as that phrase is used in the federal
Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988 (P.L. 100-430) and implementing regulations
(24 CFR, part 100, subpart E), and as these phrases are used in California
Civil Code Sections 51.2, 51.3, and 51.12. For purposes of this Chapter,
“senior citizen housing development” includes a shared housing building
development and a residential care facility for the elderly, as defined in
California Health and Safety Code Section 1569.2.
(x)   "Shared housing building" means a residential or mixed-use structure,
with five or more shared housing units and one or more common kitchens and
dining areas designed for permanent residence of more than 30 days by its
tenants. The kitchens and dining areas within the shared housing building shall
be able to adequately accommodate all residents. If a local ordinance further
restricts the attributes of a shared housing building beyond the requirements
established in this section, the local definition shall apply to the extent
that it does not conflict with the requirements of this section.
(y)   "Shared housing unit” means one or more habitable rooms, not within
another dwelling unit, that includes a bathroom, sink, refrigerator, and
microwave, is used for permanent residence, that meets the “minimum room area”
specified in Section R304 of the California Residential Code (Part 2.5 of Title
24 of the California Code of Regulations), and complies with the definition of
“guestroom” in Section R202 of the California Residential Code. If a local
ordinance further restricts the attributes of a shared housing building beyond
the requirements established in this section, the local definition shall apply
to the extent that it does not conflict with the requirements of this section.
   "Shared housing unit" for purposes of a residential care facility for the
elderly, as defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 1569.2,
includes a unit without an individual kitchen where a unit may be shared by
unrelated persons, and a unit where a room that may be shared by unrelated
persons meets the “minimum room area” requirements specified in Section R304 of
the California Residential Code.
(z)   “Student housing development" means a development that contains bedrooms
containing two or more bedspaces that have a shared or private bathroom, access
to a shared or private living room and laundry facilities, and access to a
shared or private kitchen.
(aa)   "Total units" or "total dwelling units" means a calculation of the
number of units that:
   (1)   Excludes a unit added by a density bonus awarded pursuant to this
section or any local law granting a greater density bonus.
   (2)   Includes a unit designated to satisfy an inclusionary zoning
requirement of a city, county, or city and county.
   For purposes of calculating a density bonus granted pursuant to this section
for a shared housing building, "unit" means one shared housing unit and its pro
rata share of associated common area facilities.
(ab)   "Very low vehicle travel area" means an urbanized area, as designated by
the United States Census Bureau, where the existing residential development
generates vehicle miles traveled per capita that is below 85 percent of either
regional vehicle miles traveled per capita or city vehicle miles traveled per
capita. For purposes of this paragraph, "area" may include a travel analysis
zone, hexagon, or grid. For the purposes of determining "regional vehicle miles
traveled per capita" pursuant to this paragraph, a "region" is the entirety of
incorporated and unincorporated areas governed by a multi- county or single-
county metropolitan planning organization, or the entirety of the incorporated
and unincorporated areas of an individual county that is not part of a
metropolitan planning organization.
(Ord. 5645 § 4, 2025: Ord. 5641 § 4, 2024: Ord. 5623 § 2 (part), 2024: Ord.
5523 § 2 (part), 2021: Ord. 5432 § 7 (part), 2018: Ord. 5373 § 12, 2016; Ord.
5231 § 2 (part), 2014)
18.15.030    Density Bonuses
This section describes the density bonuses that will be provided, at the
request of an applicant, when that applicant provides restricted affordable
units as described below.
   (a)   The city shall grant a twenty percent (20%) density bonus when an
applicant for a development of five (5) or more dwelling units seeks and agrees
to construct at least any one of the following in accordance with the
requirements of this Section and Government Code Section 65915:
      (1)   A rental or for-sale development, including a shared housing
building, that provides at least ten percent (10%) of the total dwelling units
as restricted affordable units affordable to lower income households.
         For each one percent (1%) increase in the percentage of restricted
lower income units up to twenty percent (20%) of total units, a development
will receive an additional one and one-half percent (1.5%) density bonus up to
thirty-five percent (35%) density bonus. For each one percent (1%) increase in
the percentage of restricted lower income units exceeding twenty percent (20%)
of total units, a development will receive an additional three and three-
quarters percent (3.75%) density bonus up to fifty percent (50%) density bonus;
or
      (2)   A rental or for-sale development, including a shared housing
building, that provides at least five percent (5%) of the total dwelling units
of the development as restricted affordable units affordable to very low income
households. For each one percent (1%) increase in the percentage of restricted
very low income units up to eleven percent (11%) of total units, a development
will receive an additional two and one-half percent (2.5%) density bonus up to
thirty-five percent (35%) density bonus. For each one percent (1%) increase in
the percentage of restricted very low income units exceeding eleven percent
(11%) of total units, a development will receive an additional three and three-
quarters percent (3.75%) density bonus up to fifty percent (50%) density bonus;
or
      (3)   A senior citizen housing development; or
      (4)   A qualifying mobilehome park; or
      (5)   At least ten percent (10%) of the total dwelling units of the
development for transitional foster youth, as defined in Section 66025.9 of the
Education Code, disabled veterans, as defined in Section 18541 of the
Government Code, or homeless persons, as defined in the federal McKinney-Vento
Homeless Assistance Act (42 U.S.C. Sec. 11301 et seq.). The units described in
this subsection shall be subject to a recorded affordability restriction of 55
years and shall be provided at the same affordability level as very low income
units.
   (b)   The city shall grant a five percent (5%) density bonus when an
applicant for a development of five (5) or more dwelling units seeks and agrees
to construct a development, in accordance with the requirements of this Section
and Government Code Section 65915, in which at least 10 percent (10%) of the
total dwelling units of a housing development are sold to moderate income
households, provided that all dwelling units in the development are offered to
the public for purchase. For each one percent (1%) increase in the percentage
of restricted moderate income units between ten and forty percent (10- 40%) of
total units, a development will receive an additional one percent (1%) density
bonus up to thirty-five percent (35%) density bonus. For each one percent (1%)
increase in the percentage of total dwelling units restricted for moderate
income households exceeding forty percent (40%), a development will receive an
additional three and three-quarters percent (3.75%) density bonus up to fifty
percent (50%) of the maximum residential density.
   (c)   The city shall grant a thirty-five percent (35%) density bonus when an
applicant for a student housing development of five (5) or more dwelling units
seeks and agrees to construct in accordance with the requirements of this
section and Government Code Section 65915, in which at least twenty percent
(20%) of the total dwelling units will be restricted and used for lower income
students. For each one percent (1%) increase in the percentage of restricted
lower income units between twenty and twenty-four percent (20-24%) of total
units, a development will receive an additional three and three-quarters
percent (3.75%) density bonus up to fifty percent (50%) of the maximum
residential density.
      (1)   For purposes of calculating a density bonus granted pursuant to
this subparagraph, the term “unit” as used in this subparagraph means one
rental bed and its pro rata share of the associated common area facilities. The
units described in this subparagraph shall be subject to an affordability
restriction of 55 years, which shall not tie any rental bed reserved for lower
income students to a specific bedroom. Notwithstanding any other law, an
affordability restriction provision, state or county law or policy, or property
management policy shall not prevent a lower income student from sharing a room
or unit with a non-lower income student. Any attempted waiver of the
requirements of this clause is void as against public policy.
      (2)   All units will be used exclusively for undergraduate, graduate, or
professional students enrolled full time at an institution of higher education
accredited by the Western Association of Schools and Colleges or the
Accrediting Commission for Community and Junior Colleges.
      (3)   The applicant must submit evidence that the applicant entered into
an operating agreement or master lease with one or more institutions of higher
education for the institution(s) to occupy all units of the student housing
development with students from that institution(s) or has established a system
for confirming its renters’ status as students to ensure that all units of the
student housing development are occupied with students from an institution of
higher education.
      (4)   The rent provided in the applicable units of the development for
lower income students shall be calculated at thirty percent (30%) of sixty-five
percent (65%) of the area median income for Santa Clara County for a single-
room occupancy unit type.
      (5)   The applicant will provide priority for the applicable affordable
units for lower income students experiencing homelessness. A homeless service
provider, as defined in paragraph (3) of subdivision (e) of Section 103577 of
the Health and Safety Code, or institution of higher education that has
knowledge of a person's homeless status may verify a person's status as
homeless for purposes of this subclause.
      (6)   The student housing development must not be located on a site that
pursuant to Section 65915(c)(3) of the California Government Code would require
replacement units for projects with greater than a thirty-five percent (35%)
density bonus.
   (d)   The city shall grant an eighty percent (80%) density bonus to a
development if the following criteria apply: one hundred percent (100%) of all
units in the development, including total units and density bonus units, but
exclusive of manager's unit or units, are for lower income households, as
defined by Section 50079.5 of the Health and Safety Code, except that twenty
percent (20%) of the units in the development, including total units and
density bonus units, may be for moderate-income households, as defined in
Section 50053 of the Health and Safety Code. For rental units, rents shall be
restricted as set forth in Government Code section 65915(c)(1)(B)(ii). The city
will not impose any maximum controls on density if either of the following
apply:
      (1)   The housing development is located in a very low vehicle travel
area within a designated county.
      (2)   The development is located within one-half mile of a major transit
stop.
   (e)   Each component of any density calculation, including base density and
bonus density, resulting in fractional units shall be separately rounded up to
the next whole number. An applicant may elect to receive a density bonus that
is less than the amount permitted by this section; however, the city shall not
be required to similarly reduce the number of restricted affordable units
required to be dedicated pursuant to this section and Government Code Section
65915(b).
   (f)   Each development is entitled to only one density bonus, which shall be
selected by the applicant based on the percentage of very low, low, or moderate
income restricted affordable units or the development’s status as a senior
citizen housing development or qualifying mobilehome park, or the development's
provision of restricted affordable units for transitional foster youth,
disabled veterans, lower income students, or homeless persons. Density bonuses
from more than one category may not be combined. Except as provided for in
18.15.030(d) and
18.15.035, in no case shall a development be entitled to a density bonus of
more than fifty percent (50%).
   (g)   The density bonus units shall not be included when determining the
number of restricted affordable units required to qualify for a density bonus.
When calculating the required number of restricted affordable units, any
resulting decimal or fraction shall be rounded to the next larger integer.
   (h)   Any restricted affordable unit provided pursuant to the city’s below
market rate housing program shall be included when determining the number of
restricted affordable units required to qualify for a density bonus or other
entitlement under this chapter. However, the payment of a housing impact or in
lieu fee shall not qualify for a density bonus or other entitlement under this
chapter.
   (i)   Except as provided in subsection (c)(6) of this Section, an applicant
(or project) shall be ineligible for a density bonus or any other incentives or
concessions under this chapter if the housing development is proposed on any
property that includes a parcel or parcels on which rental dwelling units are
located or, if the dwelling units have been vacated or demolished in the five-
year period preceding the application, have been subject to a recorded
covenant, ordinance, or law that restricts rents to levels affordable to
persons and families of lower or very low income; subject to any other form of
rent or price control through the City’s valid exercise of its police power; or
occupied by lower or very low income households, unless the proposed housing
development replaces those units, and either of the following applies:
      (1)   The proposed housing development, inclusive of the units replaced
pursuant to this paragraph, contains affordable units at the percentages set
forth in Section
18.15.030.
      (2)   Each unit in the development, exclusive of a manager’s unit or
units, is affordable to, and occupied by, either a lower or very low income
household.
   (j)   Certain other types of development activities are specifically
eligible for a density bonus pursuant to state law:
      (1)   A development may be eligible for a density bonus in return for
land donation pursuant to the requirements set forth in Government Code Section
65915(g).
      (2)   A condominium conversion may be eligible for a density bonus or
concession pursuant to the requirements set forth in Government Code Section
65915.5.
      (3)   An applicant for a commercial development who has entered into an
agreement for partnered housing may be eligible for a density bonus pursuant to
the requirements set forth in Government Code Section 65915.7.
   (k)   Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter, all developments must
satisfy all applicable requirements of the city’s Below Market Rate Housing
Program in Chapter
16.65, which may impose requirements for restricted affordable units in
addition to those required to receive a density bonus or concessions.
   (l)   For sites where Title 18, a Specific Plan, or the Comprehensive Plan
do not expressly prescribe a maximum number of dwelling units per acre and FAR
therefore acts as the limitation on density, the base density shall be
calculated by estimating the realistic development capacity, as described in
Section
18.15.020(p). In such circumstances, the density bonus shall be granted as
additional floor area in proportion to the number of bonus units proposed. The
Director of Planning and Development Services may issue additional guidance on
the application of this section.
   Table 1 summarizes the density bonus provisions described in this Section.
Table 1
Density Bonus Summary Table
Restricted                               Additional Percentage of Percentage of
Affordable   Minimum       Percentage of Bonus for  RAUs Required RAUs Required
Units (RAUs) Percentage of Density Bonus Each 1%    for 35%       for 50%
or Category  RAUs          Granted       Increase   Density Bonus Density Bonus
                                         in RAUs
Restricted                            Additional    Percentage of Percentage of
Affordable   Minimum    Percentage of Bonus for     RAUs Required RAUs Required
Units (RAUs) Percentage Density Bonus Each 1%       for 35%       for 50%
or Category  of RAUs    Granted       Increase      Density Bonus Density Bonus
                                      in RAUs
                                      2.50%
Very Low                              (3.75% bonus
Income       5%         20%           for increases 11%           15%
                                      above 11%
                                      RAU)
                                      1.50%
                                      (3.75% bonus
Lower Income 10%        20%           for increases 20%           24%
                                      above 20%
                                      RAU)
                                      1%
Moderate                              (3.75% bonus
Income       10%        5%            for increases 40%           44%
                                      above 40%
                                      RAU)
Lower Income
Student      20%        35%           -----         -----         -----
Housing
Senior
Citizen      100%       20%           ------        ------        ------
Housing
Qualifying   100%       20%           ------        ------        ------
Mobile Park
100%                    80% (or no
Affordable   100%       maximum       -----         -----         -----
Units                   density)
Note:   A density bonus may be selected from only one category.
(Ord. 5645 § 5, 2025: Ord. 5641 § 5, 2024: Ord. 5623 § 2 (part), 2024: Ord.
5523 § 2 (part), 2021: Ord. 5432 § 7 (part), 2018: Ord. 5373 § 13 (part), 2016;
Ord. 5231 § 2 (part), 2014)
18.15.035   Additional Density Bonus
   (a)   Provided that the resulting housing development would not restrict
more than 50 percent (50%) of the total units to moderate-income, lower income,
or very low income households, the city shall grant one additional density
bonus calculated pursuant to paragraph (b) when an applicant proposes to
construct a housing development that conforms to the requirements of Section
18.15.030, agrees to include additional rental or for-sale units affordable to
very low income households or moderate income households, and meets any of the
following requirements:
      (1)   The housing development conforms to Section
18.15.030(a)(1) and provides twenty-four percent (24%) of the total units for
lower income households.
      (2)   The housing development conforms to Section
18.15.030(a)(2) and provides fifteen percent (15%) of the total units for very
low income households.
      (3)   The housing development conforms to Section
18.15.030(b) and provides forty-four percent (44%) of the total units for
moderate income households.
   (b)   The additional density bonus granted under this Section shall be
calculated as follows:
Table 2
Additional Density Bonus
Percentage Very Low Percentage Density Percentage Moderate Percentage Density
Income Units        Bonus              Income Units        Bonus
5                   20                 5                   20
6                   23.75              6                   22.5
7                   27.5               7                   25
8                   31.25              8                   27.5
10                  38.75              10                  32.5
                                       11                  35
                                       12                  38.75
                                       13                  42.5
                                       14                  46.25
                                       15                  50
(Ord. 5623 § 2 (part), 2024)
18.15.040    Development Standards for Affordable Units
   (a)   Restricted affordable units shall be constructed concurrently with
non-restricted units unless both the city and the applicant agree within the
regulatory agreement to an alternative schedule for development.
   (b)   Moderate income restricted affordable units shall remain restricted
and affordable to the designated income group for a minimum period of 55 years
(or a longer period of time if required by the construction or mortgage
financing assistance program, mortgage insurance program, or rental subsidy
program). Very low and lower restricted affordable units shall remain
restricted and affordable to the designated income group for a period of 55
years for both rental and for-sale units (or a longer period of time if
required by a construction or mortgage financing assistance program, mortgage
insurance program, or rental subsidy program).
   (c)   In determining the maximum affordable rent or affordable sales price
of restricted affordable units, the presumed household size as set forth in the
city’s Below Market Rate Housing Program shall be used, unless the development
is subject to different assumptions imposed by other governmental regulations.
   (d)   Restricted affordable units shall be built on-site and be dispersed
within the development, except as permitted in the city’s Below Market Rate
Housing Program guidelines. The number of bedrooms of the restricted affordable
units shall be equivalent to the bedroom mix of the non-restricted units in the
development; except that the applicant may include a higher proportion of
restricted affordable units with more bedrooms. The design, square footage,
appearance and general quality of the restricted affordable units shall be
compatible with the design of the non-restricted units in the development. The
development shall comply with all applicable development standards, except
those which may be modified as provided by this chapter.
   (e)   A regulatory agreement, as described in Section
18.15.100, shall be made a condition of the discretionary permits for all
developments pursuant to this chapter. The regulatory agreement shall be
recorded as a restriction on the development. The regulatory agreement shall be
consistent with the city’s Below Market Rate Housing Program guidelines.
(Ord. 5623 § 2 (part), 2024: Ord. 5373 § 13 (part), 2016; Ord. 5231 § 2 (part),
2014)
18.15.050    Development Concessions and Incentives
This section includes provisions for providing concessions or incentives
pursuant to Government Code Section 65915.
   (a)   By right parking incentives. Upon request by the applicant, a
development that is eligible for a density bonus may provide parking as
provided in this subsection (a), consistent with Government Code Section 65915
(p), inclusive of parking for persons with a disability and guests:
      (1)   Zero to one bedroom unit: one on-site parking space;
      (2)   Two to three bedroom unit: one and one-half on-site parking spaces;
      (3)   Four or more bedroom unit: two and one-half parking spaces.
      (4)   One bedspace in a student housing development: zero parking spaces.
      If the total number of spaces required results in a fractional number, it
shall be rounded up to the next whole number. For purposes of this subsection,
this parking may be provided through tandem parking or uncovered parking, but
not through on-street parking.
   (b)   Additional parking incentives for transit oriented project.
      (1)   For purposes of this subdivision, a development shall have
unobstructed access to a major transit stop if a resident is able to access the
major transit stop without encountering natural or constructed impediments. For
purposes of this subdivision, "natural or constructed impediments" includes,
but is not limited to, freeways, rivers, mountains, and bodies of water, but
does not include residential structures, shopping centers, parking lots, or
rails used for transit.
         (A)   Notwithstanding subdivision (a) above, if a development includes
at least twenty percent (20%) of low-income or at least eleven percent (11%) of
very low income units provided for in section
18.15.030(a)(1) or (2), or at least forty percent (40%) moderate-income units
provided for in Section
18.15.030(B), and is located within one-half mile of a major transit stop, as
defined in subdivision (o) of Section 65915 of the Government Code, and there
is unobstructed access to the major transit stop from the development, then,
upon request of the applicant, the city shall not impose a vehicular parking
ratio, inclusive of parking for persons with a disability and guests, that
exceeds 0.5 spaces per unit.
      (2)   Notwithstanding subdivision (a) above, if a development consists
solely of rental units, exclusive of a manager’s unit, with an affordable
housing cost to lower income families, as provided in Section 50052.5 of the
Health and Safety Code, then, upon the request of the applicant, the city shall
not impose vehicular parking standards if the development meets one of the
following criteria:
         (A)   The development is located within one-half mile of a major
transit stop, as defined in subdivision (o) of Section 65915 of the Government
Code, and there is unobstructed access to the major transit stop from the
development, the ratio shall not exceed 0.5 spaces per unit.
         (B)   The development is a for-rent housing development for
individuals who are 62 years of age or older that complies with Sections 51.2
and 51.3 of the Civil Code, and the development has either paratransit service
or unobstructed access, within one-half mile, to fixed bus route service that
operates at least eight times per day.
         (C)   The development is either a special needs housing development,
as defined in Section 51312 of the Health and Safety Code, or a supportive
housing development, as defined in Section 50675.14 of the Health and Safety
Code. A development that is a special needs housing development must have
either paratransit service or unobstructed access, within one-half mile, to
fixed bus route service that operates at least eight times per day.
      (3)   Notwithstanding paragraphs (b)(i), (b)(ii)(A), and (b)(ii)(B), the
city may impose a higher vehicular parking ratio not to exceed the ratio
described in subdivision (a) if the city has conducted an area wide or citywide
parking study in compliance with Government Code Section 65915(p)(8).
   (c)   Other incentives and concessions. A development is eligible for other
concessions or incentives as follows:
      (1)   One concession or incentive for a development that makes at least
ten percent (10%) of the total dwelling units affordable to lower income
households; or at least five percent (5%) of the total dwelling units
affordable to very low income households; or at least ten percent (10%) of the
total dwelling units affordable to moderate income households in a development
in which the units are for sale; or at least twenty percent (20%) of the total
units in a student housing development for low income students, as provided for
in
18.15.030(c).
      (2)   Two concessions or incentives for a development that makes at least
seventeen percent (17%) of the total dwelling units affordable to lower income
households; or at least ten percent (10%) of the total dwelling units
affordable to very low income households; or at least twenty percent (20%) of
the total dwelling units affordable to moderate income households in a
development in which the units are for sale; or at least twenty-three percent
(23%) of the total units in a student housing development for low income
students, as provided for in
18.15.030(c).
      (3)   Three concessions or incentives for a development that makes at
least twenty-four percent (24%) of the total dwelling units affordable to lower
income households; or at least fifteen percent (15%) of the total dwelling
units affordable to very low income households, or at least thirty percent
(30%) of the total dwelling units affordable to moderate income households in a
development in which the units are for sale.
      (4)   Four incentives or concessions for at least sixteen percent (16%)
of the units for very low income households or at least forty-five percent
(45%) for persons and families of moderate income in a development in which the
units are for sale.
      (5)   Five concessions or incentives for a development that provides one
hundred percent (100%) of the total units, exclusive of a manager's unit or
units, for lower income households, as described in Section
18.15.030, subdivision (d). If the project is located within one-half mile of a
major transit stop or is located in a very low vehicle travel area in a
designated county, the development may additionally receive a height increase
of three stories or thirty-three (33) feet.
   Table 3 summarizes the provisions of Concessions or Incentives described in
subsection (a).
Table 3
Concessions and Incentives Summary Table
 
Target Group                                        Restricted Affordable Units
Very Low Income                                     5%  10% 15% 16%
Lower Income                                        10% 17% 24%     100%
Moderate Income (Applicable to For-Sale Units Only) 10% 20% 30% 45%
Lower Income Student Housing                        20% --- ---
Maximum Incentive(s)/Concession(s)                  1   2   3   4   5
Notes:
1.   Concessions or incentives may be selected from only one category (very
low, lower, moderate, low income student development)
2.   No concessions or incentives are available for land donation, or for
senior citizen housing developments and qualifying mobilehome parks that do not
contain restricted affordable units.
3.   In a student development, a “unit” is defined according to
18.15.030(c)(ii).
   (d)   The city shall not require, as a condition of granting a concession or
incentive the preparation of an additional report or study that is not
otherwise required by state law. The city may, however, request reasonable
documentation to demonstrate that the incentive or concession meets the
definition set forth in Section
18.15.020.
   (e)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to require the provision of
direct financial concessions for the development, including the provision of
publicly owned land by the city or the waiver of fees or dedication
requirements.
(Ord. 5645 § 6, 2025: Ord. 5641 § 6, 2024: Ord. 5623 § 2 (part), 2024: Ord.
5523 § 2 (part), 2021: Ord. 5373 § 13 (part), 2016; Ord. 5231 § 2 (part), 2014)
18.15.060   Waiver/Modification of Development Standards
   (a)   An applicant may apply for the waiver or modification of development
standards that will have the effect of physically precluding the construction
of a development at the densities or with the concessions or incentives
permitted by this chapter. A development that receives a waiver from any
maximum controls on density pursuant to Section
18.15.030(d)(1) and (d)(2) shall not be eligible for waivers or modifications
to development standards pursuant to this Section.
   (b)   For sites on which floor area acts as the limitation on density,
additional floor area shall be permitted to accommodate bonus units proposed,
as set forth in Section
18.15.030(l), and no additional waiver of floor area is permitted.
(Ord. 5623 § 2 (part), 2024: Ord. 5523 § 2 (part), 2021: Ord. 5231 § 2 (part),
2014)
18.15.070    Child Care Facilities
   (a)   When an applicant proposes to construct a development that is eligible
for a density bonus under Section
18.15.030 and includes a child care facility that will be located on the
premises of, as part of, or adjacent to, the development, the city shall grant
either:
      (1)   An additional density bonus that is an amount of square feet of
residential space that is equal to or greater than the square footage of the
child care facility; or
      (2)   An additional concession or incentive that contributes
significantly to the economic feasibility of the construction of the child care
facility.
   (b)   The city shall require, as a condition of approving the development,
that the following occur:
      (1)   The child care facility shall remain in operation for a period of
time that is as long as or longer than the period of time during which the
restricted affordable units are required to remain affordable pursuant to
Section
18.15.040. In the event the childcare operations cease to exist, the Director
of Planning and Development Services may approve an alternative community
service use for the child care facility.
      (2)   Of the children who attend the child care facility, the children of
very low, lower and moderate income households shall equal a percentage that is
equal to or greater than the percentage of restricted affordable units in the
development that are required for very low, lower and moderate income
households pursuant to Section
18.15.030.
   (c)   Notwithstanding subsections (a) and (b) above, the city shall not be
required to provide a density bonus or a concession or incentive for a child
care facility if it finds, based upon substantial evidence, that the community
has adequate child care facilities.
(Ord. 5623 § 2 (part), 2024: Ord. 5494 § 3, 2020: Ord. 5231 § 2 (part), 2014)
18.15.080    Application Requirements
An Application for a density bonus, incentive, concession, waiver, modification
or revised parking standard shall be made as follows:
(a)   All applications for a density bonus, incentive, concession, waiver,
modification or revised parking standard shall be submitted with the first
application for a discretionary permit for a development and shall be processed
concurrently with those discretionary permits. The application shall be on a
form prescribed by the city and shall include the following information:
   (1)   A brief description of the proposed development, including the total
number of dwelling units, restricted affordable units, and density bonus units
proposed.
   (2)   The zoning and comprehensive plan designations and assessor’s parcel
number(s) of the project site, and a description of any density bonus,
concession or incentive, waiver or modification, or revised parking standard
requested
   (3)   A vicinity map and preliminary site plan, drawn to scale, including
building footprints, driveway and parking layout.
   (4)   Site plan showing location of market-rate units, restricted affordable
units, and density bonus units within the proposed development;
   (5)   Level of affordability of the restricted affordable units and proposed
method to ensure affordability;
   (6)   If a concession or incentive is requested a brief explanation as to
the actual cost reduction achieved through the concession or incentive.
   (7)   If a waiver or modification of development standards is requested, a
brief explanation of why the development standard would physically preclude the
construction of the development with the density bonus, incentives, and
concessions requested.
(b)   If a density bonus or concession is requested for a land donation, the
application shall show the location of the land to be dedicated, provide proof
of site control, and provide evidence that all of the requirements and each of
the findings included in Government Code Section 65915(g) can be made;
(c)   If a density bonus or concession is requested for a child care facility,
the application shall show the location and square footage of the child care
facilities and provide evidence that all of the requirements and each of the
findings included in Government Code Section 65915(h) can be made.
(d)   If a density bonus or concession is requested for a condominium
conversion, the applicant shall provide evidence that all of the requirements
found in Government Code Section 65915.5 can be met.
(e)   In accordance with state law, neither the granting of a concession,
incentive, waiver, modification, or revised parking standard, nor the granting
of a density bonus, shall be interpreted, in and of itself, to require a
general plan amendment, zoning change, variance, or other discretionary
approval.
(Ord. 5623 § 2 (part), 2024: Ord. 5523 § 2 (part), 2021: Ord. 5432 § 7 (part),
2018: Ord. 5231 § 2 (part), 2014)
18.15.090   Review Procedures
An application for a density bonus, incentive, concession, waiver, modification
or revised parking standard shall be acted upon by the Approval Authority
concurrently with the application for the first Discretionary permit. The
granting of a density bonus shall not be deemed approval of the entire Project
or approval of any subsequent discretionary permit.
(a)   Before approving an application for a density bonus, incentive,
concession, waiver, modification or revised parking standard, the Approval
Authority shall make the following findings, as applicable:
   (1)   The development is eligible for the density bonus and any concessions,
waivers, modifications, or revised parking standards requested.
   (2)   Any requested concession or incentive will result in identifiable and
actual cost reductions based upon the financial analysis and documentation
provided. The city finds that the concessions and incentives included in
Section
18.15.050(c) will result in identifiable and actual cost reductions.
   (3)   If the density bonus is based all or in part on donation of land, a
finding that all the requirements included in Government Code Section 65915(g)
have been met.
   (4)   If the density bonus, concession or incentive is based all or in part
on the inclusion of a child care facility, a finding that all the requirements
included in Government Code Section 65915(h) have been met.
   (5)   If the concession or incentive includes mixed-use development, a
finding that all the requirements included in Government Code Section 65915(k)
(2) have been met.
   (6)   If a waiver or modification is requested, a finding that the
development standards for which the waiver is requested would have the effect
of physically precluding the construction of the development with the density
bonus and concessions permitted.
(b)   Any granted density bonus and/or concession(s) shall terminate with the
demolition, destruction or other removal of the structure receiving the density
bonus and/or concession.
(c)   If the findings required by subsection (a) for a concession, incentive or
waiver cannot be made, the Approval Authority may deny an application for a
concession, incentive, waiver or modification only if it makes one of the
following written findings, supported by substantial evidence:
   (1)   The concession or incentive does not result in identifiable and actual
cost reductions required to provide for affordable rents or affordable sales
prices; or
   (2)   The concession, incentive, waiver or modification would have a
specific, adverse impact upon public health or safety or the physical
environment or on real property listed in the California Register of Historic
Resources, and there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid
the specific adverse impact without rendering the development unaffordable to
low and moderate income households. For the purpose of this subsection,
“specific adverse impact” means a significant, quantifiable, direct, and
unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified, written public health or
safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date that the
application for the development was deemed complete; or
   (3)   The concession, incentive, waiver or modification is contrary to state
or federal law.
(d)   If the Approval Authority is not the City Council, any decision denying a
density bonus, incentive, concession, waiver, modification or revised parking
standard may be appealed to the City Council within fourteen days of the date
of the decision.
(Ord. 5623 § 2 (part), 2024: Ord. 5523 § 2 (part), 2021: Ord. 5432 § 7 (part),
2018: Ord. 5231 § 2 (part), 2014)
18.15.100   Regulatory Agreement
(a)   Applicants for a density bonus, incentive, concession, waiver,
modification or revised parking standard shall enter into a regulatory
agreement with the city in a form acceptable to the City Attorney.
(b)   Following execution of the agreement by all parties, the completed
density bonus regulatory agreement, or memorandum thereof, shall be recorded
and the conditions filed and recorded on the development.
(c)   The executed regulatory agreement shall be recorded on the development
prior to approval of a final map, or, where a map is not being processed, prior
to issuance of a building permit. The regulatory agreement shall be binding to
all future owners and successors interest.
(d)   The regulatory agreement shall be consistent with the guidelines of the
city’s Below Market Rate Program and shall include at a minimum the following:
   (1)   The total number of dwelling units approved for the development,
including the number of restricted affordable units;
   (2)   A description of the household income group to be accommodated by the
restricted affordable units, and the standards for determining the
corresponding affordable rent or affordable sales price;
   (3)   The location, dwelling unit sizes (square feet), and number of
bedrooms of the restricted affordable units;
   (4)   Term of use restrictions for restricted affordable units of at least
55 years for moderate income units and at least 55 years for low and very low
units;
   (5)   A schedule for completion and occupancy of restricted affordable
units;
   (6)   A description of any concession, incentive, waiver, modification, or
revised parking standard, if any, being provided by the city;
   (7)   A description of remedies for breach of the agreement (the city may
identify tenants or qualified purchasers as third party beneficiaries under the
agreement);
   (8)   That any restricted affordable unit offered for sale: is initially
sold to and occupied by a person of family of very low, low, or moderate
income, or, if not purchased by an income-qualified household within 180 days
after the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the unit is purchased by a
qualified non-profit housing corporation, in accordance with Government Code
Section 65915(C)(2); and
   (9)   Other provisions to ensure implementation and compliance with this
section.
(Ord. 5623 § 2 (part), 2024: Ord. 5494 § 3, 2020: Ord. 5373 § 13 (part), 2016;
Ord. 5231 § 2 (part), 2014)
Chapter 18.16
NEIGHBORHOOD, COMMUNITY, AND SERVICE COMMERCIAL (CN, CC and CS) DISTRICTS
Sections:
   
18.16.010   Purposes
   
18.16.020   Applicable Regulations
   
18.16.030   Definitions
   
18.16.040   Land Uses
   
18.16.050   Office Use Restrictions
   
18.16.060   Development Standards
   
18.16.065   Increased Floor Area for Housing Developments of 3-10 Units
   
18.16.070   Parking and Loading
   
18.16.080   Performance Standards
   
18.16.090   Context-Based Design Criteria and Objective Design Standards
   
18.16.100   Grandfathered Uses
18.16.010   Purposes
   The commercial zoning districts are intended to create and maintain sites
for retail, personal services, eating and drinking establishments, hotels and
other business uses in a manner that balances the needs of those uses with the
need to minimize impacts to surrounding neighborhoods.
   (a)   Neighborhood Commercial [CN]
   The CN neighborhood commercial district is intended to create and maintain
neighborhood shopping areas primarily accommodating retail sales, personal
service, eating and drinking, and office uses of moderate size serving the
immediate neighborhood, under regulations that will assure maximum
compatibility with surrounding residential areas.
   (b)   Community Commercial [CC]
   The CC community commercial district is intended to create and maintain
major commercial centers accommodating a broad range of office, retail sales,
and other commercial activities of community-wide or regional significance. The
CC community commercial district is intended to be applied to regional/
community commercial centers identified by the Palo Alto Comprehensive Plan.
   (c)   Community Commercial (2) Subdistrict [CC(2)]
   The community commercial (2) (CC(2)) subdistrict is intended to modify the
site development regulations of the CC community commercial district, where
applied in combination with such district, to allow site specific variations to
the community commercial uses and development requirements in the CC district.
   (d)   Service Commercial [CS]
   The CS service commercial district is intended to create and maintain areas
accommodating citywide and regional services that may be inappropriate in
neighborhood or pedestrian-oriented shopping areas, and which generally require
automotive access for customer convenience, servicing of vehicles or equipment,
loading or unloading, or parking of commercial service vehicles.
(Ord. 4923 § 3 (part), 2006: Ord. 4925 § 3 (part), 2006)
18.16.020   Applicable Regulations
   (a)   Applicable Chapters
   The specific regulations of this chapter and the additional regulations and
procedures established by other relevant chapters of the Zoning Code shall
apply to the CN, CS, and CC districts, and the subdistrict designated as CC(2),
as shown on the city's Zoning Map. The term "abutting residential zones," where
used in this Chapter, includes the R1, R-2, RMD, RM-20, RM-30, RM-40, or
residential Planned Community (PC) districts, unless otherwise specifically
noted.
   (b)   Applicable Combining Districts
   The combining districts applicable to the CN, CS, CC and CC(2) districts
shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following districts:
      (1)   The retail shopping (R) combining district regulations, as
specified in
Chapter 18.30(A), shall apply to the area of the CN, CS, and CC districts
designated as "R" combining district as shown on the city's Zoning Map.
      (2)   The pedestrian shopping (P) combining district regulations, as
specified in
Chapter 18.30(B), shall apply to the area of the CN, CS, CC and CC(2) districts
designated "P" combining district as shown on the city's Zoning Map.
(Ord. 5460 § 15, 2019: Ord. 4923 § 3 (part), 2006: Ord. 4925 § 3 (part), 2006)
18.16.030   Definitions
   For the purposes of this section, the following terms are defined:
   (a)   "Charleston Shopping Center" is defined as all properties zoned CN and
bounded by East Charleston Road, Middlefield Road, and Cubberley Community
Center.
   (b)   "Midtown Shopping District" is defined as all properties zoned CN in
the vicinity of the intersection of Colorado Avenue and Middlefield Road which
border Moreno Avenue, Bryson Avenue, Colorado Avenue, and San Carlos Court, or
which border Middlefield Road in the area extending from Moreno Avenue to San
Carlos Court.
   (c)   "Town and Country Village Shopping Center" is defined as all
properties zoned CC and bounded by El Camino Real, Embarcadero Road, Encina
Avenue, and the Southern Pacific right-of-way.
   (d)   "Stanford Shopping Center" is defined as all properties zoned CC and
bounded by El Camino Real, Sand Hill Road, Quarry Road, and Vineyard Lane.
   (e)   "Neighborhood-serving offices" are medical offices, professional
offices, travel agencies, and insurance agencies that fit the definition of a
neighborhood-serving use.
   (f)   A "Neighborhood Serving Use" is a use that primarily serves individual
consumers and households, not businesses, is generally pedestrian oriented in
design, and does not generate noise, fumes or truck traffic greater than that
typically expected for uses with a local customer base. A neighborhood-serving
use is also one to which a significant number of customers and clients travel,
rather than the provider of the goods or services traveling off-site.
   (g)   "Ground Floor" shall mean the first floor that is above grade.
   (h)   "Mixed Use Development" shall mean a combination of nonresidential and
residential uses arranged on a site. The uses may be combined in a vertical
configuration (within a building) or in a horizontal configuration (separate
buildings).
(Ord. 4923 § 3 (part), 2006: Ord. 4925 § 3 (part), 2006)
18.16.040   Land Uses
   The uses of land allowed by this chapter in each commercial zoning district
are identified in the following tables. Land uses that are not listed on the
tables are not allowed, except where otherwise noted. Where the last column on
the following tables ("Subject to Regulations in") includes a section number,
specific regulations in the referenced section also apply to the use; however,
provisions in other sections may apply as well.
   (a)   Commercial Zones and Land Uses
   Permitted and conditionally permitted land uses for each commercial zone are
shown in Table 1:
   TABLE 1
   PERMITTED AND CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES
   P = Permitted Use CUP = Conditional Use Permit Required
LAND USE CN (4) CC, CC(2) CS (4) Subject to Regulations In:
LAND USE                     CN (4) CC, CC(2) CS (4) Subject to Regulations In:
ACCESSORY AND SUPPORT USES
Accessory facilities and
activities customarily
associated with or essential P      P         p      18.42
to permitted uses, and
operated incidental to the
principal use.
Drive-in services or take-
out services associated with CUP    CUP       CUP    18.42
permitted uses(3)
Tire, battery, and
automotive service
facilities, when operated
incidental to a permitted           CUP              18.42, 18.40.160
retail service or shopping
center having a gross floor
area of more than 30,000
square feet.
Safe Parking                                         18.42.160
EDUCATIONAL, RELIGIOUS, AND
ASSEMBLY USES
Business and Trade Schools          P         P
Churches and Religious       P      P         P
Institutions
Private Educational          CUP    P         P
Facilities
Private Clubs, Lodges, or    CUP    P         P
Fraternal Organizations
MANUFACTURING AND PROCESSING
USES
Recycling Centers            CUP    CUP       CUP
Warehousing and Distribution                  CUP
OFFICE USES
Administrative Office                         P      18.16.050
Services
Medical Offices              CUP(5) CUP(5)    CUP(5) 18.16.050
Professional and General     P      P         P      18.16.050
Business Offices
PUBLIC/QUASI-PUBLIC USES
Utility Facilities essential
to provision of utility
services but excluding
construction or storage      CUP    CUP       CUP
yards, maintenance
facilities, or corporation
yards.
RECREATION USES
Commercial Recreation        CUP(5) CUP(5)    CUP(5) 18.40.160
Outdoor Recreation Services  CUP    CUP       CUP
RESIDENTIAL USES
Multiple-Family              P(1)   P(1)      P(1)   18.16.060(b) and (c)
Home Occupations             P      P         P
Residential Care Homes       P      P         P
RETAIL USES
Eating and Drinking
Services, excluding drive-in P      P         P      18.40.160
and take-out services
Retail Services, excluding   P      P         P      18.40.160
liquor stores
Liquor stores                CUP    P         P      18.40.160
Shopping Centers                    P                18.16.060(e), 18.40.160
SERVICE USES
Ambulance Services           CUP    CUP       CUP
Animal Care, excluding       P      P         P
boarding and kennels
Boarding and Kennels                          CUP
Automobile Service Stations  CUP    CUP       CUP    18.30(G)
Automotive Services                           CUP
Convalescent Facilities      CUP    P         P
Day Care Centers             P      P         P      18.40.160
Small Family Day Care Homes  P      P         P
Large Family Day Care Homes  P      P         P
Small Adult Day Care Homes   P      P         P
Large Adult Day Care Homes   CUP    P         P
Banks and Financial Services CUP    P(2)      P(2)
V
General Business Services           CUP       P
Hotels                              P         P      18.16.060(d), 18.40.160
Mortuaries                   CUP    P         P
Neighborhood Business        P                       18.16.060(f)
Services
Personal Services            P      P(6)      P      18.16.060(f), 18.40.160
Reverse Vending Machines     P      P         P
TEMPORARY USES
Farmer's Markets             CUP    CUP       CUP
Temporary Parking
Facilities, provided that    CUP    CUP       CUP
such facilities shall remain
no more than five years.
TRANSPORTATION USES
Parking as a principal use          CUP       CUP
Transportation Terminals            CUP       CUP
P = Permitted Use            CUP = Conditional Use Permit Required
 
   (1)   Residential is only permitted: (i) as part of a mixed use development,
pursuant to the provisions of Section
18.16.060(b), or (ii) on sites designated as housing inventory sites in the
Housing Element of the Comprehensive Plan, (iii) on CN or CS sites on El Camino
Real, or (iv) on CC(2) sites, all pursuant to the provisions of Section
18.16.060(b) and (c).
   (2)   Except drive-in services.
   (3)   So long as drive up facilities, excluding car washes, provide full
access to pedestrians and bicyclists. A maximum of two such services shall be
permitted within 1,000 feet, and each use shall not be less than 150 feet from
one another.
   (4)   For properties in the CN and CS zone districts, businesses that
operate or have associated activities at any time between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m. require a conditional use permit.
   (5)   A conditional use permit is not required for medical office or
commercial recreation uses up to 5,000 square feet of gross floor area, with
the following exceptions, for which a conditional use permit is always
required: (A) medical office fronting on California Avenue and in the Midtown
Shopping District; (B) commercial recreation uses fronting on California Avenue
and in the Town and Country Village Shopping Center.
   (6)   A conditional use permit is required for the following uses when
fronting on California Avenue: (A) Fitness or exercise studios, and similar
uses exceeding 1,800 square feet in gross floor area; and (B) Learning centers
intended for individual or small group settings. A conditional use permit is
required for fitness or exercise studios, and similar uses exceeding 1,800
square feet in gross floor area in Town and Country Village Shopping Center.
   (b)   Late Night Use and Activities
   The following regulations restrict businesses that operate or have
associated activities at any time between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00
a.m., where such site abuts or is located within 50 feet of residentially zoned
properties.
      (1)   Such businesses shall be operated in a manner to protect
residential properties from excessive noise, odors, lighting or other nuisances
from any sources during those hours.
      (2)   For properties located in the CN or CS zone districts, businesses
that operate or have associated activities at any time between the hours of 10:
00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. shall be required to obtain a conditional use permit. The
director may apply conditions of approval as are deemed necessary to assure
that the operations or activities are compatible with the nearby residentially
zoned property.
   (c)   CN District: Special Use Requirements in the Charleston and Midtown
Shopping Centers
   The following regulations shall apply to areas of Charleston Center and the
Midtown Shopping Center as defined in Section
18.16.030.
   Table 2 shows the uses permitted and conditionally permitted on the ground
floor of the applicable areas of the Charleston Center and Midtown Shopping
Centers. Permitted and conditional uses specified in subsection (a) of this
section shall only apply to the ground floor of the areas of the Charleston and
Midtown Shopping Centers as listed in Table 2. Uses lawfully existing on
January 16, 2001 may be continued as non-conforming uses but may only be
replaced with uses permitted or conditionally permitted under this subsection.
   TABLE 2
CHARLESTON AND MIDTOWN SHOPPING CENTERS GROUND FLOOR USES
P = Permitted Use CUP = Conditional Use Permit Required X = Prohibited Use
LAND USES Charleston Shopping Midtown Shopping Center Subject to Regulations
          Center                                      in:
LAND USES            Charleston Shopping Midtown Shopping Subject to
                     Center              Center           Regulations in:
ACCESSORY AND
SUPPORT USES
Accessory facilities
and uses customarily P                   P
incidental to
permitted uses.
EDUCATIONAL,
RELIGIOUS, AND
ASSEMBLY USES
Churches and
Religious            CUP                 CUP
Institutions
Private Educational  CUP                 CUP
Facilities
MANUFACTURING AND
PROCESSING USES
Recycling Centers    CUP                 CUP
OFFICE USES
Neighborhood-serving
offices that do not  P                                    18.16.050
exceed 2,500 square
feet in floor area.
Neighborhood-serving
offices exceeding    CUP                                  18.16.050
2,500 square feet in
floor area.
Administrative
office uses and
general business
office uses (other
than neighborhood-
serving travel       X                   X                18.16.050
agencies and
insurance agencies)
other than those
legally in existence
on January 16,2001
Medical offices not
exceeding 2,500
square feet in area,
professional                             CUP              18.16.050
offices, travel
agencies, and
insurance agencies
PUBLIC/QUASI-PUBLIC
USES
Utility Facilities
essential to
provision of utility
services but
excluding            CUP                 CUP
construction or
storage yards,
maintenance
facilities, or
corporation yards.
RECREATION USES
Commercial           CUP                 CUP              18.40.160
Recreation
Outdoor Recreation   CUP                 CUP
Services
Private Clubs,
Lodges, or Fraternal CUP                 CUP
Organizations
RESIDENTIAL USES
Residential uses of  X                   X
any nature
RETAIL USES
Eating and Drinking
Services, excluding  P                   P                18.40.160
drive-in and take-
out services
Retail Services,
excluding liquor     P                   P                18.40.160
stores
Liquor stores        CUP                 CUP              18.40.160
SERVICE USES
Ambulance Services   CUP                 CUP
Animal Care,
excluding boarding   P                   P
and kennels
Automobile Service   CUP                 CUP              18.30(G)
Stations
Convalescent         CUP                 CUP
Facilities
Day Care Centers     P                   P                18.40.160
Financial Services   CUP                 CUP
Mortuaries           CUP                 CUP
Neighborhood         P                   P
Business Services
Personal Services    P                   P                18.40.160
Reverse Vending      P                   P
Machines
TEMPORARY USES
Farmers' Markets     CUP                 CUP
Temporary Parking
Facilities, provided
that such facilities CUP                 CUP
shall remain no more
than five years.
P = Permitted Use   CUP = Conditional Use Permit Required   X = Prohibited Use
 
   (d)   Charleston Shopping Center: Additional Use Restrictions
      (1)   Any office use first occupying space at the Center on or after
January 16, 2001, shall obtain a written determination from the director of
planning and development services that it qualifies as a neighborhood serving
use, as defined in this chapter, before occupying its premises. The applicant
shall submit such information as the director shall reasonably require in order
to make the determination, and the director shall issue the determination
within 30 days of receiving a complete application. Failure to submit the
required information shall be grounds for determining that a business is not
neighborhood-serving.
      (2)   No more than 7,850 square feet of total floor area at the Center
shall be occupied by office uses at any time.
      (3)   Prior to approving a conditional use permit for neighborhood-
serving offices larger than 2,500 square feet in total floor area, the city
shall find that the proposed use will be neighborhood-serving, that it will be
conducted in a manner that will enhance and strengthen the Center as a
neighborhood resource, and that it will not diminish the retail strength of the
center.
   (e)   Midtown Shopping Center: Additional Use Restrictions
      (1)   An existing ground floor office may be replaced with another office
if
         (a)   the new tenant or owner will continue the existing business or
practice; or
         (b)   a conditional use permit is issued for the new office use.
      (2)   No conditional use permit shall be issued for any new office use on
the ground floor unless, in addition to the findings required for a conditional
use permit as specified in Section
18.76.010, the city finds that the proposed use will be neighborhood serving,
that it will be conducted in a manner that will enhance and strengthen the
Midtown Shopping District as a neighborhood resource, and that it will not
diminish the retail strength of the District.
      (3)   For properties at 711, 719, and 721 Colorado Avenue, and 689 Bryson
Avenue, buildings not fronting on Middlefield Avenue, designed and used for
office purposes, and not well suited to other uses are exempt from the
provisions of this subsection (b).
(Ord. 5517 § 3, 2021: Ord. 5494 § 3, 2020: Ord. 5490 § 4, 2020: Ord. 5460 § 5,
2019: Ord. 5407 § 8, 2017: Ord. 4923 § 3 (part), 2006: Ord. 4925 § 3 (part),
2006)
18.16.050   Office Use Restrictions
   The following restrictions shall apply to office uses:
   (a)   Conversion of Ground Floor Housing and Non-Office Commercial to Office
   Medical, Professional, and Business offices shall not be located on the
ground floor, unless any of the following apply to such offices:
      (1)   Have been continuously in existence in that space since March 19,
2001, and as of such date, were neither non-conforming nor in the process of
being amortized pursuant to
Chapter 18.30(I);
      (2)   Occupy a space that was not occupied by housing, neighborhood
business service, retail services, personal services, eating and drinking
services, or automotive service on March 19, 2001 or thereafter;
      (3)   Occupy a space that was vacant on March 19, 2001;
      (4)   Are located in new or remodeled ground floor area built on or after
March 19, 2001 if the ground floor area devoted to housing, retail services,
eating and drinking services, personal services, and automobile services does
not decrease;
      (5)   Are on a site located in an area subject to a specific plan or
coordinated area plan, which specifically allows for such ground floor medical,
professional, and general business offices; or
      (6)   Are located anywhere in Building E or in the rear 50% of Building C
or D of the property at the southeast corner of the intersection of Park
Boulevard and California Avenue, as shown on sheet A2 of the plans titled “101
California Avenue Townhouse/Commercial/Office, Palo Alto, CA” by Crosby,
Thornton, Marshall Associates, Architects, dated June 14, 1982, revised
November 23, 1982, and on file with the Department of Planning and Development
Services.
   (b)   Size Restrictions on Office Uses in the CN and CS Districts
      (1)   In the CN district, office uses shall be governed by the following
regulations:
         (A)   Total floor area of permitted office uses on a lot shall not
exceed 25% of the lot area, provided:
            (i)   A lot shall be permitted to have at least a total floor area
of 2,500 square feet of office uses, provided the uses meet all other zoning
regulations.
            (ii)   No lot shall be permitted to have more than a total floor
area of 5,000 square feet of office uses.
         (B)   Such uses may be allowed to exceed the maximum size, subject to
issuance of a conditional use permit in accord with the provisions of
Chapter 18.76. The maximum size for any conditional use shall be established by
the director and specified in the conditional use permit for such use.
      (2)   In the CS district, office uses shall be governed by the following
regulations:
         (A)   No lot shall be permitted to have more than a total floor area
of 5,000 square feet of office uses.
         (B)   Such uses may be allowed to exceed the maximum size, subject to
issuance of a conditional use permit in accord with the provisions of
Chapter 18.76. The maximum size for any conditional use shall be established by
the director and specified in the conditional use permit for such use.
(Ord. 5494 § 3, 2020: Ord. 5432 § 8, 2018: Ord. 5373 § 14 (part), 2016; Ord.
4923 § 3 (part), 2006: Ord. 4925 § 3 (part), 2006)
18.16.060   Development Standards
(a)   Exclusively Non-Residential Uses
   Table 3 specifies the development standards for exclusively non-residential
uses and alterations to non-residential uses or structures in the CN, CC, CC(2)
and CS districts. These developments shall be designed and constructed in
compliance with the following requirements and the context-based design
criteria outlined in Section
18.16.090, provided that more restrictive regulations may be recommended by the
architectural review board and approved by the director of planning and
development services, pursuant to Section
18.76.020.
Table 3
Exclusively Non-residential Development Standards
 CN CC CC(2) CS Subject to regulations in Section
                                                                                                                     Subject to
                                                                             CN        CC       CC(2)     CS         regulations
                                                                                                                     in Section
Minimum Site Specifications
   Site Area (ft 2 )                                                      None Required
   Site Width (ft)
   Site Depth (ft)
Minimum Setbacks
                                                                             0 - 10'            0 - 10'              Setback
                                                                             to create          to create 0 - 10' to lines
                                                                             an 8' -            an 8' -   create an  imposed by
                                                                             12'       None     12'       8' - 12'   a special
   Front Yard (ft)                                                        effective Required effective effective  setback map
                                                                             sidewalk  (8)      sidewalk  sidewalk   pursuant to
                                                                             width              width     width (1), Chapter
                                                                             (1), (2),          (1), (2), (2), (8)   20.08 of
                                                                             (8)                (8)                  this code
   Rear Yard (ft)                                                         None required
   Interior Side Yard (ft)
   Street Side Yard (ft)                                                  20' (2)   None required
   Minimum Yard (ft) for lot lines abutting or opposite residential       10' (2)   10' (2)  10' (2)   10' (2)
districts or residential PC districts
Build-To-Lines                                                               50% of frontage built to setback (7)
                                                                             33% of side street built to setback (7)
Minimum setbacks from alleys for structures other than public parking
garages (ft) (3)
   Corner lots, from rear lot line on the alley                                              8'        Not
   Corner lots, from side lot line on the alley                           Not applicable     None      applicable
   All lots other than corner lots                                                           20'
Maximum Site Coverage                                                        50%       None Required
Maximum Height (ft)
   Standard                                                               25' and 2 50'      37' (4)   50'        18.08.030
   Portions of a site within 150 ft. of an abutting residential district  stories   35'      35'       35'
(other than a PC zone) (9)
Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR)                                               0.4:1              2.0:1     0.4:1      18.18.060
                                                                                                                     (e)
Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR) for Hotels                                    N/A       - (5)    2.0:1     2.0:1      18.18.060
                                                                                                                     (d)
Daylight Plane for lot lines abutting one or more residential zone districts
other than an RM-40 or PC zone
Initial Height at side or rear lot line (ft)                                 - (6)     - (6)    - (6)     - (6)
Slope                                                                        - (6)     - (6)    - (6)     - (6)
 
   (1)   No parking or loading space, whether required or optional, shall be
located in the first 10 feet adjoining the street property line of any required
yard.
   (2)   Any minimum front, street side, or interior yard shall be planted and
maintained as a landscaped screen excluding areas required for access to the
site. A solid wall or fence between 5 and 8 feet in height shall be constructed
along any common interior lot line.
   (3)   No setback from an alley is required for a public parking garage.
   (4)   As measured to the peak of the roof or the top of a parapet;
penthouses and equipment enclosures may exceed this height limit by a maximum
of five feet, but shall be limited to an area equal to no more than ten percent
of the site area and shall not intrude into the daylight plane.
   (5)   See additional regulations in subsection (e) of this Section
18.16.050.
   (6)   The initial height and slope shall be identical to those of the most
restrictive residential zone abutting the site line in question.
   (7)   Twenty-five-foot driveway access permitted regardless of frontage;
build-to requirement does not apply to CC district.
   (8)   A 12-foot sidewalk width is required along El Camino Real frontage.
   (9)   Distance shall be measured from the property line of the subject site.
150-foot measurement may be reduced to 50 feet at minimum, subject to approval
by the Planning Director, upon recommendation by the Architectural Review Board
pursuant to criteria set forth in
Chapter 18.76.
(b)   Mixed Use and Residential
   Table 4 specifies the development standards for new residential mixed use
developments and residential developments. These developments shall be designed
and constructed in compliance with the following requirements and the objective
design standards in
Chapter 18.24, except that sites designated as Housing Element Opportunity
Sites shall meet the development standards as modified in Chapter
18.14.020 and projects utilizing the Housing Incentive Program or Affordable
Housing Incentive Program shall meet the development standards specified in
Sections
18.14.030 and
18.14.040, respectively. Non-Housing Development Projects and Housing
Development Projects that elect to deviate from one or more objective standards
in
Chapter 18.24 shall meet the context-based design criteria outlined in Section
18.16.090, provided that more restrictive regulations may be recommended by the
architectural review board and approved by the director of planning and
development services, pursuant to Section
18.76.020.
Table 4
Mixed Use and Residential Development Standards
 CN CC CC(2) CS Subject to regulations in:
                                                                                                                    Subject to
                                                                             CN        CC       CC(2)     CS        regulations
                                                                                                                    in:
Minimum Site Specifications                                                                                          
   Site Area (ft2)                                                                                                
   Site Width (ft)                                                        None required                           
   Site Depth (ft)                                                                                                
                                                                                                                    Setback
                                                                                                                    lines
                                                                                                                    imposed by
                                                                                                                    a special
Minimum Setbacks                                                                                                    setback map
                                                                                                                    pursuant to
                                                                                                                    Chapter
                                                                                                                    20.08 of
                                                                                                                    this code
                                                                                                                    may apply
                                                                             0' - 10'           0' - 10'  0' - 10'
                                                                             to create          to create to create
                                                                             an 8' -   None     an 8' -   an 8' -
   Front Yard (ft)                                                        12'       Required 12'       12'        
                                                                             effective (8)      effective effective
                                                                             sidewalk           sidewalk  sidewal k
                                                                             width (8)          width (8) width (8)
   Rear Yard (ft)                                                         10' for residential portion; no         
                                                                             requirement for commercial portion
   Rear Yard abutting residential zone district (ft)                      10'                                     
   Interior Side Yard if abutting residential zone district (ft)          10'                                     
   Street Side Yard (ft)                                                  5'                                      
                                                                             50% of frontage built to setback (1)
   Build-to-Lines                                                         33% of side street built to setback     
                                                                             (1)
                                                                             Balconies, awnings, porches,
                                                                             stairways, and similar elements may
                                                                             extend up to 6' into the setback.
                                                                             Cornices, eaves, fireplaces, and
   Permitted Setback Encroachments                                        similar architectural features          
                                                                             (excluding flat or continuous walls or
                                                                             enclosures of interior space) may
                                                                             extend up to 4' into the front and
                                                                             rear setbacks and up to 3' into
                                                                             interior side setbacks
Maximum Site Coverage                                                        50%       50%      100%      50%        
Minimum Landscape/Open Space Coverage                                        35%       30%      20%       30%       18.14.020
Usable Open Space (Private and/or Common)                                    150 sq ft per unit (2)                 18.16.090
Maximum Height (ft)                                                                                              
   Standard                                                               35'(4)    50'      37'       50'        
   Portions of a site within 150 ft. of an abutting residential district  35'       35'      35'       35'       18.08.030
(other than an RM-40 or PC zone) (5)
                                                                             Daylight plane height and slope shall
Daylight Plane for lot lines abutting one or more residential zoning         be identical to those of the most       
districts                                                                    restrictive residential zoning
                                                                             district abutting the lot line
Residential Density (net)(3)                                                 15 or 20                     30        18.16.060
                                                                             (9)                No                  (i)
   Sites on El Camino Real                                                No                 maximum   No         
                                                                             maximum                      maximum
Maximum Residential Floor Area Ratio (FAR)                                   0.5:1(4)  See sub- 0.6:1     0.6:1     18.16.065
                                                                                       section                      18.14.020
Maximum Nonresidential Floor Area Ratio (FAR)                                0.4:1     (e)      2.0:1     0.4:1      
Total Mixed Use Floor Area Ratio (FAR)                                       0.9:1(4)  below    2.0:1     1.0:1     18.16.065
                                                                                                                    18.14.020
                                                                                                0.15:1
Minimum Mixed Use Ground Floor Commercial FAR(6)                             0.15:1             (10)      0.15:1     
                                                                             (10)               0.25:1(7) (10)
                                                                                                (10)
Parking                                                                      See Chapters 18.52 and 18.54 (Parking) 18.52,
                                                                                                                    18.54
 
   (1)   Twenty-five-foot driveway access permitted regardless of frontage;
build-to requirement does not apply to CC district.
   (2)   Required usable open space: (1) may be any combination of private and
common open spaces; (2) does not need to be located on the ground (but rooftop
gardens are not included as open space except as provided below); (3) minimum
private open space dimension six feet; and (4) minimum common open space
dimension twelve feet.
      For CN and CS sites on El Camino Real, CS sites on San Antonio Road
between Middlefield Road and East Charleston Road and CC(2) sites that do not
abut a single- or two-family residential use or zoning district, rooftop
gardens may qualify as usable open space and may count as up to 60% of the
required usable open space for the residential component of a project. In order
to qualify as usable open space, the rooftop garden shall meet the requirements
set forth in Section
18.40.230.
   (3)   Residential density shall be computed based upon the total site area,
irrespective of the percent of the site devoted to commercial use.
   (4)   For CN sites on El Camino Real, height may increase to a maximum of 40
feet and the FAR may increase to a maximum of 1.0:1 (0.5:1 for nonresidential,
0.5:1 for residential).
   (5)   Distance shall be measured from the property line of the subject site.
150-foot measurement may be reduced to 50 feet at minimum, subject to approval
by the Planning Director, upon recommendation by the Architectural Review Board
pursuant to criteria set forth in
Chapter 18.76.
   (6)   Ground floor commercial uses generally include retail, personal
services, hotels and eating and drinking establishments. Office uses may be
included only to the extent they are permitted in ground floor regulations.
   (7)   If located in the California Avenue Parking Assessment District.
   (8)   A 12-foot sidewalk width is required along El Camino Real frontage.
   (9)   Residential densities up to 20 units/acre are allowed on CN zoned
housing inventory sites identified in the Housing Element. Other CN zoned sites
not located on El Camino Real are subject to a maximum residential density of
up to 15 units/acre.
   (10)   In the CC(2) zone and on CN and CS zoned sites on El Camino Real,
there shall be no minimum mixed use ground floor commercial FAR for a
residential project, except to the extent that the retail preservation
requirements of Section
18.40.180 or the retail shopping (R) combining district (
Chapter 18.30(A)) applies.
      (1)   Nonresidential uses that involve the use or storage of hazardous
materials in excess of the exempt quantities prescribed in Title 15 of the
Municipal Code, including but not limited to dry cleaning plants and auto
repair, are prohibited in a mixed use development with residential uses.
      (2)   Residential mixed use development is prohibited on any site
designated with an Automobile Dealership (AD) Combining District overlay.
(c)   Exclusively Residential Uses
   Exclusively residential uses are generally prohibited in the CN, CS, CC(2)
and CC zone districts, except on housing inventory sites identified in the
Housing Element, subject to the standards in Section
18.16.060(b), and on CS and CN sites on El Camino Real and CC(2) sites, subject
to the following.
      (1)   On CS and CN sites on El Camino Real and on CC(2) sites, where the
retail shopping (R) combining district or the retail preservation provisions of
Section
18.40.180 do not apply, exclusively residential uses are allowed subject to the
standards in Section
18.16.060(b) and the following additional requirements:
      (A)   Residential units shall not be permitted on the ground-floor of
development fronting on El Camino Real unless set back a minimum of 15 feet
from the property line or the 12-foot effective sidewalk setback along the El
Camino Real frontage, whichever is greater; for projects on Housing opportunity
sites, or those utilizing the Housing Incentive Program or Affordable Housing
Incentive Program, these setbacks may be modified by the standards in
Chapter 18.14. Common areas, such as lobbies, stoops, community rooms, and
work-out spaces with windows and architectural detail are permitted on the
ground-floor El Camino Real frontage.
      (B)   Parking shall be located behind buildings or below grade, or, if
infeasible, screened by landscaping, low walls, or garage structures with
architectural detail.
      (C)   Combining district use regulations and design and development
standards shall not apply to exclusively residential projects on Housing
Element opportunity sites designated to accommodate lower income households,
and may be limited for sites utilizing the Housing Incentive Program or
Affordable Housing Incentive Program. See
Chapter 18.14 for details.
(d)   Hotel Regulations
      (1)   The purpose of these regulations is to allow floor area for
development of hotels in excess of floor area limitations for other commercial
uses, in order to provide a visitor-serving use that results in an enhanced
business climate, increased transient occupancy tax and sales tax revenue, and
other community and economic benefits to the city.
      (2)   Hotels, where they are a permitted use, may develop to a maximum
FAR of 2.0:1, subject to the following limitations:
         (A)   The hotel use must generate transient occupancy tax (TOT) as
provided in
Chapter 2.33 of the Palo Alto Municipal Code; and
         (B)   No room stays in excess of thirty days are permitted, except
where the city council approves longer stays through an enforceable agreement
with the applicant to provide for compensating revenues.
      (3)   Hotels may include residential condominium use, subject to:
         (A)   No more than twenty-five percent of the floor area shall be
devoted to condominium use; and
         (B)   No more than twenty-five percent of the total number of lodging
units shall be devoted to condominium use; and
         (C)   A minimum FAR of 1.0 shall be provided for the hotel/condominium
building(s); and
         (D)   Where residential condominium use is proposed, room stays for
other hotel rooms shall not exceed thirty days.
      (4)   Violation of this chapter is subject to enforcement action for
stays in excess of thirty days not permitted under the provisions of this
chapter, in which case each day of room stay in excess of thirty days shall
constitute a separate violation and administrative penalties shall be assessed
pursuant to Chapters 1.12 and 1.16.
(e)   CC District Shopping Center Floor Area Ratio Regulations
      (1)   The maximum floor area ratio for the Town and Country Village
Shopping Center shall be .35 to 1; and office uses at said shopping center
shall be limited to 15% of the floor area of the shopping center existing as of
August 1, 1989. Hotel use shall not be included as part of the .35 to 1 maximum
floor area ratio, but shall not exceed an additional .25 to 1 floor area ratio,
for a maximum site floor area ratio of .60 to 1.
      (2)   The maximum floor area ratio for mixed use development for the Town
and Country Village Shopping Center shall be limited to .50 to 1; provided that
no more than .35 to 1 floor area shall be nonresidential, consistent with part
(1) above, and not more than .15 to 1 floor area shall be residential.
      (3)   Stanford Shopping Center shall not be permitted to add more than
80,000 square feet of floor area to the total amount of floor area of the
shopping center existing as of June 14, 1996, 1,332,362 square feet, for a
total square footage not to exceed 1,412,362. Any hotel or mixed use
development for the Stanford Shopping Center shall only be included if approved
as part of a Development Agreement for the site.
(f)   Size of Establishments in the CN District
   In the CN district, permitted commercial uses shall not exceed the floor
area per individual use or business establishment shown in Table 5. Such uses
may be allowed to exceed the maximum establishment size, subject to issuance of
a conditional use permit in accord with Section 18.76.010. The maximum
establishment size for any conditional use shall be established by the director
and specified in the conditional use permit for such use.
   TABLE 5
   MAXIMUM SIZE OF ESTABLISHMENT
 
Type of Establishment                  Maximum Size (ft 2 )
Personal Services                      3,000
Retail services, except grocery stores 15,000
Grocery stores                         20,000
Eating and drinking services           5,000
Neighborhood business services         3,000
 
(g)   Nuisances Prohibited
   All uses, whether permitted or conditional, shall be conducted in such a
manner as to preclude nuisance, hazard, or commonly recognized offensive
conditions or characteristics, including creation or emission of dust, gas,
smoke, noise, fumes, odors, vibrations, particulate matter, chemical compounds,
electrical disturbance, humidity, heat, cold, glare, or night illuminations.
Prior to issuance of a building permit, or occupancy permit, or at any other
time, the building inspector may require evidence that adequate controls,
measures, or devices have been provided to ensure and protect the public
interest, health, comfort, convenience, safety, and general welfare from such
nuisance, hazard, or offensive condition.
(h)   Outdoor Sales and Storage
   (1)   In the CN district, all permitted office and commercial activities
shall be conducted within a building, except for:
      (A)   Incidental sales and display of plant materials and garden supplies
occupying no more than 500 square feet of exterior sales and display area,
      (B)   Farmers’ markets that have obtained a conditional use permit, and
      (C)   Recycling centers that have obtained a conditional use permit.
      (D)   Parklets that have obtained a permit per PAMC
Chapter 12.11.
   (2)   In the CC district and in the CC(2) district, the following
regulations shall apply to outdoor sales and storage:
      (A)   Except in shopping centers, all permitted office and commercial
activities shall be conducted within a building, except for:
         (i)   Incidental sales and display of plant materials and garden
supplies occupying no more than 2,000 square feet of exterior sales and display
area,
         (ii)   Outdoor eating areas operated incidental to permitted eating
and drinking services or intensive retail uses, including parklets permitted
under PAMC
Chapter 12.11,
         (iii)   Farmers’ markets that have obtained a conditional use permit,
and
         (iv)   Recycling centers that have obtained a conditional use permit.
      (B)   Any permitted outdoor activity in excess of 2,000 square feet shall
be subject to a conditional use permit; parklets on public property approved
via permit per PAMC
Chapter 12.11 are exempt from this section.
      (C)   Exterior storage shall be prohibited, except as provided under
subparagraph (A)(iv) of this subsection.
   (3)   In the CS district, outdoor sales and display of merchandise, and
outdoor eating areas operated incidental to permitted eating and drinking
services shall be permitted subject to the following regulations:
      (A)   Outdoor sales and display shall not occupy a total site area
exceeding the gross building floor area on the site, except as authorized by a
conditional use permit. Parklets on public property approved via permit per
PAMC
Chapter 12.11 are exempt from this section.
      (B)   Areas used for outdoor sales and display of motor vehicles, boats,
campers, camp trailers, trailers, trailer coaches, house cars, or similar
conveyances shall meet the minimum design standards applicable to off street
parking facilities with respect to paving, grading, drainage, access to public
streets and alleys, safety and protective features, lighting, landscaping, and
screening.
      (C)   Exterior storage shall be prohibited, unless screened by a solid
wall or fence of between 5 and 8 feet in height.
(i)   (Reserved)
(j)   Employee Showers
   Employee shower facilities shall be provided for any new building
constructed or for any addition to or enlargement of any existing building as
specified in Table 6.
TABLE 6
EMPLOYEE SHOWERS REQUIRED
Uses Gross Floor Area of New Construction (ft 2 ) Showers Required
Uses                                Gross Floor Area of New Showers Required
                                    Construction (ft 2 )
Medical, Professional, and General  0-9,999                 No requirement
Business Offices, Financial         10,000-19,999           1
Services, Business and Trade        20,000-49,999           2
Schools, General Business Services  50,000 and up           4
                                    0-24,999                No requirement
Retail Services, Personal Services, 25,000-49,999           1
and Eating and Drinking Services    50,000-99,999           2
                                    100,000 and up          4
 
(k)   (Reserved)
(l)   Parking and Vehicular Access on California Avenue Restricted
   Vehicular access to CC(2) zoned sites on California Avenue which requires
vehicular movement across the sidewalk on California Avenue shall be
prohibited, except where required by law and as applied to parcels owned,
leased or controlled by the City.
(Ord. 5650 § 5, 2025: Ord. 5594 § 4, 2024: Ord. 5587 § 20, 2023: Ord. 5554 § 7,
2022: Ord. 5548 § 4, 2022: Ord. 5542 § 19, 2022: Ord. 5517 § 4, 2021: Ord. 5512
§ 3, 2020: Ord. 5494 § 3, 2020: Ord. 5460 § 6, 2019: Ord. 5373 § 14 (part),
2016: Ord. 5230 §§ 5, 6, 2014: Ord. 5035 § 2, 2009: Ord. 4923 § 3 (part), 2006:
Ord. 4925 § 3 (part), 2006: Ord. 5608 § 7, 2024)
18.16.065   Increased Floor Area for Housing Developments of 3-10 Units
   (a)   A housing development project as defined in paragraph (2) of
subdivision (h) of Section 65589.5 of the Government Code of the State of
California that is in a CN, CC or CS District shall be allowed to increase its
floor area ratio as follows:
      (i)   A housing development project of three to seven units shall have a
maximum floor area ratio of 1.0:1.
      (ii)   A housing development project of eight to ten units shall have a
maximum floor area ratio of 1.25:1.
   (b)   This bonus shall not apply within a historic district or property
included on the State Historic Resources Inventory, as defined in Section
5020.1 of the Public Resources Code of the State of California, or within a
site that is designated or listed as a city or county landmark or historic
property or district pursuant to a city or county ordinance.
   (c)   For mixed use development, total mixed use floor area ratio shall be
increased to the extent necessary to accommodate a non-residential floor area
ratio of 0.4:1 for retail and retail-like uses only.
(Ord. 5587 § 21, 2023: Ord. 5542 § 20, 2022)
18.16.070   Parking and Loading
   Off-street parking and loading facilities shall be required for all
permitted and conditional uses in accord with Chapters
18.52 and
18.54 of this title. All parking and loading facilities on any site, whether
required as minimums or optionally provided in addition to minimum
requirements, shall comply with the regulations and the design standards
established by Chapters
18.52 and
18.54.
(Ord. 4923 § 3 (part), 2006: Ord. 4925 § 3 (part), 2006)
18.16.080   Performance Standards
   In addition to the standards for development prescribed above, all
development in the CN, CS, CC, and CC(2) districts shall comply with the
performance criteria, general standards, and exceptions outlined in
Chapter 18.40 of the Zoning Ordinance. All mixed use development shall also
comply with the applicable provisions of
Chapter 18.40 of the Zoning Ordinance.
(Ord. 5554 § 8, 2022: Ord. 4923 § 3 (part), 2006: Ord. 4925 § 3 (part), 2006)
18.16.090   Context-Based Design Criteria and Objective Design Standards
   In addition to the standards for development prescribed above, all Housing
Development Projects in the CN, CS, CC, and CC(2) districts shall comply with
the objective design standards outlined in
Chapter 18.24 , as defined therein. All other developments, and all Housing
Development Projects that elect to deviate from one or more objective design
standards in
Chapter 18.24 , shall meet the Context Based Design Criteria, as determined by
the Director pursuant to the Architectural Review process.
   (a)   Contextual and Compatibility Criteria
   Development in a commercial district shall be responsible to its context and
compatible with adjacent development, and shall promote the establishment of
pedestrian oriented design.
      (1)   Context
         (A)   Context as used in this section is intended to indicate
relationships between the site's development to adjacent street types,
surrounding land uses, and on-site or nearby natural features, such as creeks
or trees. Effective transitions to these adjacent uses and features are
strongly reinforced by Comprehensive Plan policies.
         (B)   The word "context" should not be construed as a desire to
replicate existing surroundings, but rather to provide appropriate transitions
to those surroundings. "Context" is also not specific to architectural style or
design, though in some instances relationships may be reinforced by an
architectural response.
      (2)   Compatibility
         (A)   Compatibility is achieved when the apparent scale and mass of
new buildings is consistent with the pattern of achieving a pedestrian oriented
design, and when new construction shares general characteristics and
establishes design linkages with the overall pattern of buildings so that the
visual unity of the street is maintained.
         (B)   Compatibility goals may be accomplished through various means,
including but not limited to:
            (i)   the siting, scale, massing, and materials;
            (ii)   the rhythmic pattern of the street established by the
general width of the buildings and the spacing between them;
            (iii)   the pattern of roof lines and projections;
            (iv)   the sizes, proportions, and orientations of windows, bays
and doorways;
            (v)   the location and treatment of entryways;
            (vi)   the shadow patterns from massing and decorative features;
            (vii)   the siting and treatment of parking; and
            (viii)   the treatment of landscaping.
   (b)   Context-Based Design Considerations and Findings
   In addition to the findings for Architectural Review contained in Section
18.76.020(d) of the Zoning Ordinance, the following additional findings are
applicable in the CN, CS, CC and CC(2) districts, as further illustrated on the
accompanying diagrams:
      (1)   Pedestrian and Bicycle Environment
   The design of new projects shall promote pedestrian walkability, a bicycle
friendly environment, and connectivity through design elements such as:
   A.   Ground floor uses that are appealing to pedestrians through well-
designed visibility and access (
Figure 1-1);
Figure 1-1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5719.jpg]
 
   B.   On primary pedestrian routes, climate and weather protection where
possible, such as covered waiting areas, building projections and colonnades,
and awnings (
Figure 1-2);
Figure 1-2
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5722.jpg]
 
   C.   Streetscape or pedestrian amenities that contribute to the area's
streetscape environment such as street trees, bulbouts, benches, landscape
elements, and public art (
Figure 1-3);
Figure 1-3
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5725.jpg]
 
   D.   Bicycle amenities that contribute to the area's bicycle environment and
safety needs, such as bike racks, storage or parking, or dedicated bike lanes
or paths (
Figure 1-1); and
   E.   Vehicle access from alleys or sidestreets where they exist, with
pedestrian access from the public street.
      (2)   Street Building Facades
   Street facades shall be designed to provide a strong relationship with the
sidewalk and the street(s), to create an environment that supports and
encourages pedestrian activity through design elements such as:
   A.   Placement and orientation of doorways, windows, and landscape elements
to create strong, direct relationships with the street (
Figure 2-1);
Figure 2-1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5728.jpg]
 
   B.   Facades that include projecting eaves and overhangs, porches, and other
architectural elements that provide human scale and help break up building mass
(
Figure 2-2);
Figure 2-2
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5731.jpg]
 
   C.   Entries that are clearly defined features of front facades, and that
have a scale that is in proportion to the size and type of the building and
number of units being accessed; larger buildings should have a more prominent
building entrance, while maintaining a pedestrian scale;
   D.   Residential units and storefronts that have a presence on the street
and are not walled-off or oriented exclusively inward;
   E.   Elements that signal habitation such as entrances, stairs, porches,
bays and balconies that are visible to people on the street;
   F.   All exposed sides of a building designed with the same level of care
and integrity;
   G.   Reinforcing the definition and importance of the street with building
mass; and
   H.   Upper floors set back to fit in with the context of the neighborhood.
      (3)   Massing and Setbacks
   Buildings shall be designed to minimize massing and conform to proper
setbacks through elements such as:
   A.   Rooflines that emphasize and accentuate significant elements of the
building such as entries, bays, and balconies (
Figure 3-1);
   B.   Design with articulation, setbacks, and materials that minimize
massing, break down the scale of buildings, and provide visual interest (
Figure 3-1);
   C.   Corner buildings that incorporate special features to reinforce
important intersections and create buildings of unique architectural merit and
varied styles (
Figure 3-1);
Figure 3-1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5734.jpg]
 
   D.   Building facades articulated with a building base, body and roof or
parapet edge (
Figure 3-2);
Figure 3-2
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5737.jpg]
 
   E.   Buildings set back from the property line to create an effective 12'
sidewalk on El Camino Real, 8' elsewhere (
Figure 3-4);
Figure 3-3
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5740.jpg]
 
   F.   A majority of the building frontage located at the setback line (
Figure 3-3); and
Figure 3-4
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5743.jpg]
 
   G.   No side setback for midblock properties, allowing for a continuous
street facade, except when abutting low density residential (
Figure 3-3).
      (4)   Low-Density Residential Transitions
   Where new projects are built abutting existing lower-scale residential
development, care shall be taken to respect the scale and privacy of
neighboring properties through:
   A.   Transitions of development intensity from higher density development
building types to building types that are compatible with the lower intensity
surrounding uses (
Figure 4-1);
Figure 4-1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5746.jpg]
 
   B.   Massing and orientation of buildings that respect and mirror the
massing of neighboring structures by stepping back upper stories to transition
to smaller scale buildings, including setbacks and daylight planes that match
abutting R-1 and R-2 zone requirements (
Figure 4-2);
Figure 4-2
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5749.jpg]
 
   C.   Respecting privacy of neighboring structures, with windows and upper
floor balconies positioned so they minimize views into neighboring properties (
Figure 4-3);
Figure 4-3
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5752.jpg]
 
   D.   Minimizing sight lines into and from neighboring properties (
Figure 4-3);
   E.   Limiting sun and shade impacts on abutting properties; and
   F.   Providing pedestrian paseos and mews to create separation between uses.
      (5)   Project Open Space
   Private and public open space shall be provided so that it is usable for the
residents, visitors, and/or employees of a site.
   A.   The type and design of the usable private open space shall be
appropriate to the character of the building(s), and shall consider dimensions,
solar access, wind protection, views, and privacy;
   B.   Open space should be sited and designed to accommodate different
activities, groups, active and passive uses, and should be located convenient
to the users (e.g., residents, employees, or public)
   C.   Common open spaces should connect to the pedestrian pathways and
existing natural amenities of the site and its surroundings;
   D.   Usable open space may be any combination of private and common spaces;
   E.   Usable open space does not need to be located on the ground and may be
located in porches, decks, balconies and/or podiums (but not on rooftops) (
Figure 5-1);
Figure 5-1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5755.jpg]
 
   F.   Open space should be located to activate the street façade and increase
"eyes on the street" when possible (
Figure 5-1);
   G.   Both private and common open space areas should be buffered from noise
where feasible through landscaping and building placement;
   H.   Open space situated over a structural slab/podium or on a rooftop shall
have a combination of landscaping and high quality paving materials, including
elements such as planters, mature trees, and use of textured and/or colored
paved surfaces (
Figure 5-2); and
   I.   Parking may not be counted as open space.
Figure 5-2
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5758.jpg]
 
      (6)   Parking Design
   Parking needs shall be accommodated but shall not be allowed to overwhelm
the character of the project or detract from the pedestrian environment, such
that:
   A.   Parking is located behind buildings, below grade or, where those
options are not feasible, screened by landscaping, low walls, etc.;
   B.   Structured parking is fronted or wrapped with habitable uses when
possible (
Figure 6-1);
Figure 6-1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5761.jpg]
 
   C.   Parking that is semi-depressed is screened with architectural elements
that enhance the streetscape such as stoops, balcony overhangs, and/or art;
   D.   Landscaping such as trees, shrubs, vines, or groundcover is
incorporated into surface parking lots (
Figure 6-2);
Figure 6-2
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5764.jpg]
 
   E.   For properties with parking access from the rear of the site (such as a
rear alley or driveway) landscaping shall provide a visual buffer between
vehicle circulation areas and abutting properties (
Figure 6-3);
Figure 6-3
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5767.jpg]
 
   F.   Street parking is utilized for visitor or customer parking and is
designed in a manner to enhance traffic calming;
   G.   For properties with parking accessed from the front, minimize the
amount of frontage used for parking access, no more than 25% of the site
frontage facing a street should be devoted to garage openings, carports, or
open/surface parking (on sites with less than 100 feet of frontage, no more
than 25 feet);
   H.   Where two parking lots abut and it is possible for a curb cut and
driveway to serve several properties, owners are strongly encouraged to enter
in to shared access agreements (
Figure 6-4); and
   I.   Parking is accessed from side streets or alleys when possible.
Figure 6-4
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5770.jpg]
 
Figure 6-5 -- Mixed-Use with Surface Parking
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5773.jpg]
 
Figure 6-6 -- Mixed-Use with Podium Parking
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5776.jpg]
 
Figure 6-7 -- Mixed-Use with Partial Sub-Grade Parking Podium
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5779.jpg]
 
Figure 6-8 -- Mixed-Use with Below-Grade Parking Podium
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5782.jpg]
 
      (7)   Large (Multi-Acre) Sites
   Large (in excess of one acre) sites shall be designed so that street, block,
and building patterns are consistent with those of the surrounding
neighborhood, and such that:
   A.   New development of large sites maintains and enhances connectivity with
a hierarchy of public streets, private streets, walks and bike paths
(integrated with Palo Alto's Bicycle Master Plan, when applicable);
   B.   The diversity of building types increases with increased lot size
(e.g., <1 acre = minimum 1 building type; 1-2 acres = minimum 2 housing types;
greater than 2 acres = minimum 3 housing types) (
Figures 7-1 through
7-3); and
   C.   Where a site includes more than one housing type, each building type
should respond to its immediate context in terms of scale, massing, and design
(e.g., Village Residential building types facing or abutting existing single-
family residences) (
Figures 7-2 and
7-3).
Figure 7-1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5785.jpg]
 
Figure 7-2
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5788.jpg]
 
Figure 7-3
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5791.jpg]
 
      (8)   Sustainability and Green Building Design
   Project design and materials to achieve sustainability and green building
design should be incorporated into the project. Green building design considers
the environment during design and construction. Green building design aims for
compatibility with the local environment: to protect, respect and benefit from
it. In general, sustainable buildings are energy efficient, water conserving,
durable and nontoxic, with high-quality spaces and high recycled content
materials. The following considerations should be included in site and building
design:
   A.   Optimize building orientation for heat gain, shading, daylighting, and
natural ventilation (
Figure 8-1).
Figure 8-1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5794.jpg]
 
   B.   Design landscaping to create comfortable micro-climates and reduce heat
island effects.
   C.   Design for easy pedestrian, bicycle, and transit access.
   D.   Maximize onsite stormwater management through landscaping and permeable
pavement (
Figure 8-2).
Figure 8-2
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5797.jpg]
 
   E.   Use sustainable building materials.
   F.   Design lighting, plumbing, and equipment for efficient energy and water
use.
   G.   Create healthy indoor environments.
   H.   Use creativity and innovation to build more sustainable environments.
One example is establishing gardens with edible fruits, vegetables or other
plants to satisfy a portion of project open space requirements.
   I.   Provide protection for creeks and riparian vegetation and integrate
stormwater management measures and open space to minimize water quality and
erosion impacts to the creek environment.
   J.   Encourage installation of photovoltaic panels (
Figure 8-3).
Figure 8-3
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5800.jpg]
 
(Ord. 5554 § 9, 2022: Ord. 4923 § 3 (part), 2006: Ord. 4925 § 3 (part), 2006)
18.16.100   Grandfathered Uses
   (a)   CN District Office Uses
   In the CN district, all office uses existing as of August 1, 1989, which
were lawful conforming permitted uses or conditional uses operating subject to
a conditional use permit and which, as of such date, exceed 5,000 square feet
in size or 25% of lot area, may remain as legal nonconforming uses and shall
not require a conditional use permit or be subject to termination pursuant to
Chapter 18.70, provided, however, that in the case of a conflict between the
provisions of this section and the provisions of
Chapter 18.70, this section shall control. Such uses shall be permitted to
remodel, improve, or replace site improvements in accordance with current
applicable site development regulations, provided that any such remodeling,
improvement, or replacement shall not result in increased floor area devoted to
such office uses.
   (b)   CS District Office Uses
   In the CS district, medical, professional or general business or
administrative office uses existing on August 1, 1989 and which, as of such
date, were lawful conforming permitted uses or conditional uses operating
subject to a conditional use permit may remain as legal nonconforming uses and
shall not require a conditional use permit or be subject to termination
pursuant to
Chapter 18.70, provided, however, that in the case of a conflict between the
provisions of this section and the provisions of
Chapter 18.70, this section shall control. Such uses shall be permitted to
remodel, improve, or replace site improvements in accordance with current
applicable site development regulations, provided that any such remodeling,
improvement, or replacement shall not result in increased floor area devoted to
such office uses.
(Ord. 4923 § 3 (part), 2006: Ord. 4925 § 3 (part), 2006)
Chapter 18.18
DOWNTOWN COMMERCIAL (CD) DISTRICT
Sections:
   
18.18.010   Purposes
   
18.18.020   Applicable Regulations
   
18.18.030   Definitions
   
18.18.050   Land Uses
   
18.18.060   Development Standards
   
18.18.065   Increased Floor Area for Housing Developments of 3-10 Units
   
18.18.070   Floor Area Bonuses
   
18.18.080   Transfer of Development Rights
   
18.18.090   Parking and Loading
   
18.18.100   General Standards, Exceptions, and Performance Standards  
   
18.18.110   Context-Based Design Criteria and Objective Design Standards
   
18.18.120   Noncomplying (Grandfathered) Uses and Facilities
18.18.010   Purposes
   (a)   Downtown Commercial District [CD]
   The CD downtown commercial district is intended to be a comprehensive zoning
district for the downtown business area, accommodating a wide range of
commercial uses serving city-wide and regional business and service needs, as
well as providing for residential uses and neighborhood service needs. The CD
commercial downtown district is specifically created to promote the following
objectives in the downtown area of Palo Alto:
      (1)   control the rate and size of commercial development;
      (2)   preserve and promote ground-floor retail uses;
      (3)   enhance pedestrian activity;
      (4)   create harmonious transitions from the commercial areas to adjacent
residential areas; and
      (5)   where applied in conjunction with
Chapter 16.49 of the Palo Alto Municipal Code, preserve historic buildings.
(Ord. 4923 § 4 (part), 2006)
18.18.020   Applicable Regulations
   (a)   Applicable Chapters
   The specific regulations of this chapter and the additional regulations and
procedures established by other relevant chapters of the Zoning Code shall
apply to the CD commercial downtown district, including subdistricts designated
as CD-C (community), CD-S (service) and CD-N (neighborhood) and site
development areas within the CD district, as shown on the City's Zoning Map.
The term "abutting residential zones," where used in this chapter, includes the
R-1, R-2, RMD, RM-20, RM-30, RM-40, or residential Planned Community (PC)
districts, unless otherwise specifically noted.
   (b)   Applicable Combining Districts
   The combining districts applicable to the CD district shall include, but
shall not be limited to, the following districts:
      (1)   The pedestrian shopping (P) combining district regulations, as
specified in
Chapter 18.30(B), shall apply to the area of the CD district designated "P"
combining district as shown on the City's Zoning Map.
      (2)   The ground floor (GF) combining district regulations, as specified
in
Chapter 18.30(C), shall apply to the area of the CD district designated "GF"
combining district as shown on the City's Zoning Map.
(Ord. 5460 § 15, 2019: Ord. 4923 § 4 (part), 2006)
18.18.030   Definitions
   (a)   For the purposes of calculating floor area ratio for nonresidential
uses under this chapter, "gross floor area" includes not only the area defined
in
Chapter 18.04, but also all covered at-grade or above-grade parking for
nonresidential uses, no matter how slightly above grade such parking is.
   (b)   As used in this chapter, “historic rehabilitation” means returning a
property to a state of utility, through repair or alteration, which makes
possible an efficient contemporary use while preserving those portions and
features of the property which are significant to its historic, architectural,
and cultural values. “Historic rehabilitation” shall remedy all the known
rehabilitation needs of the building, and shall not be confined to routine
repair and maintenance as determined by the director of planning and
development services.
   (c)   As used in this chapter, “certification” means certification, by the
director of planning and development services, of floor area eligible for
transfer to another site as described in Section
18.18.070.
   (d)   As used in this chapter, "receiver site" means a site which receives
floor area pursuant to the provisions of Section
18.18.080.
   (e)   As used in this chapter, “sender site” means a site which has received
a certification by the director of planning and development services of floor
area eligible for transfer to another site pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter.
   (f)   “Transferable development right” or “TDR” means the floor area
eligible for transfer to a receiver site as described in Section
18.18.080 of this code.
(Ord. 5494 § 3, 2020: Ord. 4923 § 4 (part), 2006)
18.18.050   Land Uses
   The uses of land allowed by this chapter in each commercial zoning district
are identified in the following table. Land uses that are not listed on the
tables are not allowed, except where otherwise noted. Where the last column on
the following tables ("Subject to Regulations in") includes a section number,
specific regulations in the referenced section also apply to the use; however,
provisions in other sections may apply as well.
   Permited and conditionally permitted land uses for the CD district are shown
in Table 1:
Table 1
CD Permitted and Conditionally Permitted Uses
P Permitted Use • CUP Conditional Use Permit Required
 CD-C CD-S CD-N Subject to regulations in:
Table 1
CD Permitted and Conditionally Permitted Uses
P Permitted Use • CUP Conditional Use Permit Required
                                CD-C   CD-S   CD-N   Subject to regulations in:
ACCESSORY USES
Accessory facilities and
activities associated with or
essential to permitted uses,    P      P      P
and operated incidental to the
principal use
Drive-in or Take-out Services
associated with permitted uses  CUP    CUP    CUP
(2)
Tire, battery, and automotive
service facilities, when
operated incidental to a
permitted retail service or     CUP                  18.40.160
shopping center having a gross
floor area of more than 30,000
square feet
Safe Parking                                         18.42.160
EDUCATIONAL, RELIGIOUS, AND
ASSEMBLY USES
Business and Trade Schools      P      P
Churches and Religious          P      P      P
Institutions
Private Educational Facilities  P      P      CUP
Private Clubs, Lodges, or       P      P      CUP
Fraternal Organizations
MANUFACTURING AND PROCESSING
USES
Recycling Centers               CUP    CUP    CUP
Warehousing and Distribution           CUP
OFFICE USES
Administrative Office Services         P             18.18.060(f)
Medical, Professional, and      P      P      P      18.18.060(f)
General Business Offices
PUBLIC/QUASI-PUBLIC FACILITY
USES
Utility Facilities essential to
provision of utility services
but excluding construction or   CUP    CUP
storage yards, maintenance
facilities, or corporation
yards
RECREATION USES
Commercial Recreation           CUP(3) CUP(3) CUP(3)
Outdoor Recreation Services     CUP    CUP    CUP
RESIDENTIAL USES
Multiple-Family                 P (1)  P (1)  P (1)  18.18.060(b)
Home Occupations                P      P      P
Residential Care Homes          P      P      P
RETAIL USES
Eating and Drinking Services,                        18.18.060(g) ,
except drive-in or take-out     P      P      P      18.40.160
services
Retail Services, excluding      P      P      P      18.18.060(g) ,
liquor stores                                        18.40.160
Shopping Centers                P                    18.18.060(g) ,
                                                     18.40.160
Liquor Stores                   P      P      CUP    18.40.160
SERVICE USES
Animal Care, excluding boarding P      P      P
and kennels
Ambulance Services              CUP    CUP    CUP    18.30(G)
Automobile Service Stations     CUP    CUP    CUP
Automobile Services                    CUP
Convalescent Facilities         P      P      CUP
Day Care Centers                P      P      P      18.40.160
Small Family Day Care Homes     P      P      P
Large Family Day Care Homes     P      P      P
Small Adult Day Care Homes      P      P      P
Large Adult Day Care Homes
Financial Services, except      P      P      CUP
drive-up services
General Business Services       CUP    P      P
Hotels                          P      P      P      18.18.060(d) ,
                                                     18.40.160
Mortuaries                      P      P      CUP
Personal Services               P(4)   P(4)   P(4)   18.18.060(g) ,
                                                     18.40.160
Reverse Vending Machines        P      P      P
TRANSPORTATION USES
Parking as a principal use      CUP    CUP
Passenger Transportation               CUP
Terminals
TEMPORARY USES
Indoor Farmers’ Markets       CUP    CUP    CUP
Temporary Parking Facilities,
provided that such facilities   CUP    CUP    CUP
shall remain no more than five
years
P Permitted Use CUP Conditional Use Permit Required
   (1)   Residential is only permitted as part of a mixed use development,
pursuant to the provisions of Section
18.18.060(b), or on sites designated as Housing Opportunity Sites in the
Housing Element of the Comprehensive Plan, pursuant to the provisions of
Section
18.18.060(c).
   (2)   Drive-up facilities, excluding car washes, provide full access to
pedestrians and bicyclists. A maximum of two such services shall be permitted
within 1,000 feet and each use shall not be less than 150 ft from one another.
   (3)   A conditional use permit is not required for commercial recreation
uses up to 5,000 square feet of gross floor area, with the following
exceptions, for which a conditional use permit is always required: (A) medical
office fronting on University Avenue; (B) commercial recreation uses fronting
on University Avenue.
   (4)   A conditional use permit is required for the following uses when
fronting on University Avenue: (A) Fitness or exercise studios, and similar
uses; and (B) Learning centers intended for individual or small group settings.
 
(Ord. 5517 § 5, 2021: Ord. 5490 § 5, 2020: Ord. 5407 § 9, 2017: Ord. 5065 § 4,
2009: Ord. 4923 § 4 (part), 2006)
18.18.060   Development Standards
   (a)   Exclusively Non-Residential Use
   Table 2 specifies the development standards for new exclusively non-
residential uses and alterations to non-residential uses or structures in the
CD district, including the CD-C, CD-S, and CD-N subdistricts. These
developments shall be designed and constructed in compliance with the following
requirements and the context-based design criteria outlined in Section
18.18.110, provided that more restrictive regulations may be recommended by the
architectural review board and approved by the director of planning and
development services, pursuant to Section
18.76.020:
Table 2
Exclusively Non-Residential Development Standards
 CD-C CD-S CD-N Subject to regulations in Section:
Table 2
Exclusively Non-Residential Development Standards
                                                                                  Subject to
                                                                   CD-C CD-S CD-N regulations
                                                                                  in Section:
Minimum Setbacks                                                                  Setback
   Front Yard (ft)                                              None      10   lines
                                                                   required  (1)  imposed by
   Rear Yard (ft)                                               None required  a special
   Interior Side Yard (ft)                                      None required  setback map
   Street Side Yard (ft)                                        None      20   pursuant to
                                                                   required  (1)  Chapter
Minimum street setback for sites sharing a common block face with  -    -    -    20.08 of
any abutting residential zone district                             (4)  (4)  (4)  this code
Minimum yard (ft) for lot lines abutting or opposite residential   10'  10'  10'  may apply
zone districts                                                     (1)  (1)  (1)
Maximum Site Coverage                                              None      50%
                                                                   required
Maximum Height (ft)
   Standard                                                     50   50   25
   Portions of a site within 150 ft. of an abutting residential –  –  –  18.08.030
district                                                           (3)  (3)  (3)
                                                                   1.0: 0.4: 0.4: 18.18.060
Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR)                                     1    1    1    (e)
                                                                   (5)  (5)  (5)  18.18.070
Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR) for Hotels                          2.0: 2.0: N/A  18.18.060(d
                                                                   1    1         )
                                                                   25,000 square feet of
                                                                   gross floor area or 15,00
                                                                   square feet above the
Maximum Size of New Non-Residential Construction or Expansion      existing floor area,
Projects                                                           whichever is greater,
                                                                   provided the floor area
                                                                   limits set forth elsewhere
                                                                   in this chapter are not
                                                                   exceeded
Daylight Plane for lot lines abutting one or more residential zone
districts
   Initial Height at side or rear lot line                      –  10   10
                                                                   (2)
   Slope                                                        –  1:2  1:2
                                                                   (2)
   (1)   The yard shall be planted and maintained as a landscaped screen, excluding area
required for site access.
   (2)   The initial height and slope shall be identical to those of the residential zone
abutting the site line in question.
   (3)   The maximum height within 150 feet of any abutting residential zone district shall
not exceed the height limit of the abutting residential district.
   (4)   The minimum street setback shall be equal to the residentially zoned setback for 150
feet from the abutting single-family or multiple family development.
   (5)   FAR may be increased with transfers of development and/or bonuses for seismic and
historic rehabilitation upgrades, not to exceed a total site FAR of 3.0:1 in the CD-
C subdistrict or 2.0:1 in the CD-S or CD-N subdistricts.
 
   (b)   Mixed Use and Residential
   Table 3 specifies the development standards for new residential mixed use
developments and residential developments. Housing Development Projects shall
be designed and constructed in compliance with the following requirements and
the objective design standards in
Chapter 18.24, except that sites designated as Housing Element Opportunity
Sites shall meet the development standards as modified in Chapter
18.14.020 and projects utilizing the Housing Incentive Program or Affordable
Housing Incentive Program shall meet the development standards specified in
Sections
18.14.030 and
18.14.040, respectively. Non-Housing Development Projects and Housing
Development Projects that elect to deviate from one or more objective standards
in
Chapter 18.24 shall meet context- based design criteria outlines in Section
18.18.110, provided that more restrictive regulations may be recommended by the
architectural review board and approved by the director of planning and
development services, pursuant to Section
18.76.020:
   TABLE 3
MIXED USE AND RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
 CD-C CD-S CD-N Subject to regulations in Section:
                                                                                                                 Subject to
                                                                             CD-C        CD-S        CD-N        regulations
                                                                                                                 in Section:
                                                                                                                 Setback
                                                                                                                 lines
                                                                                                                 imposed by
                                                                                                                 a special
Minimum Setbacks                                                                                              setback map
                                                                                                                 pursuant to
                                                                                                                 Chapter
                                                                                                                 20.08 of
                                                                                                                 this code
                                                                                                                 may apply
Front Yard (ft)                                                              None required           10'          
Rear Yard (ft)                                                               10' for residential portion; no      
                                                                             requirement for commercial portion
                                                                                         10' if      10' if
Interior Side Yard (ft)                                                      No          abutting    abutting     
                                                                             requirement residential residential
                                                                                         zone        zone
Street Side Yard (ft)                                                        No          5'          5'           
                                                                             requirement
                                                                             Balconies, awnings, porches,
                                                                             stairways, and similar elements may
                                                                             extend up to 6' into the setback.
                                                                             Cornices, eaves, fireplaces, and
Permitted Setback Encroachments                                              similar architectural features       
                                                                             (excluding flat or continuous walls
                                                                             or enclosures of interior space)
                                                                             may extend up to 4' into the front
                                                                             and rear setbacks and up to 3' into
                                                                             interior side setbacks
Maximum Site Coverage                                                        No          50%         50%          
                                                                             requirement
Minimum Landscape Open Space Coverage                                        20%         30%         35%         18.14.020
Usable Open Space (Private and/or Common)                                    150 sq ft per unit (1)              18.18.110
                                                                                                                 Subject to
                                                                            CD-C        CD-S        CD-N        regulations
                                                                                                                 in Section:
Maximum Height (ft)                                                                                            
Standard                                                                     50'         50'         35'         18.08.030
   Portions of a site within 150 ft. of an abutting residential district  40'         40'         35'         18.08.030
(other than an RM-40 or PC zone) (4)
                                                                             Daylight plane height and slope
Daylight Plane for lot lines abutting one or more residential zoning         identical to those of the most       
districts or a residential PC district                                       restrictive residential zone
                                                                             abutting the lot line
Residential Density (net)(2)                                                 No maximum  30          30          18.14.020
Maximum Weighted Average Residential Unit Size(5)                            1,500 sq ft No maximum  No maximum   
                                                                             per unit
                                                                                                                 18.14.020,
Maximum Residential Floor Area Ratio (FAR)                                   1.0:1(3)    0.6:1(3)    0.5:1(3)    18.18.065,
                                                                                                                 18.18.070
Maximum Nonresidential Floor Area Ratio (FAR)                                1.0:1(3)    0.4:1       0.4:1        
                                                                                                                 18.14.020,
Total Floor Area Ratio (FAR)                                                 2.0:1(3)    1.0:1(3)    0.9:1(3)    18.18.065,
                                                                                                                 18.18.070
Parking Requirement                                                          See Chapters 18.52 and 18.54        Chs. 18.52,
                                                                                                                 18.54
 
   (1)   Required usable open space: (1) may be any combination of private and
common open spaces; (2) does not need to be located on the ground (but rooftop
gardens are not included as open space except as provided below); (3) minimum
private open space dimension 6; and (4) minimum common open space dimension 12
   (2)   Residential density shall be computed based upon the total site area,
irrespective of the percent of the site devoted to commercial use. There shall
be no deduction for that portion of the site area in nonresidential use.
   (3)   FAR may be increased with transfers of development, increased floor
area for housing development projects with 3-10 residential units pursuant to
18.18.065, and/or bonuses for seismic and historic rehabilitation upgrades, not
to exceed a total site FAR of 3.0:1 in the CD-C subdistrict or 2.0:1 in the CD-
S or CD-N subdistrict.
   (4)   Distance shall be measured from the property line of the subject site.
   (5)   The weighted average residential unit size shall be calculated by
dividing the sum of the square footage of all units by the number of units. For
example, a project with ten 800-square foot 1-bedroom units, eight 1,200-square
foot 2-bedroom units, and two 1,800-square foot 3-bedroom units would have a
weighted average residential unit size of ((10x800)+(8x1,200)+(2x1,800)) ÷
(10+8+2) = 1,060 square feet.
   (1)   Nonresidential uses that involve the use or storage of hazardous
materials in excess of the exempt quantities prescribed in Title 15 of the
Municipal Code, including but not limited to dry cleaning plants and auto
repair, are prohibited in a mixed use development with residential uses.
   (c)   Exclusively Residential Uses
      (1)   Exclusively residential uses are allowed in the CD-C subdistrict,
except in the ground floor (GF) combining district. However, GF combining
district use regulations and design and development standards shall not apply
to exclusively residential projects on Housing Element opportunity sites
designated to accommodate lower income households. See Section
18.14.020 for details.
      (2)   Exclusively residential uses are generally prohibited in the CD-
N and CD-S subdistricts. Such uses are allowed, however, where a site is
designated as a housing inventory site in the Housing Element of the
Comprehensive Plan.
   (d)   Hotel Regulations
      (1)   The purpose of these regulations is to allow floor area for
development of hotels in excess of floor area limitations for other commercial
uses, in order to provide a visitor-serving use that results in an enhanced
business climate, increased transient occupancy tax and sales tax revenue, and
other community and economic benefits to the city.
      (2)   Hotels, where they are a permitted use, may develop to a maximum
FAR of 2.0:1, subject to the following limitations:
         (A)   The hotel use must generate transient occupancy tax (TOT) as
provided in
Chapter 2.33 of the Palo Alto Municipal Code; and
         (B)   No room stays in excess of thirty days are permitted, except
where the city council approves longer stays through an enforceable agreement
with the applicant to provide for compensating revenues.
      (3)   Hotels may include residential condominium use, subject to:
         (A)   No more than twenty-five percent of the floor area shall be
devoted to condominium use; and
         (B)   No more than twenty-five percent of the total number of lodging
units shall be devoted to condominium use; and
         (C)   A minimum FAR of 1.0 shall be provided for the hotel/condominium
building(s); and
         (D)   Where residential condominium use is proposed, room stays for
other hotel rooms shall not exceed thirty days.
      (4)   Violation of this chapter is subject to enforcement action for
stays in excess of thirty days not permitted under the provisions of this
chapter, in which case each day of room stay in excess of thirty days shall
constitute a separate violation and administrative penalties shall be assessed
pursuant to Chapters 1.12 and 1.16.
   (e)   Exempt Floor Area
      (1)   When an existing building is being expanded, square footage which,
in the judgement of the chief building official, does not increase the usable
floor area, and is either necessary to conform the building to Title 24 of the
California Code of Regulations, regarding disability related access, or is
necessary to implement the historic rehabilitation of the building, shall not
be counted as floor area. For the purposes of this section disability related
upgrades are limited to the incremental square footage necessary to accommodate
disability access and shall be subject to the Director’s approval not to exceed
500 square feet per site. Disability related upgrades shall only apply to
remodels of existing buildings and shall not qualify for grandfathered floor
area in the event the building is later replaced or otherwise redeveloped.
      (2)   Buildings located in the CD-C subdistrict that are noncomplying for
height or gross floor area shall be permitted to increase height and expand
floor area to the minimum degree necessary to provide rooftop access and
related amenities. Such access and amenities may include features such as
stairs, elevators, trellises, outdoor furniture, railings, lighting, and other
similar features. For the purposes of this section rooftop access floor area
shall not be counted as gross floor area. Rooftop access-related features may
be located only on portions of buildings located at least 150 feet from a
residential zone which, for the purposes of this section, includes the R-1, R-
2, RMD, RM-20, RM-30, RM-40, and SOFA districts or Planned Community (PC)
districts that permit residential uses. Any request for a rooftop access
exception under this section shall be subject to a conditional use permit. The
Planning Director may initiate a formal review pursuant to
Chapter 18.77 (Processing of Permits and Approvals) of any conditional use
permit granted under this section if the site is the subject of multiple
complaints in violation of
Chapter 9.10 (Noise). For buildings requesting increased height, all fixtures
and structures shall remain below a plane measured at a forty-five degree angle
beginning from the edges of the building, nearest the rooftop deck surface, and
sloping upward and inward toward the center of the building.
   (f)   Restrictions on Office Uses
      (1)   New construction and alterations in the CD-C zoning district shall
be required to design ground floor space to accommodate retail use and shall
comply with the provisions of the Pedestrian (P) combining district.
      (2)   In the CD-S and CD-N subdistricts, the following requirements shall
apply to office uses:
         (A)   No new gross square footage of a medical, professional, general
business, or administrative office use shall be allowed, once the gross square
footage of such office uses, or any combination of such uses, on a site has
reached 5,000 square feet.
         (B)   No conversion of gross square footage from any other use to a
medical, professional, general business, or administrative office use shall be
allowed once the gross square footage of such office uses, or any combination
of such uses, on a site has reached 5,000 square feet.
   (g)   Restrictions on Size of Commercial Establishments in CD-N Subdistrict
   In the CD-N subdistrict, permitted commercial uses shall not exceed the
floor area per individual use or business establishment shown in Table 4. Such
uses may be allowed to exceed the maximum establishment size, subject to the
issuance of a conditional use permit in accordance with
Chapter 18.76. The maximum establishment size for any conditional use shall be
established by the director and specified in the conditional use permit for
such use.
   TABLE 4
MAXIMUM SIZE OF ESTABLISHMENT
 
Type of Establishment                  Maximum Size (ft 2 )
Personal Services                      3,000
Retail services, except grocery stores 15,000
Grocery stores                         20,000
Eating and drinking services           5,000
 
   (h)   Outdoor Sales and Storage.
   The following regulations shall apply to outdoor sales and storage in the CD
district:
      (1)   CD-C Subdistrict
      In the CD-C subdistrict, the following regulations apply:
         (A)   Except in shopping centers, all permitted office and commercial
activities shall be conducted within a building, except for:
            (i)   Incidental sales and display of plant materials and garden
supplies occupying no more than 2,000 square feet of exterior sales and display
area,
            (ii)   Outdoor eating areas operated incidental to permitted eating
and drinking services or intensive retail uses,
            (iii)   Farmers' markets which have obtained a conditional use
permit, and
            (iv)   Recycling centers that have obtained a conditional use
permit.
         (B)   Any permitted outdoor activity in excess of 2,000 square feet
shall be subject to a conditional use permit; parklets on public property
approved via permit per PAMC
Chapter 12.11 are exempt from this section.
         (C)   Exterior storage shall be prohibited, except recycling centers
which have obtained a conditional use permit.
      (2)   CD-S Subdistrict
      In the CD-S subdistrict, outdoor sales and display of merchandise, and
outdoor eating areas operated incidental to permitted eating and drinking
services and intensive retail uses shall be permitted subject to the following
regulations:
         (A)   Outdoor sales and display shall not occupy a total site area
exceeding the gross building floor area on the site, except as authorized by a
conditional use permit.
         (B)   Areas used for outdoor sales and display of motor vehicles,
boats, campers, camp trailers, trailers, trailer coaches, house cars, or
similar conveyances shall meet the minimum design standards applicable to off-
street parking facilities with respect to paving, grading, drainage, access to
public streets and alleys, safety and protective features, lighting,
landscaping, and screening.
         (C)   Exterior storage shall be prohibited, unless screened by a solid
wall or fence of between 5 and 8 feet in height.
      (3)   CD-N Subdistrict
   In the CD-N subdistrict, all permitted office and commercial activities
shall be conducted within a building, except for:
         (A)   Incidental sales and display of plant materials and garden
supplies occupying not more than 500 square feet of exterior sales and display
area, and
         (B)   Farmers' markets that have obtained conditional use permits.
            (i)   Employee Showers
   Employee shower facilities shall be provided for any new building
constructed or for any addition to or enlargement of any existing building as
specified in Table 5.
   TABLE 5
EMPLOYEE SHOWERS REQUIRED
Uses Gross Floor Area of New Construction (ft 2 ) Showers Required
Uses                                Gross Floor Area of New Showers Required
                                    Construction (ft 2 )
Medical, Professional, and General  0-9,999                 No requirement
Business Offices, Financial         10,000-19,999           1
Services, Business and Trade        20,000-49,999           2
Schools, General Business Services  50,000 and up           4
                                    0-24,999                No requirement
Retail Services, Personal Services, 25,000-49,999           1
and Eating and Drinking Services    50,000-99,999           2
                                    100,000 and up          4
 
   (j)   Nuisances Prohibited
   All uses, whether permitted or conditional, shall be conducted in such a
manner as to preclude nuisance, hazard, or commonly recognized offensive
conditions or characteristics, including creation or emission of dust, gas,
smoke, noise, fumes, odors, vibrations, particulate matter, chemical compounds,
electrical disturbance, humidity, heat, cold, glare, or night illuminations.
Prior to issuance of a building permit, or occupancy permit, or at any other
time, the building inspector may require evidence that adequate controls,
measures, or devices have been provided to ensure and protect the public
interest, health, comfort, convenience, safety, and general welfare from such
nuisance, hazard, or offensive condition.
   (k)   (Reserved)
   (l)   (Reserved)
   (m)   Parking and Vehicular Access on University Avenue Restricted
      Vehicular access to CD-C zoned sites on University Avenue which requires
vehicular movement across the sidewalk on University Avenue shall be
prohibited, except where required by law and as applied to parcels owned,
leased or controlled by the City.
(Ord. 5651 § 7, 2025: Ord. 5650 § 6, 2025: Ord. 5594 § 5, 2024: Ord. 5587 § 22,
2023: Ord. 5554 § 10, 2022: Ord. 5548 § 5, 2022: Ord. 5542 § 21, 2022: Ord.
5517 § 6, 2021: Ord. 5494 § 3, 2020: Ord. 5464 § 1, 2019: Ord. 5460 §§ 7 and
15, 2019: Ord. 5373 § 15 (part), 2016: Ord. 5065 § 4, 2009: Ord. 5035 § 3,
2009: Ord. 4923 § 4 (part), 2006: Ord. 5608 § 8, 2024)
18.18.065   Increased Floor Area for Housing Developments of 3-10 Units
   (a)   A housing development project as defined in paragraph (2) of
subdivision (h) of Section 65589.5 of the Government Code of the State of
California that is in a CD Districts shall be allowed to increase its floor
area ratio as follows:
      (i)   A housing development project of three to seven units shall have a
maximum residential floor area ratio of 1.0:1.
      (ii)   A housing development project of eight to ten units shall have a
maximum residential floor area ratio of 1.25:1.
   (b)   This bonus shall not apply within a historic district or property
included on the State Historic Resources Inventory, as defined in Section
5020.1 of the Public Resources Code of the State of California, or within a
site that is designated or listed as a city or county landmark or historic
property or district pursuant to a city or county ordinance.
   (c)   For mixed use development in the CD-N and CD-S subdistricts, total
floor area ratio shall be increased to the extent necessary to accommodate a
non-residential floor area ratio of 0.4:1 for retail and retail-like uses only.
   (d)   In no event shall total floor area ratio exceed 3.0:1 in the CD-
C subdistrict, or 2.0:1 in the CD-N and CD-S subdistricts.
(Ord. 5587 § 23, 2023: Ord. 5542 § 22, 2022)
18.18.070   Floor Area Bonuses
   (a)   Available Floor Area Bonuses
      (1)   Minor Bonus for Buildings Not Eligible for Historic or Seismic
Bonus
      A building that is neither in Historic Category 1 or 2 nor in Seismic
Category I, II, or III shall be allowed to increase its floor area by 200
square feet without having this increase count toward the FAR, subject to the
restrictions in subsection (b). Such increase in floor area shall not be
permitted for buildings that exceed a FAR of 3.0:1 in the CD-C subdistrict or a
FAR of 2.0:1 in the CD-N or CD- S subdistricts. This bonus is not subject to
transfer and must be fully parked. In addition to any applicable parking
provisions, this bonus may be parked by the payment of in lieu parking fees
under Section
18.18.090.
      (2)   Seismic Rehabilitation Bonus
      A building that is in Seismic Category I, II, or III, and is undergoing
seismic rehabilitation, but is not in Historic Category 1 or 2, shall be
allowed to increase its floor area by 2,500 square feet or 25% of the existing
building, whichever is greater, without having this increase count toward the
FAR, subject to the restrictions in subsection (b). Such increase in floor area
shall not be permitted for buildings that exceed a FAR of 3.0:1 in the CD-
C subdistrict or a FAR of 2.0:1 in the CD-N or CD-S subdistricts. This bonus
area must be fully parked. In addition to any applicable parking provisions,
this bonus may be parked by the payment of in lieu parking fees under Section
18.18.090.
      (3)   Historic Rehabilitation Bonus
      A building that is in Historic Category 1 or 2, and is undergoing
historic rehabilitation, but is not in Seismic Category I, II, or III, shall be
allowed to increase its floor area by 2,500 square feet or 25% of the existing
building, whichever is greater, without having this increase count toward the
FAR, subject to the restrictions in subsection (b). Such increase in floor area
shall not be permitted for buildings that exceed a FAR of 3.0:1 in the CD-
C subdistrict or a FAR of 2.0:1 in the CD-N or CD-S subdistricts, except as
provided in subsection (5). This bonus area must be fully parked, In addition
to any applicable parking provisions, this bonus may be parked by the payment
of in lieu parking fees under Section 18.18.090.
      (4)   Combined Historic and Seismic Rehabilitation Bonus
      A building that is in Historic Category 1 or 2, and is undergoing
historic rehabilitation, and is also in Seismic Category I, II, or III, and is
undergoing seismic rehabilitation, shall be allowed to increase its floor area
by 5,000 square feet or 50% of the existing building, whichever is greater,
without having this increase count toward the FAR, subject to the restrictions
in subsection (b). Such increase in floor area shall not be permitted for
buildings that exceed a FAR of 3.0:1 in the CD-C subdistrict or a FAR of 2.0:
1 in the CD-N or CD-S subdistricts, except as provided in subsection (5). This
bonus area must be fully parked. In addition to any applicable parking
provisions, this bonus may be parked by the payment of in lieu parking fees
under Section 18.18.090.
      (5)   Historic Bonus for Over-Sized Buildings
      A building in Historic Category 1 or 2 that is undergoing historic
rehabilitation and that currently exceeds a FAR of 3.0:1 if located in the CD-
C subdistrict or 2.0:1 if located in the CD-S or CD-N subdistricts shall
nevertheless be allowed to obtain a floor area bonus of 50% of the maximum
allowable floor area for the site of the building, based upon a FAR of 3.0:1 if
in the CD-C subdistrict and a FAR of 2.0:1 in the CD-S and CD-N subdistricts,
subject to the restrictions in subsection (b) and the following limitation:
         (A)   The floor area bonus shall not be used on the site of the
Historic Category 1 or 2 building, but instead may be transferred to another
property or properties under the provisions of Section 18.18.080.
   (b)   Restrictions on Floor Area Bonuses
      The floor area bonuses in subsection (a) shall be subject to the
following restrictions:
      (1)   All bonus square footage shall be counted as square footage for the
purposes of the annual square foot limit on office development specified in
Section
18.40.210.
      (2)   All bonus square footage shall be counted as square footage for the
purposes of the project size limit specified in Section 18.18.060 (a).
      (3)   In no event shall a building expand beyond a FAR of 3.0:1 in the
CD-C subdistrict or a FAR of 2.0:1 in the CD-S or CD-N subdistrict.
      (4)   The bonus shall be allowed on a site only once.
      (5)   For sites in Seismic Category I, II, or III, seismic rehabilitation
shall conform to the analysis standards referenced in Chapter 16.42 of this
code.
      (6)   For sites in Historic Category 1 or 2, historic rehabilitation
shall conform to the Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for Rehabilitation
and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings (36 CFR §67,7).
      (7)   For sites in both Seismic Category I, II, or III and Historic
Category 1 or 2, no bonus shall be granted unless the project includes both
seismic and historic rehabilitation conforming to the standards in subsections
(5) and (6).
      (8)   For sites in both Seismic Category I, II, or III and Historic
Category 1 or 2, a bonus granted under this section that will be used on-site
is subject to the following requirements:
         (A)   The city council must approve on-site use of such a FAR bonus.
Such approval is discretionary, and may be granted only upon making both of the
following findings:
            (i)   The exterior modifications for the entire project comply with
the U.S. Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for Rehabilitation and
Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings (36 CFR §67,7); and
            (ii)   The on-site use of the FAR bonus would not otherwise be
inconsistent with the historic character of the interior and exterior of the
building and site.
         (B)   The applicant for on-site use of a cumulative floor area bonus
shall have the burden of demonstrating the facts necessary to support the
findings required for council approval.
   (c)   Transfer of Floor Area Bonuses
      The floor area bonuses described in subsection (a), except the floor area
bonus in subsection (a)(1), may be transferred to a non-historic receiver site
as described in Section
18.18.080. Such transfer shall not be subject to the discretionary council
approval set forth in subsection (b)(8).
   (d)   Procedure for Granting of Floor Area Bonuses
      The floor area bonuses described in subsection (a), except the bonus
described in subsection (a)(1), shall be granted in accordance with the
following requirements:
      (1)   An application for such floor area bonus(es) must be filed with the
director of planning and development services in the form prescribed by the
director, stating the amount of such bonus(es) applied for, the basis therefor
under this section, and the extent to which such bonus(es) are proposed to be
used on-site and/or for transfer. An application for floor area bonus for
rehabilitation of a Category 1 or 2 historic building shall include a historic
structure report, prepared by a qualified expert, retained by the city, at the
applicant’s expense, in accordance with the standards and guidelines of the
California State Office of Historic Preservation. It shall also include a plan
for rehabilitation; if any part of the existing building is proposed to be
removed or replaced, the historic rehabilitation project plans submitted for
review shall clearly show and identify any and all material proposed for
removal or replacement.
      (2)   The city may retain an expert in historic rehabilitation or
preservation, at the applicant’s expense, to provide the city with an
independent evaluation of the project’s conformity with the Secretary of the
Interior’s “Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitation
Historic Buildings.”
      (3)   The historic resources board shall review the historic structure
report, the historic rehabilitation project plans, and, if required, the expert
independent evaluation of the project, and make a recommendation to the
director of planning and development services on the project’s conformity with
the Secretary of the Interior’s “Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines
for Rehabilitation Historic Buildings.”
      (4)   Upon completion of such an application, written determination of
the sender site’s eligibility for bonus(es) shall be issued by the director of
planning and development services or the director’s designee, based upon the
following:
         (A)   In the case of a floor area bonus for seismic rehabilitation,
the chief building official has made a determination that the project complies
with or exceeds the analysis standards referenced in Chapter 16.42 of this
code;
         (B)   In the case of the floor area bonus for historic rehabilitation
of a building in Historic Category 1 or 2, the director, taking into
consideration the recommendations of the historic resources board, has found
that the project complies with the Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for
Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings (36 CFR
§67,7); and
         (C)   In the case of a bonus for both seismic and historic
rehabilitation that is proposed to be use on-site, the city council has made
the findings set forth in subsection (b)(8) of this section.
   (e)   Certification of FAR Bonuses
      The floor area bonuses described in subsection (a), except the bonus
described in subsection (a)(1), may be used on the site of the proposed seismic
and/or historic rehabilitation project and a building permit issued therefor
only upon satisfaction of all the requirements in subsection (d) above. Upon
determining that the project has been completed as approved, or in the case of
city-owned buildings upon completion of all of the requirements of Chapter
18.28, the director or director’s designee shall issue a written certification
which shall state the total floor area bonus utilized at the site (in the case
of buildings in the CD-Commercial Downtown District), and the amount (if any)
of remaining floor area bonus which is eligible for transfer to another site
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. The certification shall be recorded
in the office of the county recorder and a copy shall be provided to the
applicant.
      As a condition precedent to being credited with a historic rehabilitation
floor area bonus whether for use on-site or for transfer, the owner of the site
shall enter into an unsubordinated protective covenant running with the land in
favor of the city (or, if the city is the owner, in favor of a qualified and
disinterested third party if the property is to be rehabilitated after the sale
of the transfer of development rights), in a form satisfactory to the city
attorney, to assure that the property will be rehabilitated and maintained in
accordance with the Secretary of Interior’s Standards for Rehabilitation of
Historic Buildings, together with the accompanying interpretive Guidelines for
Rehabilitation of Historic Buildings, as they may be amended from time to time.
For city owned buildings subject to a long term lease of ten or more years
where the rehabilitation work is to be performed by the lessee, this protective
covenant shall be in favor of the city.
(Ord. 5554 § 11, 2022: Ord. 5494 § 3, 2020: Ord. 5356 § 2, 2015: Ord. 5214 § 2,
2013: Ord. 5038 § 1, 2009: Ord. 4964 § 15, 2007: Ord. 4923 § 4 (part), 2006)
18.18.080   Transfer of Development Rights
   (a)   Purpose
      The purpose of this section is to implement the Comprehensive Plan by
encouraging seismic rehabilitation of buildings in Seismic Categories I, II,
and III, and encouraging historic rehabilitation of buildings or sites in
Historic Category 1 and 2, and by establishing standards and procedures for the
transfer of specified development rights from such sites to other eligible
sites. Except as provided in subsection (e)(1) and for city-owned properties as
provided in
Chapter 18.28, this section is applicable only to properties located in the CD
district, and is the exclusive procedure for transfer of development rights for
properties so zoned.
   (b)   Establishment of Forms
      The city may from time to time establish application forms, submittal
requirements, fees and such other requirements and guidelines as will aid in
the efficient implementation of this chapter.
   (c)   Eligibility for Transfer of Development Rights
      Transferable development rights may be transferred to an eligible
receiver site upon:
      (1)   Certification by the city pursuant to Section
18.18.070 of the floor area from the sender site which is eligible for
transfer; and
      (2)   Compliance with the transfer procedures set forth in subsection
(h).
   (d)   Availability of Receiver Sites
      The city does not guarantee that at all times in the future there will be
sufficient eligible receiver sites to receive such transferable development
rights.
   (e)   Eligible Receiver Sites
      A site is eligible to be a receiver site only if it meets all of the
following criteria:
      (1)   It is located in the CD commercial downtown district, or is located
in a planned community (PC) district if the property was formerly located in
the CD commercial downtown district and the ordinance rezoning the property to
planned community (PC) approves the use of transferable development rights on
the site.
      (2)   It is neither an historic site, nor a site containing a historic
structure, as those terms are defined in Section
16.49.020(e) of
Chapter 16.49 of this code; and
      (3)   The site is either:
         (A)   Located at least 150 feet from any property zoned for
residential use, not including property in planned community zones or in
commercial zones within the downtown boundaries where mixed use projects are.
         (B)   Separated from residentially zoned property by a city street
with a width of at least 50 feet, and separated from residentially zoned
property by an intervening property zoned CD-C, CD-S, or CD-N, which
intervening property has a width of not less than 50 feet.
   (f)   Limitations On Usage of Transferable Development Rights
      No otherwise eligible receiver site shall be allowed to utilize
transferable development rights under this chapter to the extent such transfer
would:
      (1)   Be outside the boundaries of the downtown parking assessment
district, result in a maximum floor area ratio of 0.5 to 1 above what exists or
would otherwise be permitted for that site under Section
18.18.060, whichever is greater, or result in total additional floor area of
more than 10,000 square feet.
      (2)   Be within the boundaries of the downtown parking assessment
district, result in a maximum floor area ratio of 1.0 to 1 above what exists,
or would otherwise be permitted for that site under Section
18.18.060, whichever is greater, or result in total additional floor area of
more than 10,000 square feet.
      (3)   Cause the annual office limitation set forth in Section
18.40.210 to be exceeded.
      (4)   Cause the site to exceed 3.0 to 1 FAR in the CD-C subdistrict or
2.0 to 1 FAR in the CD-S or CD-N subdistricts.
   (g)   Parking Requirements
      Any square footage allowed to be transferred to a receiver site pursuant
to this chapter shall be subject to the parking regulations applicable to the
district in which the receiver site is located.
   (h)   Transfer Procedure
      Transferable development rights may be transferred from a sender site (or
sites) to a receiver site only in accordance with all of the following
requirements:
      (1)   An application pursuant to
Chapter 18.76 of this code for major ARB review of the project proposed for the
receiver site must be filed. The application shall include:
         (A)   A statement that the applicant intends to use transferable
development rights for the project;
         (B)   Identification of the sender site(s) and the amount of TDRs
proposed to be transferred; and
         (C)   Evidence that the applicant owns the transferable development
rights or a signed statement from any other owner(s) of the TDRs that the
specified amount of floor area is available for the proposed project and will
be assigned for its use.
      (2)   The application shall not be deemed complete unless and until the
city determines that the TDRs proposed to be used for the project are available
for that purpose.
   (3)   In reviewing a project proposed for a receiver site pursuant to this
section, the architectural review board shall review the project in accordance
with Chapters
18.76 and
18.77 of this code; however, the project may not be required to be modified for
the sole purpose of reducing square footage unless necessary in order to
satisfy the findings for approval under
Chapter 18.76 or any specific requirement of the municipal code.
      (4)   Following ARB approval of the project on the receiver site, and
prior to issuance of building permits, the director of planning and development
services or the director's designee shall issue written confirmation of the
transfer, which identifies both the sender and receiver sites and the amount of
TDRs which have been transferred. This confirmation shall be recorded in the
office of the county recorder prior to the issuance of building permits and
shall include the written consent or assignment by the owner(s) of the TDRs
where such owner(s) are other than the applicant.
   (i)   Purchase or Conveyance of TDRs - Documentation
      (1)   Transferable development rights may be sold or otherwise conveyed
by their owner(s) to another party. However, no such sale or conveyance shall
be effective unless evidenced by a recorded document, signed by the transferor
and transferee and in a form designed to run with the land and satisfactory to
the city attorney. The document shall clearly identify the sender site and the
amount of floor area transferred and shall also be filed with the department of
planning and development services.
      (2)   Where transfer of TDRs is made directly to a receiver site, the
recorded confirmation of transfer described in subsection (h)(4) shall satisfy
the requirements of this section.
(Ord. 5494 § 3, 2020: Ord. 5373 § 15 (part), 2016; Ord. 5356 § 2, 2015: Ord.
5214 § 3, 2013: Ord. 4923 § 4 (part), 2006)
18.18.090   Parking and Loading
The provisions of Chapters
18.52 and
18.54 shall apply within the CD district. In particular, on-site and off-site
parking for non-residential uses within an assessment district wherein
properties are assessed under a Bond Plan G financing pursuant to Title 13
shall be provided in accordance with Section
18.52.070.
(Ord. 5554 § 12, 2022: Ord. 5494 § 3, 2020: Ord. 5373 § 15 (part), 2016; Ord.
5356 § 2, 2015: Ord. 5214 § 3, 2013: Ord. 4923 § 4 (part), 2006)
18.18.100   General Standards, Exceptions, and Performance Standards
   In addition to the standards for development prescribed above, all
development shall comply with the performance criteria, general standards, and
exceptions outlined in
Chapter 18.40 of the Zoning Ordinance. All mixed use development shall also
comply with the applicable provisions of
Chapter 18.40 of the Zoning Ordinance.
(Ord. 5554 § 13, 2022: Ord. 4923 § 4 (part), 2006)
18.18.110   Context-Based Design Criteria and Objective Design Standards
   In addition to the standards for development prescribed above, all Housing
Development Projects in the CD districts shall comply with the objective design
standards outlined in
Chapter 18.24 , as defined therein. All other developments, and Housing
Development Projects that elect to deviate from one or more objective design
standards in
Chapter 18.24 , shall meet the Context Based Design Criteria, as determined by
the Director pursuant to the Architectural Review process.
   (a)   Contextual and Compatibility Criteria
   Development in a commercial district shall be responsible to its context and
compatible with adjacent development, and shall promote the establishment of
pedestrian oriented design.
      (1)   Context
         (A)   Context as used in this section is intended to indicate
relationships between the site's development to adjacent street types,
surrounding land uses, and on-site or nearby natural features, such as creeks
or trees. Effective transitions to these adjacent uses and features are
strongly reinforced by Comprehensive Plan policies.
         (B)   The word "context" should not be construed as a desire to
replicate existing surroundings, but rather to provide appropriate transitions
to those surroundings. "Context" is also not specific to architectural style or
design, though in some instances relationships may be reinforced by an
architectural response.
      (2)   Compatibility
         (A)   Compatibility is achieved when the apparent scale and mass of
new buildings is consistent with the pattern of achieving a pedestrian oriented
design, and when new construction shares general characteristics and
establishes design linkages with the overall pattern of buildings so that the
visual unity of the street is maintained.
         (B)   Compatibility goals may be accomplished through various means,
including but not limited to:
            (i)   the siting, scale, massing, and materials;
            (ii)   the rhythmic pattern of the street established by the
general width of the buildings and the spacing between them;
            (iii)   the pattern of roof lines and projections;
            (iv)   the sizes, proportions, and orientations of windows, bays
and doorways;
            (v)   the location and treatment of entryways;
            (vi)   the shadow patterns from massing and decorative features;
            (vii)   the siting and treatment of parking; and
            (viii)   the treatment of landscaping.
   (b)   Context-Based Design Considerations and Findings
   In addition to the findings for Architectural Review contained in Section
18.76.020(d) of the Zoning Ordinance, the following additional findings are
applicable in the CD district and subdistricts, as further illustrated on the
accompanying diagrams:
      (1)   Pedestrian and Bicycle Environment
   The design of new projects shall promote pedestrian walkability, a bicycle
friendly environment, and connectivity through design elements such as:
   A.   Ground floor uses that are appealing to pedestrians through well-
designed visibility and access (Figure 1-1);
Figure 1-1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5928.jpg]
 
   B.   On primary pedestrian routes, climate and weather protection where
possible, such as covered waiting areas, building projections and colonnades,
and awnings (Figure 1-2);
Figure 1-2
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5931.jpg]
 
   C.   Streetscape or pedestrian amenities that contribute to the area's
streetscape environment such as street trees, bulbouts, benches, landscape
elements, and public art (Figure 1-3);
Figure 1-3
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5934.jpg]
 
   D.   Bicycle amenities that contribute to the area's bicycle environment and
safety needs, such as bike racks, storage or parking, or dedicated bike lanes
or paths (Figure 1-1); and
   E.   Vehicle access from alleys or sidestreets where they exist, with
pedestrian access from the public street.
      (2)   Street Building Facades
   Street facades shall be designed to provide a strong relationship with the
sidewalk and the street(s), to create an environment that supports and
encourages pedestrian activity through design elements such as:
   A.   Placement and orientation of doorways, windows, and landscape elements
to create strong, direct relationships with the street (Figure 2-1);
Figure 2-1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5937.jpg]
 
   B.   Facades that include projecting eaves and overhangs, porches, and other
architectural elements that provide human scale and help break up building mass
(Figure 2-2);
Figure 2-2
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5940.jpg]
 
   C.   Entries that are clearly defined features of front facades, and that
have a scale that is in proportion to the size and type of the building and
number of units being accessed; larger buildings should have a more prominent
building entrance, while maintaining a pedestrian scale;
   D.   Residential units and storefronts that have a presence on the street
and are not walled-off or oriented exclusively inward;
   E.   Elements that signal habitation such as entrances, stairs, porches,
bays and balconies that are visible to people on the street;
   F.   All exposed sides of a building designed with the same level of care
and integrity;
   G.   Reinforcing the definition and importance of the street with building
mass; and
   H.   Upper floors set back to fit in with the context of the neighborhood.
      (3)   Massing and Setbacks
   Buildings shall be designed to minimize massing and conform to proper
setbacks through elements such as:
   A.   Rooflines that emphasize and accentuate significant elements of the
building such as entries, bays, and balconies (Figure 3-1);
   B.   Design with articulation, setbacks, and materials that minimize
massing, break down the scale of buildings, and provide visual interest (Figure
3-1);
   C.   Corner buildings that incorporate special features to reinforce
important intersections and create buildings of unique architectural merit and
varied styles (Figure 3-1);
Figure 3-1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5943.jpg]
 
   D.   Building facades articulated with a building base, body and roof or
parapet edge (Figure 3-2);
Figure 3-2
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5946.jpg]
 
   E.   Buildings set back from the property line to create an effective 12'
sidewalk on El Camino Real, 8' elsewhere (Figure 3-4);
Figure 3-3
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5949.jpg]
 
   F.   A majority of the building frontage located at the setback line (Figure
3-3); and
Figure 3-4
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5952.jpg]
 
   G.   No side setback for midblock properties, allowing for a continuous
street facade, except when abutting low density residential (Figure 3-3).
      (4)   Low-Density Residential Transitions
   Where new projects are built abutting existing lower-scale residential
development, care shall be taken to respect the scale and privacy of
neighboring properties through:
   A.   Transitions of development intensity from higher density development
building types to building types that are compatible with the lower intensity
surrounding uses (Figure 4-1);
Figure 4-1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5955.jpg]
 
   B.   Massing and orientation of buildings that respect and mirror the
massing of neighboring structures by stepping back upper stories to transition
to smaller scale buildings, including setbacks and daylight planes that match
abutting R-1 and R-2 zone requirements (Figure 4-2);
Figure 4-2
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5958.jpg]
 
   C.   Respecting privacy of neighboring structures, with windows and upper
floor balconies positioned so they minimize views into neighboring properties
(Figure 4-3);
Figure 4-3
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5961.jpg]
 
   D.   Minimizing sight lines into and from neighboring properties (Figure 4-
3);
   E.   Limiting sun and shade impacts on abutting properties; and
   F.   Providing pedestrian paseos and mews to create separation between uses.
      (5)   Project Open Space
   Private and public open space shall be provided so that it is usable for the
residents, visitors, and/or employees of a site.
   A.   The type and design of the usable private open space shall be
appropriate to the character of the building(s), and shall consider dimensions,
solar access, wind protection, views, and privacy;
   B.   Open space should be sited and designed to accommodate different
activities, groups, active and passive uses, and should be located convenient
to the users (e.g., residents, employees, or public)
   C.   Common open spaces should connect to the pedestrian pathways and
existing natural amenities of the site and its surroundings;
   D.   Usable open space may be any combination of private and common spaces;
   E.   Usable open space does not need to be located on the ground and may be
located in porches, decks, balconies and/or podiums (but not on rooftops)
(Figure 5-1);
Figure 5-1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5964.jpg]
 
   F.   Open space should be located to activate the street façade and increase
"eyes on the street" when possible (Figure 5-1);
   G.   Both private and common open space areas should be buffered from noise
where feasible through landscaping and building placement;
   H.   Open space situated over a structural slab/podium or on a rooftop shall
have a combination of landscaping and high quality paving materials, including
elements such as planters, mature trees, and use of textured and/or colored
paved surfaces (Figure 5-2); and
   I.   Parking may not be counted as open space.
Figure 5-2
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5967.jpg]
 
      (6)   Parking Design
   Parking needs shall be accommodated but shall not be allowed to overwhelm
the character of the project or detract from the pedestrian environment, such
that:
   A.   Parking is located behind buildings, below grade or, where those
options are not feasible, screened by landscaping, low walls, etc.;
   B.   Structured parking is fronted or wrapped with habitable uses when
possible (Figure 6-1);
Figure 6-1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5970.jpg]
 
   C.   Parking that is semi-depressed is screened with architectural elements
that enhance the streetscape such as stoops, balcony overhangs, and/or art;
   D.   Landscaping such as trees, shrubs, vines, or groundcover is
incorporated into surface parking lots (Figure 6-2);
Figure 6-2
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5976.jpg]
 
   E.   For properties with parking access from the rear of the site (such as a
rear alley or driveway) landscaping shall provide a visual buffer between
vehicle circulation areas and abutting properties (Figure 6-3);
Figure 6-3
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5973.jpg]
 
   F.   Street parking is utilized for visitor or customer parking and is
designed in a manner to enhance traffic calming;
   G.   For properties with parking accessed from the front, minimize the
amount of frontage used for parking access, no more than 25% of the site
frontage facing a street should be devoted to garage openings, carports, or
open/surface parking (on sites with less than 100 feet of frontage, no more
than 25 feet);
   H.   Where two parking lots abut and it is possible for a curb cut and
driveway to serve several properties, owners are strongly encouraged to enter
in to shared access agreements (Figure 6-4); and
   I.   Parking is accessed from side streets or alleys when possible.
Figure 6-4
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5979.jpg]
 
Figure 6-5 -- Mixed-Use with Surface Parking
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5982.jpg]
 
Figure 6-6 -- Mixed-Use with Podium Parking
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5985.jpg]
 
Figure 6-7 -- Mixed-Use with Partial Sub-Grade Parking Podium
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5988.jpg]
 
Figure 6-8 -- Mixed-Use with Below-Grade Parking Podium
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5991.jpg]
 
      (7)   Large (Multi-Acre) Sites
   Large (in excess of one acre) sites shall be designed so that street, block,
and building patterns are consistent with those of the surrounding
neighborhood, and such that:
   A.   New development of large sites maintains and enhances connectivity with
a hierarchy of public streets, private streets, walks and bike paths
(integrated with Palo Alto's Bicycle Master Plan, when applicable);
   B.   The diversity of building types increases with increased lot size
(e.g., <1 acre = minimum 1 building type; 1-2 acres = minimum 2 housing types;
greater than 2 acres = minimum 3 housing types) (Figures 7-1 through 7-3); and
   C.   Where a site includes more than one housing type, each building type
should respond to its immediate context in terms of scale, massing, and design
(e.g., Village Residential building types facing or abutting existing single-
family residences) (Figures 7-2 and 7-3).
Figure 7-1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5994.jpg]
 
Figure 7-2
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5997.jpg]
 
Figure 7-3
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6000.jpg]
 
      (8)   Sustainability and Green Building Design
   Project design and materials to achieve sustainability and green building
design should be incorporated into the project. Green building design considers
the environment during design and construction. Green building design aims for
compatibility with the local environment: to protect, respect and benefit from
it. In general, sustainable buildings are energy efficient, water conserving,
durable and nontoxic, with high-quality spaces and high recycled content
materials. The following considerations should be included in site and building
design:
   A.   Optimize building orientation for heat gain, shading, daylighting, and
natural ventilation (Figure 8-1).
Figure 8-1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6003.jpg]
 
   B.   Design landscaping to create comfortable micro-climates and reduce heat
island effects.
   C.   Design for easy pedestrian, bicycle, and transit access.
   D.   Maximize onsite stormwater management through landscaping and permeable
pavement (Figure 8-2).
Figure 8-2
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6006.jpg]
 
   E.   Use sustainable building materials.
   F.   Design lighting, plumbing, and equipment for efficient energy and water
use.
   G.   Create healthy indoor environments.
   H.   Use creativity and innovation to build more sustainable environments.
One example is establishing gardens with edible fruits, vegetables or other
plants to satisfy a portion of project open space requirements.
   I.   Provide protection for creeks and riparian vegetation and integrate
stormwater management measures and open space to minimize water quality and
erosion impacts to the creek environment.
   J.   Encourage installation of photovoltaic panels (Figure 8-3).
Figure 8-3
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6009.jpg]
 
(Ord. 5554 § 14, 2022: Ord. 4923 § 3 (part), 2006)
18.18.120   Noncomplying (Grandfathered) Uses and Facilities
   (a)   Noncomplying (Grandfathered) Uses
   (1)   The following uses and facilities may remain as legal noncomplying
(grandfathered) uses, and shall not require a conditional use permit or be
subject to the provisions of
Chapter 18.70:
      (A)   Any use which was being conducted on August 28, 1986; or
      (B)   A use not being conducted on August 28, 1986, if the use was
temporarily discontinued due to a vacancy of 6 months or less before August 28,
1986; or
      (C)   Any office use existing on April 16, 1990 on a property zoned CD
and GF combining, which also existed as a lawful conforming use prior to August
28, 1986, notwithstanding any intervening conforming use.
   (2)   The legal noncomplying uses in subsection (1) shall be permitted to
remodel, improve, or replace site improvements on the same site, for continual
use and occupancy by the same use, provided such remodeling, improvement, or
replacement complies with all of the following:
      (A)   shall not result in increased floor area;
      (B)   shall not relocate below grade floor area to above grade portions
of the building;
      (C)   shall not result in an increase of the height, length, building
envelope, building footprint or any other increase in the size of the
improvement. For purposes of this section, “building envelope” shall mean the
three dimensional shape and size occupied by an existing building. It is not
the maximum, buildable potential of the site;
      (D)   shall not increase the degree of noncompliance, except pursuant to
the exceptions to floor area ratio regulations set forth in Section
18.18.070; or
      (E)   in the case of medical, professional, general business or
administrative office uses of a size exceeding 5,000 square feet in the CD-S or
CD-N district that are deemed legal noncomplying pursuant to subsection (1),
such remodeling, improvement, or replacement shall not result in increased
floor area devoted to such office uses.
      (F)   The Director may approve minor changes to the building’s footprint,
height, length, and the building envelope through Architectural Review of minor
aesthetic architectural improvements and to improve pedestrian-orientation
provided there is no increase to the degree of any non- complying feature.
   (3)   If a legal noncomplying use deemed existing pursuant to subsection (1)
ceases and thereafter remains discontinued for 12 consecutive months, it shall
be considered abandoned and may be replaced only by a conforming use.
   (4)   A use deemed legal noncomplying pursuant to subsection (1) which is
changed to or replaced by a conforming use shall not be reestablished, and any
portion of a site or any portion of a building, the use of which changes from a
legal noncomplying use to a conforming use, shall not thereafter be used except
to accommodate a conforming use.
(b)   Noncomplying (Grandfathered) Facilities
   (1)   Any noncomplying (grandfathered) facility existing on August 28, 1986
and which, when built, was a complying facility, may remain as a legal
noncomplying facility and shall not be subject to the provisions of
Chapter 18.70.
   (2)   The legal noncomplying facilities in subsection (1) shall be permitted
to remodel, improve, or replace site improvements on the same site, provided
such remodeling, improvement, or replacement complies with all of the
following:
      (A)   shall not result in increased floor area;
      (B)   shall not relocate below grade floor area to above grade portions
of the building;
      (C)   shall not result in an increase of the height, length, building
envelope, building footprint, or any other increase in the size of the
improvement;
      (D)   shall not increase the degree of noncompliance, except pursuant to
the exceptions to floor area ratio regulations set forth in Section
18.18.070;
      (E)   The Director may approve minor changes to the building’s footprint,
height, length, and the building envelope through Architectural Review of minor
aesthetic architectural improvements and to improve pedestrian-orientation
provided there is no increase to the degree of any non- complying feature,
except as provided for rooftop access and amenities in Section
18.18.060(e).
      (F)   The residential portion of any legal noncomplying facility shall
not be converted to a non- residential land use or reduced in gross floor area
or number of units. An applicant asserting that the operation of this
subsection (F) is preempted by state or federal law shall submit a statement of
its position with all claims and all supporting documentary evidence at the
time it applies for a change of use. The City Council shall hold at least one
noticed public hearing in accordance with the procedures set forth in PAMC
18.77.080 to consider whether to waive or adjust the requirements of one or
more provisions of Titles 18 or 21. The City Council may seek additional
information including, without limitation, third party peer review paid for at
the applicant’s expense.
(Ord. 5462 §2, 2019: Ord. 5464 §2, 2019: Ord. 5373 §15 (part), 2016; Ord. 4923
§ 3 (part), 2006)
Chapter 18.20
OFFICE, RESEARCH, AND MANUFACTURING
(MOR, ROLM, RP and GM) DISTRICTS
Sections:
   
18.20.010   Purposes
   
18.20.020   Applicability
   
18.20.030   Land Uses
   
18.20.040   Site Development Standards
   
18.20.050   General Standards, Exceptions, and Performance Criteria
   
18.20.060   Grandfathered Uses
   
18.20.070   Conflict with Development Agreement
18.20.010   Purposes
   The office research, industrial and manufacturing zoning districts provide
sites for office, light industrial, research and development, and limited
commercial uses. The specific purposes for each district are listed below.
   (a)   Medical Office and Medical Research (MOR) District
   The MOR medical office and medical research district provides for medical
office, medical research, and some medical support services in areas
characterized by low building intensity, large site size, and landscaped
grounds. The MOR district is primarily intended for land that is designated for
research and office park use in the Palo Alto Comprehensive Plan, and that is
near hospitals.
   (b)   Research, Office and Limited Manufacturing (ROLM) District
   The ROLM research, office and limited manufacturing district provides for a
limited group of office, research and manufacturing uses in a manufacturing/
research park environment, where uses requiring larger sites and available
natural light and air can locate. Office uses can be accommodated, but should
not predominate in the district. The ROLM district is primarily intended for
land designated for research and office park use by the Palo Alto Comprehensive
Plan and located east of El Camino Real.
   (c)   Research, Office and Limited Manufacturing Subdistrict - Embarcadero
[ROLM(E)]
   The research, office and limited manufacturing subdistrict [ROLM(E)]
modifies the site development regulations of the ROLM research, office and
limited manufacturing district to apply to smaller sites in areas with limited
access or with environmental sensitivity due to their proximity to the Palo
Alto Baylands in the Embarcardero Road area.
   (d)   Research Park District [RP]
   The RP research park district provides for a limited group of research and
manufacturing uses that may have unusual requirements for space, light, and
air, and desire sites in a research park environment. Premium research and
development facilities should be encouraged in the RP district. Support office
uses should be limited and should exist primarily to serve the primary research
and manufacturing uses. The RP district is intended for application to land
designated for research and office park use in the Palo Alto Comprehensive Plan
on sites that are west of El Camino Real and held in large parcels, which may
or may not also be subject to ground leases.
   (e)   Research Park Subdistrict 5 [RP(5)]
   The Research Park site subdistrict [RP(5)] modifies the site development
regulations of the RP research park district to regulate large sites in hilly
areas.
   (f)   General Manufacturing District [GM]
   The GM general manufacturing district provides for light manufacturing,
research, and commercial service uses. Office uses are very limited in order to
maintain the district as a desirable location for manufacturing uses. The GM
district is intended for application to land designated for light industrial
use in the Palo Alto Comprehensive Plan.
(Ord. 4884 § 2 (part), 2005: Ord. 4883 § 7 (part), 2005)
18.20.020   Applicable Regulations
   The specific regulations of this chapter and the additional regulations and
procedures established by this Title 18 shall apply to all Office Research,
Industrial, and Manufacturing districts.
(Ord. 4884 § 2 (part), 2005: Ord. 4883 § 7 (part), 2005)
18.20.030   Land Uses
   (a)   Permitted and Conditionally Permitted Land Uses
   Table 1 lists the land uses permitted or conditionally permitted in the
industrial and manufacturing districts.
Table 1
Industrial/Manufacturing District Land Uses
[P = Permitted Use   CUP = Conditional Use Permit Required]
 MOR ROLM ROLM(E) RP RP(5) GM Subject to regulations in Chapter:
                                                                            ROLM  RP      Subject to
                                                                        MOR ROLM  RP  GM  regulations
                                                                            (E)   (5)     in Chapter:
ACCESSORY AND SUPPORT USES
Accessory facilities and activities customarily associated with or                        Chs. 18.40,
essential to permitted uses, and operated incidental to the principal   P   P     P   P   18.42
use.
Automatic Teller Machines                                               P   P     P   P   18.20.030
                                                                                          (d)
Home Occupations, when accessory to permitted residential uses.         P   P     P   P   Chs. 18.40,
                                                                                          18.42
Safe Parking                                                                              18.42.160
EDUCATIONAL, RELIGIOUS, AND ASSEMBLY USES
Business and Trade Schools                                                            P
Religious Institutions                                                      P     P   P
Colleges and Universities                                               P   P     P
Private Clubs, Lodges, or Fraternal Organizations                       CUP CUP   CUP CUP
Private Schools (K-12)                                                  CUP CUP   CUP CUP
HEALTH CARE SERVICES
Ambulance Services                                                      CUP
Convalescent Facilities                                                 CUP CUP   CUP CUP 18.23.100
                                                                                          ( B)
Medical Office                                                          P   CUP   CUP
Medical Research                                                        P   P     P       18.20.030
                                                                                          (c)
Medical Support Retail                                                  P                 18.20.030
                                                                                          (b)
Medical Support Services                                                P                 18.20.030
                                                                                          (b)
MANUFACTURING AND PROCESSING USES
Manufacturing                                                               P     P   P   18.23.100
                                                                                          ( B)
Recycling Centers                                                           CUP   CUP CUP
Research and Development                                                CUP P     P   P   18.23.100
                                                                                          ( B)
Warehousing and Distribution                                                P     P   P
OFFICE USES
Administrative Office Services                                              P     P   CUP
Financial Services                                                          CUP   CUP
Professional and General Business Office                                    P     P
PUBLIC/QUASI-PUBLIC USES
Service and Equipment Yards                                                           P
Utility Facilities                                                                    CUP
Utility Facilities essential to provision of utility services but
excluding construction/storage yards, maintenance facilities, or        CUP CUP   CUP
corporation yards
RECREATION USES
Commercial Recreation                                                       CUP   CUP CUP 18.40.160
Neighborhood Recreational Centers                                       CUP
RESIDENTIAL USES
Single-Family                                                           Not permitted     18.20.040
Two-Family                                                              Not permitted     (b)

Multiple-Family (Housing Element Opportunity Site)                          P     P   P   18.14.020
Multiple-Family                                                         CUP CUP   P   CUP 18.14.020,
                                                                            (1)   (2) (1) 18.42.200
Residential Care Homes                                                  P   CUP   CUP CUP 18.42.200
                                                                                          (B)
RETAIL USES
Eating and Drinking Services, excluding drive-in and take-out services      CUP   CUP CUP 18.40.160
Retail Services                                                             CUP   CUP CUP 18.40.160
SERVICE USES
Animal Care, excluding boarding and kennels                                           P
Boarding and Kennels                                                                  CUP
                                                                                          18.23.100
Day Care Centers                                                        P   CUP   CUP CUP (B),
                                                                                          18.40.160
                                                                            P             18.20.030
Emergency Shelters for the Homeless                                         (ROLM         (d)
                                                                            (E)
Family Day Care Homes
   Small Family Day Care                                             P   CUP   CUP CUP 18.23.100
                                                                                          ( B)
   Large Family Day Care                                             P   CUP   CUP CUP 18.23.100
                                                                                          ( B)
General Business Services                                                             P
Lodging
   Hotels providing not more than 10% of rooms with kitchens         CUP               18.40.160
Mortuaries and Funeral Homes                                                          P
Personal Services                                                           CUP   CUP CUP 18.40.160
Vehicle Services
   Automobile Service Stations, subject to site and design review in     CUP   CUP
accord with the provisions of Chapter 18.30(G)
   Automotive Services                                                             CUP
   Off-site new vehicle storage for auto dealerships located in Palo     CUP       CUP
Alto
TEMPORARY USES
Temporary Parking Facilities, provided that such facilities shall       CUP CUP   CUP CUP
remain no more than five years
TRANSPORTATION USES
Passenger Transportation Terminals                                                    CUP
 
Notes:
   (1)   Adjacent to Bayshore Freeway and generally bounded by East Charleston
Road and Loma Verde Avenue (see Figure 1), subject to CUP.
   (2)   A CUP is required for residential development proposed on sites within
600 feet of a facility in which Tier 2 Hazardous Materials are manufactured,
stored, used, or handled. In no event shall residential development be
permitted on a site within 300 feet of a facility in which Tier 2 Hazardous
Materials are manufactured, stored, used, or handled. This footnote shall be
interpreted in a manner consistent with Section
18.42.200.
   (b)   Limitations on Medical Support Service and Medical Support Retail Uses
in the Medical Office and Medical Research (MOR) Zone
      (1)   The intent of this limitation is to restrict medical support
service and medical support retail uses in the Medical Office and Medical
Research (MOR) zone in order to preserve and facilitate space for medical
offices and medical research facilities.
      (2)   Floor area devoted to medical support services and medical support
retail uses in the Medical Office and Medical Research (MOR) zoning district
shall not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the total gross floor area within the
district.
      (3)   The director may require a report from the property owner or
applicant whenever application is made to the city to develop new space for
medical support service or medical support retail uses or to convert existing
space to such uses. The report shall identify the gross floor area of buildings
on each site within the zoning district and the gross floor area of medical
support service and medical support retail uses for each site. The director
may, from time to time, establish procedures and standards implementing this
Section
18.20.030(b).
   (c)   Automatic Teller Machines
      (1)   Automatic teller machines may be allowed as an accessory use in the
MOR, ROLM, ROLM(E), RP, RP(5), and GM districts when incidental to a primary
use on the site and when accessible only from the interior of a building.
      (2)   Automatic teller machines may be allowed as a permitted use in the
MOR, ROLM, ROLM(E), RP, RP(5), and GM districts when incidental to a primary
use on the site and when accessible from the exterior of a building. Staff
level Architectural Review is required prior to issuance of a building permit.
   (d)   Emergency Shelters for the Homeless
Emergency shelters for the homeless may be allowed as a permitted use in the
ROLM(E) district on properties located east of Highway 101, subject to the
following performance standards. An emergency shelter in the ROLM(E) district
shall be reviewed ministerially, without discretionary review.
   (1)   The construction of and/or renovation of a building for use as an
emergency shelter shall conform to all applicable building and fire code
standards.
   (2)   Maximum number of persons/beds. The emergency shelter for the homeless
shall contain no more than 40 beds.
   (3)   On-site management and security. On-site management and on-site
security shall be provided during hours when the emergency shelter is in
operation.
   (4)   The emergency shelter provider shall submit an operations plan that
addresses the standards for operation contained in the Santa Clara Countywide
Quality Assurance Standards for Homeless Housing & Service Programs.
   (5)   Length of stay. Temporary shelter shall be available to residents for
no more than 120 days. Extensions up to a total stay of 180 days may be
provided if no alternative housing is available.
   (6)    Outdoor lighting shall be sufficient to provide illumination and
clear visibility to all outdoor areas, with minimal shadows or light leaving
the property. The lighting shall be stationary, and directed away from adjacent
proper ties and public rights-of -way.
   Figure 1: GM/ROLM Housing Element Focus Area
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9597.png]
 
(Ord. 5646 § 2 (part), 2025: Ord. 5490 § 6, 2020: Ord. 5407 § 10, 2017: Ord.
5381 § 3, 2016: Ord. 5230 § 7, 2014: Ord. 4884 § 2 (part), 2005: Ord. 4883 § 7
(part), 2005: Ord. 5608 § 6, 2024)
18.20.040   Site Development Standards
   Development in the office research, industrial, and manufacturing districts
is subject to the following development standards, provided that more
restrictive regulations may be required as part of design review under
Chapter 18.76 of the Palo Alto Municipal Code.
   (a)   Development Standards for Non-Residential Uses
   Table 2 shows the site development standards for exclusively non-residential
uses in the industrial and manufacturing districts.
TABLE 2
INDUSTRIAL/MANUFACTURING NON-RESIDENTIAL SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
 MOR ROLM ROLM(E) RP RP(5) GM Subject to Regulations in Chapter:
                                                                               ROLM                 Subject to
                                                                   MOR    ROLM (E)  RP   RP(5) GM   Regulations
                                                                                                    in Chapter:
Minimum Site Specifications                                                                    
Site Area (sq. ft.)                                                25,000 1 acre    1    5     1     
                                                                                    acre acres
Site Width (ft.)                                                   150    100       100  250        
Site Depth (ft.)                                                   150    150       150  250        
                                                                   Setback lines imposed by a
Minimum Setbacks                                                   special setback map pursuant to   
                                                                   Chapter 20.08 of this code may
                                                                   apply.
Front Yard (ft)                                                    50(3)  20        20   100   (1)   
Rear Yard (ft)                                                     10(3)  20        20   40         
Interior Side Yard (ft)                                            10     20        20   40         
Street Side Yard (ft)                                              20(3)  20        20   70         
                                                                                                    18.20.060
Minimum Yard (ft) for site lines abutting or opposite residential  10(3)  20        20   . 10      (e)(1)(D)
districts                                                                                           18.20.060
                                                                                                    (e)(1)(E)
Maximum Site Coverage                                              30%    30%       30%  15%        
Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR)                                     0.5:1  0.4: 0.3: 0.4: 0.3:1 0.5:  
                                                                          1(4) 1(4) 1 W  (4)   1
Parking                                                            See Chs. 18.52, 18.54            Chs. 18.52,
                                                                                                    18.54
Landscaping                                                        See Section 18.20.050            18.20.050
                                                                   (Performance Criteria)
Maximum Height (ft)                                                                            
Standard                                                           50     35(4)     35(4)      50    
   Portions of a site within 150 ft. of a residential district (35     35        35         35   18.08.030
   Portions of a site within 40 ft. of a residential district (535     25        25         35   18.08.030
Daylight Plane for site lines having any part abutting one or more                                   
residential districts.
Initial Height                                                     _(2)                    10    
Slope                                                              _(2)                    1:2   
 
   (1)   For any property designated GM and fronting on East Bayshore Road a
minimum setback of 20 feet along that frontage is established.
   (2)   Daylight plane requirements shall be identical to the daylight plane
requirements of the most restrictive residential district abutting the side or
rear site line. Such daylight planes shall begin at the applicable site lines
and increase at the specified slope until intersecting the height limit
otherwise established for the MOR district.
   (3)   In the MOR district, no required parking or loading space shall be
located in the first 10 feet adjoining the street property line of any required
yard.
   (4)   See subsection
18.20.040(e) below for exceptions to height and floor area limitations in the
ROLM and RP zoning districts.
   (5)   Distance shall be measured from the property line of the subject site.
   (b)   Development Standards for Exclusively Residential Uses
   Residential uses shall be permitted in the MOR, RP, RP(5), ROLM, ROLM(E),
and GM zoning districts, subject to the following criteria.
   (1)   It is the intent of these provisions that a compatible transition be
provided from lower density residential zones to higher density residential or
non-residential zones. The Village Residential development type should be
evaluated for use in transition areas and will provide the greatest flexibility
to provide a mix of residence types compatible with adjacent neighborhoods.
   (2)   No new single-family or two-family residential development is
permitted in any of the office, research and manufacturing districts, and no
new residential development is permitted within 300 feet of an existing
Hazardous Materials Tier 2 use. Existing single-family and two-family uses and
existing residential development within 300 feet of an existing Hazardous
Materials Tier 2 use shall be permitted to remain, consistent with the
provisions of
Chapter 18.70 (Nonconforming Uses and Noncomplying Facilities).
   (3)   MOR District. All multi-family development in the MOR zoning district
shall be permitted subject to approval of a conditional use permit and
compliance with the development standards prescribed for the RM-30 zoning
district.
   (4)   RP and RP(5) Districts. All multi-family development in the RP, and RP
(5) zoning districts that is located within 150 feet of an R-E, R-1, R-2, RMD,
or similar density residential PC zone shall be permitted subject to the
provisions above in
18.20.040(b)(2), approval of a conditional use permit, and compliance with the
development standards prescribed for the RM-20 zoning district, including
Village Residential development types. Multi-family development in the MOR, RP,
and RP(5) zoning districts that is located greater than 150 feet from an R-E,
R-1, R-2, RMD, or low density residential PC shall be permitted subject to the
provisions above in
18.20.040(b)(2), approval of a conditional use permit, and compliance with the
development standards prescribed for the RM-30 zoning district, except for
sites designated as Housing Element Opportunity Sites or Focus Areas, which are
regulated by Chapter
18.20.040.
   (5)   ROLM (E) District. All multi-family development in the ROLM(E) zoning
district shall be permitted subject to the provisions above in
18.20.040(b)(2), approval of a conditional use permit, and compliance with the
development standards prescribed for the RM-20 zoning district.
   (6)   ROLM District. All multi-family development in the ROLM zoning
district shall be permitted subject to the provisions above in
18.20.040(b)(2), approval of a conditional use permit, and compliance with the
development standards prescribed for the RM-30 zoning district, except for
sites designated as Housing Element Opportunity Sites or Focus Areas, which are
regulated by Chapter
18.14.020. Sites designated as Housing Element Opportunity Sites or Focus Areas
may also elect to utilize the Housing Incentive Program or Affordable Housing
Incentive Program, in which case they shall meet the development standards
specified in Sections
18.14.030 and
18.14.040, respectively.
   (7)   GM District. All residential development is prohibited in the GM
zoning district, except for sites designated as Housing Element Opportunity
Sites or Focus Areas, which are regulated by Chapter
18.14.020. Sites designated as Housing Element Opportunity Sites or Focus Areas
may also elect to utilize the Housing Incentive Program or Affordable Housing
Incentive Program, in which case they shall meet the development standards
specified in Sections
18.14.030 and
18.14.040, respectively.
   (8)   Combining Districts. Combining district use regulations and design and
development standards shall not apply to exclusively residential projects on
Housing Element opportunity sites designated to accommodate lower income
households, and may be limited for sites utilizing the Housing Incentive
Program or Affordable Housing Incentive Program. See
Chapter 18.14 for details.
   (c)   Development Standards for Mixed (Residential and Nonresidential) Uses
in the MOR, ROLM, ROLM(E), RP, and RP(5) Zoning Districts
   Mixed (residential and nonresidential) uses shall be permitted in the MOR,
ROLM, ROLM(E), RP, and RP(5) zoning districts, subject to the following
criteria:
   (1)   It is the intent of these provisions that a compatible transition be
provided from lower density residential zones to higher density residential,
non-residential, or mixed use zones. The Village Residential development type
should be evaluated for use in transition areas and will provide the greatest
flexibility to provide a mix of residence types compatible with adjacent
neighborhoods.
   (2)   New sensitive receptor land uses shall not be permitted within 300
feet of a Hazardous Materials Tier 2 or Tier 3 use. Existing sensitive
receptors shall be permitted to remain, consistent with the provisions of
Chapter 18.70 (Nonconforming Uses and Noncomplying Facilities).
   (3)   ROLM(E) District. Mixed (residential and nonresidential) development
in the ROLM(E) zoning district shall be permitted, subject to the provisions
above in
18.20.040(c)(2), approval of a conditional use permit, determination that the
nonresidential use is allowable in the district and that the residential
component of the development complies with the development standards prescribed
for the RM-20 zoning district. The maximum floor area ratio (FAR) for mixed use
development is 0.3 to 1.
   (4)   ROLM District. Mixed (residential and nonresidential) development in
the ROLM zoning district shall be permitted, subject to the provisions above in
18.20.040(c)(2), approval of a conditional use permit, determination that the
nonresidential use is allowable in the district and that the residential
component of the development complies with the development standards prescribed
for the RM-30 zoning district. The maximum floor area ratio (FAR) for mixed use
development is 0.4 to 1.  Sites designated as Housing Element Opportunity Sites
or Focus Areas shall meet the development standards specified in Chapter
18.14.020 and projects utilizing the Housing Incentive Program or Affordable
Housing Incentive Program shall meet the development standards specified in
Sections
18.14.030 and
18.14.040, respectively.
   (5)   GM District. Mixed use (residential and nonresidential) development is
prohibited in the GM zoning district, except for sites designated as Housing
Element Opportunity Sites or Focus Areas, which are regulated by Chapter
18.14.020. Sites designated as Housing Element Opportunity Sites or Focus Areas
may also elect to utilize the Housing Incentive Program or Affordable Housing
Incentive Program, in which case they shall meet the development standards
specified in Sections
18.14.030 and
18.14.040, respectively
   In computing residential densities for mixed (residential and
nonresidential) uses, the density calculation for the residential use shall be
based on the entire site, including the nonresidential portion of the site.
   (d)   Floor Area Bonus for Child Care Facilities
   Floor area operated as a licensed child care facility shall not be included
when calculating floor area ratios for a site. In addition, the permitted floor
area on the site shall be increased by an amount equal to fifty percent (50%)
of the floor area of the child care facility. The floor area bonus is not
exempt from parking requirements and shall not be granted unless the director
determines that on-site circulation (including for pick-up and drop-off) for
the child care facility is adequate.
   (e)   Height and Floor Area Exceptions for Equipment Storage and Access in
the RP and RP(5) Districts
      (1)   The intent of this subsection is to provide flexibility in height
and floor area limitations to accommodate equipment needs for research and
development and similar facilities.
      (2)   The maximum height in the RP and RP(5) zoning districts may be
increased to forty (40) feet where a) interstitial space is provided between
floors to accommodate mechanical and/or electrical equipment, b) the load for
such interstitial space is limited, to the satisfaction of the Building
Official, to preclude conversion to habitable space, c) the building contains
no more than two stories of habitable space above grade, and d) the portion of
any building over 35 feet in height is located a minimum of 150 feet from the
nearest property line of a residential zone or residential PC zone.
Interstitial space refers to intermediate floors used for mechanical or
electrical systems and access for equipment maintenance purposes.
      (3)   Rooftop and/or basement areas used to enclose mechanical equipment
shall be excluded from floor area calculations, provided that the total of any
such excluded areas does not exceed one-third of the building footprint area.
Rooftop equipment or rooftop equipment enclosures shall not extend above a
height of fifteen (15) feet above the roof, and any enclosed rooftop equipment
located adjacent to residential property shall be set back at least 20 feet
from the building edge closest to the residential site or a minimum of 100 feet
from the residential property line, whichever is closer.
   (f)   Limitations on Outdoor Uses and Activities.
      (1)   In the GM district, outdoor sales and display of merchandise and
outdoor eating areas operated incidental to permitted eating and drinking
services are permitted subject to the following regulations:
         (A)   Outdoor sales and display shall not occupy a total site area
exceeding the gross building floor area on the site, except as authorized by a
conditional use permit.
         (B)   Areas used for outdoor sales and display of motor vehicles,
boats, campers, camp trailers, trailers, coaches, house cars, or similar
conveyances shall meet the minimum standards applicable to off-street parking
facilities with respect to paving, grading, drainage, access to public streets
and alleys, safety and protective features, lighting, landscaping, and
screening.
         (C)   Exterior storage shall be prohibited, unless screened by a solid
wall or fence of between five and eight feet in height. This requirement is not
applicable to recycling centers.
      (2)   In the ROLM and RP districts, all outdoor activities or uses are
prohibited except:
         (A)   Outdoor activities associated with residential use;
         (B)   Landscaping;
         (C)   Parking and loading facilities;
         (D)   Recycling centers that have obtained a conditional use permit;
         (E)   Noncommercial recreational activities and facilities accessory
to permitted or conditional uses; and
         (F)   Activities and facilities accessory to conditional uses, when
authorized by a conditional use permit.
      (3)   In all industrial and manufacturing districts, equipment such as
generators and air conditioning compressors is permitted outdoors so long as it
is located out of setbacks adjacent to (including across a street from) a
residential use, and is screened from view from the residential area.
      (4)   Any outdoor storage or use of hazardous materials in excess of
exempt quantities prescribed in Title 15 of the Municipal Code or outdoor
storage, use or handling of any amount of toxic gas or materials regulated
under Title 15 shall also require a conditional use permit.
   (g)   Employee Showers.
   Employee shower facilities shall be provided for any new building
constructed or for any addition to or enlargement of any existing building as
specified in Table 4.
TABLE 4
EMPLOYEE SHOWERS REQUIRED
 
Uses                               Gross Floor Area ol New Showers Required
                                   Construction (ft2)
Medical, Professional, and General 0-9,999                 No requirement
Business Offices, Financial        10,000-19,999           1
Services, Colleges and             20,000-49,999           2
Universities, Business and Trade
Schools, Research and Development, 50,000 and up           4
General Business Services, and
Manufacturing
 
   (h)   Nuisances and Hazards
      In all office research, industrial, and manufacturing districts,
excluding the MOR Medical Office and Medical Research district, all uses,
whether permitted or conditional, shall be conducted in such a manner so as to
preclude any nuisance, hazard, or commonly recognized offensive conditions or
characteristics, including creation or emission of dust, gas, smoke, noise,
fumes, odors, vibrations, particulate matter, chemical compounds, etiological
(biological) agents, electrical disturbance, humidity, heat, cold, glare, or
night illumination. Prior to issuance of a building permit or occupancy permit,
or at any other time, the building official may require evidence that adequate
controls, measures, or devices have been provided to ensure and protect the
public interest, health, comfort, convenience, safety, and general welfare from
such nuisance, hazard, or offensive condition.
   (i)   Emergency Shelters for the Homeless
      An emergency shelter for the homeless shall conform to all site
development standards and performance criteria of the ROLM(E) zone district
except as modified by the following standards:
      (1)   Sufficient on-site parking shall be provided to accommodate all
staff working in the emergency shelter.
      (2)   Shelters shall provide 10 square feet of interior waiting and
client intake space per bed. In addition, there shall be two office areas
provided for shelter staff. Any outdoor waiting area shall be in a location not
adjacent to the street. Waiting and intake areas may be used for other purposes
as needed during the operations of the shelter.
      (3)   There shall be a refuse area screened from view.
   (j)   Designated Sites
      Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Section
18.20.040, on those sites that are Designated Sites under the Development
Agreement between the City of Palo Alto and Stanford University approved and
adopted by Ordinance No. 4870, the maximum floor area ratio shall be 0.5 to 1
as provided in that Agreement.
(Ord. 5650 § 7, 2025: Ord. 5646 § 2 (part), 2025: Ord. 5554 § 15, 2022: Ord.
5548 § 6, 2022: Ord. 5460 § 15, 2019: Ord. 5381 § 4, 2016: Ord. 5373 § 16,
2016: Ord. 4884 § 2 (part), 2005: Ord. 4883 § 7 (part), 2005: Ord. 5608 § 6,
2024)
18.20.050   General Standards, Exceptions, and Performance Criteria
   All development in the Office/Research/Manufacturing zoning districts shall
comply with the applicable requirements and guidelines outlined in
Chapter 18.40, including performance criteria intended to reduce the impacts of
these non-residential uses on surrounding residential districts and other
sensitive receptors.
(Ord. 5554 § 16, 2022: Ord. 5381 § 5, 2016: Ord. 4884 § 2 (part), 2005: Ord.
4883 § 7 (part), 2005)
18.20.060   Grandfathered Uses
   (a)   Applicability
      (1)   Except as provided in this section, nonconforming uses and
noncomplying facilities are governed by
Chapter 18.70 of the Zoning Ordinance.
      (2)   Any use allowed as a conditional use but legally existing as a
permitted use prior to the effective date of amendments to the Zoning Ordinance
modifying the allowable uses in the MOR, ROLM, ROLM(E), RP, RP(5), or GM
districts shall be considered a conforming use, except that a conditional use
permit shall be required if the use is expanded as outlined in Section
18.70.020.
   (b)   Grandfathered Uses in the GM District
      (1)   The following uses are grandfathered in the GM District, subject to
the provisions in subsection (2):
         (A)   Retail sales service uses or general business office uses
existing on January 13, 1986.
         (B)   General business office uses existing on September 6, 1984.
      (2)   The uses specified in subsection (1) may remain as grandfathered
uses provided that those uses:
         (A)   are located in the GM district;
         (B)   existed on the specified date;
         (C)   on that date, were lawful permitted uses or conditional uses
operating subject to a conditional use permit; and
         (D)   on that date, were conforming uses.
   (c)   Permitted Changes
   The following regulations shall apply to grandfathered uses in the GM
district, as specified in subsection (b) above:
      (1)   Such uses shall be permitted to remodel, improve, or replace site
improvements on the same site, for continual use and occupancy by the same use,
with the following provision:
         (A)   Unless a design enhancement exception is granted pursuant to
Chapter 18.76, remodeling, improvement or replacement shall not:
            (i)   result in increased floor area or number of rooms,
            (ii)   result in shifting of building footprint,
            (iii)   increase the height, length, building envelope, or size of
the improvement, or
            (iv)   increase the existing degree of noncompliance.
      (2)   If a grandfathered use ceases and thereafter remains discontinued
for twelve consecutive months, it shall be considered abandoned and may be
replaced only by a conforming use.
      (3)   A grandfathered use which is changed to or replaced by a conforming
use shall not be reestablished, and any portion of a site or any portion of a
building, the use of which changes from a grandfathered use to a conforming
use, shall not thereafter be used except to accommodate a conforming use.
(Ord. 4884 § 2 (part), 2005: Ord. 4883 § 7 (part), 2005)
18.20.070   Conflict with Development Agreement
   In the event that any provision of this
Chapter 18.20 conflicts with any provision of the Development Agreement between
the City of Palo Alto and Stanford University approved and adopted by Ordinance
No. 4870, the provisions adopted by Ordinance No. 4870 shall apply.
(Ord. 4884 § 2 (part), 2005: Ord. 4883 § 7 (part), 2005)
Chapter 18.24
Contextual Design Criteria and Objective Design Standards
Sections:
   
18.24.010   Purpose and Applicability
   
18.24.020   Public Realm/Sidewalk Character
   
18.24.030   Site Access
   
18.24.040   Building Orientation and Setbacks
   
18.24.050   Building Massing
   
18.24.060   Façade Design
   
18.24.070   Residential Entries
   
18.24.080   Open Space
   
18.24.090   Materials
   
18.24.100   Sustainability and Green Building Design
18.24.010   Purpose and Applicability
   (a)   Purpose
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide guidance for good design in the
form of "contextual design criteria" which establish design intent, and
objective design standards that facilitate streamlined review. Diagrams are
provided for illustrative purposes only and are not intended to convey required
architectural style. Rather, the objective design standards aim to accommodate
a variety of styles, construction types (e.g., wood frame, modular) and housing
types including townhomes, apartments, condos, and mixed-use buildings.
   (b)   Applicability of Regulations
   These regulations apply to Housing Development Projects (as defined in Gov.
Code 65589.5), both new construction and renovations, within the following
zones and combining districts:
   (1)   
Chapter 18.12: R-1, for multiple-family uses only
   (2)   
Chapter 18.13: RM-20, RM-30, RM-40
   (3)   
Chapter 18.16: CN, CC, CC(2), CS
   (4)   
Chapter 18.18: CD-C, CD-S, CD-N
   (5)   
Chapter 18.20: MOR, ROLM, ROLM(E), RP, RP(5), GM
   (6)   
Chapter 18.28: PF
   (7)   
Chapter 18.29: NV-N3, NV-R4, NV-MXM, NV-MXH
   (8)   
Chapter 18.34: PTOD combining district
   Multifamily housing with three or more units ("multiple-family use" as
defined in Section 18.04.030), supportive and transitional housing, and
residential mixed-use projects with at least two-thirds residential square
footage shall meet the objective design standards.
   (c)   Process and Alternative Compliance
   Each section of this chapter includes two components:
   (1)   Contextual design criteria establish design intent for more detailed
standards and are intended to give guidance for all applicable projects,
regardless of use.
   (2)   Objective design standards provide detailed measurable standards or
options for compliance. Projects meeting objective standards are automatically
assumed to meet contextual design criteria.
   Housing Development Projects are required to comply with objective standards
in order to take advantage of streamlined review pursuant to Section
18.77.073. However, applicants may choose to forgo one or more objective
standards, in which case the housing project no longer qualifies for
streamlined review and will be evaluated based on Context-Based Design Criteria
for the zoning district, if relevant, and be subject to architectural review as
set forth in Sections
18.76.020 and
18.77.070.
   Non-Housing Development Projects and non-residential projects shall adhere
to the Context-Based Design Criteria for the zoning district, if relevant, and
be subject to architectural review as set forth in Section
18.76.020 and
18.77.070.
   (d)   Definitions
   In addition to definitions provided in
Chapter 18.04, the following definitions are specific to this chapter.
   (1)   "Primary Building Frontage" means the front lot line or lot line along
the public right-of-way. In the case of a through-lot or corner lot, the
primary building frontage could be on either public right-of-way.
   (2)   "Primary Building Entry" means the entrance leading to a lobby and
accessed from the primary building frontage.
   (3)   "Pedestrian Walkway" means a sidewalk or path that is publicly-
accessible and connects from a public right-of-way or private street to another
public right-of-way, private street, or publicly accessible open space.
   (4)   "Façade Modulation" means a change in building plane, either a recess
or a projection, that changes the shape of the exterior massing of the
building.
(Ord. 5634 § 4, 2024: Ord. 5553 § 1 (part), 2022)
18.24.020   Public Realm/Sidewalk Character
   (a)   Contextual Design Criteria
   To create an attractive and safe public realm and sidewalk space for
pedestrians and cyclists through the implementation of design, landscaping, and
infrastructure. Publicly accessible spaces and sidewalks should:
   (1)   Design the transition between the public and private realm through the
coordination of amenities and materials, such as accent paving, tree wells,
lighting and street furniture (e.g., benches, bicycle racks, trash receptacles,
news racks).
   (2)   Complement or match accent paving to existing designs in the Downtown
and California Avenue business district.
   (3)   Provide sidewalk widths that accommodate landscaping, street trees,
furniture, and pedestrian amenities; create a pleasant, desirable place to
walk; provide shade; and enable comfortable pedestrian passage.
   (4)   Provide amenities, such as parking and repair equipment, for
micromobility, such as bicycles and scooters.
   (5)   Utilize street parking for visitor or customer parking and to enhance
traffic calming.
   (b)   Objective Design Standards
   (1)   Sidewalk Widths
      (A)   Public sidewalks abutting a development parcel in any commercial
mixed-use district (CN, CS, CC, CC(2), CD-C, CD-S, CD-N, PTOD) shall have a
minimum sidewalk width (curb to back of walk) of at least ten feet. This
standard may be met with a combination of pedestrian clear path and landscape
and furniture strip (see Figure 1), as long as the pedestrian clear path is no
less than eight feet. If the existing public sidewalk does not meet the minimum
standard, a publicly accessible extension of the sidewalk, with corresponding
public access easement, shall be provided. Notwithstanding the total dimensions
required herein, the following streets/locations shall have a minimum sidewalk
width as noted:
         (i)   El Camino Real: 12 ft
         (ii)   San Antonio Road, from Middlefield Road to East Charleston
Road: 12 ft
      (B)   Publicly accessible sidewalks or walkways, with landscape strips,
connecting through a development parcel (e.g., on a through lot) shall have a
minimum six-foot width.
      (C)   Pedestrian walkways that are designed to provide access to bicycles
shall have a minimum width of eight feet, with two feet of clear space on
either side.
   Figure 1: Illustrative Sidewalk Section and Description of Zones
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9159.png]
 
 
Table 1: Allowed features by sidewalk zone
Frontage               Sidewalk                             Street
Building Frontage Area Pedestrian Landscape/Furniture Zone  Vehicles/Bike
Setback                Clear Zone                           Lanes
Mixed-Use
• Sidewalk Dining               • Street Trees/Planting
• Outdoor Displays              • Street Lighting
• Public Art                    • Seating               • Street Parking
• Seating                       • Bike Parking          • Bike Lanes
• Trees/Planting     • Sidewal• Public Art            • Drop-off Zones
Residential                       • Outdoor Dining        • Parklets
• Stoops                        • Bus Shelters          • Bus Stops
• Porches                       • Utilities (e.g.,
• Front Yards                   hydrants)
• Trees/Planting
 
   (2)   Street Trees
      Sidewalks shall include at least one street tree, within six feet of the
sidewalk, for every 30 feet of linear feet of sidewalk length. Rights of way
under control of the County of Santa Clara or State of California, supersede
this requirement if they have conflicting regulations.
   (3)   Accent Paving
      On University and California Avenues, new construction projects shall
install accent paving along the project frontage(s) (e.g., at intersections,
sidewalks and/or other publicly-accessible areas), as indicated in the table
below.
Table 2: Accent Paving
 
Street Segment                           Paving Material
University Avenue from Alma Street to    Brick at corners
Webster Street                           Brick trim at mid-block
California Avenue from El Camino Real to Decorative Glass throughout sidewalk
Park Boulevard
 
   (4)   Mobility Infrastructure
      (A)   Where provided or required, micromobility infrastructure, such as
locations to lock bicycles and scooters, shall be located within 30 feet of the
primary building entry and/or a path leading to the primary building entry.
This standard may be satisfied by existing infrastructure already located
within 50 feet of the project site and located in the public right-of-way.
      (B)   Primary building entries shall provide at least one exterior
seating area or bench within 30 feet of building entry and/or path leading to
building entry. This standard may be satisfied by existing seating area or
benches located in public right-of-way within 50 feet of the building entry. On
arterials–except Downtown–seating areas or benches shall not be located between
the sidewalk and curb. Arterial roadways are identified in Map T-5 of the
Comprehensive Plan and do not include residential arterials.
(Ord. 5553 § 1 (part), 2022)
18.24.030   Site Access
   (a)   Contextual Design Criteria
   To provide facilities and accommodations for pedestrians, vehicles,
cyclists, and transit users to safely and efficiently access and circulate both
within individual sites and in the site's surrounding context. Site access
should include the following elements:
   (1)   Site circulation and access that presents a clear hierarchy and
connectivity pattern both within a project and to adjacent sidewalks and
transit stops. This hierarchy should prioritize pedestrians, bikes, vehicles,
and utility/loading access in the order listed. This hierarchy may provide
separate access for vehicles and other modes, or demonstrate how all modes are
accommodated in shared access points.
   (2)   Connections to side streets, open spaces, mews, alleys, and paseos.
   (3)   Vehicle, loading and service access that is integrated into building
and landscape design and located to prevent conflicts with pedestrians and
cyclists, while also provided convenient access to building entries.
   (4)   Shared access agreements among property owners, where feasible, to
reduce the number and widths of curb cuts and driveways.
   (b)   Objective Design Standards
   (1)   Through-Lot Connections.
      Through lots located more than 300 feet from an intersecting street or
pedestrian walkway shall provide a publicly accessible sidewalk or pedestrian
walkway connecting the two streets.
   (2)   Building Entries.
      Primary Building Entries shall be located from a public right-of-way. If
there is no public right-of-way adjacent to the building, entries shall be
located from a private street or Pedestrian Walkway.
   (3)   Vehicle Access.
      (A)   Vehicle access shall be located on alleys or side streets when they
abut the property.
      (B)   Except for driveway access and short-term loading spaces, off-
street parking, off-street vehicle loading, and vehicular circulation areas are
prohibited between the building and the primary building frontage.
   (4)   Loading Docks and Service Areas.
      Loading and service areas shall be integrated into building and landscape
design and located to minimize impact on the pedestrian experience as follows:
      (A)   Loading docks and service areas shall be located on façades that do
not face a primary building frontage: on alleys, from parking areas, and/or at
the rear or side of building if building includes these frontages.
      (B)   Loading dock and service areas located within setback areas shall
be screened by a solid fence, or wall, or dense landscaping and separated from
pedestrian access to the primary building entry to avoid impeding pedestrian
movement and safety.
(Ord. 5553 § 1 (part), 2022)
18.24.040   Building Orientation and Setbacks
   (a)   Contextual Design Criteria
   To create a coherent and active interface between private development and
the public realm that contributes to the sense of place and structure of the
neighborhood and enhances the public's experience. Site design that responds to
the orientation of adjacent uses and creates opportunities for landscaping and
usable open space. Buildings and site design should meet the following
criteria:
   (1)   Buildings that create a street frontage that are compatible with
nearby buildings and land uses.
   (2)   Placement and orientation of doorways, windows, stoops, and landscape
elements to create a direct relationship with the street.
   (3)   Ground floor residential units that have direct entry and presence on
the street, and maintain privacy.
   (4)   Transitional spaces and buffer areas between buildings, parcels, and
sites through building setbacks that distinguish private and public spaces.
   (5)   Buildings that provide side and rear setbacks and/or upper story step
backs to create a compatible relationship with abutting lower density
residential development.
   (6)   Landscaped or usable areas that contain a balance between landscape
and hardscape.
   (7)   Optimized building orientation for thermal comfort, shading,
daylighting, and natural ventilation and other forms of passive design.
   (b)   Objective Design Standards
   (1)   Treatment of Corner Buildings (less than 40 feet)
      Corner buildings less than 40 feet in height and end units of townhouses
or other attached housing products that face the street shall include the
following features on their secondary building frontage:
      (A)   A height to width ratio greater than 1.2:1
      (B)   A minimum of 15 percent fenestration area.
      (C)   At least one façade modulation with a minimum depth of 18 inches
and a minimum width of two feet. Examples: Wrap around front porch, bay window.
   (2)   Treatment of Corner Buildings (40 feet and higher)
      Corner buildings 40 feet or taller in height shall include at least one
of the following special features:
      (A)   Street wall shall be located at the minimum front yard setback or
build-to line for a minimum aggregated length of 40 feet in length on both
façades meeting at the corner and shall include one or more of the following
building features:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9164.png]
 
         (i )   An entry to ground floor retail or primary building entrance
located within 25 feet of the corner of the building
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9166.png]
         (ii )   A different material application and/or fenestration pattern
from the rest of the façade.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9168.png]
         (iii)   A change in height of at least four feet greater or less than
the height of the adjacent primary façade.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9170.png]
 
      (B)    An open space with a minimum dimension of 20 feet and minimum area
of 450 square feet. The open space shall be at least one of the following:
         (i )   A publicly accessible open space/plaza
         (ii )   A space used for outdoor seating for public dining
         (ii i)   A residential Common Open Space adjacent to a common interior
space and less than two feet above adjacent sidewalk grade. Fences and railing
shall be a minimum 50% open/transparent.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9172.png]
 
   (3)   Primary Building Entry
      The primary building entry shall meet at least one of the following
standards:
      (A)    Face a public right-of-way.
      (B)    Face a publicly accessible pedestrian walkway.
      (C)    Be visible from a public right-of-way through a forecourt or front
porch that meets the following standards:
         (i )   For residential buildings with fewer than seven units, building
entry forecourts or front porches shall be a minimum area of 36 square feet and
minimum dimension of six feet.
         (ii)   For commercial buildings or residential buildings with seven or
more units, building entry forecourts or front porches shall be a minimum of
100 square feet and a minimum width of eight feet.
   (4)   Ground Floor Residential Units
      (A)   The finished floor of ground floor residential units, when adjacent
to a public right-of-way, shall be within the minimum and maximum heights
according to setback distance from back of walk identified in Figure 2. On
sites with a cross slope greater than 2% along a building façade, the average
height of the finished floor and back of walk shall be used. In flood zones,
the minimum floor height shall be defined by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA) flood zone elevation.
      (B)   Ground floor units with a setback greater than 15 feet shall have
at minimum an average of one tree per 40 linear feet of façade located in the
building set back.
      (C)   Ground floor residential unit entries shall be setback a minimum of
ten feet from the back of sidewalk.
      (D)   Where no minimum building set back is required, all residential
units shall be set back a minimum five feet from back of walk.
      (E)   A minimum of 80% of the ground floor residential units that face a
public right-of-way or publicly accessible path, or open space shall have a
unit entry with direct access to the sidewalk, path, or open space. (Senior
units or other deed-restricted units for special populations are exempt.)
   Figure 2a: Finished Floor heights for ground floor residential units,
calculation.
      [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/IMAGES/0-0-0-9174.png]
                  where y = ground floor finished floor height, in feet
                  and x = setback distance from back of walk, in feet
Setback Ground Floor Finished Floor Height (minimum)
Length
Setback Ground Floor Finished Floor Height (minimum)
Length
5 ft*   4 ft
7.5 ft  3 ft 4 in
10 ft   2 ft 8 in
12.5 ft 2 ft
15 ft   1 ft 4 in
17.5 ft 8 in
20 ft   0 ft (grade)
 
         *Per Section
18.24.040(b)(4)(D), ground-floor residential units shall be set back a minimum
five feet from back of walk.
   Figure 2b: Finished Floor range for ground floor residential units.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9176.png]
 
   Example 1: Finished floor height greater than 4 feet above sidewalk grade
with minimum 5 feet setback.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9178.png]
 
   Example 2: Finished floor height in the middle of the range.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9180.png]
 
   Example 3: Finished floor height at sidewalk grade.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9182.png]
 
   (5)   Front Yard Setback Character
      Required setbacks shall provide a hardscape and/or landscaped area to
create a transition between public and private space. The following standards
apply, based on intended use and exclusive of areas devoted to outdoor seating,
front porches, door swing of building entries, and publicly accessible open
space:
      (A)    Ground-floor retail or retail-like uses shall have a minimum of
10% of the required setback as landscaped area or planters.
      (B)    Ground-floor residential uses shall have a minimum of 60%
landscaped area in the required setback area.
   (6)   Side Year Setback Character
      (A)   Each detached dwelling unit shall have at least one usable side
yard, at least six feet wide, between the house and fence or other structure,
to provide outdoor passage between the front and rear yards.
(Ord. 5553 § 1 (part), 2022)
18.24.050   Building Massing
   (a)   Contextual Design Criteria
   To create buildings that are compatible with and enhance the surrounding
area through the consideration of building scale, massing, and bulk. Massing
should create a human-scale environment that is of high aesthetic quality and
accommodates a variety of uses and design features. Building massing should
include elements that:
   (1)   Break down large building façades and massing to create a human-scaled
building that enhances the context of the site.
   (2)   Are consistent in scale, mass and character to adjacent land uses and
land use designations.
   (3)   Reinforce the definition and importance of the street.
   (4)   Provide rooflines and massing that emphasize and accentuate
significant elements of the building such as entries, bays, and balconies, and
shading elements where appropriate.
   (5)   Provide harmonious transitions between abutting properties.
   (6)   Maintain privacy of residential uses through design strategies such as
offset windows, reduced glazing, landscape screening, and site planning that
extends setbacks to residential uses.
   (b)   Objective Design Standards
   (1)   Upper Floor Step Backs & Daylight Planes
      (A)   When the height of the subject building is more than 20 feet above
the average height (i.e., average of low and high roof elevations) of an
adjacent building, an upper floor step back shall start within two vertical
feet of the height of the adjacent building. The step back shall be a minimum
depth of six feet along both the façade on the primary building frontage and
the facing façade of the adjacent building, and the step shall occur for a
minimum of 70% of each façade length.
      (B)   Notwithstanding, subsection (a), when adjacent to a single-story
building, the upper floor step back shall occur between 33 and 37 feet in
height.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9184.png]
 
      (C)   If a project meets the following criteria, a daylight plane with an
initial height of 25 feet above grade at the property line and a 45-degree
angle shall be required. No setback is required unless otherwise required by
the zoning district. This daylight plane is required if all of these criteria
are met:
         (i )   The project is not subject to a daylight plane requirement,
pursuant to district regulations in Title 18; and
         (ii )   The project proposes a building which is more than 20 feet
above the average height (i.e., average of low and high roof elevations) of an
adjacent building; and
         (iii)   The project abuts residential units in the side or rear yard.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9186.png]
 
   (2)    Privacy and Transitions to Residential Uses
      When a building abuts a residential use at an interior side and/or rear
property line, the building shall break down the facing façade and maintain
privacy by meeting all of the following applicable standards:
      (A)    Landscape Screening: A landscape screen that includes a row of
trees with a minimum one tree per 25 linear feet and continuous shrubbery
planting. This screening plant material shall be a minimum 72 inches (six feet)
in height when planted. Required trees shall be minimum 24" box size.
      (B)    Façade Breaks: A minimum façade break of four feet in width, two
feet in depth, and 32 square feet of area for every 36 to 40 feet of façade
length.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9188.png]
 
      (C)    Maximum Amount of Transparent Windows: Within 40 feet of the
façade of an adjacent structure, no more than 15% of the facing façade area
shall be windows or other glazing. Additional windows are allowed in order to
maintain light, if they are fixed and fully obscured.
      (D)    Windows: Within 30 feet of facing residential windows (except
garage or common space windows) or private open space on an adjacent
residential building, facing windows on the subject site shall meet the
following:
         (i)   Window sills at and above the 2nd floor shall be at least five
feet above finished floor; or
         (ii)   Windows shall have opaque or translucent glazing at or below
five feet above finished floor; or
         (iii)   Windows shall be angled up to 30 degrees (parallel to window)
to face away from the adjacent privacy impacts; and
         (iv)   Landscape screening shall be 24-inch box size or larger and
eight+ feet height at planting; 50% evergreens; and located to align with
proposed second floor windows at maturity.
      (E)   Balconies: Within 30 feet of residential windows (except garage or
common space windows) or private open space on an adjacent residential
building, balconies and decks on the subject site shall be designed to prevent
views:
         (i)   No sight lines to the adjacent property window or open space are
permitted within five feet above the balcony or deck flooring and a 45-degree
angle downward from balcony railing.
         (ii)   Submit section view of proposed balcony/deck and abutting
residential windows and/or private open space.
         (iii)   Provide balcony/deck design measure which may include:
            a.   Minimum 85% solid railing
            b.   Obscure glass railing
            c.   Barrier with min. 18" horizontal depth from railing (e.g.,
landscape planter)
   (3)   Maximum Façade Length.
      For portions of a building façade facing a public street, right-of-way,
or publicly accessible path, any building greater than 25 feet in height and 70
feet in length shall not have a continuous façade plane greater than 70% of the
façade length without an upper floor modulation, which can include bay windows.
Upper floor façade modulations shall be a minimum two feet in depth, which can
be a recess or a projection.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9190.png]
 
      (A)   Buildings 250 feet in length or greater, which face a public
street, right-of-way, or publicly accessible path, shall have at least one
vertical façade break with a minimum area greater than 400 square feet and a
width greater than or equal to two times the depth.
      (B)    Buildings 150 to 250 feet in length, which face a public street,
right-of-way, or publicly accessible path, shall have at least one vertical
façade break with a minimum area greater than 64 square feet and a minimum
width of eight feet and minimum depth of four feet.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9192.png]
 
   (4)    Special Conditions - Railroad Frontages
      All parcels with lot lines abutting railroad rights-of-way shall meet the
following standards on the railroad-abutting façade:
      (A)    A minimum façade break of at least ten feet in width and six feet
in depth for every 60 feet of façade length.
      (B)   For portion of a building 20 feet or greater in height, a maximum
continuous façade length shall not exceed 60 feet.
   (5)   Diversity of Housing Types
      (A)   A diversity of housing types (e.g., detached units, attached
rowhouses/townhomes, condominiums or apartments, mixed use) are required for
projects on large lots:
         •   < 1-acre lots: minimum 1 housing type;
         •   1 to 2-acre lots: minimum 2 housing types; or
         •   > 2-acre lots = minimum 3 housing types.
(Ord. 5553 § 1 (part), 2022)
18.24.060   Façade Design
   (a)   Contextual Design Criteria
   To create cohesive and well-crafted building façades with human-scaled
details that incorporate textures, colors, and other details that are
compatible with and enhance the surrounding area. Façades should include the
following elements:
   (1)   Human-scaled detail, articulation, and craftsmanship.
   (2)   Quality of construction, craftsmanship, and design to create long
lasting buildings.
   (3)   Expression of a human-scaled façade rhythm and pattern that reflects
the building's use.
   (4)   Fenestration that enhances the architectural character of the
building.
   (5)   Defined building entry that is proportional to the building and number
of people served.
   (6)   Articulation of the building shall break down the scale of the
building via building modulation, façade articulation, and variation of
fenestration and material patterns.
   (b)   Application
   (1)   All façades shall meet all the required design standards and
guidelines to ensure the same level of care and integrity throughout the
building design.
   (2)   Façade sidewalls located along a zero-lot line where, at time of
approval are not visible from a right-of-way, are exempt.
   (3)   Façade sidewalls located along a zero-lot line, where at time of
approval are visible from a right-of-way, shall continue color, material, and
pattern of the main façade.
   (c)   Objective Design Standards
   (1)   Base/Middle/Top
      (A)   Buildings three stories or taller and on lots wider than 50 feet
shall be designed to differentiate a defined base or ground floor, a middle or
body, and a top, cornice, or parapet cap. Each of these elements shall be
distinguished from one another for a minimum of 80% of the façade length
through use of three or more of the following four techniques:
         (i)   Variation in building modulation (minimum of one, if option
selected)
            a.   Horizontal shifts. Changes in floor plates that protrude and/
or recess with a minimum dimension of two feet from the primary façade.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9194.png]
 
            b.   Upper floor step backs. A horizontal step back of upper-floor
façades with a minimum five-foot step back from the primary façade for a
minimum of 80% of the length of the façade.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9208.png]
 
            c.   Ground floor step back. A horizontal shift of the ground floor
façade with a minimum depth of two feet for a minimum 80% of the length of the
façade. Ground floor step backs shall not exceed the maximum setback
requirements, where stated.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9196.png]
 
         (ii )   Variation in façade articulation (minimum of one, if option
selected)
            a.   Variation in horizontal and/or vertical recesses or
projections such as a pattern of recessed grouping of windows, recessed panels,
or bay windows. The recess or projection shall be a minimum four inches in
depth.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9198.png]
 
 
            b.   Variation in horizontal and/or vertical projections such as
shading and weather protection devices, decorative architectural details.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9200.png]
 
            c.   Datum lines that continue the length of the building, such as
parapets or cornices, with a minimum four inches in height or a minimum two
inches in depth and include a change in material;
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9202.png]
 
         (iii)   Variation in at least two of the following: fenestration size,
proportions, pattern, and depth or projection.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9204.png]
 
         (iv)   Variation in two of the following: façade material, material
size, texture and pattern, or color.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9206.png]
 
   (2)   Façade Composition
      Building façades shall use a variety of strategies including building
modulation, fenestration, and façade articulation to create visual interest and
express a variety of scales through a variety of strategies. All façades shall
include a minimum of three of the following façade articulation strategies to
create visual interest:
      (A)    Vertical and horizontal recesses such as a pattern of recessed
grouping of windows or recessed panels. The recess shall be a minimum four
inches in depth.
      (B)   Vertical and horizontal projections such as shading and weather
protection devices or decorative architectural details. Projections shall be a
minimum four inches in depth.
      (C)   Datum lines that continue the length of the building, such as
cornices, with a minimum four inches in depth, or a minimum two inches in depth
and include a change in material;
      (D)   Balconies, habitable projections, or Juliet balconies (every 20 to
40 feet) with a minimum four inches in depth;
      (E)   Screening devices such as lattices, louvers, shading devices, or
perforated metal screens;
      (F)   Use of fine-grained building materials, such as brick or wood
shingles, not to exceed eight inches in either height or width; or
      (G)   Incorporate a minimum of three colors, materials, and/or textures
across the whole building.
   (3)   Compatible Rhythm and Pattern
      (A)   Buildings shall express a vertical rhythm and pattern that reflects
the size and scale of a housing unit and/or individual rooms and spaces. This
may be achieved with building modulation to create vertically oriented façades
(height greater than the width of the façade), façade articulation and
fenestration repetitive vertically oriented patterns. Depending on the length
of the façade, the following standards apply:
         (i)   For continuous façades less than 100 feet in length, the façade
shall have vertically oriented patterns of vertical recesses or projections,
façade articulation, and/or fenestration.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9211.png]
         (ii )   For continuous façades 100 feet or greater in length, the
façade shall include either:
            a.   A vertical recess or change in façade plane with a minimum two
feet deep vertical shift modulation for a minimum four feet in width to
establish a vertical rhythm or a unit between 20 to 50 feet in width; or
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9213.png]
            b.   A vertical recess or projection with a minimum depth of two
feet that establishes the vertical rhythm housing units or individual rooms
between 10 to 16 feet in width.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9215.png]
      (B)    Residential mixed-use buildings shall express a vertical rhythm
and pattern by meeting at least one of the following standards:
         (i )   Vertical Patterns and Modulation: Façades shall use vertical
patterns of building modulation, façade articulation, and fenestration.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9227.png]
         (ii)    Horizontal Patterns and Modulation: Façades that use
horizontal articulation and fenestration patterns shall use a vertical massing
strategy with a minimum four feet wide and two feet deep vertical shift in
modulation at least once every 50 feet of façade length.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9219.png]
      (C)   Storefront uses shall express a vertical rhythm not to exceed 30 to
50 feet in width.
   (4)   Emphasize Building Elements and Massing
      (A)   Building Entries Within Façade Design
         (i)   Primary building entries shall be scaled proportionally to the
number of people served (amount of floor-area or number of units accessed).
Building entries inclusive of doorway and façade plane shall meet the following
minimum dimensions:
            a.   Individual residential entries: five feet in width
            b.   Shared residential entry, such as mixed-use buildings: eight
feet in width
            c.   Commercial building entry: 20 feet in width
            d.   Storefront entry: six feet in width
         (ii)   Primary building entries (not inclusive of individual
residential entries) shall include a façade modulation that includes at least
one of the following:
            a.   A recess or projection from the primary façade plane with a
minimum depth of two feet.
      (B)   Primary entries shall include weather protection that is a minimum
four feet wide and four feet deep by recessing the entry, providing an awning
or using a combination of these methods.
   (5)   Storefront/Retail Ground Floors
      (A)   Ground floor height shall be a minimum 14 feet floor-to-floor or
shall maintain a 2nd floor datum line of an abutting building.
      (B)   Transparency shall include a minimum 60% transparent glazing
between two and ten feet in height from sidewalk, providing unobstructed views
into the commercial space.
      (C)   Bulkheads and solid base walls: If provided, shall measure between
12 and 30 inches from finished grade.
      (D)   Primary entries shall include weather protection that is a minimum
six feet wide and four feet deep by recessing the entry, providing an awning or
using a combination of these methods.
      (E)   Awnings, canopies and weather protection:
         (i)   When transom windows are above display windows, awnings,
canopies and similar, weather protection elements shall be installed between
transom and display windows. These elements should allow for light to enter the
storefront through the transom windows and allow the weather protection feature
to shade the display window.
         (ii)   Awnings may be fixed or retractable.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9225.png]
   (6)   Other Non-residential Ground Floors
      (A)    Ground floor height shall be a minimum 14 feet floor-to-floor or
shall match the 2nd floor datum line of an abutting building.
      (B)     Transparency shall include a minimum 50% transparent glazing
between four and ten feet in height from sidewalk or terrace grade.
      (C)    Primary entries shall include weather protection that is a minimum
six feet wide and four feet deep by recessing the entry, providing an awning or
using a combination of these methods.
   (7)   Parking/Loading/Utilities
      (A)   Entry Size: No more than 25% of the site frontage facing a street
should be devoted to garage openings, carports, surface parking, loading
entries, or utilities access (on sites with less than 100 feet of frontage, no
more than 25 feet)
      (B)   Above grade structured parking levels facing a public right-of-way
or publicly accessible open space/path, with the exception of vehicular alleys,
shall be lined with commercial or habitable uses with a minimum depth of 20
feet.
      (C)   Partially sub-grade parking shall not have an exposed façade that
exceeds five feet in height above abutting grade at back of sidewalk.
      (D)   Partially sub-grade parking shall be screened with continuous
landscaping and shrubbery with minimum height of three feet and be within ten
feet of the sub-grade parking.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9223.png]
(Ord. 5553 § 1 (part), 2022)
18.24.070   Residential Entries
   (a)   Contextual Design Criteria
   Private entries into ground floor residential units shall be designed to
provide:
   (1)   human-scaled detailing
   (2)   enhanced pedestrian experience
   (3)   transition between public and private space
   (4)   spaces for residents to gather and spend time outdoors
   (5)   resident privacy
   (b)   Objective Design Standards
   (1)   Ground Floor Unit Entries: Where ground floor residential unit entries
are required, one or more of the following entry types shall be provided:
      (A)   Stoop:
         (i)   Stoops shall provide entry access for a maximum of two units;
and
         (ii)   Stoop heights shall be within one step of finished floor height
of adjacent unit; and
         (iii)   Stoop entry landings shall be a minimum five feet in depth;
and
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9229.png]
         (i v)   The maximum stoop height from the back of sidewalk grade shall
be five feet.
      (B)    Porch:
         (i )   Porches shall provide entry access for a maximum of one unit;
and
         (ii )   Porch heights shall be within one step of finished floor
height of adjacent unit; and
         (ii i)   Porches shall be large enough so a six-foot by six-foot
square can fit inside of a porch for each unit; and
         (i v)   The maximum porch floor height from the back of sidewalk grade
shall be five feet.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9231.png]
      (C)    Patio Entry
         (i )   Patio entries may serve up to two units; and
         (ii )   Patios shall be large enough so a five-foot by five-foot
square can fit inside of the patio for each unit; and
         (iii)   The Patio shall include at least one of the following features
to define the transition between public and private space:
            a.   A row of shrubs not exceeding 42 inches in height located
between the sidewalk and the patio that assists with defining the edge between
public and private space. Shrubs shall be at least one gallon in size and be
planted a maximum of three feet on center; or
            b.   A fence not to exceed 36 inches in height located between the
sidewalk and the patio that assists with defining the edge between public and
private space, with a gate or fence opening to provide access to the pedestrian
route between the pedestrian way and the front door; or
            c.   A metal, wood or stone wall not to exceed 36 inches in height
located between the sidewalk and the patio that assists with defining the edge
between public and private space with a gate or wall opening to provide access
to the pedestrian route between the pedestrian way and the front door. A
minimum 18-inch landscape strip shall be located between the wall and the
abutting pedestrian way and entirely landscaped with ground cover, shrubs or
other landscape living plant material.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9233.png]
      (D)    Terrace:
         (i)   A Terrace may serve multiple unit entries; and
         (ii)   The maximum Terrace height shall be 30 inches above the grade
of the back of the adjacent sidewalk or accessway; and
         (ii i)   Walls, fences and hedges on Terraces shall be a maximum of 42
inches tall and have a minimum transparency of 40%.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9235.png]
      (E)    Frontage Court:
         (i )   A Frontage Court may serve multiple unit entries; and
         (ii )   The minimum Frontage Court width along a primary frontage
shall be 25 feet; and
         (iii)   The maximum Frontage Court width along a primary frontage
shall be 50% of the façade length or 80 feet, whichever is less; and
         (iv)   The minimum Frontage Court depth shall be 25 feet; and
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9237.png]
         (v )   The maximum Frontage Court depth shall be 50 feet or a ratio
not to exceed 2:1 depth to width.
(Ord. 5553 § 1 (part), 2022)
18.24.080   Open Space
   (a)   Contextual Design Criteria
   To ensure that residents and visitors have access to usable open space and
common facilities that provide recreational opportunities, promote a healthy
environment, and enhance the experience of living in Palo Alto. Common and
private open spaces should include the following characteristics:
   (1)   Be integrated into the site access and building circulation strategy.
   (2)   Be generous in dimension to provide usable space.
   (3)   Provide landscape elements that will support the health of the plants
and enhance the character of place.
   (4)   Promote public health.
   (5)   Be located to provide easy access to private and common building
areas, protected from the activities of commercial areas, and balance privacy
and noise impacts to neighboring uses.
   (6)   Promote sustainable practices and opportunities for green
infrastructure.
   (7)   Promote community safety through eyes on the street.
   (b)   Objective Design Standards
   (1)   Private Open Space
      If Private Open Spaces is provided, it shall meet the following
standards:
      (A)   Floor area shall include a clear space with a minimum dimension of
a circle with a six-foot diameter.
      (B)   Minimum clear height dimension of 8'-6" feet.
      (C)   Be accessed directly from a residential unit.
      (D)   Balconies shall not be located within the daylight plane.
      (E)   Notwithstanding subsection (a), ground floor patios shall meet the
following minimum requirements:
         (i)   RM-20 and RM-30 districts: Minimum 100 square feet of area, the
least dimension of which is eight feet for at least 75% of the area.
         (ii)   RM-40 districts: Minimum 80 square feet of area, the least
dimension of which is six feet for at least 75% of the area.
         (iii)   Street facing private open space on the ground floor shall
meet the finished floor height for ground floor residential standards in
Section
18.24.040(b)(4).
   (2)   If Common Open Space is provided, it shall meet the following
standards:
      (A)   Minimum size of 200 square feet.
      (B)   Area shall include a space with a minimum dimension of a circle
with a ten-foot diameter.
      (C)   A minimum of 60% of the area shall be open to the sky and free of
permanent weather protection or encroachments. Trellises and similar open-air
features are permitted.
      (D)   Notwithstanding subsection (1), courtyards enclosed on four sides
shall have a minimum dimension of 40 feet and have a minimum courtyard width to
building height ratio of 1:1.25.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9239.png]
      (E)    Include places to sit.
      (F)   A minimum 20% of landscaping.
      (G)    Soil Depth: Planting in above grade courtyards shall have a
minimum soil depth of 12 inches for ground cover, 20 inches for shrubs, and 36
inches for trees.
(Ord. 5553 § 1 (part), 2022)
18.24.090   Materials
   (a)   Contextual Design Criteria
   To promote the use of high quality, durable, sustainable, and attractive
materials that exhibit a sense of permanence and contribute to the aesthetic
quality of the development and to the urban design fabric of the community.
   (b)   Objective Design Standards
   (1)   Façade Materials.
      Primary, secondary, and accent materials are allowed or prohibited as in
the Residential and Residential Mixed-use Material List, which may be updated
from time to time by the Director of Planning with a recommendation by the ARB.
(Ord. 5553 § 1 (part), 2022)
18.24.100   Sustainability and Green Building Design
   (a)   Contextual Design Criteria
   To incorporate sustainability, green building, and environmental
considerations into the project design and construction. Green building design
aims for compatibility with the local environment: to protect, respect and
benefit from it. In general, sustainable buildings are energy efficient, water
conserving, durable and nontoxic, with high-quality spaces and high recycled
content materials. The following considerations should be included in site and
building design:
   (1)   Optimize building orientation for thermal comfort, shading,
daylighting, and natural ventilation, including operable windows .
   (2)   Design landscaping to create comfortable micro-climates and reduce
heat island effects.
   (3)   Design landscaping with native species.
   (4)   Maximize onsite stormwater management through landscaping and
permeable pavement.
   (5)   Use sustainable building materials.
   (6)   Design lighting, plumbing and equipment for efficient energy use.
   (7)   Create healthy indoor environments.
   (8)   Use creativity and innovation to build more sustainable environments.
One example is establishing gardens with edible fruits, vegetables or other
plants to satisfy a portion of project open space requirements.
   (b)   Objective Design Standards
   See Chapter 16.14: California Green Building Standards additional
requirements for green building and sustainable design. Notwithstanding Section
18.24.010(c), these regulations may not be modified through alternative
compliance.
(Ord. 5553 § 1 (part), 2022)
Chapter 18.28
SPECIAL PURPOSE (PF, OS and AC) DISTRICTS
Sections:
   
18.28.010   Purposes
   
18.28.020   Definitions
   
18.28.030   Applicable Regulations
   
18.28.040   Land Uses
   
18.28.050   Site Development Standards
   
18.28.060   Additional PF District Regulations
   
18.28.070   Additional OS District Regulations
   
18.28.080   Additional AC District Regulations
   
18.28.090   Parking and Loading
   
18.28.100   (Reserved)
18.28.010   Purposes
   (a)   Public Facilities District [PF]
   The PF public facilities district is designed to accommodate governmental,
public utility, educational, and community service or recreational facilities.
   (b)   Open Space District [OS]
   The purpose and intent of this district is to:
      (1)   protect the public health, safety, and welfare;
      (2)   protect and preserve open space land as a limited and valuable
resource;
      (3)   permit the reasonable use of open space land, while at the same
time preserving and protecting its inherent open space characteristics to
assure its continued availability for the following: as agricultural land,
scenic land, recreation land, conservation or natural resource land; for the
containment of urban sprawl and the structuring of urban development; and for
the retention of land in its natural or near-natural state, and to protect life
and property in the community from the hazards of fire, flood, and seismic
activity; and
      (4)   coordinate with and carry out federal, state, regional, county, and
city open space plans.
   (c)   Agricultural Conservation [AC]
   The AC agricultural conservation district is intended to permit agricultural
and compatible uses on property intended for preservation and retention
essentially in its natural, farmed, or landscaped state.
(Ord. 4964 § 4 (part), 2007)
18.28.020   Definitions
   As used in this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, the
following definitions shall apply:
   (a)   “Conservation or natural resource land” means land which possesses or
encompasses conservation or natural resources.
   (b)   “Conservation or natural resource” includes, but is not necessarily
limited to, streams, watersheds, groundwater recharge, soils, wildlife habitat,
as defined in this section, special land forms, and natural vegetation.
   (c)   “Farmworker housing” means employee housing, as that term is defined
in California Health and Safety Code Section 17008, for agricultural employees,
as that term is defined in California Labor Code Section 1104.4.
   (d)   “Open space land” means any parcel or area of land essentially
unimproved or in its natural state, and devoted to an open space use as defined
in this section, and which is designated in the open space element for an open
space use.
   (e)   “Open space district” means any area of land or water designated “OS”
and subject to all of the terms and regulations of this chapter.
   (f)   “Open space use” means the use of land for:
      (1)   Public recreation;
      (2)   Enjoyment of scenic beauty;
      (3)   Conservation or use of natural resources;
      (4)   Production of food or fiber;
      (5)   Protection of persons and their artifacts (buildings, property,
etc.);
      (6)   Containment and structuring of urban development.
   (g)   “Recreation land” means any area of land or water susceptible to
recreational uses.
   (h)   “Scenic land” means any area of land or water that possesses scenic
qualities worthy of preservation.
   (i)   “Wildlife habitat” means any area of land or water valuable or
necessary to the preservation or enhancement of wildlife resources.
(Ord. 5646 § 7 (part), 2025: Ord. 5123 § 6 (part), 2011: Ord. 4964 § 4 (part),
2007)
18.28.030   Applicable Regulations
   The specific regulations of this chapter and the additional regulations and
procedures established by this title shall apply to all Special Purpose
Districts.
(Ord. 4964 § 4 (part), 2007)
18.28.040   Land Uses
   Table 1 shows the permitted (P) and conditionally permitted (CUP) land uses
for the Special Purpose Districts.
Table 1
Land Uses
 PF OS AC Subject to Regulations in Chapter:
                                  PF      OS   AC   Subject to Regulations in
                                                    Chapter:
ACCESSORY AND SUPPORT USES
Accessory facilities and                  P         Chs. 18.40 and
accessory uses                                      18.42
Eating and drinking services in   CUP(1)
conjunction with a permitted use
Retail services as an accessory
use to the administrative offices
of a non-profit organization,
provided that such retail         CUP(1)
services do not exceed 25% of the
gross floor area of the combined
administrative office services
and retail service uses
Retail services in conjunction    CUP(1)
with a permitted use
Sale of agricultural products
produced on the premises;
provided, that no permanent                    P
commercial structure for the sale
or processing of agricultural
products shall be permitted.
Accessory dwelling units          P(2)    P(2) P(2) 18.09
Junior Accessory Dwelling Units   P(2)    P(2) P(2) 18.09
Safe Parking                                        18.42.170
AGRICULTURAL AND OPEN SPACE USES
Agricultural Uses, including
animal husbandry, crops,
dairying, horticulture,
nurseries, livestock farming,
tree farming, viticulture, and
similar uses not inconsistent            P    P     
with the intent and purpose of
this chapter, including
farmworker housing(3) in
accordance with California Health
and Safety Code
Botanical conservatories, outdoor
nature laboratories, and similar         P         
facilities
Native wildlife sanctuaries              P         
Park uses and uses incidental to  P                
park operation
EDUCATIONAL, RELIGIOUS, AND ASSEMBLY USES
Business or trade schools         CUP (1)          
Churches and religious            CUP(1)           
institutions
Educational, charitable,
research, and philanthropic              CUP       
institutions
Private educational facilities    CUP(1)           
Public or private colleges and
universities and facilities       CUP              
appurtenant thereto
Special education classes         CUP (1)          
OFFICE USES
Administrative office services    CUP (1)          
for non-profit organizations
OTHER USES
Other uses which, in the opinion
of the director, are similar to   CUP(1)           
those listed as permitted or
conditionally permitted uses
PUBLIC/QUASI-PUBLIC FACILITY USES
All facilities owned or leased,
and operated or used, by the City
of Palo Alto, the County of Santa
Clara, the State of California,
the government of the United      P                
States, the Palo Alto Unified
School District, or any other
governmental agency, or leased by
any such agency to another party
Communication Facilities                 CUP       
Community Centers                 CUP (1)          
Utility Facilities                CUP     CUP  CUP   
RECREATIONAL USES
Neighborhood recreation centers   CUP (1)          
Outdoor recreation services       CUP (1)     CUP   
Recreational uses including
riding academies, clubs, stables,        CUP       
country clubs, and golf courses
Youth clubs                       CUP (1)          
RESIDENTIAL USES
Single-family dwellings                  p         
Manufactured housing (including
mobile homes on permanent                P        18.42.010
foundations)
Multiple-Family (Housing Element  P               18.40.020
Opportunity Site)
Guest ranches                            CUP       
Residential care facilities, when
utilizing existing structures on  CUP (1)          
the site
Residential Care Homes                   P         
Residential use, and accessory
buildings and uses customarily
incidental to permitted
dwellings; provided, however,
that such permitted dwellings
shall be for the exclusive use of
the owner or owners, or lessee or            P     
lessor of land upon which the
permitted agricultural use is
conducted, and the residence of
other members of the same family
and bona fide employees of the
aforementioned
SERVICE USES
Animal care, including boarding          CUP  CUP   
and kennels
Cemeteries                                   CUP   
Cemeteries, not including
mausolea, crematoria, or                 CUP       
columbaria
Small day care homes                     P         
Large day care homes                     CUP       
Art, dance, gymnastic, exercise   CUP (1)          
or music studios or classes
Medical Services:                                 
Hospitals                         CUP              
Outpatient medical facilities     CUP              
with associated medical research
TEMPORARY USES
Temporary parking facilities,
provided that such facilities     CUP (1)          
shall remain no more than five
years
TRANSPORTATION USES
Airports and airport-related uses CUP (1)          
 
   (1)   Provided such use is conducted on property owned by the City of Palo
Alto, the County of Santa Clara, the State of California, the government of the
United States, the Palo Alto Unified School District, or any other governmental
agency, and leased for said uses.
   (2)   An Accessory Dwelling Unit or a Junior Accessory Dwelling Unit
associated with a single-family or multi-family residence, subject to the
provisions of
Chapter 18.09.
   (3)   In accordance with California Health and Safety Code Section 17021.5,
employee housing for six (6) or fewer employees shall be deemed a single-family
structure. In accordance with Health and Safety Code Section 17021.6,
qualifying farmworker housing shall be considered an agricultural use.
(Ord. 5656 § 8 (part), 2025: Ord. 5646 § 7 (part), 2025: Ord. 5505 § 2, 2020:
Ord. 5490 § 7, 2020: Ord. 5412 § 18, 2017: Ord. 5134A § 4, 2011: Ord. 4964 § 4
(part), 2007: Ord. 5608 § 9, 2024)
18.28.050   Site Development Standards
   (a)   Development Standards. On Housing Element opportunity sites (City-
owned parking lots): development standards are identified in Section
18.14.020.
   The development standards for the special purpose districts are specified in
Table 2, provided that more restrictive regulations may be recommended by the
Architectural Review Board, pursuant to Section
18.76.020 of the Palo Alto Municipal Code.
Table 2
Special Purpose District Site Development Standards
 PF OS(5) AC Subject to Regulations in Chapter or Section:
Table 2
Special Purpose District Site Development Standards
                                                            Subject to
                     PF     OS(5)         AC                Regulations in
                                                            Chapter or Section:
Minimum Site
Specifications
Site Area (acres)           10            5
Site Width (ft)                           250
Site Depth (ft)                           250
Minimum Setbacks     Setback lines imposed by a special     Section
(ft)                 setback map pursuant to                18.28.060(e)
                     Chapter 20.08 of this code shall apply
Front Setback        –(2) 30            30                Section
                                                            18.28.060(e)
Rear Setback         –(2) 30            30                Section
                                                            18.28.060(e)
                                                            Section
Interior Side        –(2) 30            15                18.28.060(e)
Setback                                                     Chapter
                                                            20.08
Street Side Setback  –(2) 30            24                Section
                                                            18.28.060(e)
                                                            Section
Maximum Floor Area   1:1(3) See Table 3
Ratio                                                       18.28.050(b),
                                                            18.28.060(e)
Site Coverage and
Impervious Coverage
Maximum Site         30%(3)               10%               Section
Coverage                                                    18.28.060(e)
Additional Site Area
permitted covered by                      10%(1)
impervious ground
surfaces
                                                            Section
Maximum Impervious          See Table3(4)
Coverage                                                    18.28.050(b)
                                                            18.28.070(m)
Height Restrictions
Maximum Height (ft)  50     25            35                Section
                                                            18.28.060(e)
Maximum Height                                              Section
within 150 feet of   35
aresidential                                                18.28.060(a)
district (ft)
Maximum Number of           2
Stories
Daylight Plane for
site lines abutting
a residential
district
Initial height (ft)  10
Slope                1:2
Residential Density                       1 unit/acre
(1)   For cemetery uses, all markers of graves shall be flush with grade level,
and shall be considered impervious area under this requirement.
(2)   The minimum front, side, and rear yards in the PF public facilities
district shall be equal to the respective front, side, and rear yards required
in the most restrictive abutting district; provided, that no yard adjoining a
street shall be less than 20 feet and that no interior yard shall be less than
10 feet.  See Section
18.28.060(e) for exceptions to these development standards.
(3)    Provided that, for parking facilities the maximum floor area ratio and
site coverage shall be equal to the floor area ratio and site coverage
established by the most restrictive adjacent district. See Section
18.28.060(e) for exceptions to these development standards.
(4)   Including buildings and all impervious ground surfaces, calculated
pursuant to the provisions of Section
18.28.070(m).
(5)   See Section
18.28.070(r) for specific exceptions to these development standards.
 
   (b)   Open Space Impervious Coverage and Floor Area
      (1)   Residential Use
         The impervious coverage and floor area ratios shall be determined
based on a sliding scale calculation. Table 3 provides the range of allowable
percentages for the calculation. Allowable development for other site sizes
between 1 and 10 acres shall be calculated on a prorated basis between the
acreages shown in Table 3. Except that on Housing Element opportunity sites
(City-owned parking lots), development standards are identified in Section
18.14.020.
 
Table 3
Open Space Residential Impervious Coverage and Floor Area Ratio Scale
Parcel Size Impervious Coverage Floor Area Ratio1  FAR with Bonus1
                                (FAR)
                                                        If >80% of site remains
< 1 acre    7.5%                6.0%               7.5% undisturbed and/or is
                                                        restored with native
                                                        vegetation
                                                        If >85% of site remains
3 acres     5.0%                5.0%               6.0% undisturbed and/or is
                                                        restored with native
                                                        vegetation
                                                        If >90% of site remains
5 acres     4.0%                4.0%               5.0% undisturbed and/or is
                                                        restored with native
                                                        vegetation
                                                        If >95% of site remains
>10 acres   3.5%                3.5%               4.0% undisturbed and/or is
                                                        restored with native
                                                        vegetation
1See subsections (A) and (B) below.
 
         (A)   Bonus FAR
            (i)   The bonus FAR incentive is intended to encourage property
owners to preserve and enhance the natural environment and agricultural uses in
the OS district. For those property owners who agree to maintain or restore the
vegetative conditions on their property to a natural state with appropriate
native plantings or with certain agricultural crops, the designated floor area
bonus for the development of the property shall be permitted. The minimum area
that must be maintained in a natural or restored state is described in Section
18.28.050(b).
            (ii)   Areas to be set aside as “undisturbed” or “restored” shall
include, but not be limited to: a) vegetation that has not been disturbed by
development (construction, ornamental landscaping, farming, orchards, etc.); b)
plantings with vegetation that is now considered native to the area, especially
including drought-resistant and fire-resistant plantings; and c) retention or
planting of edible crops or orchards with negligible grading and involving no
removal of native vegetation. For restoration projects, the proposed landscape
plans shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning Department. The Director
of Planning shall develop and maintain a list of native plantings and
acceptable restoration vegetation.
            (iii)   As a requirement of receiving bonus FAR, the property owner
shall enter into a covenant that is recorded with the property and would apply
to all future property owners assuring that the designated areas will remain in
the approved vegetative condition; enforcement provisions acceptable to the
City Attorney will be outlined in the covenant. To remove the landscape
restrictions related to the bonus FAR, the site development shall be modified
to reduce the FAR to meet the standard requirements. These modifications are
subject to design review.
            (iv)   For projects approved with bonus FAR, the property owner
shall be required to submit a follow-up landscape/arborist report verifying the
site is in compliance with the approved plans, five years after the project’s
final sign-off, as outlined in
18.28.070(d).
         (B)   Calculation of Floor Area Ratio
            (i)   Gross floor area shall be calculated based upon the same
criteria as Low Density Residential zone districts, as specified in Definitions
Section
18.04.030(65)(C) and (D), except as below.
            (ii)   Basements shall follow the same standards as the R-1 Single
Family Residential district, except that in addition basement area shall count
if any portion is constructed on a slope in excess of ten percent (10%).
   (2)   Non-Residential Use
      Where non-residential uses are proposed on a site, the impervious
coverage shall be limited to 3.5% and the floor area ratio shall be limited to
5.0% of the site area. However, the City Council may, after recommendation from
the Planning and Transportation Commission, allow increased impervious coverage
and/or floor area through the Site and Design Review process, where Council
finds that the use furthers the open space objectives of this chapter. In no
case shall impervious cover or floor area ratio be allowed to exceed 10.0%.
(Ord. 5445 § 1, 2018: Ord. 5123 § 6 (part), 2011: Ord. 5062 § 2, 2009: Ord.
4964 § 4 (part), 2007: Ord. 5608 § 9, 2024)
18.28.060   Additional PF District Design Requirements
   The following additional regulations shall apply in the PF district:
   (a)   Recycling Storage
   All new development, including approved modifications that add thirty
percent or more floor area to existing uses, shall provide adequate and
accessible interior areas or exterior enclosures for the storage of recyclable
materials in appropriate containers. The design, construction and accessibility
of recycling areas and enclosures shall be subject to approval by the
architectural review board, in accordance with design guidelines adopted by
that board and approved by the city council pursuant to Section 16.48.070.*
* Editor’s Note: Chapter 16.48, Architectural Review, was repealed in its
entirety by Ordinance No. 4826, § 21, 2004.
   (b)   Employee Shower Facilities
   Employee shower facilities shall be provided for any new building
constructed or for any addition to or enlargement of any existing building as
specified in Table 3.
 
Table 3*
Employee Showers Required
Uses                               Gross Floor Area of New Showers Required
                                   Construction(ft2)
All government or special district 0-9,999                 No requirement
facilities designed for employee   10,000-19,999           1
occupancy, colleges and            20,000-49,999           2
universities, private educational
facilities, business and trade     50,000 and up           4
schools and similar uses
 
* Editor’s Note: Ordinance 5062 § 2, 2009, added a new Table 3 to § 18.28.050,
thereby duplicating the numbering of this table. Future legislation will
eliminate the redundancy when necessary.
   (c)   Landscaping of Yards
      (1)   All required interior yards (setbacks) abutting or opposite a
residential district shall be planted and maintained as a landscaped screen.
      (2)   For sites abutting a residential district, a solid wall or fence
between 5 and 8 ft in height shall be shall be constructed and maintained along
the common site line.
   (d)   Transfer of Development Rights*
      (1)   The city council by resolution may, from time to time, designate
one or more city-owned buildings that are Category 1 or Category 2 on the
city's historic inventory and/or Category I, II, or III on the city's seismic
hazards identification list as eligible to participate as “sender sites” in the
Transfer of Development Rights program as provided in
Chapter 18.18.
      (2)   Before any transferable development rights are offered for sale,
the city manager shall establish, in writing, a public process using the city's
formal bidding procedures to sell bonus floor area development rights from any
sites so designated by the city council.
      (3)   Before formally soliciting the participation of other organizations
or agencies in the rehabilitation of a city-owned historic building, the city
should have a historic structures report prepared by a qualified expert in
accordance with the standards and guidelines of the California State Office of
Historic Preservation.
      (4)   Before concluding a sale of transferable development rights for any
city building, the city shall comply with Section
18.18.080.
      (5)   The city manager shall establish and maintain a special fund into
which all proceeds of the sale of transferable rights, and any interest
thereon, shall be deposited. Upon receipt and entry into the accounting records
for the fund such monies shall be considered committed to the rehabilitation of
the city-owned building from which the development rights were sold, or to the
rehabilitation of other city-owned buildings in the Historic Category 1 or 2 or
Seismic Hazard Categories I, II, or III.
   (e)   Development Standards Exceptions
      The city council may in its discretion modify the development standards
in Table 2 of Section
18.28.050 and setback lines established by a special setback map under
Chapter 20.08 of Title 20, to achieve community objectives for the following
facilities:
      (1)   Parking facilities, including appurtenant structures, within the
Downtown and the California Avenue business district, where the parking
facility is the principal use and is owned or leased, and operated or used, by
the City of Palo Alto. "California Avenue business district" means that area
bounded by the following streets in the City of Palo Alto: Grant Avenue to the
south, El Camino Real to the west, College Avenue to the north, and Park
Boulevard to the east.
      (2)   Essential services buildings as defined in Health and Safety Code
section 16007, as amended, including appurtenant or ancillary structures.
      The exceptions shall be included in the review of the project through the
applicable development review process.
(Ord. 5445 § 2, 2018: Ord. 5062 § 3, 2009: Ord. 4964 §§ 4 (part), 16, 2007)
* Editor’s Note: Subsection (d) derives from former Section 18.32.090, as
adopted by of Ordinance 4862, § 2, 2005.
18.28.070   Additional OS District Regulations
   The following additional regulations shall apply in the OS district:
   (a)   Accessory Dwelling Units and Junior Accessory Dwelling Units
      Accessory Dwelling Units and Junior Accessory Dwelling Units are subject
to the regulations set forth in
Chapter 18.09.
   (b)   Site and Design Approval
      All sites in the OS district shall be subject to the Site Design and
Review Combining District (D) as provided in
Chapter 18.30(G) of the Zoning Ordinance, subject to the following
modifications:
      (1)   Minor Site and Design Review: For minor projects (e.g., fences,
landscape changes to an approved project, trash enclosures, accessory buildings
200 square feet or less, etc.), the review process shall follow the Minor
Architectural Review (staff level) procedures as outlined in Section
18.77.070. To qualify as a minor project, the project shall have less than 10
cubic yards of excavation and or grading and be Categorically Exempt from the
California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA).
      (2)   Major Site and Design Review: For all other projects not reviewed
as Minor Site and Design Review, the project will be forwarded to the Planning
and Transportation Commission for review and recommendation and then placed on
the Council Consent agenda for final action, as prescribed for staff actions
outlined in Section
18.77.060 (Standard Staff Review Process). Provided, however, that the
following projects may be forwarded directly to the City Council Consent agenda
by staff, without review by the Planning and Transportation Commission, where
all of the following conditions apply:
         a.   The project is not a second dwelling unit; and
         b.   The project would comprise less than 1,000 square feet of floor
area, less than 1,000 square feet of impervious cover, and less than 100 cubic
yards of excavation and/or grading; and
         c.   The proposed floor area or impervious cover would not exceed 50%
of the allowable for the site; and
         d.   The project and any prior projects within the prior five years
would not cumulatively exceed these thresholds.
      (3)   Farmworker housing may be entitled to streamlined review pursuant
to California Health and Safety Code Section 17021.8.
   (c)   Geological Soils Investigation and Report
      (1)   All applications for site and design approval shall be accompanied
by a combined in-depth geologic and soils investigation and report prepared by
a registered geologist certified by the state of California as an engineering
geologist, and by a licensed civil engineer qualified in soil mechanics. Such
report shall be based on surface, subsurface, and laboratory investigations and
examinations and shall fully and clearly present:
         (A)   All pertinent data, interpretations, and evaluations;
         (B)   The significance of the data, interpretations, and evaluations
with respect to the actual development or implementation of the intended land
uses, and with respect to the effect upon future geological processes both on
and off the site;
         (C)   Recommendations for any additional investigations that should be
made. All costs and expenses incurred as a result of the requirements of this
section, including the costs and expense of an independent review of the
material submitted under this chapter by qualified persons retained by the
city, shall be borne by the applicant.
      (2)   The requirement of subsection (1) may be waived by the city
engineer for accessory facilities and landscaping where such improvements, in
his opinion, would pose no potential hazard to life or property on the subject
or surrounding properties.
   (d)   Landscaping
   The existing natural vegetation and land formations shall remain in a
natural state unless modification is found to be necessary for a specific use
allowed in this chapter through the site and design approval procedure.
Reduction or elimination of fire hazards will be required where heavy
concentrations of flammable vegetation occur. Landscaping as may be necessary
and required shall be consistent with the purpose of this chapter.
      (1)   Landscaping shall be designed and installed consistent with the
requirements and guidelines of Section
18.40.130 (Landscaping) of the Zoning Ordinance, and in particular with
subsection
18.40.130(c) regarding landscaping in Natural Areas, as well as with the
relevant Comprehensive Plan policies outlined in subsection (o) below.
Exceptions to tree removal restrictions may be made for invasive species such
as eucalyptus trees.
      (2)   A follow-up arborist and/or landscape report shall be required five
years after the final sign-off of the project completion. This report shall
evaluate the health of trees and significant landscape that were required for
screen planting or and/or were designated as protected plantings on the
approved plans for the project. The specifications of the report shall be
provided in the conditions of approval of the project. This requirement also
applies to sites that receive bonus floor area ratio (FAR) for maintaining
specific percentages of the site as undisturbed native or restored. Any
subsequent owner(s) shall also be obligated to replace any trees that die with
trees of the same size and species stated on the approved planning and building
permit plans.
   (e)   Fencing Restriction
   No barbed wire, or similar fencing having a cutting edge, may be installed
except:
      (1)   To protect a vegetative community or wildlife habitat until it is
fully established, subject to the imposition of reasonable time limits through
site and design review pursuant to
Chapter 18.30; and
      (2)   To enclose utility facilities, including, but not limited to, water
or sewage pumps, storage tanks, and wells.
   (f)   Trash Enclosures
   Trash/recycle enclosures shall be permitted, with staff-level design review,
within the front setback, including Special Setbacks, providing the enclosure
is not more than six (6) feet tall, is covered, is fitted with self closing
gates, and is screened. The access to the enclosure shall not be located on the
side facing the street. The design of the enclosure shall be the minimum size
needed to accomplish the purpose of enclosing and screening the containers.
   (g)   Tree Removal
   Removal of live trees shall be permitted only as provided in Title 8.
   (h)   Access to Remote Areas
   Roads, tracks, driveways, trails, or runways for automobiles, trucks, buses,
or motorcycles or other wheeled vehicles shall not be developed except upon the
securing of site and design approval. No such approval shall be granted except
upon finding that the purpose for which the roads, tracks, driveways, trails,
or runways are proposed is essential for the establishment or maintenance of a
use which is expressly permitted in this chapter and that the design and
location of the proposed roads, tracks, driveways, trails, or runways will be
compatible with the terrain. The use of all roads, tracks, driveways, trails,
or runways existing at the time of the adoption of this chapter which are
nonconforming or have been established without proper approvals shall be
terminated and shall be returned to natural terrain unless given approval in
accordance with the regulations set forth in this chapter.
   (i)   Grading
   No grading for which a grading permit is required shall be authorized except
upon the securing of site and design approval. No such approval shall be
granted except upon a finding that the purpose for which the grading is
proposed is essential for the establishment or maintenance of a use which is
expressly permitted in this chapter and that the design, scope, and location of
the grading proposed will be compatible with adjacent areas and will result in
the least disturbance of the terrain and natural land features. All grading for
which no permits or approvals are required shall be subject to the provisions
set forth in this chapter.
   (j)   Soil Erosion and Land Management
   No site and design plan shall be approved unless it includes soil erosion
and sediment control measures in accordance with any adopted procedures,
technical standards, and specifications of the planning commission. No approval
will be granted unless all needed erosion control measures have been completed
or substantially provided for in accordance with said standards and
specifications. The applicant shall bear the final responsibility for the
installation and construction of all required erosion control measures
according to the provisions of said standards and specifications.
   (k)   Subdivision
   All divisions of land into four or more parcels shall be designed on the
cluster principle and shall be designed to minimize roads; to minimize cut,
fill, and grading operations; to locate development in less rather than more
conspicuous areas; and to achieve the purpose of this chapter.
   (l)   Substandard Lots
   Any parcel of land not meeting the area or dimension requirements of this
chapter is a lawful building site if such parcel was a lawful building site on
July 5, 1972. All other requirements of this chapter shall apply to any such
parcel.
   (m)   Impervious Coverage
   The intent of limiting impervious cover is to minimize runoff, enhance
infiltration to the soil, and provide a semi-rural appearance compatible with
the OS district. Impervious coverage allowances are prescribed in Section
18.28.050(b) and shall be calculated as outlined below to include all building
coverage, plus paved surfaces including but not limited to driveways, parking
areas, sports or tennis courts, swimming pools, patios or decks, subject to
exceptions and provisions as follows:
      (1)   All paved surfaces shall be classified as 100%, 75%, 50%, or 25%
impervious, based upon the material that is to be used and the proposed design
and installation. Determinations shall be made by the Planning Director based
on permeability information provided by the applicant, and the Director may
consult with the Public Works Department when necessary to determine the extent
of the permeability. The applicant may provide information in the soils report
to outline the baseline permeability of the specific areas proposed for
coverage, and the baseline may be considered in determining the permeability of
the material.
      (2)   A primary driveway composed of gravel or decomposed granite shall
not be counted as impervious up to a width of 20 feet, where approved for use
by the Public Works and Fire Departments.
      (3)   The portions of a primary driveway located in the 200 scenic
setback shall be designed to have a natural appearance and shall not be counted
as impervious up to a width of 20 feet (assuming the primary residence is
located beyond the 200 setback).
      (4)   A primary driveway is one that extends from the nearest access road
to the garage or carport providing the required parking for the main residence.
      (5)   The proposed pervious paving materials for the primary driveway
shall only be permitted if acceptable to the Palo Alto Fire Department.
      (6)   The water surface area for in-ground pools and hot tubs shall not
be counted as impervious. The Fire Department may require additional
specifications for the pool in order to utilize the water more effectively for
emergency response.
      (7)   The areas excluded from impervious coverage pursuant to approvals
granted prior to July 1, 2007 shall remain excluded from impervious coverage
calculations, unless the surfacing material is altered to a less permeable
material.
   (n)   Light and Glare
   Exterior lighting should be low-intensity and shielded from view so it is
not directly visible from off-site. The light emitted from skylights shall be
minimal during the night hours. Utilizing treatments such as translucent glass,
shading systems, and interior light placement can reduce the night glare.
Skylights shall not use white glass.
   (o)   Story Poles and Other Visual Review Aids
   Story poles (with associated taping or flagging) shall be erected for
projects involving new residences or other structures, or for substantial
additions to new residences, for the purpose of providing a better
understanding of the visual impacts of a proposal in the OS district. Story
poles shall accurately outline the perimeter and key and highest rooflines of
the proposed structure(s) and shall be durable and sturdy enough to be visible
from distant views. Story poles shall be constructed to the satisfaction of the
director prior to notice of a hearing and shall remain in place through the
public hearing date. Erection of story poles prior to public hearing notice may
be required by the director to allow for staff and neighbors to view the
project. Other aids, such as taping the perimeter of other development
(structures, pools, sport courts, etc.) on the site and identifying trees to be
removed, may also be required by the director. Story poles shall be removed
upon final action on a project or upon the direction of the director.
   (p)   Open Space Review Criteria
   In addition to the above provisions and development standards in Table 2,
the following criteria shall be considered in the Site and Design review of all
development of land in the OS district, as outlined in the Conservation Element
of the Comprehensive Plan:
      (1)   The development should not be visually intrusive from public
roadways and public parklands. As much as possible, development should be sited
so it is hidden from view.
      (2)   Development should be located away from hilltops and designed to
not extend above the nearest ridge line.
      (3)   Site and structure design should take into consideration impacts on
privacy and views of neighboring property.
      (4)   Development should be clustered, or closely grouped, in relation to
the area surrounding it to make it less conspicuous, minimize access roads, and
reduce fragmentation of natural habitats.
      (5)   Built forms and landscape forms should mimic the natural
topography. Building lines should follow the lines of the terrain, and trees
and bushes should appear natural from a distance.
      (6)   Existing trees with a circumference of 37.5 inches, measured 4.5
feet above the ground level, should be preserved and integrated into the site
design. Existing vegetation should be retained as much as possible.
      (7)   Cut is encouraged when it is necessary for geotechnical stability
and to enable the development to blend into the natural topography. Fill is
generally discouraged and should never be distributed within the driplines of
existing trees. Locate development to minimize the need for grading.
      (8)   To reduce the need for cut and fill and to reduce potential runoff,
large, flat expanses of impervious surfaces should be avoided.
      (9)   Buildings should use natural materials and earthtone or subdued
colors.
      (10)   Landscaping should be native species that require little or no
irrigation. Immediately adjacent to structures, fire retardant plants should be
used as a fire prevention technique.
      (11)   Exterior lighting should be low-intensity and shielded from view
so it is not directly visible from off-site.
      (12)   Access roads should be of a rural rather than urban character.
(Standard curb, gutter, and concrete sidewalk are usually inconsistent with the
foothills environment.)
   (q)   Standard Conditions of Approval
   The director shall maintain a list of standard project conditions for
projects in the OS district that reflect the intent of the OS criteria.
Conditions may address, but are not limited to, landscaping, tree protection,
planting, and maintenance, lighting, roofing materials, grading, construction
staging, and fire protection.
   (r)   Development Standards Exception
   Pursuant to a 1978 Settlement Agreement, nine designated lots less than 10
acres in size, located on page 54, book 182 of the Assessor’s Parcel Maps (182-
54-xxx) are entitled to be developed as if they complied with the 10 acre
minimum lot size for the OS zone. Owners of these nine lots may choose to
comply with the parameters of the 1978 Agreement or the standard development
regulations as described in this Chapter. A site shall utilize either the 1978
Agreement standards or the regulations described in this Chapter, but cannot
use both.
(Ord. 5656 § 8 (part), 2025: Ord. 5646 § 7 (part), 2025: Ord. 5432 § 9, 2018:
Ord. 5412 § 19, 2017: Ord. 5062 § 4, 2009: Ord. 4964 § 4 (part), 2007)
18.28.080   Additional AC District Design Requirements
   The following additional regulations shall apply in the AC district:
   (a)   Site and Design Approval
   All sites in the AC district shall be subject to the Site Design and Review
Combining District (D) regulations as provided in Chapter 18.30(G), except that
farmworker housing may be entitled to streamlined review pursuant to California
Health and Safety Code Section 17021.8.
   (b)   Location of Agricultural Facilities
   Barns, stables, sheds, chicken houses, and other similar facilities for the
shelter and feeding of animals, exclusive of domestic household pets, shall be
located a minimum of 40 feet from any site line.
(Ord. 5646 § 7 (part), 2025: Ord. 5062 § 5, 2009: Ord. 4964 § 4 (part), 2007)
18.28.090   Parking and Loading
   Off-street parking and loading facilities shall be required for all
permitted and conditional uses in accord with
Chapter 18.40. All parking and loading facilities on any site, whether required
as minimums or optionally provided in addition to minimum requirements, shall
comply with the regulations and the design standards established by
Chapter 18.42. In addition, parking facilities shall be subject to the
following regulations:
   (a)   PF District
   In the PF district, no required parking space shall be located in the first
10 feet adjoining the street property line of any required yard. The city
council may waive this requirement for eligible parking facilities and
essential services buildings through the process provided in Section
18.28.060(e).
   (b)   OS District
      (1)   In the OS district, no parking space shall be located in a required
front or side yard or in a special setback.
      (2)   Vehicle parking, other than the four required spaces, may be
allowed in the 200' Special Setback if located at least 100' from the affected
property line, as approved through the Site and Design review process. A lesser
setback, with a minimum of 50', may be considered if the 100' setback is
determined by the Planning Director as infeasible based on the site
constraints. These additional spaces shall be screened from public views.
   (c)   AC District
   In the AC district, no required parking space shall be located in a required
front yard or required street side yard.
(Ord. 5445 § 3, 2018: Ord. 5062 § 6, 2009: Ord. 4964 § 4 (part), 2007)
18.28.100   (Reserved)
   Editor’s Note: Former Section 18.28.100, Grandfathered uses, derived from
Ord. 4964 § 4 (part), 2007, was repealed by § 8 of Ord. 5656.
Chapter 18.29
NORTH VENTURA (NV) DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Sections:
   
18.29.010   Purpose
   
18.29.020   Applicability of Regulations
   
18.29.030   Zoning Districts
   
18.29.040   Definitions
   
18.29.050   Permitted Uses
   
18.29.060   Development Standards
   
18.29.070   Parking and Loading
   
18.29.080   Context-Based Design Criteria and Objective Design Standards
   
18.29.090   Housing Incentive Programs for NV District
   
18.29.100   Non-Conforming Uses and Non-Complying Facilities
   
18.29.110   Transportation Demand Management Plan
18.29.010 Purpose
   The purpose of the North Ventura district is to implement the vision and
framework of the North Ventura Coordinated Area Plan (NVCAP) through use
regulations and development standards.
(Ord. 5634 § 2 (part), 2024)
18.29.020 Applicability of Regulations
   (a)   The North Ventura districts shall apply to properties within the NVCAP
and designated as North Ventura Coordinated Area Plan within the Palo Alto
Comprehensive Plan. Where designated, the regulations set forth in this chapter
shall apply in lieu of the comparable provisions established by the underlying
zoning district regulations.
   (b)   Refer to the NVCAP for design guidelines related to streets and
buildings in conjunction with the regulations contained within this chapter.
(Ord. 5634 § 2 (part), 2024)
18.29.030 Zoning Districts
   The North Ventura districts shall apply to properties designated on the
zoning map by the symbol “NV” in front of the zoning district designation.
   The following zoning districts are intended to create and maintain sites for
residential, commercial and mixed-use sites:
   (a)   Single-Family Residential District (NV-R1)
   The NV-R1 single-family residential district is intended to create,
preserve, and enhance areas suitable for detached dwellings with a strong
presence of nature and with open area affording maximum privacy and
opportunities for outdoor living and children’s play. Minimum site area
requirements are established to create and preserve variety among
neighborhoods, to provide adequate open area, and to encourage quality design.
Accessory dwelling units, junior accessory dwelling units and accessory
structures or buildings are appropriate. Community uses and facilities are
allowed to the extent no net loss of housing would result.
   (b)   Two-Family Residential District (NV-R2)
   The NV-R2 two-family residential district is intended to allow a second
dwelling unit, under the same ownership as the initial dwelling unit, in areas
designated for single-family use or NVCAP by the Palo Alto Comprehensive Plan,
under regulations that preserve the essential character of single-family use.
Community uses and facilities are allowed to the extent no net loss of housing
would result.
   (c)   Medium Density Multiple-Family Residential District (NV-R3)
   The NV-R3 medium density multiple-family residential district is intended to
create, preserve and enhance neighborhoods for multiple-family housing with
better transition to lower density residential districts. Projects at this
density are intended for larger parcels that will enable developments to
provide their own parking spaces and to meet their open space needs in the form
of garden apartments or cluster developments. While there is no maximum density
in the NV-R3 residential district, the NVCAP anticipates realistic development
yields ranging from sixteen to thirty dwelling units per acre based on the
applicable development standards.
   (d)   High Density Multiple-Family Residential District (NV-R4)
   The NV-R4 high density multiple-family residential district is intended to
create, preserve and enhance locations for apartment living at the greater
density deemed appropriate for NVCAP. The most suitable locations for this
district are along major transportation corridors which are close to mass
transportation facilities and major employment and service centers. While there
is no maximum density in the NV-R4 residential district, the NVCAP anticipates
realistic development yields ranging from sixty-one to one hundred dwelling
units per acre based on the applicable development standards.
   (e)   Low Density Mixed-Use District (NV-MXL)
   The purpose of the NV-MXL district is to allow for small-scale commercial
and services with limited amount of residential that is compatible with the
surrounding development. While there is no maximum density in the NV-MXL
district, the NVCAP anticipates realistic development yields ranging from three
to seventeen dwelling units per acre.
   (f)   Medium Density Mixed-Use District (NV-MXM)
   The purpose of the NV-MXM district is to allow for a compatible mix of
residential and limited commercial. While there is no maximum density in the
NV-MXM district, the NVCAP anticipates realistic development yields ranging
from thirty-one to seventy dwelling units per acre.
   (g)   High Density Mixed-Use District (NV-MXH)
   The purpose of the NV-MXH district is to allow for a mix of retail,
restaurant, entertainment and commercial uses on the ground floor with
residential on the upper floors, while maintaining a pedestrian-oriented
streetscape. It is intended that the active ground floor retail space required
will ensure neighborhood-oriented retail and services are provided within
walking distance of high density residential. Ground floor active uses are
required along El Camino Real. While no maximum density in the NV-MXH district,
the NVCAP anticipates realistic development yields ranging from sixty-one to
one hundred dwelling units per acre.
   (h)   Public Facilities District (NV-PF)
   The NV-PF public facilities district is designed to accommodate
governmental, public utility, educational, and community service or
recreational facilities. Within the North Ventura area, an approximate one-acre
portion of the NV-PF district may permit a one hundred percent affordable
housing project.
(Ord. 5634 § 2 (part), 2024)
18.29.040 Definitions
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
   (a)   “Street yard” means a yard adjoining a street lot line and may also be
a front lot line.
(Ord. 5634 § 2 (part), 2024)
18.29.050 Permitted Uses
   The uses of land allowed by this chapter in each zoning district are
identified in the following tables. Land uses that are not listed in the tables
are not allowed, except where otherwise noted. Where the last column on the
following tables ("Subject to Regulations in") includes a section number,
specific regulations in the referenced section also apply to the use; however,
provisions in other sections not specifically referenced may apply as well.
TABLE 1: PERMITTED AND CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES
P = Permitted Use
CUP = Conditional Use Permit Required
TUP = Temporary Use Permit Required
— = Not Permitted
                                 NV-MXL (1)                         Subject to
LAND USE NV-R1 NV-R2 NV-R3 NV-R4 (5)        NV-MXM (5) NV-MXH NV-PF Regulations
                                                                    In:
TABLE 1: PERMITTED AND CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES
P = Permitted Use
CUP = Conditional Use Permit Required
TUP = Temporary Use Permit Required
— = Not Permitted
                                       NV-MXL NV-MXM                Subject to
LAND USE       NV-R1 NV-R2 NV-R3 NV-R4 (1)(5) (5)    NV-MXH NV-PF   Regulations
                                                                    In:
ACCESSORY AND SUPPORT USES
Accessory
facilities and
activities                                                          18.40
customarily    P     P     P     P     P      P      P      -       18.10.080
incidental to                                                       18.12.080
the permitted
use
Accessory
Dwelling Unit
& Junior
Accessory
Dwelling Unit  P     P     P     P     P      P      P      -       18.09
when accessory
to primary and
permitted
residential
use
Home
Occupations,
when accessory P     P     P     P     P      P      P      P       18.42
to permitted
residential
use
Horticulture,
Gardening, and
Growing of
food products  P     P     P     P     P      P      P      -        
for
consumption by
occupants of a
site
EDUCATIONAL, RELIGIOUS, AND ASSEMBLY USES
Private Clubs,
Lodges, or
Fraternal
Organizations,
excluding any  -     -     -     CUP   CUP    -      -      -        
such facility
operated as a
business for
profit
Private
Educational    CUP   CUP   CUP   CUP   CUP    P      P      -        
Facilities
Religious      CUP   CUP   CUP   CUP   P      P      P      -        
Institutions
OFFICE USES(2)
Administrative                                                      18.29.050
Office         -     -     -     -     P      P      P      -       (a)
Services
Medical        -     -     -     -     P      P      P      -       18.29.050
Offices                                                             (a)
Professional
and General    -     -     -     -     P      P      P      -       18.29.050
Business                                                            (a)
Offices
PUBLIC/QUASI-PUBLIC USES
Community      CUP   CUP   CUP   CUP   -      -      -      CUP (3)  
Centers
Utility
Facilities
essential to
provision of
utility
services but
excluding      CUP   CUP   CUP   CUP   CUP    CUP    CUP    -        
construction
or storage
yards,
maintenance
facilities, or
corporation
yards.
RECREATION USES
Neighborhood
Recreational   -     -     CUP   CUP   -      -      -      CUP(3)   
Centers
Commercial     -     -     -     -     CUP    CUP    CUP    CUP(3)   
Recreation
Outdoor
Recreation     CUP   CUP   CUP   CUP   -      CUP    CUP    CUP(3)   
Services
Youth Clubs    -     -     -     -     -      -      -      CUP(3)   
RESIDENTIAL USES
Single-Family  P     P     -     -     -      -      -      -        
Two-Family     P     P     -     -     -      -      -      -       18.42.180
Multiple-      -     -     P     P     P      P      P      P (4)    
Family
Residential    P     P     P     P     P      P      P      -        
Care Homes
RETAIL USES
Eating and
Drinking                                                            18.40.160,
Services,      -     -     P     P     P      P      P      CUP (3) 18.29.050
except drive-                                                       (c)
in and takeout
services
Personal
Services and                                                        18.40.160,
Retail         -     -     P     P     P      P      P      CUP (3) 18.29.050
Services of a                                                       (c)
neighborhood-
serving nature
                                                                    18.40.160,
Liquor stores  -     -     -     -     -      P      P      -       18.29.050
                                                                    (c)
SERVICE USES
Animal Care,
excluding      -     -     -     -     P      P      P      -       18.29.050
boarding and                                                        (c)
kennels
Convalescent   -     -     -     CUP   P      P      P      -        
Facilities
Day Care       CUP   CUP   CUP   P     P      P      P      -       18.40.160
Centers
Large Family   P     P     P     P     P      P      P      P(3)     
Day Care Homes
Small Family   P     P     P     P     P      P      P      P(3)     
Day Care Homes
Large Adult    CUP   CUP   P     P     P      P      P      P(3)     
Day Care Homes
Small Adult    P     P     P     P     P      P      P      P(3)     
Day Care Homes
                                                                    18.29.050
Financial      -     -     -     -     P      P      P      -       (a),
Services                                                            18.29.060
                                                                    (b)
General                                                             18.29.050
Business       -     -     -     -     P      P      P      -       (a),
Services                                                            18.29.060
                                                                    (b)
                                                                    18.40.160,
Hotels         -     -     -     -     -      P      P      -       18.16.060
                                                                    (d)
                                                                    18.40.160,
Personal                                                            18.29.050
Services       -     -     -     -     P      P      P      -       (c),
                                                                    18.29.060
                                                                    (b)
AGRICULTURAL AND OPEN SPACE USES
Park uses and
uses           -     -     -     -     -      -      -      P        
incidental to
park operation
All facilities
owned or
leased, and
operated or
used, by the
City of Palo
Alto, the
County of
Santa Clara,
the State of
California,
the government -     -     -     -     -      -      -      P        
of the United
States, the
Palo Alto
Unified School
District, or
any other
governmental
agency, or
leased by any
such agency to
another party
Utility        -     -     -     -     -      -      -      CUP      
Facilities
TEMPORARY USES
Temporary Uses -     -     TUP   TUP   -      -      -      -       18.42.050
Farmer’s     -     -     -     -     -      CUP    CUP    -        
Markets
Temporary
Parking
Facilities,
provided that
such           -     -     -     -     -      CUP    CUP    CUP (3)  
facilities
shall remain
no more than
five years
Notes:
(1)   For NV-MXL zoning district, the total floor area of non-residential uses
permitted and conditionally permitted on a lot shall not exceed 5,000 square
feet.
(2)   For office uses, total floor area of permitted office uses on a lot shall
not exceed 5,000 square feet.
(3)   Provided such use is conducted on property owned by the City of Palo
Alto, the County of Santa Clara, the State of California, the government of the
United States, the Palo Alto Unified School District, or any other governmental
agency, and leased for said uses.
(4)   Only a 100% Affordable Housing Project is permitted. Development shall
follow NV-R4 standards.
(5)   Ground floor uses shall comply with the ground floor edge framework set
forth in NVCAP section 2.3.
 
   (a)   Office Use Restrictions
      (1)   Conversion of Ground Floor Housing and Non-Office Commercial to
Office Medical, Professional, and Business offices shall not be located on the
ground floor, unless any of the following apply to such offices:
      (A)   Have been continuously in existence in that space since November
21, 2024 and as of such date, were neither non-conforming nor in the process of
being amortized pursuant to
Chapter 18.30(I);
      (B)   Occupy a space that was not occupied by housing, neighborhood
business service, retail services, personal services, eating and drinking
services, or automotive service on November 21, 2024 or thereafter;
      (C)   Occupy a space that was vacant on November 21, 2024; or
      (D)   Are located in new or remodeled ground floor area built on or after
November 21, 2024 if the ground floor area devoted to housing, retail services,
eating and drinking services, and personal services does not decrease.
         (E)   Along El Camino Real, the office use has a consistent flow of
in-person customers visiting the business, such as a dentist or medical office.
      (2)   Size Restrictions on Office Uses in the NV District
         (A)   Total floor area of permitted office uses on a lot shall not
exceed 5,000 square feet.
   (b)   Late Night Use and Activities
      Late Night Use and Activities requirements established in Section
18.42.040 shall apply to NV zoning districts.
   (c)   Active Ground Floor Commercial Uses
      The NVCAP requires active ground floor uses along the El Camino Real
corridor and encourages active ground floor uses on other designated streets.
Active uses are activities and functions that promote social engagement,
vitality, and interaction within a community. Refer to NVCAP, Section 2.3 for
detailed requirements.
      (1)   Active ground floor commercial uses generally include retail,
personal services, neighborhood business service, and eating and drinking
establishments. These may also include other active uses such as daycare,
building lobbies, spaces accessory to residential uses such as fitness rooms,
workspaces, leasing offices, bicycle facilities (Class I) with direct access to
the sidewalk. Office uses may be included only to the extent they are permitted
in ground floor regulations, are consistent with
18.29.080(a) and have a regular flow of in-person customers.
      (2)   Ground floor commercial uses are required for properties with
frontage along El Camino Real, as shown in the NVCAP Section 2.3 (Ground Floor
Edges).
      (3)   Ground floor commercial uses shall have a minimum floor to ceiling
height of 14 feet.
      (4)   Retail or retail-like at the ground floor is required at the
intersections of El Camino Real and Olive Avenue, and El Camino Real and
Portage Avenue.
      (5)   100% affordable housing projects are exempt from providing ground
floor commercial uses.
(Ord. 5634 § 2 (part), 2024)
18.29.060 Development Standards
   (a)   The following tables specify the development standards that shall
apply to NV district properties. Where the last column on the following tables
("Subject to Regulations in") includes a section number, specific regulations
in the referenced section also apply to the development standard; however,
provisions in other sections may apply as well.
TABLE 1: LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
DEVELOPMENT STANDARD NV-R1 NV-R2 Subject to Regulations In:
TABLE 1: LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
DEVELOPMENT STANDARD NV-R1               NV-R2               Subject to
                                                             Regulations In:
                     Setback lines imposed by a special
Minimum Setbacks     setback map pursuant to                 18.10.050
                     Chapter 20.08 of this code may also
                     apply
                     Pepper Ave:
                     10' to create a 12'
Street yard (ft)     effective sidewalk  Olive Ave: 10'      18.29.020(b)
                     width(1)
                     Olive Ave: 10'
Height(ft)           35'                 35'
Parking              Refer to
                     18.29.070
Other development    See regulations in  See regulations in
standards            Chapter 18.12       Chapter 18.10
Notes:
(1)   The effective sidewalk width includes the pedestrian clear zone and
landscape/furniture zone as described in PAMC
18.24.020.
 
TABLE 2: MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL & MUTLI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL MIXED-USE
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
DEVELOPMENT STANDARD NV-R3 NV-R4 Subject to Regulations In:
TABLE 2: MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL & MUTLI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL MIXED-USE
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
DEVELOPMENT STANDARD  NV-R3           NV-R4                Subject to
                                                           Regulations In:
Minimum Site
Specifications        8,500
Site Area (ft2)       70
Site Width (ft)       100
Site Depth (ft)
Minimum Setbacks
                                      Park Blvd.: 15'
                                      Olive Ave.: 20'
                      Park Blvd.: 15' Ash St.: 5'
Street Yard (ft)      Ash St: 5'      Page Mill Rd:        18.29.020(b)
                      Acacia Ave: 5'  sufficient to create
                      Portage Ave: 5' a
                                      12' effective
                                      sidewalk width(2)(3)
Interior Side Yards   5'              5'
(ft)
Interior Rear Yards   10'             10'
(ft)
                      50% of frontage built to setback(1)
Build-to-Lines        33% of side street built to setback
                      (1)
Maximum Height (ft)
Standard              45'             65'                  18.29.100
Daylight Plane, for
side and rear lot
lines for sites
abutting any NV-R1 or
NV-R2 district or     10' initial height
abutting a site       45-degree daylight plane angle
containing a single-
family or two- family
residential use in a
mixed-use district
Daylight Plane, for
side and rear lot
lines for sites
abutting any NV-R3,
NV-R4, Planned        Refer to
Community, or mixed-  18.24.050(b)(1)(C)
use district that
does not contain a
single-family or two-
family residential
use
Maximum Lot Coverage (%)
Base                  60              80
Additional area
permitted to be
covered by covered
patios or overhangs   5               5
otherwise in
compliance with all
applicable laws
Floor Area Ratio (FAR)
Maximum Residential   1.5:1           3.0:1
FAR
Maximum Non-          0.15:1          0.15:1               18.29.050(c)
residential FAR
Total Mixed-Use FAR   1.5:1           3.0:1
Residential Density (net units per acre)
Maximum units per     None            None
acre
Minimum units per     16              61
acre
Minimum Landscape/
Open Space            30              10
Coverage (%)(4)
Minimum Usable Open   150             150
Space (ft2 per unit)
Minimum Common Open   75              75
Space (ft2 per unit)
Minimum Private Open  50              50
Space (ft2 per unit)
Landscape                                                  18.40.130
Requirements
Parking               Refer to
                      18.29.070
Notes:
(1)   25-foot driveway access permitted regardless of frontage.
(2)   No parking or loading space, whether required or optional, shall be
located in the first 10 feet adjoining the street property line of any
required yard.
(3)   Any minimum front, street side, or interior yard shall be planted and
maintained as a landscaped screen excluding areas required for access to the
site. A solid wall or fence between 5 and 8 feet in height shall be
constructed along any common interior lot line.
(4)   Landscape coverage may be provided above the ground-floor.
 
TABLE 3: MIXED-USE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
DEVELOPMENT STANDARD NV-MXL NV-MXM NV-MXH Subject to Regulations In:
TABLE 3: MIXED-USE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
DEVELOPMENT     NV-MXL          NV-MXM          NV-MXH          Subject to
STANDARD                                                        Regulations In:
Minimum Site
Specifications
Site Area (ft2) None Required                                    
Site Width (ft)
Site Depth (ft)
Minimum Setbacks
                                El Camino Real:
                                sufficient to   Park Blvd: 15'
                                create a 12'    El Camino Real:
                                effective       sufficient to
                                sidewalk width  create a 12'
                                (1)(2) El       effective
                                Camino Real:    sidewalk width
                Ash St.: 5'     sufficient to   (1)(2)
Street Yard     Olive Ave.: 10' create a 12'    Oregon Expy/
(ft)            Portage Ave: 0' effective       Page Mill       18.29.020(b)
                Pepper Ave: 10' sidewalk width  Rd: sufficient
                                (1)(2)          to
                                Pepper: 10'     create a 12'
                                Olive Ave: 10'  effective
                                Ash St: 5'      sidewalk(1)(2)
                                Park Blvd: 15'  Lambert Ave: 5'
                                Lambert Ave: 5' Acacia Ave: 5'
                                Portage Ave: 5' Portage Ave: 5'
                                Acacia Ave: 5'
                                For properties abutting El
                                Camino Real:
Build-to-Lines  None            50% of frontage built to
                                setback(1)
                                33% of side street built to
                                setback(1)
                                10' for         10' for
                                residential     residential
Rear Yard (ft)  10'             portion/none    portion/none
                                for commercial  for commercial
                                portion         portion
Rear Yard
abutting
residential     10'             10'             10'
zone district
(ft)
Interior Side   10'             5'              5'
Yard (ft)
Build-to-lines  None required
Permitted       Refer to Section
Setback         18.40.070
Encroachments
Maximum Setback Not applicable  El Camino Real: El Camino Real:
(ft)                            10'             10'
Maximum Lot
Coverage        50              100             100
(%)
Minimum
Landscape/Open  20              10              10
Space Coverage
(%)
Usable Open
Space (Private  150 per unit                                    18.16.090
and/or Common)
(ft2)
Maximum Height                                                  18.29.100
(ft)
Standard        35'             55'             65'
Ground Floor    Refer to Section
Height          18.24.060(c)(5)(A)
Daylight Plane
for lot
lines abutting  Daylight plane height and slope shall be
one or          identical to those of the most restrictive
more            residential zoning district abutting the lot
residential     line
zoning
districts
Residential Density (net units per acre)
Maximum units   None Required
per acre
Minimum units
per             3               31              61
acre
Floor Area Ratio (FAR)
Maximum         0.5:1           2.0:1           3.0:1
Residential FAR
Maximum                                                         18.29.050(c)
Nonresidential  0.25:1          0.25:1          0.25:1          18.29.060(c)
FAR(4)
Minimum Mixed-
Use Ground      0.15:1          0.15:1          0.15:1          18.29.050(c)
Floor
Commercial FAR
Total Mixed-Use 0.5:1(4)        2.0:1           3.0:1
FAR
Parking         Refer to
                18.29.070
Notes:
(1)   No parking or loading space, whether required or optional, shall be
located in the first 10 feet adjoining the street property line of any required
yard.
(2)   Any minimum front, street side, or interior yard shall be planted and
maintained as a landscaped screen excluding areas required for access to the
site. A solid wall or fence between 5 and 8 feet in height shall be constructed
along any common interior lot line.
(3)   The 150-foot measurement may be reduced to 50 feet at minimum, subject to
approval by the Planning Director, upon recommendation by the Architectural
Review Board pursuant to criteria set forth in
Chapter 18.76.
(4)   As provided in
18.29.060(c), maximum FAR for hotels shall be 2.0:1. Hotel projects in the NV-
MXL zone may reach a Total Mixed-Use FAR of 2.0:1.
 
   (b)   Storefront Guidelines
   Where active use and retail frontages are required or located within the NV
district on the ground floor, the following design standards shall apply:
      (1)   Exterior windows on the ground floor shall use transparent glazing
to the extent feasible. Low-e glass or minimal tinting to achieve sun control
is permitted, so long as the glazing appears transparent when viewed from the
ground level.
      (2)   Window coverings are not permitted on the ground floor during
typical business hours. Where operations preclude transparency (e.g., theaters)
or where privacy requires window coverings, sidewalk-facing frontage shall
include items of visual interest including displays of merchandise or artwork;
visual access shall be provided to a minimum depth of three feet.
      (3)   No more than ten percent of the total street-facing building façade
or a maximum of twenty-five feet in width, whichever is greater, shall be
dedicated to mechanical equipment rooms, parking garage entrances, exit stairs,
and other facilities necessary for building operation.
   (c)   Hotel Regulations
      (1)   The purpose of these regulations is to allow floor area for
development of hotels more than floor area limitations for other commercial
uses, to provide a visitor-serving use that results in an enhanced business
climate, increased transient occupancy tax and sales tax revenue, and other
community and economic benefits to the city.
      (2)   Hotels, where they are a permitted use, may develop to a maximum
FAR of 2.0:1, subject to the following limitations:
         (A)   The hotel use must generate transient occupancy tax (TOT) as
provided in
Chapter 2.33 of the Palo Alto Municipal Code; and
         (B)   No room stays more than thirty days are permitted, except where
the city council approves longer stays through an enforceable agreement with
the applicant to provide for compensating revenues.
      (3)   Hotels may include residential condominium use, subject to:
         (A)   No more than twenty-five percent of the floor area shall be
devoted to condominium use; and
         (B)   No more than twenty-five percent of the total number of lodging
units shall be devoted to condominium use; and
         (C)   A minimum FAR of 1.0 shall be provided for the hotel/condominium
building(s); and
         (D)   Where residential condominium use is proposed, room stays for
other hotel rooms shall not exceed thirty days.
      (4)   Violation of this chapter is subject to enforcement action for
stays more than thirty days not permitted under the provisions of this chapter,
in which case each day of room stay more than thirty days shall constitute a
separate violation and administrative penalties shall be assessed pursuant to
Chapters
1.12 and
1.16.
(Ord. 5634 § 2 (part), 2024)
18.29.070 Parking and Loading
   All projects shall comply with the parking and loading standards in PAMC
Chapters 18.52 and
18.54, unless a parking reduction is permitted pursuant to state law. If a
reduction in automobile parking is permitted under Government Code Section
65863.2, a project will be subject to the requirement to provide electric
vehicle spaces and accessible parking spaces that would have otherwise applied
to the development if Government Code Section 65863.2 did not apply.
(Ord. 5634 § 2 (part), 2024)
18.29.080 Context-Based Design Criteria and Objective Design Standards
   In addition to the development standards prescribed in
18.29.050, all Housing Development Projects shall comply with the objective
standards outlined in
Chapter 18.24, as defined herein. All other developments, and Housing
Development Projects that elect to deviate from one or more objective design
standards in
Chapter 18.24, shall meet the Context Based Design Criteria, as determined by
the Director pursuant to the Architectural Review process. In the event of any
conflict between the development standards established in this Chapter and
those established in
Chapter 18.24, the NVCAP standards shall prevail.
   (a)   Multiple Family Context-Based Design Criteria
      Refer to Section
18.13.060 for the Context Based Design Criteria.
   (b)   Mixed-Use and Commercial Context-Based Design Criteria
      Refer to Section
18.16.090 for the Context Based Design Criteria.
(Ord. 5634 § 2 (part), 2024)
18.29.090 Housing Incentive Programs for NV District
   (a)   Housing development projects in the NV Districts may utilize any
Housing Incentive Program or Affordable Housing Incentive Program set forth in
Sections
18.14.030 and
18.14.040.
(Ord. 5634 § 2 (part), 2024)
18.29.100 Non-conforming Uses and Non-Complying Facilities
   (a)   Office Use.
      (1)   Any office use that is the most recently operating use and any
office facility established prior to the effective date of this ordinance may
remain as legal and non-conforming use and/or non-complying facility.
      (2)   The legal and non-conforming office use described in subdivision
(a)(1) shall be considered abandoned and may be replaced only by a conforming
use if it ceases and thereafter remains discontinued for up to twenty-four
consecutive months after the effective date of this ordinance.
      (3)   A non-conforming office use which is changed to or replaced by a
conforming use shall not be reestablished, and any portion of a site or any
portion of a building, the use of which changes from a legal non-conforming use
to a conforming use, shall not thereafter be used except to accommodate a
conforming use.
      (4)   The legal and non-conforming office use and/or non-complying office
facilities shall be permitted to remodel, improve, or replace site improvements
on the same site, for continual use and occupancy by the same use, provided
such remodeling, improvement, or replacement complies with all of the
following:
         (A)   Shall not result in increased floor area.
         (B)   Shall not relocate below grade floor area to above grade
portions of the building.
         (C)   Shall not result in an increase of the height, length, building
envelope, building footprint or any other increase in the size of the
improvement. For purposes of this section, “building envelope” shall mean the
three-dimensional shape and size occupied by an existing building. It is not
the maximum, buildable potential of the site.
         (D)   Shall not increase the degree of noncompliance.
         (E)   The Director may approve minor changes to the building’s
footprint, height, length, and the building envelope through Architectural
Review of minor aesthetic architectural improvements and to improve pedestrian-
orientation provided there is no increase to the degree of any non-complying
feature.
   (b)   Any other uses or facilities rendered non-conforming or non-complying
by this Chapter shall be subject to
Chapter 18.70, including the schedules for required termination of non-
conforming uses under Section
18.70.070.
(Ord. 5634 § 2 (part), 2024)
18.29.110 Transportation Demand Management Plan
   A transportation demand management plan shall be required for all new
development projects or any projects that meet the conditions listed in PAMC
Section
18.52.030(i).
(Ord. 5634 § 2 (part), 2024)
Chapter 18.30
COMBINING DISTRICTS
   Editor's Note
Chapter 18.30, Combining Districts, comprises under one general chapter
heading, the city's various combining district regulations, each of which is
designated by a letter as being a subchapter.
Chapters:
   
18.30(A)   Retail Shopping (R) Combining District Regulations
   
18.30(B)   Pedestrian Shopping (P) Combining District Regulations
   
18.30(C)   Ground Floor (GF) Combining District Regulations
   
18.30(D)   Hotel (H) Combining District Regulations
   
18.30(E)   Landscape (L) Combining District Regulations
   
18.30(F)   Automobile Dealership (AD) Combining District Regulations
   
18.30(G)   Site and Design (D) Review Combining District Regulations
   
18.30(H)   Floodplain (F) District Regulations
   
18.30(I)   Nonconforming Use Amortization (N) Combining District Regulations
   
18.30(J)   (Reserved)
   
18.30(K)   Workforce Housing (WH) Combining District Regulations
Chapter 18.30(A)
RETAIL SHOPPING (R) COMBINING DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Sections:
   
18.30(A).010   Specific Purposes
   
18.30(A).020   Applicability of Regulations
   
18.30(A).030   Zoning Map Designation
   
18.30(A).040   Permitted Uses
   
18.30(A).050   Conditional Uses
   
18.30(A).055   Design Standards
   
18.30(A).060   Special Requirements
   
18.30(A).070   Waivers and Adjustments
18.30(A).010   Specific Purposes
   The retail shopping combining district is intended to modify the uses
allowed in a commercial district, where applied in combination with such
district, to allow only retail, eating and service-oriented commercial
development on the ground floors.
(Ord. 3519 § 3 (part), 1984)
18.30(A).020   Applicability of Regulations
   The retail shopping combining district may be combined with any commercial
district, in accord with
Chapter 18.08 and
Chapter 18.80. Where so combined, the regulations set forth in this chapter
shall apply in lieu of the comparable provisions established by the underlying
commercial district regulations.
(Ord. 3519 § 3 (part), 1984)
18.30(A).030   Zoning Map Designation
   The retail shopping combining district shall apply to properties designated
on the zoning map by the symbol "R" within parentheses, following the
commercial designation with which it is combined.
(Ord. 3519 § 3 (part), 1984)
18.30(A).040   Permitted Uses
Except to the extent a conditional use permit is required pursuant to Section
18.30(A).050, the following uses shall be permitted in an R district:
   (a)   Eating and drinking services, except drive-in and take-out services.
   (b)   Personal services, except the following on California Avenue: fitness
or exercise studios exceeding 1,800 square feet in gross floor area.
   (c)   Retail services.
   (d)   Retail financial services, except drive-in services.
   (e)   Pet grooming services.
   (f)   Automobile showroom.
   (g)   All other uses permitted in the underlying commercial district,
provided they are not located on a ground floor.
(Ord. 5642 § 3 (part); 2024: Ord. 5637 § 3 (part), 2024: Ord. 5517 § 7, 2021:
Ord. 5407 § 3 (part), 2017: Ord. 5358 § 4, 2015: Ord. 3519 § 3 (part), 1984)
18.30(A).050   Conditional Uses
The following uses may be conditionally permitted in an R district, subject to
the issuance of a conditional use permit in accord with
Chapter 18.76 (Permits and Approval):
   (a)   All other conditional uses allowed in the underlying commercial
district provided they are not located on a ground floor.
   (b)   Formula retail businesses on California Avenue.
   (c)   Fitness or exercise studios exceeding 1,800 square feet in gross floor
area on California Avenue.
(Ord. 5642, § 3 (part), 2024: Ord. 5637 § 3 (part), 2024: Ord. 5517 § 8, 2021:
Ord. 5358 § 5, 2015: Ord. 4826 § 86, 2004: Ord. 3519 § 3 (part), 1984)
18.30(A).055   Design Standards
The following design standards shall apply in the R combining district:
   (a)   Exterior windows on the ground floor shall use transparent glazing to
the extent feasible. Low-e glass or minimal tinting to achieve sun control is
permitted, so long as the glazing appears transparent when viewed from the
ground level.
   (b)   Window coverings are not permitted on the ground floor during typical
business hours. Where operations preclude transparency (e.g., theaters) or
where privacy requires window coverings, sidewalk-facing frontage shall include
items of visual interest including displays of merchandise or artwork; visual
access shall be provided to a minimum depth of 3 feet.
(Ord. 5407 § 3 (part), 2017)
18.30(A).060   Special Requirements
   The following special requirements shall apply in the R retail shopping
combining district.
   Lawful conforming permitted uses or conditional use operating pursuant to a
conditional use permit which were existing on April 26, 1984 may remain as
grandfathered uses and shall not require a conditional use permit or be subject
to the provisions of
Chapter 18.70. Such uses shall be permitted to remodel site improvements on the
same site for continual use and occupancy by the same use; provided, that any
such remodeling shall not result in increased floor area, shifting of building
footprint or building envelope, or increased height, length or any other
increase in the size of the improvement, or any increase in the existing degree
of noncompliance. The intentional destruction or demolition of more than fifty
percent (50%) of the exterior walls by horizontal linear feet at the ground
floor, or, for structures not principally supported by exterior bearing walls,
fifty percent (50%) of primary structural elements of an improvement (including
columns, and structural frames) shall terminate any right to a grandfathered
use or conditional use pursuant to this section, even if the reconstructed
improvement does not alter the building footprint, height, length, envelope,
size, or degree of noncompliance. If a use deemed grandfathered pursuant to
this section ceases and thereafter remains discontinued for twelve consecutive
months, it shall be considered abandoned and may be replaced only by a
conforming use.
   A use deemed grandfathered pursuant to this section which is changed to or
replaced by a conforming use shall not be reestablished, and any portion of a
site or any portion of a building, the use of which changes from a
grandfathered use to a conforming use, shall not thereafter be used except to
accommodate a conforming use.
(Ord. 5358 § 6, 2015: Ord. 4826 § 87, 2004: Ord. 4140 § 15, 1993: Ord. 4016 §
29, 1991: Ord. 3519 § 3 (part), 1984)
18.30(A).070   Waivers and adjustments.
   (a)   The following shall be grounds for a request for waiver or adjustment
of this Chapter:
      (1)   Economic Hardship. An applicant may request that the requirements
of this Chapter be adjusted or waived upon a showing that strict application
would result in an unreasonable financial burden on the property.
      (2)   Alternative Viable Use. An applicant may request that the
requirements of this
Chapter 18.30(A) be adjusted or waived based on a showing that: the permitted
retail or retail-like use is not viable; the proposed alternative use will
support the purposes of the combining district and Comprehensive Plan land use
designation; and the proposed use will encourage active pedestrian-oriented
activity and connections.
   (b)   Documentation.
      The applicant shall bear the burden of presenting substantial evidence to
support a waiver or modification request under this section and shall set forth
in detail the factual and/or legal basis for the claim, including all
supporting technical documentation. Any request under this section shall be
submitted to the Planning and Development Services Director together with the
fee specified in the municipal fee schedule and an economic analysis or other
supporting documentation. A request under this section shall be acted upon by
the City Council.
(Ord. 5642, § 3 (part); 2024: Ord. 5637 § 3 (part), 2024: Ord. 5358 § 7, 2015)
Chapter 18.30(B)
PEDESTRIAN SHOPPING (P) COMBINING DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Sections:
   
18.30(B).010   Special Purposes
   
18.30(B).020   Applicability of Regulations
   
18.30(B).030   Zoning Map Designation
   
18.30(B).040   Use Limitations and Site Development Regulations
18.30(B).010   Special Purposes
   The pedestrian shopping combining district is intended to modify the
regulations of the CN neighborhood commercial district, the CC community
commercial district and the CD commercial downtown district in locations where
it is deemed essential to foster the continuity of retail stores and display
windows and to avoid a monotonous pedestrian environment in order to establish
and maintain an economically healthy retail district.
(Ord. 3792 § 1, 1988: Ord. 3098 § 1, 1978; Ord. 3048 (part), 1978)
18.30(B).020   Applicability of Regulations
   The pedestrian shopping combining district may be combined with any CN, CC
or CD district, in accord with
Chapter 18.08 and
Chapter 18.80. Where so combined, the regulations established by this chapter
shall apply in lieu of, or in addition to, the provisions established by
Chapter 18.16 or
Chapter 18.18.
(Ord. 3792 § 2, 1988: Ord. 3048 (part), 1978)
18.30(B).030   Zoning Map Designation
   The pedestrian shopping combining district shall apply to any site adjacent
to designated pedestrian frontage or pedestrian ways shown on the zoning map.
(Ord. 3048 (part), 1978)
18.30(B).040   Use Limitations and Site Development Regulations
   (a)   Pedestrian Design Features Required
   On any site, or portion of a site, adjoining a designated pedestrian
sidewalk or pedestrian way, new construction and alterations to existing
structures shall be required as determined by the architectural review board,
to provide the following design features intended to create pedestrian or
shopper interest, to provide weather protection for pedestrians, and to
preclude inappropriate or inharmonious building design and siting:
      (1)   Display windows, or retail display areas;
      (2)   Pedestrian arcades, recessed entryways, or covered recessed areas
designed for pedestrian use with an area not less than the length of the
adjoining frontage times 1.5 feet;
      (3)   Landscaping or architectural design features intended to preclude
blank walls or building faces.
   The specific nature and requirements of pedestrian design features shall be
determined as part of architectural review pursuant to
Chapter 18.76 (Permits and Approvals).
   (b)   Parking and Vehicular Access Restricted
   Vehicular access to sites adjoining designated pedestrian sidewalks or
pedestrian ways which requires vehicular movement across such pedestrian
sidewalks or pedestrian ways shall be prohibited, except where required by law
or as may be authorized by a use permit in accord with
Chapter 18.76 (Permits and Approvals).
(Ord. 4826 § 88, 2004: Ord. 3792 § 3, 1988: Ord. 3108 § 18, 1979: Ord. 3098 §
2, 1978: Ord. 3048 (part), 1978)
Chapter 18.30(C)
GROUND FLOOR (GF) COMBINING DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Sections:
   
18.30(C).010   Specific Purpose
   
18.30(C).020   Permitted Uses
   
18.30(C).030   Conditional Uses
   
18.30(C).035   Design Standards
   
18.30(C).040   Annual Monitoring of Ground Floor Retail Use
   
18.30(C).050   Waivers and Adjustments
18.30(C).010   Specific Purpose
   The ground floor combining district is intended to provide design guidelines
and modify the uses allowed in the commercial districts and subdistricts to
promote active, pedestrian-oriented uses, with a high level of transparency and
visual interest at the ground level. For the purposes of this chapter, “ground
floor” means the first floor which is above grade. Where the ground floor
combining district is combined with a commercial district, the regulations
established by this chapter shall apply in lieu of the uses normally allowed in
the underlying district. Except for the regulations relating to uses set forth
in this chapter, all other regulations shall be those of the applicable
underlying district.
(Ord. 5407 § 4 (part), 2017: Ord. 4098 § 2 (part), 1992)
18.30(C).020   Permitted Uses
   (a)   The following uses shall be permitted in the GF combining district,
subject to restrictions in Section
18.40.180:
      (1)   Eating and drinking;
      (2)   Hotels;
      (3)   Personal services, except the following on parcels with frontage on
University Avenue: fitness and exercise studios exceeding 3,000 square feet in
gross floor area;
      (4)   Retail services;
      (5)   Theaters;
      (6)   Travel agencies;
      (7)   Commercial recreation up to 5,000 square feet in gross floor area,
except for parcels with frontage on University Avenue;
      (8)   Retail financial services, except drive-in services;
      (9)   Pet grooming services;
      (10)   Automobile showroom;
      (11)   All other uses permitted in the underlying district, provided such
uses are not on the ground floor.
   (b)   Elimination or conversion of basement space currently in retail or
retail-like use or related support purposes is prohibited.
   (c)   Entrance, lobby, or reception areas serving non-ground floor uses may
be located on the ground floor to the extent reasonably necessary, provided
they do not interfere with the ground floor use(s), and subject to the approval
of the Director.
(Ord. 5642 § 4, 2024: Ord. 5637 § 4 (part), 2024: Ord. 5517 § 9, 2021: Ord.
5407 § 4 (part), 2017: Ord. 4098 § 2 (part), 1992)
18.30(C).030   Conditional Uses
   (a)   The following uses may be conditionally allowed on the ground floor in
the GF ground floor combining district, subject to issuance of a conditional
use permit in accord with
Chapter 18.76 (Permits and Approvals) and with the additional finding required
by subsection (b), subject to restrictions in Section
18.40.160:
      (1)   Business or trade school;
      (2)   Commercial recreation over 5,000 square feet in gross floor area or
with frontage on University Avenue;
      (3)   Day care;
      (4)   General business service;
      (5)   All other uses conditionally permitted in the applicable underlying
district, provided such uses are not on the ground floor.
   (b)   The director may grant a conditional use permit under this section
only if he or she makes the following findings in addition to the findings
required by
Chapter 18.76 (Permits and Approvals):
      (1)   The location, access or design of the ground floor space of the
existing building housing the proposed use, creates exceptional or
extraordinary circumstances or conditions applicable to the property involved
that do not apply generally to property in the same district.
      (2)   The proposed use will not be determined to the retail environment
or the pedestrian-oriented design objectives of the GF combining district.
   (c)   Any use conditionally permitted pursuant to this section shall be
effective only during the existence of the building that created the
exceptional circumstance upon which the finding set forth in subsection (b) was
made.
(Ord. 5637 § 4, 2024: Ord. 5517 § 10, 2021: Ord. 5407 § 4 (part), 2017: Ord.
4826 §§ 94, 95, 2004: Ord. 4098 § 2 (part), 1992)
18.30(C).035   Design Standards
Where the GF combining district is combined with the CD-C subdistrict, the
following design standards shall apply:
   (a)   Exterior windows on the ground floor shall use transparent glazing to
the extent feasible. Low-e glass or minimal tinting to achieve sun control is
permitted, so long as the glazing appears transparent when viewed from the
ground level.
   (b)   Window coverings are not permitted on the ground floor during typical
business hours. Where operations preclude transparency (e.g., theaters) or
where privacy requires window coverings, sidewalk-facing frontage shall include
items of visual interest including displays of merchandise or artwork; visual
access shall be provided to a minimum depth of 3 feet.
(Ord. 5407 § 4 (part), 2017)
18.30(C).040   Annual Monitoring of Ground Floor Retail Use
A downtown retail vacancy rate and use survey shall be prepared annually in
September of each year, and a report shall be prepared conveying that
information to the Planning and Transportation Commission and City Council
prior to the end of the year. The purpose of the survey is to assess changes in
retail use in the downtown zones. The vacancy rate shall address all areas
zoned CD-C or GF in downtown.
(Ord. 5407 § 4 (part), 2017: Ord. 5065 § 3, 2009)
18.30(C).050   Waivers and Adjustments
   (a)   The following shall be grounds for a request for waiver or adjustment
of this Chapter:
      (1)   Economic Hardship. An applicant may request that the requirements
of this Chapter be adjusted or waived upon a showing that strict application
would result in an unreasonable financial burden on the property.
      (2)   Alternative Viable Use. An applicant may request that the
requirements of this
Chapter 18.30(C) be adjusted or waived based on a showing that: the permitted
retail or retail-like use is not viable; the proposed alternative use will
support the purposes of the combining district and Comprehensive Plan land use
designation; and the proposed use will encourage active pedestrian-oriented
activity and connections.
   (b)   Documentation.
      The applicant shall bear the burden of presenting substantial evidence to
support a waiver or modification request under this section and shall set forth
in detail the factual and/or legal basis for the claim, including all
supporting technical documentation. Any request under this section shall be
submitted to the Planning and Development Services Director together with the
fee specified in the municipal fee schedule and an economic analysis or other
supporting documentation. A request under this section shall be acted upon by
the City Council.
(Ord. 5642 § 4, 2024: Ord. 5637 § 4 (part), 2024)
Chapter 18.30(D)
HOTEL (H) COMBINING DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Sections:
   
18.30(D).010   Specific Purposes
   
18.30(D).020   Applicability of Regulations
   
18.30(D).030   Zoning Map Designation
   
18.30(D).040   Site Development Regulations.
   
18.30(D).050   Special Requirements
18.30(D).010   Specific Purposes
   The hotel combining district is intended to modify the regulations of the
research, office and limited manufacturing (ROLM), research park (RP), and
general manufacturing (GM) districts to permit hotels in those districts and to
develop to specified maximum floor area ratios, upon rezoning to the (H)
combining district, and subject to site and design review.
(Ord. 5035 § 4 (part), 2009: Ord. 3890 § 14 (part), 1989)
18.30(D).020   Applicability of Regulations
   The combining district may be combined with a ROLM, RP, or GM district, in
accord with
Chapter 18.20 of the Zoning Ordinance. Where so combined, the floor area
regulations established by this chapter shall apply in lieu of the comparable
provisions established by the underlying ROLM, RP, or GM district.
(Ord. 5035 § 4 (part), 2009: Ord. 3890 § 14 (part), 1989)
18.30(D).030   Zoning Map Designation
   The hotel combining district shall apply to properties designated on the
zoning map by the symbol "H" within parentheses, following the research, office
or limited manufacturing (ROLM), research park (RP), or general manufacturing
(GM) designation with which it is combined.
(Ord. 5035 § 4 (part), 2009: Ord. 3890 § 14 (part), 1989)
18.30(D).040   Site Development Regulations
   The site development regulations of
Chapter 18.20 (ROLM, RP and GM), whichever is applicable, shall apply except
for the following:
   (a)   Floor Area Ratio. The maximum floor area ratio (FAR) for hotel use
shall be 2.0 to 1 in the ROLM, RP and GM districts.
   (b)   Site and design review pursuant to
Chapter 18.30(G) shall apply to all proposed hotel uses with a FAR in excess of
0.6 to 1.
(Ord. 5035 § 4 (part), 2009: Ord. 3890 § 14 (part), 1989)
18.30(D).050   Special requirements.
   Hotels in the CC(H) or CS(H) District shall be permitted to develop beyond
the density otherwise permitted in the CC or CS District, whichever is
applicable, up to a maximum 0.6 to 1 floor area ratio, only upon issuance of a
conditional use permit in accord with
Chapter 18.76 (Permits and Approvals), and subject to site and design review in
accord with
Chapter 18.30(G).
(Ord. 4826 § 89, 2004: Ord. 3890 § 14 (part), 1989)
Chapter 18.30(E)
LANDSCAPE (L) COMBINING DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Sections:
   
18.30(E).010   Specific Purposes
   
18.30(E).020   Applicability of Regulations
   
18.30(E).030   Zoning Map Designation
   
18.30(E).040   Use Limitations
18.30(E).010   Specific Purposes
   The landscape combining district is intended to provide regulations to
ensure the provision of landscaped open space as a physical and visual
separation between residential districts and intensive commercial or industrial
uses, and in selected locations where landscaped buffers are desirable.
(Ord. 3048 (part), 1978)
18.30(E).020   Applicability of Regulations
   The landscape combining district may be combined with any other district
established by this title, in accord with the provisions of
Chapter 18.08 and
Chapter 18.80. Where so combined, the provisions of this chapter shall apply in
lieu of the corresponding provisions of the general district with which the
landscape combining district is combined.
(Ord. 3048 (part), 1978)
18.30(E).030   Zoning Map Designation
   The landscape combining district shall be applied only adjoining site lines
or property lines, where consistent with the purposes of this chapter, and
shall be designated on the zoning map by the symbol "L" within parentheses,
following the general district designation for the district with which it is
combined. The dimension of the landscape combining district, measured at right
angles to the property line, shall be indicated on the zoning map.
(Ord. 3048 (part), 1978)
18.30(E).040   Use Limitations
   (a)   Permitted Uses
   Within the landscape combining district, permitted uses shall be limited to
the following uses only, in lieu of any uses prescribed for the general
district:
      (1)   Landscaping and screen planting;
      (2)   Such fences or walls adjoining the property line as may be
required, by the provisions of the general district regulations.
   (b)   Conditional Uses
   Within the landscape combining district, conditional uses shall be limited
to the following uses only, in lieu of any uses prescribed for the general
district:
      (1)   Noncommercial recreational activities and facilities, when
conducted primarily in open, unenclosed landscaped areas, and when conducted
accessory to or in association with uses listed as permitted uses or as
conditional uses in the general district;
      (2)   Pedestrian, bicycle, and equestrian pathways, walkways and trails,
or vehicular access drives, when serving uses listed as permitted or
conditional uses in the general district.
(Ord. 3048 (part), 1978)
Chapter 18.30(F)
AUTOMOBILE DEALERSHIP (AD)
COMBINING DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Sections:
   
18.30(F).010   Specific Purposes
   
18.30(F).020   Applicability of Regulations
   
18.30(F).030   Zoning Map Designation
   
18.30(F).040   Permitted Uses
   
18.30(F).045   Conditional Uses
   
18.30(F).050   Site Development Regulations
   
18.30(F).060   Parking and Loading
   
18.30(F).070   Special Requirements
18.30(F).010   Specific Purposes
   The automobile dealership (AD) combining district is intended to modify the
regulations of the service commercial (CS) and general manufacturing (GM or GM
(B)) districts to create and maintain areas accommodating automobile
dealerships primarily engaged in new and used automobile sales and service on a
citywide and regional basis. Such uses generally require special parking,
access, and outdoor display provisions for customer convenience, servicing of
vehicles or equipment, loading or unloading, or parking of commercial service
vehicles.
(Ord. 4845 § 3 (Exh. A. (part)), 2004)
18.30(F).020   Applicability of Regulations
   The combining district may be combined with a service commercial (CS)
district, a general manufacturing (GM or GM(B)) district, or limited
manufacturing (LM) zoning district parcels within 1/4 mile of the intersection
at San Antonio Road and Bayshore Freeway (Highway 101), but not directly
adjacent nor directly opposite (across a street) from a low-density residential
(R-1, RE, R-2, RMD) nor residential PC zoning district in accord with Chapters
18.08 and
18.80. Where so combined, the regulations established by this chapter shall
apply in lieu of the comparable provisions established by the service
commercial district or community commercial district.
(Ord. 4889 § 2, 2006: Ord. 4845 § 3 (Exh. A. (part)), 2004)
18.30(F).030   Zoning Map Designation
   The service commercial combining district shall apply to properties
designated on the zoning map by the symbol "AD" within parentheses, following
the service commercial (CS) or general manufacturing (GM or GM(B)) designation
with which it is combined.
(Ord. 4845 § 3 (Exh. A. (part)), 2004)
18.30(F).040   Permitted Uses
The following uses shall be permitted in the (AD) combining district:
   (a)   Automobile dealerships.
   (b)   All other uses permitted in the underlying district.
(Ord. 5651 § 8, 2025: Ord. 4845 § 3 (Exh. A. (part)), 2004)
18.30(F).045   Conditional Uses
The following uses may be conditionally permitted in the (AD) district, subject
to the issuance of a conditional use permit in accord with
Chapter 18.76 (Permits and Approval):
   (a)   All other conditional uses allowed in the underlying district.
(Ord. 5651 § 8, 2025)
18.30(F).050   Site Development Regulations
   The site development regulations in this Section
18.30(F).050 apply to automobile dealership uses in the (AD) combining
district, in addition to the regulations of the underlying district. Where the
regulations of the underlying district conflict with this Section
18.30(F).050, this section shall control.
   (a)   Floor Area Ratio
      (1)   The maximum floor area ratio for automobile dealership uses shall
be 0.4 to 1.
      (2)   An additional 0.2:l FAR is permitted exclusively for automobile
showroom space, for a total FAR of 0.6:1. “Automobile showroom space” is that
area for the display of new automobiles, located only on the first floor and
excluding all other uses associated with the automobile dealership including
sales office and sale of related merchandise. The director of planning and
development services is authorized to determine whether floor area is
automobile showroom space, as described above. Floor area used for automobile
showroom space shall not be converted to any other use if the total floor area
devoted to uses other than automobile showroom space would exceed a floor area
ratio of 0.4:1 following the conversion.
      (3)   Notwithstanding Section
18.04.030(65), the following shall not count toward an automobile dealership's
maximum floor area:
         a.   Parking facilities for required parking related to service and
repair areas shall be excluded from the calculation of gross floor area as
provided in Section
18.52.040(b)(2), however, any enclosed or covered parking in excess of this
requirement shall count toward total gross floor area;
         b.   Covered area dedicated to queuing of customer vehicles for drop
off and pick up of service vehicles shall be exempt from the calculation of
gross floor area; only one contiguous designated area shall be excluded in a
development.
   (b)   Height
   The maximum height shall be fifty feet. Provided, the maximum height for
automobile showroom space, as defined in subsection (a)(2) above, shall be
twenty feet.
   (c)   Outdoor Sales and Storage
   Outdoor sales and display of automobiles and merchandise shall be permitted
subject to the following regulations:
      (1)   Two automobile display pads shall be permitted in the required
setback area, including landscaped areas, adjacent to a public right-of-way. A
single automobile display pad shall be no higher than eight feet, measured to
the highest point of the automobile on the display pad, and the surface of the
display pad area shall be no larger than 175 square feet.
      (2)   Areas for outdoor sales and display of motor vehicles, other than
automobile display pads, shall meet the minimum design standards applicable to
off-street parking facilities with respect to paving, grading, drainage, safety
and protective features, lighting, and screening. Striping for parking stalls
shall not be required for auto display and storage areas.
      (3)   Exterior storage shall screened by a solid wall or fence of between
five and eight feet in height.
(Ord. 5494 § 3, 2020: Ord. 5406 § 2, 2017: Ord. 4845 § 3 (Exh. A. (part)),
2004)
18.30(F).060   Parking and Loading
   Off-street parking and loading facilities shall be required for all
automobile dealerships in the (AD) combining district, in accord with Chapters
18.52 and
18.54. Where the provisions of Chapters
18.52 and
18.54 conflict with the provisions of this Section
18.30(F).060, this section shall control. The following parking requirements
apply to automobile dealerships in the (AD) combining district, in lieu of
comparable requirements of Chapters
18.52 and
18.54 and the underlying district:
   (a)   Auto storage and display areas shall not be required to be striped for
parking stall and aisle width.
   (b)   Areas for customer parking shall be designated.
(Ord. 4845 § 3 (Exh. A. (part)), 2004)
18.30(F).070   Special Requirements
   The special requirements in this Section
18.30(F).070 apply to automobile dealership uses in the (AD) combining
district, in addition to the regulations of the underlying district. Where the
regulations of the underlying district conflict with this Section
18.30(F).070, this section shall control.
   (a)   Sites abutting or having any portion located within one hundred fifty
feet of any RE, R-1, R-2, RM or any PC district permitting single-family
development or multifamily development shall be subject to the following
additional height and yard requirements:
      (1)   On any portion of a site in the (AD) combining district which abuts
a site in any RE, R-1, R-2, RM or applicable PC district, a minimum interior
yard of ten feet shall be required and a solid wall between five and eight feet
in height shall be constructed and maintained along the common site line. The
minimum interior yard shall be planted and maintained as a landscaped screen.
If the director determines that location and installation of the landscape
screen is not practical, such landscaping may be reduced or deleted, if
measures are taken to ensure that screening with an eight-foot decorative wall
is adequate to mitigate noise and visual impacts to the satisfaction of the
director.
      (2)   On any portion of a site in the (AD) combining district which is
opposite from a site in any RE, R-1, R-2, RM or applicable PC district and
separated therefrom by a street, alley, creek, drainage facility, or other open
area, a minimum yard of ten feet shall be required. The minimum yard shall be
planted and maintained as a landscaped screen, excluding areas required for
access to the site. If the director determines that location and installation
of the landscape screen is not practical, such landscaping may be reduced or
deleted, if measures are taken to ensure that screening with an eight-foot
decorative wall is adequate to mitigate noise and visual impacts to the
satisfaction of the director.
      (3)   Sites sharing any lot line with one or more sites in any RE, R-1,
R-2, RM or any residential PC district shall be subject to a maximum height
established by a daylight plane beginning at a height of ten feet at the
applicable side or rear site lines and increasing at a slope of three feet for
each six feet of distance from the side or rear site lines until intersecting
the height limit otherwise established for the underlying district.
   (b)   LM zoning district sites shall be subject to the following additional
requirements:
      (1)   Large deliveries to the dealership, including automobiles or parts
shall be delivered, loaded, and unloaded on-site. At no such time shall such
deliveries occupy street parking, nor block public or private residential
streets in any way.
      (2)   Vehicle test-driving is prohibited on residential streets.
      (3)   All development in the areas east of the Bayshore Freeway (Hwy.
101) is subject to the Site and Design Review (D) provisions of
Chapter 18.30(G) and shall include performance criteria including, but not
limited to lighting, noise, and landscaping. All development is subject to the
policies and guidelines outlined in the Baylands Master Plan and in the Site
Assessment and Design Guidelines for Palo Alto Baylands Nature Preserve. These
policies and guidelines include, but are not limited, to:
   a.   Maintenance and, where possible, restoration of the environmental
quality of the Baylands;
   b.   Use of materials and colors compatible with the area;
   c.   Design to preserve the horizon line with low and horizontal elements;
and
   d.   Fencing and signage compatible with the preserve character of the
Baylands.
      (4)   Development in the two LM zones adjacent to the intersection of San
Antonio Road and the Bayshore Freeway shall require a conditional use permit
pursuant to Section
18.76.010 ("Conditional Use Permit").
   a.   For development in the LM zone adjacent to San Antonio Road east of the
Bayshore Freeway, a conditional use permit for auto dealership may only be
granted on a finding that the design of the proposed improvements and the
operation of the proposed use will not be detrimental to the ecological
qualities of the Baylands natural areas and will be aesthetically compatible
with the character of the Baylands as a regional recreation area and nature
preserve.
(Ord. 4889 § 3, 2006: Ord. 4845 § 3 (Exh. A. (part)), 2004)
Chapter 18.30(G)
SITE AND DESIGN (D) REVIEW COMBINING DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Sections:
   
18.30(G).010   Specific Purposes
   
18.30(G).020   Applicability of Regulations
   
18.30(G).030   Zoning Map Designation
   
18.30(G).040   Design Approval Required
   
18.30(G).050   Application
   
18.30(G).055   Application Process
   
18.30(G).060   Action by Commission
   
18.30(G).070   Action by Council
   
18.30(G).080   Term - Expiration.
18.30(G).010   Specific Purposes
   The site and design review combining district is intended to provide a
process for review and approval of development in environmentally and
ecologically sensitive areas, including established community areas which may
be sensitive to negative aesthetic factors, excessive noise, increased traffic
or other disruptions, in order to assure that use and development will be
harmonious with other uses in the general vicinity, will be compatible with
environmental and ecological objectives, and will be in accord with the Palo
Alto Comprehensive Plan.
(Ord. 3890 § 18, 1989: Ord. 3048 (part), 1978)
18.30(G).020   Applicability of Regulations
   The site and design review combining district may be combined with any other
district established by this title, in accord with the provisions of
Chapter 18.08 and
Chapter 18.80. Where so combined, the site and design review process
established by this chapter shall apply to all sites. In addition, the
provisions of this chapter shall apply to all sites in the OS open space
district, and shall apply to all sites in the AC agricultural conservation
district.
(Ord. 3048 (part), 1978)
18.30(G).030   Zoning Map Designation
   Where combined with any general district other than OS or AC, the site and
design review district shall be designated on the zoning map by the symbol "D"
within parentheses, following the general district designation for the district
with which it is combined.
(Ord. 3048 (part), 1978)
18.30(G).040   Design Approval Required
   Site and design approval shall be secured prior to issuance of any permit or
other approval for the construction of any building or the establishment of any
use on any site within the site and design review combining district, or on any
site which is made subject to the provisions of this chapter by an express
requirement of any other provision of this code.
(Ord. 3048 (part), 1978)
18.30(G).050   Application
   Application for site and design review shall be made to the director and
shall be accompanied by the application fee prescribed in the municipal fee
schedule. The application shall include the following:
   (a)   A site plan showing the location of all proposed buildings,
structures, planted or landscaped areas, paved areas, and other improvements,
and indicating the proposed uses or activities within the site;
   (b)   Drawings or sketches showing the elevations of all proposed buildings,
sufficiently dimensioned to indicate the general scale, height, and bulk of
such buildings.
(Ord. 3048 (part), 1978)
18.30(G).055   Application Process
   (a)   The applicant seeking site and design approval shall initially submit
to the planning commission a site plan and elevations as described in Section
18.30(G).050. The plans and elevations may be preliminary in nature but must
show all pertinent information requested by the director.
   (b)   If the planning commission recommends denial, a detailed site plan and
elevations consistent with the planning commission recommendation shall be
forwarded directly to the city council.
   (c)   If the planning commission recommends approval, a detailed site plan
and elevations consistent with the planning commission recommendation shall be
forwarded to the architectural review board for review, except in the case of
single-family and accessory uses. The architectural review board shall make a
recommendation on the plans and elevations based on the findings for
architectural review in Section
18.76.020(d).
   (d)   The plans and elevations, as approved by the planning commission and
the architectural review board, are submitted with recommendations to council
for final action.
(Ord. 4826 § 120, 2004: Ord. 3108 § 15, 1979)
18.30(G).060   Action by Commission
   Unless the application for design approval is diverted for minor
architectural review under Section
18.76.020 (b)(3)(E), the planning commission shall review the site plan and
drawings, and shall recommend approval or shall recommend such changes as it
may deem necessary to accomplish the following objectives:
   (a)   To ensure construction and operation of the use in a manner that will
be orderly, harmonious, and compatible with existing or potential uses of
adjoining or nearby sites.
   (b)   To ensure the desirability of investment, or the conduct of business,
research, or educational activities, or other authorized occupations, in the
same or adjacent areas.
   (c)   To ensure that sound principles of environmental design and ecological
balance shall be observed.
   (d)   To ensure that the use will be in accord with the Palo Alto
Comprehensive Plan.
(Ord. 5432 § 10, 2018: Ord. 4826 § 121, 2004: Ord. 3048 (part), 1978)
18.30(G).070   Action by Council
   To the extent that site and design review is contemplated under this
chapter, and upon receipt of the recommendation of the planning commission, the
council may approve, modify, or disapprove the proposed plans submitted
pursuant to this chapter. No building permit or other permit or approval for
building construction or use of the site shall be issued or granted until the
plans have been approved by the city council, or by the director of planning
and development services as provided in Section
18.76.020(b)(3)(D).
(Ord. 5494 § 3, 2020: Ord. 4826 § 122, 2004: Ord. 3048 (part), 1978)
18.30(G).080   Term - Expiration.
   In the event actual construction of the project is not commenced within two
years of the effective date of approval thereof, said approval shall expire and
be of no further force or effect. Whenever a vesting tentative map is approved
or conditionally approved pursuant to
Chapter 21.13 of the Palo Alto Municipal Code and the Subdivision Map Act, the
approval pursuant to this chapter shall be valid until the expiration of the
vesting tentative map, or expiration of development rights under the final map.
Applications may be made for extensions, but only in conjunction with
applications for extensions of the vesting tentative map or the final vesting
map pursuant to
Chapter 21.13 and the Subdivision Map Act.
(Ord. 3689 § 5, 1986: Ord. 3048 (part), 1978)
Chapter 18.30(H)
FLOODPLAIN (F) DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Sections:
   
18.30(H).010   Specific Purposes
   
18.30(H).020   Applicability of Regulations
   
18.30(H).030   Permitted Uses
   
18.30(H).040   Conditional Uses
   
18.30(H).050   Site Development Regulations
18.30(H).010   Specific Purposes
   The F Floodplain district is intended to protect persons and property from
the hazards of development in inundated areas or in areas subject to
inundation, to protect the community from costs which may be incurred when
unsuitable or premature development occurs in such areas, and to allow uses
which may be appropriate to such areas.
(Ord. 3048 (part), 1978)
18.30(H).020   Applicability of Regulations
   The specific regulations of this chapter and the additional regulations and
procedures established by Chapters
18.54 to 18.99, inclusive, shall apply to all F floodplain districts.
(Ord. 3048 (part), 1978)
18.30(H).030   Permitted Uses
   The following uses shall be permitted in the F floodplain district:
   (a)   All agricultural uses, except the conduct and maintenance of hog
farms;
   (b)   Extraction of chemicals from seawater, by solar and natural
evaporation.
(Ord. 3048 (part), 1978)
18.30(H).040   Conditional Uses
   The following uses may be conditionally allowed in the F floodplain
district:
   (a)   Dredging of oyster shells and other deposits;
   (b)   Any permanent structures shall be subject to issuance of a conditional
use permit in accord with
Chapter 18.76 (Permits and Approvals).
(Ord. 3048 (part), 1978)
18.30(H).050   Site Development Regulations
   The following site development regulations shall apply in the F floodplain
district:
   (a)   Site Area. The minimum site area shall be ten acres.
   (b)   Site Width. The minimum site width shall be three hundred feet.
   (c)   Site Depth. The minimum site depth shall be three hundred feet.
   (d)   Front Yard. The minimum front yard shall be fifty feet.
   (e)   Rear Yard. The minimum rear yard shall be forty feet.
   (f)   Side Yard. The minimum side yard shall be thirty feet.
   (g)   Height. The maximum height shall be fifteen feet.
   (h)   Accessory Facilities and Uses. Regulations governing accessory
facilities and uses and governing the application of site development
regulations in specific instances are established by Chapter 18.88.
(Ord. 3048 (part), 1978)
Chapter 18.30(I)
NONCONFORMING USE AMORTIZATION (N) COMBINING DISTRICT
Sections:
   
18.30(I).010   Specific Purposes
   
18.30(I).020   Applicability of Regulations
   
18.30(I).030   Requirements for Establishment of District
   
18.30(I).040   Alternative Schedule for Termination of Nonconforming use
18.30(I).010   Specific Purposes
   The nonconforming use amortization combining district is intended to modify
the regulations governing required termination of nonconforming uses to promote
the timely, simultaneous, and orderly conversion to conforming use in areas
having several properties occupied by nonconforming uses.
(Ord. 3048 (part), 1978)
18.30(I).020   Applicability of Regulations
   The nonconforming use amortization combining district may be combined with
any district, in accord with the provisions of
Chapter 18.08 and
Chapter 18.80. Where so combined, the provisions of this chapter shall apply to
required termination of certain nonconforming uses, in lieu of the comparable
provisions of
Chapter 18.70.
(Ord. 3048 (part), 1978)
18.30(I).030   Requirements for Establishment of District
   The nonconforming use amortization combining district may be established
only when the planning commission recommends and the city council makes the
following findings:
   (a)   That the proposed district contains three or more nonconforming uses
covering one-third or more of the parcels in a total area not greater than
fifty acres, and each parcel containing such use or uses is no greater than two
hundred feet from the next parcel containing such use or uses;
   (b)   That the formation of such district would tend to reduce
deterioration, blight, and long-term vacancies in the proposed district;
   (c)   That the formation of such district would not be injurious to the
property or improvements of conforming uses within the proposed district and
the immediately surrounding area.
   When established, the nonconforming use amortization combining district
classification shall be identified on the zoning map by the letter "N" within
parentheses, following the general district classification.
(Ord. 3048 (part), 1978)
18.30(I).040   Alternative Schedule for Termination of Nonconforming Use
   Upon establishment of a nonconforming use amortization combining district,
the planning commission shall recommend and the city council shall adopt a
period for required termination for all nonconforming uses within the district
subject to termination as provided in Section
18.70.070. Said period shall be the period for required termination of such
uses within the district and shall supersede the periods set forth in Section
18.70.070. Any ordinance enacted pursuant to this chapter shall state the
applicable period of time on its face. In recommending and adopting such
period, the planning commission and city council shall take into consideration,
but not be limited to: the nature of construction of the facilities within the
district subject to amortization, the ages of such facilities, the nature of
the existing zoning, and ability to convert such facilities to accommodate
conforming uses.
(Ord. 3048 (part), 1978)
Chapter 18.30(J)
(RESERVED)
Chapter 18.30(K)
WORKFORCE HOUSING (WH) COMBINING DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Sections:
   
18.30(K).010   Specific purpose
   
18.30(K).020   Applicability of regulations
   
18.30(K).030   Definitions
   
18.30(K).040   Zoning map designation
   
18.30(K).050   Site development review process
   
18.30(K).060   Permitted uses
   
18.30(K).070   Development standards
   
18.30(K).080   Additional WH combining district regulations
18.30(K).010   Specific Purpose
   The purpose of the workforce housing combining district is to incentivize
development of new housing that is affordable to the local workforce. This
combining district promotes the development of such housing projects located
within one-half mile radius of a major fixed-rail transit stop by providing
flexible development standards and modifying the uses allowed in the public
facilities (PF) district.
(Ord. 5443 § 2 (part), 2018)
18.30(K).020   Applicability of Regulations
   The workforce housing combining district may be combined with the public
facilities (PF) zoning district set forth in
Chapter 18.28 of this title, in accord with
Chapter 18.08 and
Chapter 18.80, on any parcel that is located within one-half mile radius of a
major fixed-rail transit station platform with the exception of sites in park
use or being used for outdoor recreational purpose or within 25 feet of such a
use at the time of adoption of this chapter. Where so combined, the regulations
established by this chapter shall apply for workforce housing projects in lieu
of the uses allowed and development standards and procedures applied in the
underlying PF district. A property owner may elect to use the parcel consistent
with the underlying district, in which case the regulations in
Chapter 18.28 for the PF district shall apply.
(Ord. 5443 § 2 (part), 2018)
18.30(K).030   Definitions
   For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
   (a)   "Workforce housing" means a multi-family rental housing project in
which at least 20% of the units, excluding any required below-market-rate
units, are affordable to households earning more than 120% of area median
income (AMI) up to and including 150% of AMI.
(Ord. 5443 § 2 (part), 2018)
18.30(K).040   Zoning Map Designation
   The workforce housing combining district shall apply to properties
designated on the zoning map by the symbol "WH" within parentheses, following
the public facilities (PF) district designation with which it is combined.
(Ord. 5443 § 2 (part), 2018)
18.30(K).050   Site Development Review Process
   All projects shall be subject to architectural review as provided in Section
18.76.020 except that projects proposing nine units or more shall be subject to
site and design review under
Chapter 18.30(G).
(Ord. 5443 § 2 (part), 2018)
18.30(K).060   Permitted Uses
   (a)   The following uses shall be permitted in the WH combining district:
      (1)   Workforce housing;
      (2)   Incidental retail and/or community center space on the ground floor
only when provided in conjunction with workforce housing and not to exceed 10%
of the total gross floor area of the site;
      (3)   All other uses permitted in the underlying district, subject to the
development standards for the underlying district.
   (b)   The uses in subsections (a)(1) and (a)(2) above shall not be used in
combination with (a)(3).
(Ord. 5443 § 2 (part), 2018)
18.30(K).070   Development Standards
   (a)   Where the WH combining district is combined with the public facilities
district, the following development standards shall apply for workforce housing
projects, including permitted incidental uses, in lieu of the development
standards for the underlying PF zoning district:
   Table 1
   Development Standards
   WH Combining District
Minimum Site                                        Subject to regulations in:
Specifications
Site Area (ft)
Site Width (ft)           None required
Site Depth (ft)
                                                     Setback lines imposed by a
Minimum Setbacks                                    special setback map
                                                     pursuant to Chapter 20.08
                                                     of this code may apply
                          10 feet; may be increased
Front Yard (ft)           to 20 feet by               
                          decisionmaking body (1)
Rear Yard (ft)            10'(2)                      
Interior Side Yard        5'(2)                       
Interior Side Yard if
abutting residential
zoning district (ft)      10'(2)                      
(other than an RM-40 or
PC zone)
                          5 feet; may be increased
Street Side Yard (ft)     to 10 feet by               
                          decisionmaking body (1)
Maximum Site Coverage     None Required               
Landscape/Open Space      20%(3)                      
Coverage
Usable Open Space(4)      75 square feet (sf) per     
                          unit
Maximum Height (ft)                                   
Standard                  50'                         
Portions of a site within
150 ft. of an abutting
residential district      35'                        18.08.030
(other than an RM-40 or
PC zone) (5)
                          Daylight plane height and
Daylight Plane for lot    slope shall be identical
lines abutting one or     to those of the most        
more residential zoning   restrictive residential
districts                 zoning district abutting
                          the lot line
Maximum Residential       None Required               
Density (net)
Maximum Residential Floor
Area Ratio (FAR) -        2.0:1                       
Residential-Only or Mixed
Use Projects
Maximum Unit Size         750 sf                      
                          Parking requirements shall
                          be no less than one space
                          per unit or bedroom,
                          whichever is greater. The
                          decisionmaking body may
                          reduce this standard based
Vehicle Parking           on a parking study. Any     
                          incidental retail or
                          community center space
                          shall be subject to the
                          parking requirements
                          outlined in
                          Chapter 18.52.
                          Bicycle parking
Bicycle Parking           requirements shall be in    
                          accordance with Section
                          18.52.040.
                          A transportation demand
                          management (TDM) plan
                          shall be required and
                          shall comply with the TDM
TDM Plan                  pursuant to Section         
                          18.52.050(d), associated
                          administrative guidelines,
                          and the decisionmaking
                          body.
 
Notes:
1.   A 12-foot sidewalk width is required along El Camino Real frontage.
2.   In order to encourage below-grade parking, garage ramps and subterranean
structures may encroach into the required setback provided that sufficient
landscaping is still provided between the project site and adjacent properties.
3.   Landscape/open space may be any combination of landscaping or private and
common open spaces.
4.   Useable open space includes a combination of common and private open
space.
5.   Distance shall be measured from the property line of the subject site.
(b)   Housing Development Projects shall be subject to objective design
standards in
Chapter 18.24. Non-Housing Development Projects and Housing Development
projects that elect to deviate from one or more objective standards in
Chapter 18.24 shall meet the performance criteria outlined in Chapter 18.23, as
well as the context-based design criteria outlined in Section 18.13.090 for
residential projects, provided that more restrictive regulations may be
recommended by the architectural review board and approved by the director,
pursuant to Section
18.76.020.
(Ord. 5554 § 27, 2022: Ord. 5548 § 8, 2022: Ord. 5443 § 2 (part), 2018)
18.30(K).080   Additional WH Combining District Regulations
   (a)   Affordability requirement. At least 20% of the units in a workforce
housing project, excluding any required below-market-rate units, shall be
affordable to households earning up to and including 150% of area median income
(AMI).
   (b)   BMR provisions applicable. The below market rate housing requirements
set forth in Chapter 16.65 of Title 16 of this code shall apply to workforce
housing projects. Any BMR units provided will not be counted toward the total
number of units in a workforce housing project for purposes of calculating the
number of workforce affordable units required under subsection (a) above.
   (c)   Continued affordability. All workforce housing units provided under
subsection (a) above shall be subject to a deed of trust or regulatory
agreement recorded against the property for execution by the City Manager in a
form approved by the City Attorney, to ensure the continued affordability of
the workforce housing units. All workforce housing units shall remain
affordable to the targeted income group for 99 years.
   (d)   Local workforce preference. All residential units within a workforce
housing project shall be offered first to eligible households with at least one
household member who currently lives or whose place of employment is within a
three mile radius of the project or within the City of Palo Alto. If units
remain unoccupied after offers are made to this first category, those units
shall be offered to eligible households with at least one household member
whose place of employment is within one-half mile of a major fixed-rail transit
stop.
(Ord. 5443 § 2 (part), 2018)
Chapter 18.31
CEQA REVIEW
Sections:
   
18.31.010   Delegation of CEQA Authority
   
18.31.020   Incorporation of State CEQA Guidelines
   
18.31.030   CEQA Appeals
18.31.010   Delegation of CEQA Authority
   The PCE Director or other decision maker as delegated in this Code shall
have authority to make California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) decisions
relating to planning and land use entitlements, except that any Environmental
Impact Report requiring a statement of overriding considerations shall be
considered by the City Council. For projects requiring a statement of
overriding considerations, the PCE Director shall refer any action on the
entitlements to the City Council.
(Ord. 5373 § 18 (part), 2016)
18.31.020   Incorporation of State CEQA Guidelines
   Resolution No. 6232 is hereby repealed and the full text of the State CEQA
Guidelines adopted as 14 California Code of Regulations, Title 14, Section
15000, et seq., and any subsequent amendments thereto, are hereby incorporated
by reference into this Chapter. If there is a conflict between the procedural
provisions of the State Guidelines and this Chapter, the more restrictive
provision shall apply.
(Ord. 5373 § 18 (part), 2016)
18.31.030   CEQA Appeals
   Any person may appeal to the City Council from the decision of a non-elected
decision-making body of the City to certify an environmental impact report,
approve a negative declaration or mitigated negative declaration or determine
that a project is not subject to Public Resources Code Section 21080 et seq.
(California Environmental Quality Act) if that decision is not otherwise
subject to further administrative review. Any such appeal must be filed on a
form specified by the Director and must be filed within the same time period
governing appeals of the underlying entitlement decision or within fourteen
consecutive calendar days of the date that the environmental decision is made,
if there is no appeal of the entitlement. The appellant shall state the
specific reasons for the appeal. The appeal must be accompanied by the required
filing fee.
(Ord. 5373 § 18 (part), 2016)
Chapter 18.34
PEDESTRIAN AND TRANSIT ORIENTED DEVELOPMENT (PTOD)
COMBINING DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Sections:
   
18.34.010   Purposes
   
18.34.020   Applicability
   
18.34.030   Land Uses
   
18.34.040   Pedestrian and Transit Oriented Development (PTOD) Combining
District Regulations
   
18.34.050   Pedestrian and Transit Oriented Development (PTOD) Combining
District Context-Based Design Criteria and Objective Design Standards
   
18.34.060   Review Process
   
18.34.070   Non-conforming Uses and Non-complying Facilities
18.34.010   Purposes
   (a)   California Avenue Pedestrian and Transit Oriented Combining District
   The California Avenue Pedestrian and Transit Oriented Development (PTOD)
Combining District is intended to allow higher density residential dwellings on
commercial, industrial and multi-family parcels within a walkable distance of
the California Avenue Caltrain station, while protecting low density
residential parcels and parcels with historical resources that may also be
located in or adjacent to this area. The combining district is intended to
foster densities and facilities that:
      (1)   Support use of public transportation;
      (2)   Encourage a variety of housing types, commercial retail and limited
office uses;
      (3)   Encourage project design that achieves an overall context-based
development for the PTOD overlay area;
      (4)   Require streetscape design elements that are attractive pedestrians
and bicyclists;
      (5)   Increase connectivity to surrounding existing and planned
pedestrian and bicycle facilities; and
      (6)   Implement the city's Housing Element and Comprehensive Plan.
   (b)   [Reserved]
(Ord. 4914 § 2 (part), 2006)
18.34.020   Applicability
   (a)   The California Avenue Pedestrian and Transit Oriented Development
Combining District (PTOD) may be combined with any R-1, CC(2), CN, GM, PF,
RM30, or RM40 district or combination of such districts within the designated
California Avenue PTOD boundary (Exhibit A, reflected on the city's Zoning
Map), consistent with the provisions of Chapters
18.08 and
18.80. Where so combined, the regulations established by this chapter shall
apply in lieu of the provisions established by the underlying CC(2), CN, GM,
RM30, and/or RM40 zoning district(s). Compliance with the provisions of
Chapter 18.30(A), Retail Shopping (R), and
Chapter 18.30(B), Pedestrian Shopping (P), combining districts shall also be
required where such combining districts are applicable.
   (b)   [Reserved]
   (c)   A pedestrian and transit oriented development combining district may
be applied to a parcel through rezoning of the site, within the specified
boundaries of the district, as shown on the city's approved zoning maps,
pursuant to the provisions and process outlined in Section
18.34.060 of this chapter and
Chapter 18.80 of the Zoning Ordinance.
(Ord. 4914 § 2 (part), 2006)
18.34.030   Land Uses
   (a)   The following land uses shall be permitted in the California Avenue
Pedestrian and Transit Oriented Development (PTOD) Combining District, subject
to limitations outlined in Sections
18.34.040 and
18.34.050.
TABLE 1
LAND USES
 
                                                      PTOD
Land Uses                   PTOD California Avenue    University Avenue
                                                      [Reserved]
Multiple-family residential P
housing
Mixed-use development,      P
where -residential and non- See Section 18.34.030(b)
residential uses are        below for specific uses
combined
                            CUP
Live/Work Units             Subject to limitations of
                            Section 18.34.040(b)
                            P
Hotel                       Subject to limitations of
                            Section 18.34.040(c)
P = Permitted Use CUP = Conditional Use, Use Permit Required
 
   (b)   Mixed use development, where residential and non-residential uses are
combined, may include two or more of the following uses:
      (1)   Multi-family residential;
      (2)   Non-residential uses, limited to:
         (A)   Retail and personal services;
         (B)   Eating and drinking services;
         (C)   Other non-residential uses allowed except on the ground floor
where an (R) overlay exists:
            (i)   Offices;
            (ii)   General business services;
            (iii)   Business and trade schools;
            (iv)   Private education facilities;
            (v)   Day care center;
            (vi)   Community center;
            (vii)   Commercial recreation;
            (viii)   Convalescent facility; and
   (ix)   Research and development, limited to sites where the underlying
zoning district is GM and involving the use and storage of hazardous materials
in quantities less than the exempt quantities allowed by Title 15 of the
Municipal Code (Section 105.8 of the Uniform Fire Code).
   (c)   Prohibited uses in the California Avenue PTOD:
      (1)   Single-family and two-family uses;
      (2)   Manufacturing, processing, warehousing and distribution; and
      (3)   Research and development where hazardous materials are used or
stored in excess of quantities less than the exempt quantities allowed by Title
15 of the Municipal Code (Section 105.8 of the Uniform Fire Code)
   (d)   All land uses must be reviewed and approved by the planning and
transportation commission and city council at the time of rezoning to PTOD.
(Ord. 4914 § 2 (part), 2006)
18.34.040   Pedestrian and Transit Oriented Development (PTOD) Combining
District Regulations
   (a)   Properties in the PTOD combining district are subject to the following
regulations:
TABLE 2
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Standards1 PTOD - California Avenue PTOD - Downtown [Reserved]
                                                                                                                 PTOD -
Standards1                              PTOD - California Avenue                                                 Downtown
                                                                                                                 [Reserved]
Max. Dwelling Units:                    40 DU/AC 2                                                                
Max. FAR:
100% Residential FAR                    1.0:1 2                                                                   
Mixed Use FAR                           1.25:1 23                                                                 
Mixed Use Non-Residential FAR Cap       Total: 0.35 4                                                             
                                        Office and research and development uses: 0.25 FAR
Hotels                                  2.0                                                                       
Height:                                 40 feet2                                                                  
Open Space:
   Minimum area required (Private or 5 or fewer units: 200 s.f. per unit 6 or more units: 100 s.f. per unit,
Common)                                 subject to Section                                                        
                                        18.24.040
                                        Rates established by use, per
Parking:                                Chs. 18.52 and                                                            
                                        18.54
Parking Adjustments:                    See  Section                                                              
                                        18.34.040(d)
Setbacks and daylight plane requirements for properties adjacent to R-1 and R-2 zones:
                                        On portion of site that abuts:
Setbacks                                1.   Interior side yard: 6 feet                                        
                                        2.   Rear yard: 20 feet
                                        On portion of site that abuts:
                                        1.   Interior side yard:
                                        a.   Initial height at interior side lot line: 10 feet
Daylight Plane                          b.   Angle (degrees): 45                                               
                                        2.   Rear yard:
                                        a.   Initial height at rear setback line: 16 feet
                                        b.   Angle (degrees): 45
Setbacks and daylight and daylight plane requirements for properties adjacent to Caltrain Right-of-Way:
Setbacks                                On portion of site that abuts Caltrain right-of-way: 5 feet (landscaped)  
                                        On portion of site that abuts Caltrain right-of-way:
Daylight Plane                          a.   Initial height at property line w/Caltrain right-of-way: 16 feet  
                                        b.   Angle (Degrees): 45
 
   (1)   Non-residential development that is not consistent with the mixed-use
limitations set forth above, with the exception of hotels, must be developed
per the underlying zoning district regulations.
   (2)   See Section
18.34.040 (e) for Below Market Rate (BMR) bonus provisions.
   (3)   The residential component of the mixed use may not exceed 1.0:1.
   (4)   The non-residential component of a mixed use project shall not exceed
50% of the total square-footage of the project.
   (b)   Live/Work Units
      (1)   A live/work unit, for the purposes of this chapter, is defined as a
rental or ownership unit comprised of both living space and work area, with the
living space occupying a minimum of 60% of the total gross floor area of the
unit, and such that the resident of the living space is the owner/operator of
the work area.
      (2)   The work area shall be located on the ground level, oriented to the
street and provide for at least one external entrance/exit separate from the
living space. The work area may be used for office, retail, personal services,
or handcrafted goods (unless otherwise limited by this chapter), but shall not
be used for restaurants or cafes or for any business involving the storage or
use of hazardous materials in excess of the quantities allowed by Title 15 of
the Municipal Code (Section 105.8 of the Fire Code).
      (3)   The maximum number of employees who do not reside within the unit
is two.
      (4)   The signage shall not exceed the requirements of the City of Palo
Alto Municipal Code and shall require approval and recommendation by the
architectural review process prior to approval by the director.
      (5)   The parking requirements shall include a maximum total of two
spaces for the residential unit, plus one space per 200 square feet for the
gross square footage of the work area, less one space from the total (to
reflect the overlap of the resident and one employee).
      (6)   The live/work units are subject to the development standards of the
PTOD zone outlined in Table 2 for a 100% residential development, except that
the maximum non-residential FAR is limited to 0.40.
      (7)   The maximum size of a live/work unit shall be limited to 2,500
square feet.
      (8)   The design of street frontage of a live/work unit shall be
consistent with the context-based criteria outlined for street frontage in
Section
18.34.050 below.
      (9)   A live/work unit may be converted to an entirely residential unit
where residential use on the ground floor is not otherwise prohibited.
   (c)   Hotels
      (1)   Hotels for the purpose of this section are defined as hotels,
motels, or other lodging for which City of Palo Alto transient occupancy tax is
collected, consistent with the provisions and limitations outlined in Section
18.16.060(d) for hotels in commercial zoning districts.
      (2)   Hotels may be constructed to a maximum FAR of 2.0 and a maximum
height of 50 feet.
      (3)   All hotels are subject to the context-based design criteria
outlined in Section
18.34.050 below.
   (d)   Parking Adjustments
   Adjustments to the required parking standards may be allowed with the
director's approval pursuant to the provisions outlined in Section
18.52.050, with the following additional allowances and requirements:
      (1)   For multi-family residential or mixed use projects on sites rezoned
to the PTOD combining district, the director may waive a portion of or all
guest parking requirements, and may waive any requirement to provide a
landscape reserve for parking, subject to the following conditions:
   (A)   The project includes a minimum of four residential units;
   (B)   The average residential unit size is 1,250 square feet or less; and
   (C)   Not more than one parking space per residential unit shall be assigned
or secured, such that other required parking spaces are available to other
residents and guests.
      (2)   Projects providing more than 50% of the project residential units
at low or very-low income housing rates may further reduce parking requirements
by an additional 20%.
      (3)   In no case, however, shall total parking requirements for the site
be reduced by greater than 30% from the standard requirements, or by greater
than 40% for an affordable housing project consistent with subdivision (2)
above, or by more than 50% if housing for the elderly is proposed pursuant to
Section
18.52.050(d) of the Zoning Ordinance.
      (4)   For any request for parking adjustments, the project applicant
shall indicate parking and traffic demand measures to be implemented to reduce
parking need and trip generation. Measures may include, but are not limited to:
limiting "assigned" parking to one space per residential unit, providing for
Caltrain and/or other transit passes, or other measures to encourage transit
use or to reduce parking needs. The program shall be proposed to the
satisfaction of the director, shall include proposed performance targets for
parking and/or trip reduction, and shall designate a single entity (property
owner, homeowners association, etc.) to implement the proposed measures.
Monitoring reports shall be submitted to the director not later than two years
after building occupancy and again not later than five years after building
occupancy, noting the effectiveness of the proposed measures as compared to the
initial performance targets and suggestions for modifications if necessary to
enhance parking and/or trip reductions.
   (e)   Density, FAR, and Height Bonus Provisions
   The following provisions are intended to allow for increased density, FAR,
height, and other development bonuses upon construction of additional below
market rate (BMR) housing units. The bonus allowances shall be allowed subject
to the following limitations:
      (1)   Bonuses are only applicable where below market rate (BMR) units are
provided in excess of those required by Palo Alto’s BMR program as set forth in
Section 18.14.030(a) and Program H-3.1.2 of the Housing Element. Key elements
of the BMR Program include:
         (A)   Five or more units: Minimum 15% of units must be BMR units;
         (B)   Five or more acres being developed: Minimum 20% of units must be
BMR units; and
         (C)   BMR units shall meet the affordability and other requirements of
Program H-3.1.2 and the city's BMR Program policies and procedures.
      (2)   The following BMR bonuses shall be considered and may be approved
upon rezoning to the PTOD district:
         (A)   Density Increase: Density may be increased above the maximum
base density allowed (40 units per acre), such that at least one additional BMR
unit is provided for every three additional market rate units constructed. The
resultant density may not exceed fifty units per acre. Density shall be
calculated based on the gross area of the site prior to development.
         (B)   FAR Increase: For projects with a residential density greater
than thirty units per acre, the allowable residential FAR may be increased. The
FAR increase shall be equivalent to 0.05 for each additional 5% (in excess of
the city requirements) of the total number of units that are proposed as BMR
units, but may not exceed 50% of the residential FAR prior to the bonus, and
may not exceed a total FAR of 1.5.
         (C)   Height Increase: For projects with a residential density greater
than 30 units per acre, the allowable project height may be increased. The
height increase shall be equivalent to one foot above the maximum for each
additional 5% (in excess of the city requirements) of the total number of units
that are proposed as BMR units, but may not exceed a maximum height (50 feet).
         (D)   Other incentives for development of BMR units, such as reduced
setbacks and reduced open space, may be approved where at least 25% of the
total units constructed are BMR units and subject to approval by the
architectural review board.
      (3)   The provisions of this section are intended to address the density
bonus requirements of state law within the PTOD District. The maximum bonus
density available under this section shall be the greater of the bonus density
allowed under this chapter or under the city’s density bonus provisions
contained in
Chapter 18.15.
(Ord. 5554 § 28, 2022: Ord. 5373 § 19, 2016; Ord. 5035 § 5, 2009: Ord. 4914 § 2
(part), 2006)
18.34.050   Pedestrian and Transit Oriented Development (PTOD) Combining
District Context-Based Design Criteria and Objective Design Standards
   In addition to the standards for development prescribed above, all Housing
Development Projects in the PTOD combining district shall comply with the
objective design standards outlined in
Chapter 18.24, as defined therein. All other developments, and Housing
Development Projects that elect to deviate from one or more objective design
standards in
Chapter 18.24, shall meet the Context Based Design Criteria, as determined by
the Director pursuant to the Architectural Review process.
   (a)   Contextual and Compatibility Criteria
   Development in a pedestrian and transit oriented development combining
district shall be responsive to its context and compatible with adjacent
development, and shall promote the establishment of a pedestrian and transit
oriented neighborhood.
      (1)   Context.
         (A)   "Context" as used in this section is intended to indicate
relationships between the site's development to adjacent street types,
surrounding land uses, and on-site or nearby natural features, such as creeks
or trees. Effective transitions to these adjacent uses and features are
strongly reinforced by Comprehensive Plan policies.
         (B)   The word "context" should not be construed as a desire to
replicate existing surroundings, but rather to provide appropriate transitions
to those surroundings. "Context" is also not specific to architectural style or
design, though in some instances relationships may be reinforced by an
architectural response.
      (2)   Compatibility.
         (A)   Compatibility is achieved when the apparent scale and mass of
new buildings is consistent with the intent of achieving a pedestrian and
transit oriented neighborhood, and when new construction shares general
characteristics and establishes design linkages with the overall pattern of
buildings so that the visual unity of the street is maintained.
         (B)   Compatibility goals may be accomplished through various means,
including but not limited to:
            (i)   the siting, scale, massing, and materials;
            (ii)   the rhythmic pattern of the street established by the
general width of the buildings and the spacing between them;
            (iii)   the pattern of roof lines and projections;
            (iv)   the sizes, proportions, and orientations of windows, bays,
and doorways;
            (v)   the location and treatment of entryways;
            (vi)   the shadow patterns from massing and decorative features;
and
            (vii)   the treatment of landscaping
   (b)   Context-Based Design Considerations and Findings
   In addition to the findings for architectural review contained in Section
18.76.020(d) of the Zoning Ordinance, the following additional findings are
applicable in the California Avenue Pedestrian and Transit Oriented Development
Combining District, as further illustrated on the accompanying diagrams:
      (1)   Pedestrian and Bicycle Environment.
   The design of new projects shall promote pedestrian walkability, a bicycle
friendly environment, and connectivity through design elements such as:
   A.   Connectivity for pedestrians and cyclists with external and internal
(if any) streets, pathways, or bike facilities (See 
Figure 1-1);
Figure 1-1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6078.jpg]
 
   B.   Pathways and streets that present a clear hierarchy and connectivity
pattern both within a project and to adjacent sidewalks;
   C.   Wide sidewalks (built as easements beyond the property line if needed,
but not to the detriment of existing or future bike lanes) along Park Boulevard
to reinforce the street as a primary pedestrian and bicycle linkage to the
multimodal station;
   D.   Bicycle amenities that contribute to the area's bicycle environment and
safety needs, such as bike racks, storage or parking, or dedicated bike lanes
or paths (See 
Figure 1-2);
Figure 1-2
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6081.jpg]
 
   E.   Ground floor uses that are appealing to pedestrians through well-
designed visibility and access (See 
Figure 1-2);
   F.   On primary pedestrian routes such as Park Boulevard and California
Avenue, climate and weather protection where possible, such as covered waiting
areas, building projections and colonnades, and awnings (See 
Figure 1-3);
Figure 1-3
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6084.jpg]
 
   G.   Streetscape or pedestrian amenities that contribute to the area's
streetscape environment such as street trees, bulb-outs, benches, landscape
elements, and public art (See 
Figures 1-4 and
1-5); and
   H.   Vehicle access from alleys or sidestreets where they exist, with
pedestrian access from the public street.
Figure 1-4
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6087.jpg]
 
Figure 1-5
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6090.jpg]
 
      (2)   Street Building Facades.
   Street facades shall be designed to provide a strong relationship with the
sidewalks and the street(s), to create an environment that supports and
encourages pedestrian activity through design elements such as:
   A.   Facade articulation reflecting the rhythm of nearby commercial and
residential areas such as California Avenue;
   B.   Placement and orientation of doorways, windows, and landscape elements
to create strong, direct relationships with the street (See 
Figures 2-1 and
2-2);
   C.   Facades that include projecting eaves and overhangs, porches, and other
architectural elements that provide human scale and help break up building mass
(See 
Figures 2-1 and
2-2);
   D.   Entries and windows that face onto the street (See 
Figures 2-1 and
2-2);
   E.   Entries that are clearly defined features of front facades, and that
have a scale that is in proportion to the size of the building and number of
units being accessed; larger buildings should have a more prominent building
entrance, while maintaining a pedestrian scale (See 
Figures 2-1 and
2-2); and
   F.   Residential units and storefronts that have a presence on the street
and are not walled-off or oriented exclusively inward.
Figure 2-1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6093.jpg]
 
Figure 2-2
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6096.jpg]
 
      (3)   Massing and Articulation.
   Buildings shall be designed to minimize massing and provide for articulation
and design variety through elements such as:
   A.   Buildings that include pedestrian-scaled detail, articulation and
craftsmanship of the facade (See 
Figure 3-1);
   B.   Rooflines that emphasize and accentuate significant elements of the
building such as entries, bays, and balconies (See 
Figure 3-1);
Figure 3-1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6099.jpg]
 
   C.   Corner buildings that incorporate special features to reinforce
important intersections and create buildings of unique architectural merit and
varied styles (See 
Figures 3-2 and
3-3);
Figure 3-2
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6102.jpg]
 
Figure 3-3
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6105.jpg]
 
   D.   Design with articulation, setbacks, and materials that minimize
massing, break down the scale of buildings, and provide visual interest from
the train and neighborhood east of the tracks;
   E.   Limiting facades such that no more than 70%, and no more than 100
continuous linear feet, of the street facade exceeds a height of 25 feet (See 
Figure 3-4);
   F.   Landscape elements to buffer the rear of the lot and the railroad
tracks, with trees spaced at a maximum of 25 feet on center and combined with
other landscape elements such as fencing, hedges or shrubs (See 
Figure 3-4);
   G.   Application of daylight plane requirements for R-1 and R-2 adjacencies
to property boundaries adjacent to the railroad right-of-way (See 
Figure 3-5); and
   H.   Maintaining view corridors from Colorado Avenue and El Dorado Avenue
west to the hills.
Figure 3-4
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6108.jpg]
 
Figure 3-5
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6111.jpg]
 
      (4)   Low-Density Residential Transitions.
   Where new projects are built adjacent to existing lower-scale residential
development, care shall be taken to respect the scale and privacy of adjacent
properties through:
   A.   Transitions of development intensity from higher density development
building types to building types that are compatible with the lower intensity
surrounding uses (See 
Figure 4-1);
Figure 4-1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6114.jpg]
 
   B.   Massing and orientation of buildings that respect and mirror the
massing of neighboring structures by stepping back upper stories to transition
to smaller scale buildings, including setbacks and daylight planes that match
adjacent R-1 and R-2 zone requirements (See 
Figure 4-2);
Figure 4-2
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6117.jpg]
 
   C.   Respecting privacy of neighboring structures, with windows and upper
floor balconies positioned so they minimize views into neighboring properties
(See 
Figure 4-3);
Figure 4-3
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6120.jpg]
 
   D.   Minimizing sight lines into and from neighboring properties (See 
Figure 4-3);
   E.   Limiting sun and shade impacts on adjacent properties;
   F.   Providing pedestrian paseos and mews to create separation between uses;
   G.   Design with articulation, varied setbacks, and materials that minimize
sound reflection to neighboring properties adjacent to the railroad.
      (5)   Project Open Space.
   Private and public open space shall be provided so that it is usable for the
residents, visitors, and/or employees of a site.
   A.   The type and design of the usable private open space shall be
appropriate to the character of the building(s), and shall consider dimensions,
solar access, wind protection, views, and privacy;
   B.   Open space should be sited and designed to accommodate different
activities, groups and active and passive uses, and should be located
convenient to the users (e.g., residents, employees, or public);
   C.   Common open spaces should connect to the pedestrian pathways and
existing natural amenities of the site and its surroundings (See 
Figure 5-2);
   D.   Usable open space may be any combination of private and common spaces;
   E.   Usable open space does not need to be located on the ground (See 
Figure 5-1);
   F.   Open space should be located to activate the street façade and increase
"eyes on the street" when possible (See 
Figure 5-3);
   G.   Both private and common open space areas should be buffered from noise
where feasible; and
   H.   Parking may not be counted as open space.
Figure 5-1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6123.jpg]
 
Figure 5-2
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6126.jpg]
 
Figure 5-3
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6129.jpg]
 
      (6)   Parking Design.
   Parking needs shall be accommodated but shall not be allowed to overwhelm
the character of the project or detract from the pedestrian environment, such
that:
   A.   Parking is located behind buildings, below grade or, where those
options are not feasible, screened by landscaping, low walls, etc.;
   B.   Structured parking is fronted or wrapped with habitable uses when
possible (See 
Figure 6-1);
   C.   Parking that is semi-depressed is screened with architectural elements
that enhance the streetscape such as stoops, balcony overhangs, and/or art
(See 
Figure 6-2);
   D.   Landscaping such as trees, shrubs, vines or groundcover is incorporated
into surface parking lots (See 
Figure 6-3); and
   E.   Street parking is utilized for visitor or customer parking and is
designed in a manner to enhance traffic calming on the street.
Figure 6-1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6132.jpg]
 
Figure 6-2
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6135.jpg]
 
Figure 6-3
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6138.jpg]
 
      (7)   Large (multi-acre) Sites.
   Large (in excess of one acre) sites shall be designed so that street, block,
and building patterns are consistent with those of the surrounding
neighborhood, and such that:
   A.   New development of large sites maintains and enhances connectivity with
a hierarchy of public streets, private streets, walks and bike paths
(integrated with the Palo Alto Bicycle Master Plan, when applicable);
   B.   The diversity of building types increases with increased lot size
(e.g., less than 1 acre = minimum 1 housing type; 1 - 2 acres = minimum 2
housing types; greater than 2 acres = minimum 3 housing types) (See 
Figure 7-1); and
   C.   Where a site includes more than one housing type, each housing type
should respond to its immediate context in terms of scale, massing, and design
(e.g., lower density building types facing or adjacent to existing single-
family residences) (See 
Figure 7-1).
Figure 7-1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6141.jpg]
 
      (8)   Sustainability and Green Building Design.
   Project design and materials to achieve sustainability and green building
design should be incorporated into the project. Green building design considers
the environment during design and construction. Green building design aims for
compatibility with the local environment: to protect, respect and benefit from
it. In general, sustainable buildings are energy efficient, water conserving,
durable and nontoxic, with high-quality spaces and high recycled content
materials. The following considerations should be included in site and building
design:
   A.   Optimize building orientation for heat gain, shading, daylighting, and
natural ventilation (See 
Figure 8-1);
Figure 8-1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6144.jpg]
 
   B.   Design landscaping to create comfortable micro-climates and reduce heat
island effects (See 
Figure 8-2);
Figure 8-2
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6147.jpg]
 
   C.   Design for easy pedestrian, bicycle, and transit access;
   D.   Maximize onsite stormwater management through landscaping and permeable
pavement (See 
Figure 8-3);
Figure 8-3
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6150.jpg]
 
   E.   Use sustainable building materials.
   F.   Design lighting, plumbing and equipment for efficient energy use;
   G.   Create healthy indoor environments;
   H.   Use creativity and innovation to build more sustainable environments.
One example is establishing gardens with edible fruits, vegetables or other
plants to satisfy a portion of project open space requirements (See 
Figure 8-2); and
   I.   Provide protection for creeks and riparian vegetation and integrate
stormwater management measures and open space to minimize water quality and
erosion impacts to the creek environment.
   (c)   [Reserved]
   (d)   Historic Preservation
   Historic resources review, as required in
Chapter 16.49 of Title 16 of the Municipal Code, is required for alterations or
modifications to any structure designated on the city's Historic Inventory as a
Category 1 or Category 2 historic structure as defined in Section
16.49.020 of the Municipal Code or any contributing structure located within a
locally designated historic district. The Category 1 or Category 2 designation
process for becoming a historic structure is contained in
Chapter 16.49 of Title 16 of the Municipal Code.
   (e)   Performance Standards
   All development subject to the PTOD District requirements must also comply
with the performance standards outlined in Chapter 18.64 pertaining to noise,
lighting, visual, and access impacts.
(Ord. 5554 § 29, 2022: Ord. 4914 § 2 (part), 2006)
18.34.060   Review Process
   Rezoning and review of a site to a pedestrian and transit oriented
development (PTOD) combining district shall be made pursuant to the following
procedures:
   (a)   Application to apply the PTOD overlay district may be made by an owner
of record of any property located or partially located within the PTOD
boundary, or may be initiated by vote of the planning and transportation
commission or city council;
   (b)   Applications for rezoning shall be made and reviewed in accordance
with
Chapter 18.80 (Amendments to Zoning Map and Zoning Regulations), including
Section
18.80.020 regarding changes in district boundaries. Planning and transportation
commission review and city council approval shall establish limits on allowable
or required uses (e.g., the types and appropriate mix of uses, including
revenue-generating uses) and intensity (e.g., density, floor area ratio,
height, site coverage) of development. The specified limitations shall be part
of the rezoning and shall be recorded as property restrictions enforceable by
the City of Palo Alto. Revisions to these restrictions requires rezoning
through the same process, except that the director of planning and development
services may determine that a revision is minor and does not materially alter
the city council’s restrictions or intent regarding land use and intensity. As
used in this subsection, the term “minor” means a change that is of little
visual significance, does not materially alter the appearance of previously
approved improvements, is not proposed to change the use of the land in
question, and does not alter the character of the structure involved. If the
cumulative effect of multiple minor changes would result in a major change, a
new application for approval of a pedestrian and transit oriented development
is required and shall be reviewed by the architectural review board, planning
and transportation commission, and/or city council, as determined by the
director. Submittal requirements for the PTOD combining district may be
supplemented as determined by the director of planning and development
services;
   (c)   Applications for amendments to the Comprehensive Plan to designate a
site consistent with transit oriented residential development shall be made and
reviewed pursuant to the provisions of Section
19.04.080; and
   (d)   Upon approval of rezoning of a property to pedestrian transit oriented
development (PTOD) combining district, the project plans shall be submitted as
a major architectural review to the architectural review board, who shall
review the project for compliance with the architectural review criteria
specified in
Chapter 18.76 of the Zoning Code, as well as Section
18.34.050 of this chapter. A single preliminary review by the ARB may be
allowed in advance of rezoning approval if plans are submitted and reviewed
prior to planning commission consideration of the rezoning request.
(Ord. 5494 § 3, 2020: Ord. 4914 § 2 (part), 2006)
18.34.070   Non-conforming Uses and Non-complying Facilities
   Owners of sites with existing legal non-conforming uses and non-complying
facilities within the PTOD boundary may request the application of the PTOD
combining district to the site through the rezoning process referenced in
Section
18.34.060 above. In applying the PTOD combining district, the use and/or
facility would then be subject to the PTOD overlay standards.
(Ord. 4914 § 2 (part), 2006)
Chapter 18.36
HOSPITAL (HD) DISTRICT
Sections:
   
18.36.010   Purposes
   
18.36.020   Applicable Regulations
   
18.36.030   Definitions
   
18.36.040   Land Uses
   
18.36.050   Development Standards
   
18.36.060   Parking and Loading
   
18.36.070   Tree Preservation
   
18.36.080   Signs
   
18.36.090   Historical Review
   
18.36.100   Architectural Review
   
18.36.110   Grandfathered Uses
   
18.36.120   Consistency with Development Agreement
18.36.010   Purposes
   The Hospital (HD) district is designed to accommodate medical and
educational uses including the Stanford Hospital and Clinics (SHC), Lucile
Packard Children's Hospital (LPCH), medical, office, research, clinic and
administrative facilities at the Stanford Hoover Pavilion Site, and School of
Medicine (SoM) buildings in a manner that balances the needs of hospital,
clinic, medical office and research uses with the need to minimize impacts to
surrounding areas and neighborhoods.
(Ord. 5123 § 7 (part), 2011)
18.36.020   Applicable Regulations
   The specific regulations of this chapter and the additional regulations and
procedures established by this title shall apply to all Hospital districts.
(Ord. 5123 § 7 (part), 2011)
18.36.030   Definitions
   For the purposes of this section, the following terms are defined:
   (a)   The "Main SUMC" site is defined as all properties zoned HD bounded by
Welch Road, Pasteur Drive and Quarry Road and is comprised of Assessor's Parcel
Numbers 142-23-003, 142-23-004, 142-08-005, 142-23-006, 142-23-007, 142-23-010,
142-23-012, 142-23-016, 142-23-017, 142-23-018, 142-23-019, 142-23-024, 142-23-
025.
   (b)   The "Stanford Hoover Pavilion" site is defined as all properties zoned
HD bounded by Quarry Road and Palo Road and is comprised of Assessor's Parcel
numbers, 142-04-011 and 142-04-019.
(Ord. 5123 § 7 (part), 2011)
18.36.040    Land Uses
   The uses of land allowed by this chapter in the HD district are identified
in the following table. Land uses that are not listed on the table are not
allowed, except where otherwise noted. Permitted and conditionally permitted
land uses for the HD district are shown in Table 1:
   Table 1: HD Permitted and Conditional Uses
LAND USE HD Subject to Regulations in:
LAND USE                                      HD     Subject to Regulations in:
ACCESSORY AND SUPPORT USES
Accessory facilities and activities
customarily associated with or essential to   P
permitted uses, and operated incidental to
the principal use                                    Ch. 18.40, 18.42
Eating and drinking services in conjunction   P
with a permitted use
Retail services in conjunction with a         P
permitted use
Safe Parking                                         18.42.160
EDUCATIONAL, RELIGIOUS, AND ASSEMBLY USES
Churches and religious institutions           P
Public or private colleges and universities   CUP
and facilities appurtenant thereto
HEALTH CARE SERVICES
Ambulance Services                            CUP
Convalescent Facilities                       CUP
Hospitals                                     CUP
Medical Office                                CUP
Medical Research                              CUP
Medical Support Retail                        P
Medical Support Services                      P
OTHER USES
Other uses which, in the opinion of the
director, are similar to those listed as      P, CUP
permitted or conditionally permitted uses
PUBLIC/QUASI-PUBLIC FACILITY USES
All facilities owned or leased, and operated
or used, by the City of Palo Alto, the County
of Santa Clara, the State of California, the  P
government of the United States, the Palo
Alto Unified School District, or any other
governmental agency
Community Centers                             CUP
Utility Facilities essential to provision of
utility services but excluding construction/  CUP
storage yards, maintenance facilities, or
corporation yards.
SERVICE USES
Day Care Centers                              CUP
Hotels providing not more than 10% of rooms   CUP
with kitchens
TRANSPORTATION USES
Helipads and helicopter uses                  CUP
Transit stops and shelters                    P
Parking Facilities                            CUP
TEMPORARY USES
Farmer's Markets                              P
Temporary parking facilities, provided such
facilities shall remain no more than five     P
years
 
(Ord. 5490 § 8, 2020: Ord. 5123 § 7 (part), 2011)
18.36.050   Development Standards
   (a)   Development Standards
   Table 2 specifies the development standards for structures in the HD
district.
   Table 2: Development Standards
 HD Subject to regulations in Section (7):
                               HD             Subject to regulations in Section
                                              (7):
Minimum Site Area              No standards
Minimum Site Width             No standards
Minimum Site Depth             No standards
Minimum Street Setbacks        10 ft(1)
Maximum Site Coverage          40%(2)(4)      18.04.030(a)(86)
Maximum Height (ft)            130 ft(5)      18.04.030(a)(67);
                                              18.40.090
Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR) 1.5 to 1(3)(6) 18.04.030(a)(57)
(1) Measured from the right-of-way line of any public street to the base of the
buildings and not including any awnings or other projections. This setback
requirement does not apply to below-grade parking facilities or portions of
buildings that bridge a street. This setback requirement also does not apply to
any portion of a lot or site that does not abut a public street.

(2) Site coverage is calculated based upon the total contiguous area within
this zone (Main SUMC site or the Stanford Hoover Pavilion site), rather than on
a parcel-by-parcel basis.

(3) FAR is calculated based up on the total contiguous area within this zone
(Main SUMC site or the Stanford Hoover Pavilion site), rather than on a parcel-
by-parcel basis.

(4) The maximum site coverage for the Stanford Hoover Pavilion site shall be 30
percent.

(5) The maximum height for new construction at the Stanford Hoover Pavilion
site shall be 60 ft.

(6) The maximum floor area ratio for the Stanford Hoover Pavilion site shall be
0.5 to 1.

(7) The regulations referenced in this table apply except as revised in this
chapter.
 
   (b)   Floor Area Ratio
      Except as provided in this section, floor area ratio shall be defined in
accord with
Chapter 18.04 of the Zoning Ordinance. All areas used to enclose service and
mechanical equipment, whether on rooftops, basements, interstitial space, or
other interior areas, shall be excluded from floor area calculations. All
parking facilities also shall be excluded from floor area calculations.
   (c)   Lot Coverage
      Except as provided in this section, lot coverage shall be defined in
accord with
Chapter 18.04 of the Zoning Ordinance. Parking facilities shall be excluded
from lot coverage.
   (d)   Height and Grade
      (1)   Except as provided in this section, building height shall be
defined in accord with
Chapters 18.04 and Section
18.40.090 of the Zoning Ordinance. Helicopter pads on top of the buildings,
rooftop mechanical equipment and associated screens, cryogen vents, grease
hoods, wind or solar energy equipment, and elevator shafts/ overruns shall be
excluded from building height calculations, but shall be subject to
architectural review as required in
Chapters 18.76 and
18.77 of the Zoning Ordinance.
      (2)   Grade shall be measured in accord with
Chapter 18.04 of the Zoning Ordinance.
   (e)   Street Setbacks
      Except as provided in this section, setbacks shall be defined in accord
with
Chapter 18.04 of the Zoning Ordinance. In the HD district, setbacks from public
streets shall be defined as the area between the right of way line of any
public street to the base of the building, and not including any awnings or
other projections. Setback requirements do not apply to any below grade parking
facilities or portions of buildings that bridge a street. Setback requirements
also do not apply to any portion of a lot or site that does not abut a public
street. No setback requirements other than street setback requirements apply in
the HD district.
   (f)   Recycling Storage
      All new development, including approved modifications that add thirty
percent or more floor area to existing uses, shall provide adequate and
accessible interior areas or exterior enclosures for the storage of recyclable
materials in appropriate containers. The design, construction and accessibility
of exterior recycling areas and exterior enclosures shall be subject to
recommendation by the architectural review board, and approval by the director
of planning and development services, in accordance with Section
18.76.020 of the Zoning Ordinance.
   (g)   Employee Shower Facilities
      Employee shower facilities shall be provided for any new building
constructed or for any addition to or enlargement of any existing building as
specified in Table 3.
   Table 3: Employee Showers Required
 
Uses                               Gross Floor Area of New Showers Required
                                   Construction (ft2)
All government or special district 0 - 9,999               No requirement
facilities designed for employee   10,000 – 19,999       1
occupancy, colleges and            20,000 – 49,999       2
universities, private educational
facilities, business and trade     50,000 and up           4
schools and similar uses
 
(Ord. 5494 § 3, 2020: Ord. 5123 § 7 (part), 2011)
18.36.060   Parking and Loading
   (a)   Except as provided in this section, off-street parking and loading
facilities shall be required for all permitted and conditional uses in accord
with
Chapter 18.52 and
18.54 of the Zoning Ordinance. Except as provided in this section, all parking
and loading facilities on any site, whether required as minimums or optionally
provided in addition to minimum requirements, shall comply with regulations and
the design standards established by
Chapters 18.52 and
18.54 of the Zoning Ordinance.
   (b)   Parking requirements in the HD district will be performance-based, as
established by the applicable conditional use permit. Parking shall be provided
to meet projected needs, with consideration given to the potential for reduced
parking demand due to the proximity of the Palo Alto Intermodal Transit Station
(PAITS) and demonstrated effective transportation demand management (TDM)
programs.
   (c)   The following parking improvements shall be exempt from the parking
landscape requirements of Section
18.54.040:
      (1)   All structured parking facilities;
      (2)   Restriping of existing surface parking facilities and other
improvements to surface parking facilities that do not materially alter the
existing conditions; and
      (3)   Parking or loading areas identified for use in the event of
emergency or mass population events such as earthquakes, pandemics, or human-
made biological/chemical exposure.
   (d)   Valet parking facilities shall be exempt from the requirements of
Sections
18.54.030 and
18.54.040(c).
   (e)   For the purposes of calculating shading percentage pursuant to Section
18.54.040(d):
      (1)   Shade structures may be utilized in lieu of trees;
      (2)   The canopies of protected trees (as defined by Section
8.10.020 (l)) transplanted on the site will count as double the actual tree
canopy; and
   (3)   Valet parking facilities may be designed to achieve twenty-five
percent shading (rather than fifty percent shading).
(Ord. 5557 § 7, 2022: Ord. 5123 § 7 (part), 2011)
18.36.070    Tree Preservation
   (a)   Applicability
      (1)   Except as provided in this section, development in the HD district
shall comply with Palo Alto Municipal Code
Chapter 8.10 (Tree Preservation and Management Regulations), and the city Tree
Technical Manual.
      (2)   No protected tree (as defined by Section
8.10.020(l)), shall be removed or relocated until the director of planning and
development services (“director”), in consultation with the urban forester, has
determined whether the protected tree meets the standards of Group 1 or Group 2
Trees, as defined below, and the applicable Protected Tree Removal Permit or
Protected Tree Relocation Permit has been obtained. The city’s determination
whether a protected tree meets the standards of Group 1 or Group 2 Trees shall
be valid for a period of ten years following the date of such determination.
   (3)   For the purposes of this chapter, “Biological tree resources” shall
have the same meaning as “Protected trees” as defined in Section
8.10.020(l).
      (4)   For the purposes of this chapter, "Biological and Aesthetic tree
resources" shall consist of those trees that are both biological tree resources
and that have been designated as Group 1 Trees by the director in consultation
with the city arborist based on a finding that the tree possesses at least one
of the following characteristics:
         (A)   Functions as an important or prominent visual feature relating
to the existing area, proposed conditions, pedestrian or vehicular
thoroughfares;
         (B)   Contributes to a larger grove or shared canopy, landscape theme
or otherwise provides important visual balance to existing buildings, trees or
streetscape; or
         (C)   Possesses unique character as defined in the designation of
heritage trees, (Section
8.10.090) such as, an outstanding specimen of a desirable species, distinctive
in form, size, age, location or historical significance.
      (5)   Within the HD district, protected trees fall into one of the
following categories:
         (A)   Group 1 Trees: Biological and aesthetic tree resources which are
identified in Table 4. If a protected tree is not listed in Table 4, or if more
than ten years have elapsed since the city's determination whether the tree is
a Group 1 Tree, the director shall determine whether the tree meets the
definition of Section 18.36.070(a)(4), above prior to issuance of any permit to
remove or relocate the tree;
         (B)   Group 2 Trees: Biological tree resources that are identified in
Table 4. If a protected tree is not listed in Table 4, or if more than ten
years have elapsed since the city's determination whether the tree is a Group 2
Tree, the director shall determine whether the tree meets the definition of
Section
18.36.070(a)(3), above prior to issuance of any permit to remove or relocate
the tree.
   Table 4: Protected Tree Groups
Tree Group Tree Tag Number (from SUMC FEIR) Tree Location
Tree Group Tree Tag Number (from SUMC FEIR)                       Tree Location
           33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41                     Kaplan Lawn
   1    317, 318, 319, 320, 322, 323*, 324*                    FIM 1
           608, 996*                                              Welch Road
           325, 326, 327, 328                                     FIM 1
           333, 373, 374, 375, 383, 387, 388, 410, 425, 428, 433, SHC
           436, 438, 439, 440, 441, 448, 450, 478, 479, 538, 544
           887, 960, 961, 966, 967, 968, 969, 970, 1010, 1011,
   2    1016, 1017, 1092, 1096, 1097, 1098, 1102, 1103, 1104,  LPCH
           1107, 1108, 1109, 1111, 1119, 1170, 1172, 1174, 1175,
           1176, 1177
           1349, 1350, 1351, 1352, 1365,1366, 1388, 1389, 1390,
           1391, 1393, 1399, 1400, 1420, 1435, 1438, 1439, 1442,  Hoover
           1469, 1481, 1483, 1485, 1500, 1503, 1506
           *Trees to be relocated.
 
   (b)   Preservation.
      Notwithstanding
Chapter 8.10, Group 1 Trees shall not be removed unless they meet the standard
in Section
8.10.050 (a)(1)(i). Authorized relocation of Group 1 Trees shall not constitute
removal.
   (c)   Relocation.
      Notwithstanding
Chapter 8.10, Group 1 and Group 2 Trees may be relocated upon issuance of a
Protected Tree Relocation Permit from the director in consultation with the
urban forester. For purposes of this section, authorized relocation of Group 1
and 2 Trees shall not constitute removal. The requirements for a Protected Tree
Relocation Permit shall be as follow:
      (1)   The applicant shall submit a proposed Tree Relocation and
Maintenance Plan (TRMP) that (i) evaluates the feasibility of moving the tree
to another location on or near the development site; and (ii) identifies the
actions to be taken to increase the likelihood that relocation is successful
including the following information: pre-relocation irrigation, relocation
procedures, monitoring inspections, and post-relocation tree irrigation and
maintenance.
      (2)   If the director determines the proposed relocation is feasible, the
director shall issue a Protected Tree Relocation Permit requiring the
following:
         (A)   The Protected Tree Relocation Permit shall specify the actions
required to increase the likelihood that relocation is successful.
         (B)   Location of relocated trees is subject to review and approval by
the director in consultation with the urban forester.
      (C)   If the relocated tree does not survive after a period of five
years, the relocated tree shall be replaced with a tree or a combination of
trees and tree value standards consistent with Tree Canopy Replacement
provisions of the Tree and Landscape Technical Manual. If, after relocation, a
relocated tree is disfigured, leaning with supports needed, or in decline with
a dead top or dieback of more then twenty-five percent, the tree shall be
considered a total loss and replaced as described in this subsection.
      (D)   The applicant shall provide a security guarantee for relocated
trees, as determined by the director of planning and development services, in
consultation with the urban forester, in an amount consistent with the Tree and
Landscape Technical Manual.
   (d)   Removal of Group 2 Trees.
      Notwithstanding
Chapter 8.10, removal of Group 2 Trees shall be allowed in the HD district,
upon issuance of a Protected Tree Removal Permit from the director in
consultation with the city arborist. The requirements for a Protected Tree
Removal Permit shall be as follows:
      (1)   Group 2 Trees that are removed without being relocated shall be
replaced in accordance with the ratios set forth in the City of Palo Alto Tree
and Landscape Technical Manual in the following way:
         (A)   The Protected Tree Removal Permit issued shall stipulate the
tree replacement requirements for the removed tree, including number of trees,
size, location, and irrigation. The number and size of trees required for
replacement shall be calculated in accordance with Tree Canopy Replacement
provisions of the Tree and Landscape Technical Manual.
         (B)   The difference between the required tree replacement and the
number of trees that cannot be feasibly planted on site shall be mitigated
through contribution to the City of Palo Alto Forestry Fund as provided in the
Tree and Landscape Technical Manual. Payment to the Forestry Fund would be in
the amount representing the fair market value, as described in the Tree and
Landscape Technical Manual, of the replacement trees that cannot be feasibly
planted on site.
      (2)   Location of replacement trees is subject to review and approval by
the director in consultation with the urban forester.
   (e)   Appeal. Any person seeking the director’s classification of Group 1 or
2 Trees, or seeking the approval to remove or relocate a protected tree
pursuant to this chapter who is aggrieved by a decision of the director may
appeal such decision in accordance with the procedures set forth in
Chapter 18.78 (Appeals).
(Ord. 5557 § 8, 2022: Ord. 5494 § 3, 2020: Ord. 5123 § 7 (part), 2011)
18.36.080   Signs
   Signs within the HD district shall comply with
Chapter 16.20, except as follows: The requirements for directory signs and
directional signs set forth in Section
16.20.160 are modified to allow such directory and directional signs to be up
to twelve feet in height, thirty square feet in area, and located no less than
two feet from the nearest public right-of-way unless an alternative location is
approved by the planning director.
(Ord. 5123 § 7 (part), 2011)
18.36.090   Historic Review
   Any exterior alterations to the Stanford Hoover Pavilion and any new
construction on the Stanford Hoover Pavilion site shall be provided to the
historic resources commission for comment prior to final review by the
architectural review board. In reviewing any new construction on the Stanford
Hoover Pavilion site the prime concern of the historic review board shall be to
ensure that the new construction is differentiated from the old and is
compatible with the massing, size, scale, and architectural features to protect
the historic integrity of the Hoover Pavilion building and site.
(Ord. 5123 § 7 (part), 2011)
18.36.100   Architectural Review
   Architectural review, as required in
Chapters 18.76 and
18.77 of the Zoning Ordinance, is required prior to the issuance of any
building permit in the HD district. Architectural review for landscape and
design features linking building areas within the HD district may be
implemented through approval of design guidelines, which may be modified in the
same manner as other architectural review approvals. Directory signs,
construction project signs, and directional signs consistent with the area and
location regulations set forth in Section
16.20.160 (as modified by Section
18.36.080) and temporary, unsecured pedestrian amenities such as café seating
and furniture are exempt from architectural review.
(Ord. 5123 § 7 (part), 2011)
18.36.110   Grandfathered Uses
   (a)   Applicability
      (1)   Except as provided in this section, nonconforming uses and
noncomplying facilities are governed by
Chapter 18.70 of the Zoning Ordinance.
      (2)   Any use allowed as a conditional use but legally existing as a
permitted use prior to the effective date of amendments to the Zoning Ordinance
modifying the allowable uses in the HD district shall be considered a
conforming use, except that a conditional use permit shall be required if the
use is expanded as outlined in Section
18.70.020.
(Ord. 5123 § 7 (part), 2011)
18.36.120   Consistency with Development Agreement
   It is the intent of the city council that the provisions of this
Chapter 18.36 be interpreted consistent with the terms of the development
agreement between the City of Palo Alto and Stanford University approved and
adopted by Ordinance No. 5124.
(Ord. 5123 § 7 (part), 2011)
Chapter 18.38
PC PLANNED COMMUNITY DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Sections:
   
18.38.010   Specific purposes.
   
18.38.020   Applicability of regulations.
   
18.38.030   Permitted uses.
   
18.38.040   Conditional uses.
   
18.38.050   Establishment of districts.
   
18.38.060   Required determinations.
   
18.38.065   Application process.
   
18.38.070   Application requirements.
   
18.38.080   Development program statement.
   
18.38.090   Development plan.
   
18.38.100   Development schedule.
   
18.38.110   Action by commission.
   
18.38.120   Action by council.
   
18.38.130   Change in development schedule.
   
18.38.140   Failure to meet development schedule.
   
18.38.150   Special requirements.
   
18.38.160   Inspections.
   
18.38.170   Recycling storage.
   
18.38.180   Safe parking.
18.38.010   Specific purposes.
   The PC planned community district is intended to accommodate developments
for residential, commercial, professional, research, administrative,
industrial, or other activities, including combinations of uses appropriately
requiring flexibility under controlled conditions not otherwise attainable
under other districts. The planned community district is particularly intended
for unified, comprehensively planned developments which are of substantial
public benefit, and which conform with and enhance the policies and programs of
the Palo Alto Comprehensive Plan.
(Ord. 3048 (part), 1978)
18.38.020   Applicability of regulations.
   The specific regulations of this chapter, and the additional regulations and
procedures established by Chapters
18.54 to 18.99, inclusive, shall apply to all planned community districts.
Notwithstanding the regulations of Chapters
18.54 to 18.99, inclusive, where specific regulations are adopted pursuant to
Sections
18.38.110 and 16.68.120, the specific regulations so adopted shall apply to
that planned community district.
(Ord. 3108 § 22, 1979: Ord. 3070 § 3, 1978: Ord. 3048 (part), 1978)
18.38.030   Permitted uses.
   Any use may be permitted in any specific PC district; provided such use
shall be specifically listed as a permitted use and shall be located and
conducted in accord with the approved development plan and other applicable
regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter to govern each specific PC
district.
(Ord. 3048 (part), 1978)
18.38.040   Conditional uses.
   Any use may be established as a conditional use in any specific PC district,
provided such use shall be specifically listed as a conditional use subject to
the provisions of
Chapter 18.76 (Permits and Approvals), and shall be located and conducted in
accord with the approved development plan and other applicable regulations
adopted pursuant to this chapter to govern each specific PC district.
(Ord. 4826 § 108, 2004: Ord. 3048 (part), 1978)
18.38.050   Establishment of districts.
   Planned community districts may be established, modified, or removed from
the zoning map, and the regulations applicable to any specific PC district may
be established, modified, or deleted in accord with
Chapter 18.80.
   All PC districts shall be identified on the zoning map with the letter
coding "PC" followed by a specific reference number identifying each separate
district. All use regulations, development plans, development schedules, and
other regulatory provisions adopted pursuant to this chapter, or pursuant to
Chapter 18.80, which apply to any specific PC district, shall be considered to
be a part of this title as if fully set forth in this title, and shall be
identified by reference to the corresponding designation of each specific PC
district on the zoning map.
(Ord. 3048 (part), 1978)
18.38.060   Required determinations.
   The planning commission, prior to recommending approval of any PC district
application, and the city council, prior to approving an ordinance designating
and regulating any PC district, shall make all of the following required
findings with respect to the application, in addition to findings required by
Chapter 18.80:
   (a)   The site is so situated, and the use or uses proposed for the site are
of such characteristics that the application of general districts or combining
districts will not provide sufficient flexibility to allow the proposed
development.
   (b)   Development of the site under the provisions of the PC planned
community district will result in public benefits not otherwise attainable by
application of the regulations of general districts or combining districts. In
making the findings required by this section, the planning commission and city
council, as appropriate, shall specifically cite the public benefits expected
to result from use of the planned community district.
   (c)   The use or uses permitted, and the site development regulations
applicable within the district shall be consistent with the Palo Alto
Comprehensive Plan, and shall be compatible with existing and potential uses on
adjoining sites or within the general vicinity.
(Ord. 3048 (part), 1978)
18.38.065   Application process.
   (a)   The applicant for a PC district shall initially submit to the planning
commission a development program statement, development plan, and a development
schedule which are described in Sections
18.38.080,
18.38.090, and
18.38.100. The plot plans, landscape development plan, and design plan in the
development plan should only be preliminary during this phase of review by the
planning commission.
   (b)   If the planning commission acts favorably in its initial review of the
PC application, the development plan shall be submitted to the architectural
review board for review, except in the case of single-family and accessory
uses. In this phase, a detailed plot plan, landscape development plan, and
design plan of the development plan are required. The architectural review
board shall make a recommendation on the development plan based on the findings
for architectural review in Section
18.76.020 (d).
   (c)   The development plan as approved by the architectural review board is
then returned to the planning commission for final planning commission review
and recommendation before being submitted to the city council for final action.
(Ord. 4826 § 109, 2004: Ord. 3048 (part). 1978)
18.38.070   Application requirements.
   In addition to the provisions of
Chapter 18.80, each application for a PC district shall be accompanied by a
development program statement, a development plan, and a development schedule.
   The development plan shall, as approved by the city council, become a part
of the zoning regulations applicable within the respective PC district.
Subsequent changes in the development plan shall be made in accord with
Chapter 18.80, or, for minor changes, through the architectural review process,
as set forth in Section
18.76.020 (b)(3)(D).
   The development schedule shall, as approved by the city council, become a
part of the zoning regulations applicable within the respective PC district.
Subsequent changes in the development schedule, if included as part of the
regulations, shall be made in accord with
Chapter 18.80 or, for minor changes, through the architectural review process,
as set forth in Section
18.76.020 (b)(3)(D); provided, that specifically authorized changes may be made
by the director pursuant to Section
18.38.130.
(Ord. 4826 § 110, 2004: Ord. 3048 (part), 1978)
18.38.080   Development program statement.
   The purpose of the development program statement shall be to describe the
proposed use or uses to be conducted in the district in a manner sufficient to
enable preparation and consideration of regulations governing permitted uses,
conditional uses, site use and development regulations, off-street parking and
loading requirements, and other special regulations which may be appropriate to
govern development, use, and maintenance of the site or sites included within
the PC district.
   The development program statement shall include the following:
   (a)   A statement by the applicant demonstrating the necessity of the
application for the PC district, including information demonstrating the
compliance of the proposed development with the required determinations set
forth in Section
18.38.060;
   (b)   A complete listing of all uses proposed, or potentially to be
included, within the PC district, incorporating insofar as possible the
terminology used in other parts of this title to define, describe, and regulate
permitted uses and conditional uses, and the definitions pertinent thereto;
   (c)   A complete description of the nature of uses proposed, and the
conditions or characteristics of occupancy, use, or operation, with particular
reference to those conditions or characteristics which may warrant regulation
differing from those regulations which might apply to such uses if located in
one or more general districts within the city;
   (d)   A schedule or statement indicating number, type, floor area, number of
bedrooms, and projected sale or rental price of all housing units proposed in
the district;
   (e)   Such additional information as the director may prescribe as
necessary, in his judgment, to facilitate review and action on the application
by the planning commission, the architectural review board, and the city
council.
(Ord. 3048 (part), 1978)
18.38.090   Development plan.
   The development plan submitted with the application for a PC district shall
include the following, unless waived by the director for cause:
   (a)   An aerial photograph of the site and adjacent land within two hundred
fifty feet of the site, at a scale to be prescribed by the director. The
director may specify that information required by subsections (b) through (i)
be superimposed on the aerial photograph, or a duplicate copy thereof;
   (b)   A map showing any public or private streets, proposed building sites,
and any areas proposed to be dedicated or reserved for parks, parkways, paths,
playgrounds, school sites, public buildings and other such uses. Compliance
with this requirement shall not be construed to relieve the applicant from
compliance with the subdivision code in Title 21, or any other applicable
ordinances of the city;
   (c)   A map showing the existing and proposed topography of the proposed
district at contour intervals as determined appropriate by director;
   (d)   A land use plan for the proposed district indicating the areas
proposed for each use or combination of uses identified by the development
program statement;
   (e)   A plot plan or plans for each building site in the proposed district,
or any portion thereof, in such form as required by the director. The required
plans shall show the location of all proposed buildings and principal site
improvements, shall indicate dimensions of buildings, site lines, and
improvements, and shall indicate the location of physical or natural site
features, including trees, and any changes proposed thereto.
   (f)   A landscape development plan, showing the boundaries and location of
proposed landscaped areas and exterior site improvements, including but not
limited to lights, swimming pools, and service and refuse areas.
   (g)   A circulation plan, indicating the proposed movement of vehicles,
goods, and pedestrians within the district, and to and from adjacent public
thoroughfares. Any special engineering features and traffic regulation devices
needed to insure safety or to facilitate ease of access and circulation,
whether on or off the site, shall be shown.
   (h)   A parking and loading plan, showing the number of spaces and the
location, internal circulation and dimensions of all parking and loading areas.
The parking and loading plan shall be based upon the requirements of
Chapter 18.54, unless requested modifications to meet the needs of the
individual project are supported by traffic engineering studies or relevant
data, as may be required by the director, demonstrating the feasibility and
adequacy of the plan.
            (i)   Preliminary design plans, including such schematic floor
plans, schematic exterior elevations and sections, and/or perspective drawings,
as may be necessary to indicate the height of proposed buildings and the
general appearance of the proposed structures to the end that the entire
development will have architectural unity and will be compatible with existing
and proposed neighborhood development. Such drawings need not show final
architectural detail. Construction drawings and contract plans, subsequently
submitted with applications for required permits or other construction
approvals pursuant to approved PC district regulations, shall conform
substantially to the preliminary design plans, and shall be subject to all
applicable review and permit requirements in effect at the time of approval and
permit issuance.
(Ord. 3108 § 20, 1979: Ord. 3048 (part), 1978)
18.38.100   Development schedule.
   The development schedule submitted with the application for a PC district
shall include the following:
   (a)   A schedule, indicating to the best of the applicant's knowledge, the
approximate date on which construction or development is expected to begin, the
duration of time required for completion of the development, and the
approximate date or dates of occupancy;
   (b)   A phasing program, indicating, in the event the proposed development
within the district is expected to require more than two years for completion
and occupancy, a logical or programmed sequence of phases and incorporating a
schedule as described in subsection (a) for each phase of development.
(Ord. 3048 (part), 1978)
18.38.110   Action by commission.
   In addition to the requirements of
Chapter 18.80, the planning commission shall review and consider all materials
submitted by the applicant pursuant to this chapter, and shall prepare and
recommend to the city council, as appropriate, the specific regulations to be
applied within the proposed planned community district. The specific
regulations may modify those regulations contained in Chapters
18.54 to 18.99, inclusive, as is appropriate to meet the individual district
and shall include the following:
   (a)   Permitted Uses. A listing of all uses to be permitted generally within
the district, or the uses to be permitted in specific locations within the
district as shown on the development plan;
   (b)   Conditional Uses. A listing of all uses to be conditionally allowed
within the district, or the uses to be permitted in specific locations within
the district as shown on the development plan;
   (c)   Site Development Regulations. Maximum or minimum regulations, as
appropriate, governing site dimensions, required yards and distances between
buildings, site coverage, building height, residential density, and floor area
ratio, open space requirements, accessory facilities and uses, and other
aspects of the proposed development within the district. The regulations may be
in text, or by reference to the development plan, or both. In no event shall
the maximum height exceed fifty feet except as provided in
Chapter 18.76 (Permits and Approvals);
   (d)   Parking and Loading Requirements. Regulations establishing off-street
parking and loading requirements for the district, and governing design,
location, screening, landscaping and operation of parking and loading
activities. The regulations may be by reference to
Chapter 18.54, or in text if the regulations of
Chapter 18.54 are modified for the individual district, or both;
   (e)   Special Requirements. Additional regulations, as may be appropriate to
assure a harmonious relationship between uses within the district, and a
compatible relationship with existing or potential uses within adjoining
districts, may be recommended by the commission. Such regulations may include
additional height limitations, yard requirements, landscaping and screening,
provisions governing outdoor activities, and other requirements;
   (f)   Development Plan and Development Schedule. The development plan
submitted pursuant to Section
18.38.090 and the development schedule submitted pursuant to Section
18.38.100, as amended or approved by the planning commission, shall be
recommended for inclusion in the regulations applicable to the PC planned
community district;
   (g)   Definitions. Definitions applicable specifically to the regulations
recommended for the district may be included.
(Ord. 4826 § 111, 2004: Ord. 3108 § 21, 1979: Ord. 3048 (part), 1978)
18.38.120   Action by council.
   In the event the city council adopts an ordinance pursuant to
Chapter 18.80 establishing a specific PC planned community district, the
council shall include the regulations described in Section
18.38.110, either as recommended by the planning commission or as modified by
the council.
(Ord. 3048 (part), 1978)
18.38.130   Change in development schedule.
   For good cause shown by the property owner in writing and unless otherwise
specified by the specific applicable regulations for the district, prior to the
expiration of the original time schedule for the development, the director may,
without a public hearing, modify the time limits imposed by any adopted
development schedule; provided, that such modification shall not extend the
schedule by more than one year; and provided, that only one such modification
may be made.
(Ord. 3048 (part), 1978)
18.38.140   Failure to meet development schedule.
   Sixty days prior to the expiration of the development schedule, the director
shall notify the property owner in writing of the date of expiration and advise
the property owner of Section
18.38.130. Failure to meet the approved development schedule, including an
extension, if granted, shall result in:
   (a)   The expiration of the property owner's right to develop under the PC
district. The director shall notify the property owner, the city council, the
planning commission and the building official of such expiration; and
   (b)   The director's initiating a zone change for the property subject to
the PC district in accordance with
Chapter 18.80. The property owner may submit a new application for a PC
district concurrently with the director's recommendation for a zone change.
(Ord. 3418 § 1, 1983: Ord. 3345 § 21, 1982: Ord. 3048 (part), 1978)
18.38.150   Special requirements.
   Sites abutting or having any portion located with 150 feet of any RE, R-1,
R-2, RMD, RM, or any PC district permitting single-family development or
multiple-family development shall be subject to the following additional height
and yard requirements:
   (a)   Parking Facilities. The maximum height shall be equal to the height
established in the most restrictive adjacent zone district.
   (b)   All Other Uses. The maximum height within 150 feet of any RE, R-1, R-
2, RMD, RM, or applicable PC district shall be 35 feet; provided, however, that
for a use where the gross floor area excluding any area used exclusively for
parking purposes, is at least 60 percent residential, the maximum height within
150 feet of an RM-30 or RM-40 district shall be 50 feet.
   (c)   Sites sharing any lot line with one or more sites in any RE, R-1, R-2,
RM or applicable PC district, a minimum interior yard of 10 feet shall be
required, and a solid wall or fence between 5 and 8 feet in height shall be
constructed and maintained along the common site line. Where a use in a PC
district where the gross floor area, excluding any area used exclusively for
parking purposes, is at least sixty percent residential, the interior yard
shall be at least as restrictive as the interior yard requirements of the most
restrictive residential district abutting each such side or rear site line. The
minimum interior yard shall be planted and maintained as a landscaped screen.
   (d)   On any portion of a site in the PC district which is opposite from a
site in any RE, R-1, R-2, RM or applicable PC district, and separated therefrom
by a street, alley, creek, drainage facility or other open area, a minimum yard
of 10 feet shall be required. Where a use in a PC district where the gross
floor area, excluding any area used exclusively for parking purposes, is at
least sixty percent residential, the minimum yard requirement shall be at least
as restrictive as the yard requirements of the most restrictive residential
district opposite such site line. The minimum yard shall be planted and
maintained as a landscaped screen, excluding areas required for access to the
site.
   (e)   Sites sharing any lot line with one or more sites in any RE, R-1, R-2,
RM or any residential PC district shall be subject to a maximum height
established by a daylight plane beginning at a height of ten feet at the
applicable side or rear site lines and increasing at a slope of three feet for
each six feet of distance from the side or rear site lines until intersecting
the height limit otherwise established for the PC district; provided, however,
that for a use where the gross floor area excluding any area used exclusively
for parking purposes, is at least sixty percent residential, the daylight
planes may be identical to the daylight plane requirements of the most
restrictive residential district abutting each such side or rear site line
until intersecting the height limit otherwise established for the PC district.
If the residential daylight plane, as allowed in this section, is selected, the
setback regulations of the same adjoining residential district shall be
imposed.
(Ord. 5548 § 9, 2022: Ord. 3683 §§ 12, 13, 1986: Ord. 3465 §§ 40, 44, 1983:
Ord. 3418 §§ 2 and 3, 1983: Ord. 3130 §§ 11, 25(f), 1979: Ord. 3108 § 9, 1979:
Ord. 3048 (part), 1978)
18.38.160   Inspections.
   Each PC district shall be inspected by the building division at least once
every three years for compliance with the PC district regulations and the
conditions of the ordinance under which the district was created.
(Ord. 3345 § 23, 1982)
18.38.170   Recycling storage.
   All new development, including approved modifications that add thirty
percent or more floor area to existing uses, shall provide adequate and
accessible interior areas or exterior enclosures for the storage of recyclable
materials in appropriate containers. The design, construction and accessibility
of recycling areas and enclosures shall be subject to architectural review
approval pursuant to
Chapter 18.76 (Permits and Approvals).
(Ord. 4826 § 112, 2004: Ord. 4069 § 12, 1992)
18.38.180   Safe parking.
   Safe parking in compliance with Section
18.42.160 of this code is allowed on any site in the PC district with a legal
church or religious institution use.
(Ord. 5490 § 9, 2020)
Chapter 18.40
GENERAL STANDARDS AND EXCEPTIONS
Sections:
   
18.40.010   Purposes
   
18.40.020   Application
   
18.40.030   Measurement
   
18.40.040   Separation Between Buildings
   
18.40.050   Location and Use of Accessory Buildings
   
18.40.060   Permitted Uses and Facilities in Required Yards
   
18.40.070   Projections into Yards
   
18.40.080   Substandard Lots
   
18.40.090   Height Exceptions
   
18.40.100   Setback Map
   
18.40.110   Utility Easements
   
18.40.120   Hazardous Conditions
   
18.40.130   Landscaping
   
18.40.140   Stream Corridor Protection
   
18.40.150   Storm Water Quality Protection
   
18.40.160   Replacement Project or Discretionary Review Required
   
18.40.170   Deferral of Director’s Action
   
18.40.180   Retail Preservation
   
18.40.190   Application Withdrawal by Applicant or Director
   
18.40.200   New Application Submittal Required
   
18.40.210   Annual Office Limit
   
18.40.220   Growth Management
   
18.40.230   Rooftop Gardens
   
18.40.240   Refuse Disposal Areas
   
18.40.250   Lighting
   
18.40.260   Visual Screening and Landscaping
   
18.40.270   Air Quality
18.40.010   Purposes
   This chapter provides general site planning and development standards for
all uses that are allowed by district regulations in multiple zoning districts.
(Ord. 4934 § 3 (part), 2007)
18.40.020   Application
   The regulations established in this chapter shall apply to all zoning
districts, in addition to other applicable provisions including the standards
of the zone district where the use is located.
(Ord. 4934 § 3 (part), 2007)
18.40.030   Measurement
   Distances between buildings, or between any structure and any property line,
setback line, or other line or location prescribed by this title shall be
measured to the nearest vertical support or wall of such structure. Where one
or more buildings do not have vertical exterior walls, the distances between
the buildings shall be prescribed by the building official.
(Ord. 5373 § 20 (part), 2016; Ord. 4934 § 3 (part), 2007)
18.40.040   Separation Between Buildings
   (a)   Minimum Distance Required
   The minimum distance between separate buildings located on the same site
shall be as required by Title 16; provided, however, accessory buildings in the
RE single-family residence districts shall be separated from the principal
building by at least three feet.
   (b)   Connection of Principal and Accessory Building
   A principal building and an accessory building, meeting the requirements of
Title 16 and each located on a site as otherwise permitted for principal
building and accessory buildings, may be connected by a structure meeting the
definition of a breezeway. Such structure, or breezeway, shall be a part of the
accessory building.
(Ord. 4934 § 3 (part), 2007)
18.40.050   Location and Use of Accessory Buildings
   (a)   Accessory Buildings Setbacks
   Except as otherwise provided in this section, accessory buildings shall at
all times be located in conformance with requirements for principal buildings,
and shall not be located in any required front, side or rear yard.
   (b)   Limitations of Uses for Accessory Buildings
   In residential zones, accessory buildings may be located in a required
interior yard subject to the following limitations:
      (1)   An accessory building shall not be used for living and/or sleeping
purposes unless the building was legally constructed for or legally converted
to living and/or sleeping purposes prior to October 13, 1983.
      (2)   An accessory building shall not be located in a required front
yard, a required street yard, or a required rear yard of a through lot.
      (3)   An accessory building shall not be located in a required interior
side or rear yard unless the building is at least seventy-five feet from any
street line, measured along the respective lot line.
      (4)   Accessory buildings located within a required interior yard as
permitted by this section shall be subject to a maximum height established by a
daylight plane beginning at a height of eight feet at the property line and
increasing at a slope of three feet for each ten feet of distance from the
property line, to a maximum height of twelve feet.
      (5)   No accessory building shall have more than two plumbing fixtures.
Accessory buildings shall not be allowed to be turned into habitable space nor
shall these structures be allowed to have showers (indoor or outdoor), gas
lines, washer/dryers, and/or cooking facilities to be provided inside or
attached to the structure, unless the structure is proposed as an ADU/JADU that
satisfies all requirements of the Palo Alto Municipal Code.
   (c)   Swimming Pool, Hot Tub and Spa
      No swimming pool, hot tub, spa or similar accessory facility shall be
located in any portion of a required front or street side yard.
(Ord. 5585 § 6, 2023: Ord. 4934 § 3 (part), 2007)
18.40.060   Permitted Uses and Facilities in Required Yards
   Except as otherwise prescribed by district regulations or other provisions
of this title, use and development of required yards shall be limited to the
following:
   (a)   Fences, screening, and enclosures permitted by
Chapter 16.24;
   (b)   Landscaping;
   (c)   Outdoor recreation, including open structures and ground level
facilities related thereto, such as tennis courts, swimming pools, other game
or court facilities, sitting areas, decks, patios, terraces, and like features
constructed at ground level or within one foot above natural grade; provided,
that no below-grade improvements such as swimming pools shall be permitted
within three feet from the property line;
   (d)   Pedestrian walkways and driveways;
   (e)   Required parking, in accord with the location provisions specified
within each district.
   (f)   Electrification Equipment for residential uses only: When installed in
a required yard, Electrification Equipment and any associated housing,
screening, insulation, or bollards necessary to enable compliance with the
applicable regulations, including
Chapter 9.10 of this Code, shall provide a minimum three foot interior side and
rear yard setback and a minimum ten foot street sideyard setback. Except as
otherwise provided in this Title for EVSE and energy storage systems,
Electrification Equipment shall not be located in the required front yard
setback and shall at all times provide sufficient clearance for fire safety
purposes. EVSE, energy storage systems, and safety bollards may encroach two
feet into a 20-foot standard front setback.
(Ord. 5601 § 5, 2023: Ord. 4934 § 3 (part), 2007)
18.40.070   Projections into Yards
   (a)   Architectural Features
   Cornices, eaves, fireplaces and similar architectural features, excluding
flat or continuous walls or enclosures of usable interior space, may extend
into a required side yard a distance not exceeding two feet, or may extend into
a required front or rear yard a distance not exceeding four feet. Window
surfaces, such as bay windows or greenhouse windows, may extend into a required
front, side or rear yard a distance not exceeding two feet or into a required
front yard a distance not exceeding three feet. In residential districts or
nonresidential districts adjacent to residential districts, the window surface
may not extend into any yard above a first story.
   (b)   Canopies and Patio Covers
   A canopy or patio cover may be located in any residential district in the
required rear yard or that portion of the interior side yard which is more than
seventy-five feet from the street lot line measured along the common lot line.
Such canopies shall be subject to the following conditions: The permit may be
granted by the director without a requirement for public hearing and notice.
      (1)   A canopy or patio cover shall not be more than twelve feet in
height.
      (2)   The canopy or patio cover shall be included in the computation of
building coverage.
      (3)   The canopy or patio cover and other structures shall not occupy
more than fifty percent of the required rear yard.
      (4)   The canopy or patio cover shall not be enclosed on more than two
sides.
   (c)   Storage Structures
   Structures not over six feet in height or twenty-five square feet in floor
area, used exclusively for storage purposes, may extend into a required side
yard a distance not exceeding two feet, or may extend into a required front or
rear yard a distance not exceeding four feet.
   (d)   Porches, Stairways, Landings and Fire Escapes
   Uncovered porches, stairways, landings, balconies or fire escapes may extend
not more than six feet into a required front or rear yard, and may extend not
more than three feet into a required side yard; provided that, in residential
districts or in nonresidential districts adjacent to residential districts,
these projections may not extend into any yard above a first story.
   (e)   Pools, Spas and Hot Tubs
   Pools, spas and hot tubs may extend into a required rear yard a distance not
to exceed fourteen feet, provided that a minimum setback of six feet from the
property line shall be maintained.
   (f)   Building Extensions and Corner Lots
   In residential districts, a portion of a main building which is less than
half the maximum width of such building may extend into the required rear yard
no more than six feet and with a height of no more than one story, except that
a corner lot having a common rear property line with an adjoining corner lot
may extend into the required rear yard not more than ten feet and with a height
of no more than one story.
   (g)   Encroachment into a Special Setback
   Subsections (a) through (d) of this section notwithstanding, a projection
shall not be permitted to encroach into a special setback, as established by
the setback map pursuant to
Chapter 20.08 of the Palo Alto Municipal Code.
   (h)   Excavated Features: Terraces and Terraced Landscaping
   In residential districts the terraced and landscaped portions of excavated
features, such as below grade patios and sunken gardens, that comply with the
provisions of Sections
18.10.090(c) or
18.12.090(c), as applicable, may extend into a required side yard a distance
not to exceed two feet, or may extend into a required rear yard a distance not
to exceed four feet.
(Ord. 5373 § 20 (part), 2016; Ord. 4934 § 3 (part), 2007)
18.40.080   Substandard Lots
   (a)   Specified Provisions and Dates of Recorded Title
   Any lot having a site area, width, or depth less than required by this
title, which meets one of the provisions specified in this subsection, may be
used as a lot or site under the provisions of this title, subject to the
applicable district regulations and other provisions of this title:
      (1)   A lot shown upon an official subdivision map duly approved and
recorded;
      (2)   A lot for which a deed or a valid contract of sale is on record in
the office of the county recorder of Santa Clara County prior to February 19,
1951, and was of legal area at the time it was recorded;
      (3)   A lot for which individual water, sewer, and/or gas service or
services were installed by the city prior to October 8, 1947;
      (4)   A lot upon which a dwelling was constructed on or after October 8,
1947, and prior to July 20, 1978 which at the time of construction complied
with all lot width and area requirements;
      (5)   A lot otherwise meeting applicable requirements at the time such
lot was created, but which does not meet the minimum requirements of this title
as currently applicable to such lot, by reason of annexation, a change in
zoning district, or a change in applicable regulations within a district.
   (b)   Substandard Lots Cannot Be Further Reduced
   A substandard lot meeting one of the provisions designated in subsection (a)
shall be considered a legal lot; provided the particular measurement (area,
width, or depth) not in accord with this title shall not be further reduced.
   (c)   Lots merged by Amendments to Subdivision Map Act
   All lots that were merged by the 1977 amendments to the Subdivision Map Act
prior to the adoption of Chapter 234, Statutes 1977, are hereby deemed
unmerged.
(Ord. 4934 § 3 (part), 2007)
18.40.090   Height Exceptions
   Except in OS, RE, R-1, and R-2 districts, flues, chimneys, exhaust fans or
air conditioning equipment, elevator equipment, cooling towers, antennas, and
similar architectural, utility, or mechanical features may exceed the height
limit established in any district by not more than fifteen feet; provided,
however, that no such feature or structure in excess of the height limit shall
be used for habitable space, or for any commercial or advertising purposes. In
OS, RE, R-1, and R-2 districts, flues, chimneys and antennas may exceed the
established height limit by not more than fifteen feet.
(Ord. 4934 § 3 (part), 2007)
18.40.100   Setback Map
See 
Chapter 20.08 of the Municipal Code for setback map regulations.
(Ord. 4934 § 3 (part), 2007)
18.40.110   Utility Easements
   No structures other than fences or landscaping features shall be located
within any portion of an easement granted to the city for utility purposes,
unless authorized pursuant to an encroachment permit granted by the city. Any
structure now existing which does not comply with this section shall not be
expanded, enlarged, or replaced in event of demolition or destruction, except
as may be authorized by an encroachment permit issued by the city.
(Ord. 4934 § 3 (part), 2007)
18.40.120   Hazardous Conditions
   In any area within the city identified by the Comprehensive Plan as having
moderate or high risk due to flood hazard, seismic activity hazard, to other
geologic hazard, the following provisions shall apply:
   (a)   Geologic Report - High Risk
   In areas identified as subject to high risk, the building official may
require, prior to issuance of a building permit or other permit authorizing any
new construction, submission by the permit applicant of detailed geologic,
soils, and engineering data sufficient to define the extent of any potential
hazard and to demonstrate that the proposed construction shall, to the maximum
extent feasible, mitigate or otherwise recognize such hazard. Such reports and
data shall be required for any use involving public assembly.
   (b)   Geologic Report - Moderate Risk
   In areas identified as subject to moderate risk, the building official may
require such reports as described in (a) for any use except single-family use
or two-family use. Such reports and data shall be required for any use
involving public assembly.
(Ord. 4934 § 3 (part), 2007)
18.40.130   Landscaping
   (a)   Purpose
   The purpose of this section is to encourage creative and sustainable
landscape design that enhances structures, open space areas, streetscapes and
parking areas. Sustainable landscape design preserves native plant species to
the maximum extent feasible, consumes less water and provides permeable
surfaces for storm water management and groundwater recharge. Tree shading and
appropriate landscape design can contribute to economic vitality and public
health, and can reduce the need for frequent infrastructure repair. Landscaping
provides recreation areas, cleans the air and water, prevents erosion, offers
fire protection, replaces ecosystems displaced by development, and is water
efficient.
   (b)   General Regulations
   In addition to the provisions of this section, all projects shall adhere to
the landscape requirements cited elsewhere in Title 18 (Zoning Ordinance),
including but not limited to:
      (1)   Design Standards - General Parking Facilities (Section
18.54.020).
      (2)   Design Standards - Landscaping in Parking Facilities and Required
Landscape Areas (Section
18.54.040).
      (3)   Architectural Review Findings (Section
18.76.020).
   (c)   Natural Areas (Open Space District, Hillside Lands, Baylands, Creek
and Riparian Areas)
   Landscaping should retain or enhance native vegetation in hillside, baylands
or other natural open spaces areas or adjacent to such areas. The existing
natural vegetation and land formations should remain in a natural state unless
modification is found to be necessary or appropriate for a specific use allowed
through architectural or site design review.
      (1)   In the selection of new landscaping, preference shall be given to
natural, indigenous and drought resistant plants and materials. Non-indigenous
landscaping should be limited to the immediate area around a structure or
structures.
      (2)   Site development plans shall, to the maximum extent feasible,
provide for the retention of existing vegetation and land formations, and shall
include an erosion and sediment control element setting forth reasonable
mitigation measures in accord with the grading and subdivision ordinances of
the city.
      (3)   Landscaping shall, to the maximum extent feasible, integrate and
accommodate existing trees and vegetation to be preserved; make use of water-
conserving plants, materials and irrigation systems; and be clustered in
natural appearing groups, as opposed to being placed in rows or regularly
spaced.
      (4)   Colors of roofing materials shall blend with the natural landscape
and be nonreflective. All roof mounted equipment shall be screened in a manner
that protects the viewshed from adjacent properties, including from views from
above.
      (5)   Planting of invasive plant species shall not be permitted and
removal of invasive species may be required as part of landscape plan
requirements.
      (6)   To the maximum extent feasible, existing vegetation shall be
retained or enhanced to maintain contiguous wildlife habitat.
      (7)   Riparian vegetation shall be retained or enhanced within natural
stream corridors, and best practices for development shall be used to protect
riparian habitat and water quality of adjacent streams.
   (d)   Low-Density Residential Landscaping Design Standards
      (1)   In the R-1, R-2, and RMD zones, a minimum of 50% of the required
front setback area shall be landscaped, subject to the limitations of Section
18.12.040(h). Planting in the right-of-way shall not count towards fulfillment
of the required landscape area.
      (2)   Street trees may be required to be planted in the right-of-way
frontage of any residential structure subject to individual review for a new
second story or addition to a second story, or for other discretionary review
in the R-1, R-2, or RMD zones.
      (3)   Trees planted near public bicycle trails or curbs shall be of a
species and installed in a manner that prevents physical damage to sidewalks,
curbs, gutters and other public improvements.
      (4)   Trees and shrubs shall be planted so that at maturity they do not
interfere with service lines (a minimum of five feet from water lines and ten
feet from sanitary sewer lines) and traffic safety visibility areas.
      (5)   All proposed light wells and below-grade basements shall be
screened to minimize visibility from public rights-of-way or other public
properties.
   (e)   Special Design and Landscaping Standards for All Zoning Districts
Requirements:
      (1)   Utilities (e.g., transformer cabinets, pads, fiber optic trenching
and above ground cabinets, large water check valves) and underground utilities
shall not be placed within required landscaped areas, except where they will
not preclude appropriate planting of trees and will be predominantly screened
from public view.
      (2)   All landscaping within multi-family, commercial, and industrial
zoning districts shall be equipped with automatic irrigation systems. Backflow
preventers shall be located in the rear or side yard and screened from public
view by landscaping. If backflow preventers must be located in the front yard
for access purposes, they should be located near the main structure to the
maximum extent feasible.
      (3)   For all development within commercial and industrial zoning
districts, lawn areas shall not exceed 15 percent of the planting area on a
property. Required common areas, active recreation areas, and areas located
within the public right-of-way between the curb and public sidewalk shall not
count against such lawn area.
      (4)   All required perimeter yards shall be landscaped. The landscaping
of these yards shall, at a minimum, consist of a combination of living
vegetation, such as trees, shrubs, grasses or ground cover materials. The
director may, however, allow a combination of hardscape and landscape to
satisfy landscape requirements where the visual quality and screening functions
of the hardscape/landscape area are maintained. Landscape buffering and
screening shall be designed to create compatible relationships of scale and
appearance with neighboring properties.
      (5)   Plant material shall be maintained in a healthy, disease-free,
growing condition at all times. All required planting areas shall be maintained
free of weeds, debris, and litter. The planning director may specify conditions
of approval to assure that dead or diseased plantings are replaced in a timely
manner and with adequate replacement plantings.
   (f)   Guidelines:
      (1)   Rooftop gardens, edible gardens, and other sustainable agricultural
landscaping alternatives are encouraged for multi-family, commercial,
industrial, and multi-family developments. See supplementary standards in
Section
18.40.230: Rooftop Gardens.
   (2)   Structural soils, as specified by the director of planning and
development services, shall be preferred where planting in compacted soil
areas, such as parking lots and sidewalks.
   (3)   Landscape swales, pervious paving and other landscape features should
be incorporated into site design to the maximum extent feasible to accommodate
filtration of storm water runoff from impervious areas, particularly from
parking lots.
   (4)   All projects requiring discretionary review within the multi-family,
commercial, or industrial zoning districts should, where feasible, pursuant to
Chapter 16.12: Recycled Water, and include the following:
      (a)   Incorporation of recycled water usage into the design of landscape
and irrigation systems.
      (b)   Consideration of plants suitable for irrigation with recycled
water.
      (c)   The installation of the infrastructure necessary to connect the
irrigation system to the city’s recycled water supply, if available in the
foreseeable future.
   (5)   The director may allow a combination of hardscape and landscape to
satisfy landscape requirements where permeable surface materials are used and
where the visual quality and screening functions of the hardscape/landscape
area are maintained, as specified in the conditions of approval.
(Ord. 5554 § 30, 2022: Ord. 5494 § 3, 2020: Ord. 4934 § 3 (part), 2007)
18.40.140   Stream Corridor Protection
   (a)   Purpose
   The purpose of the water resources protection measures specified below is to
provide site planning and development standards designed to preserve riparian
resources, protect improvements from damage caused by potential stream flooding
and bank erosion, and minimize storm water pollution. The further intent of the
regulations and guidelines is to consider these factors in site planning early
in the review process.
   (b)   Water Resources Protection for Streamside Properties
      (1)   Streamside Review Area Defined
   "Streamside review area" means all properties abutting a stream or located
within 50 feet from the top of a stream bank, except those properties separated
from the stream by a public street.
      (2)   Applicability of Streamside Review Area Requirements and Guidelines
   For parcels within the streamside review area, the following types of
developments are subject to these requirements and guidelines listed in
subsections (3) and (4) below.
         (a)   Development in all zones except the R-1, R-2 and RMD districts;
         (b)   Development in the R-1, R-2, or RMD zones requiring
discretionary review, including but not limited to:
            (i)   Individual review for a new two-story home
            (ii)   Individual review for a new second story on an existing
house, where an expansion or change in the building footprint results
            (iii)   Variances, including for fences
            (iv)   Home Improvement Exceptions; and
         (c)   Development requiring a Conditional Use Permit in the R-1, R-2,
or RMD zones.
   The following projects are exempt from streamside review area requirements
and guidelines:
         (a)   Less than 3 cubic yards of earthwork associated with landscaping
with native riparian vegetation or with remedial creek bank stability work
deemed necessary by the director of public works;
         (b)   Interior construction; or
         (c)   Replacement of utility service laterals where location outside
the protected areas is not readily available.
      (3)   Requirements Within streamside review area
         (a)   Slope stability protection area. All development shall be
located outside the slope stability protection area. The slope stability
protection area shall extend to a point 20 feet landward from the top of bank
or to a point measured at a ratio of 2:1 (horizontal: vertical) landward from
the toe of bank, whichever is greater.
   The following structures/uses shall not be allowed within the slope
stability protection area:
            (i)   All structures (including accessory structures);
            (ii)   Decks of any height;
            (iii)   Swimming pools, spas, and hot tubs; and
            (iv)   Parking lots.
   Exceptions to this requirement may be granted by the director of public
works where the applicant provides a geotechnical slope stability analysis,
demonstrating that the proposed development would not threaten the stability of
the stream bank slope, require introduction of hardscape in order to maintain
the stream bank slope, or be at risk of damage from future bank stability or
erosion, and demonstrating how maintenance and repair of the stream could be
provided with the proposed development in place, subject to compliance with
requirements (b) through (i) below and with all applicable zoning setbacks.
         (b)   New fences shall be constructed a minimum of five feet landward
from the top of bank.
         (c)   All native riparian vegetation within 100 feet from the top of
bank shall be retained unless its removal is approved by the director of
planning and development services. Replacement planting shall be required when
native riparian vegetation is approved for removal.
         (d)   Planting of non-native invasive plant species is not permitted.
Prohibited plant material is listed in the Santa Clara Valley Water Resources
Protection Collaborative's User Manual Guidelines and Standards for Land Uses
Near Streams.
         (e)   Only native riparian vegetation shall be planted between the top
of the banks of a stream.
         (f)   Loading docks, trash enclosures, chemical storage areas, and
stationary noise-producing mechanical equipment shall be located a minimum of
50 feet from the top of bank of a stream, provided that the director may allow
noise-producing equipment closer than 50 feet where site conditions and/or
other setback requirements make compliance impractical.
         (g)   Nighttime lighting shall be directed away from the riparian
corridor of a stream.
         (h)   Irrigation systems shall be designed such that they do not cause
soil erosion.
         (i)   All permitted improvements shall be constructed in a manner
consistent with the current version of the Santa Clara Valley Water Resources
Protection Collaborative User Manual Guidelines and Standards for Land Uses
Near Streams.
      (4)   Guidelines Within Streamside Review Area
         (a)   The distance between nighttime lighting and the riparian
corridor of a stream should be maximized.
         (b)   Bright colors and glossy or glare-producing building finishes on
buildings facing streams or riparian areas should be avoided.
         (c)   Lot Measurement Along Watercourses
   No portion of a lot which is located within the easement lines, or top of
the banks in the event such easement lines cannot be ascertained, of any
natural watercourse, river, stream, creek, waterway, channel, or flood-control
easement or drainage easement shall be included in the determination of lot
area and lot dimensions. In the case of any such lot which is bounded, in whole
or in part, by any such natural watercourse, river, stream, creek, waterway,
channel, or flood-control easement or drainage easement, for those portions of
the lot so bounded, all measurements and dimensions specified by this title and
related to or determined from lot lines shall be measured from said easement
line, or top of the bank, of such watercourse. Provided the expansion of an
existing easement over a lot adjacent to San Francisquito Creek and fronting on
Edgewood Drive in favor of the Santa Clara Valley Water District (or its
successor in interest) on or after January 1, 2002 shall not alter the
calculation of lot area. Lot area, lot dimensions, and setbacks shall be
calculated for such lots as if the post-January 1, 2002 easement had not been
created.
(Ord. 5494 § 3, 2020: Ord. 4934 § 3 (part), 2007)
18.40.150   Storm Water Quality Protection
   (a)   Purpose
   The purpose of this section is to preserve and enhance storm water quality
by reducing pollutants discharged to streams and the San Francisco Bay.
Projects are encouraged to incorporate site design measures to reduce storm
water pollution by decreasing or slowing storm water runoff or interrupting the
flow of runoff across a series of contiguous impervious surfaces into land
development projects.
   (b)   Applicability of Guidelines
   All projects are subject to these guidelines. The following site design
measures should be included in site and building design wherever feasible in
order to minimize storm water runoff and protect and enhance the quality of
storm water runoff leaving the site.
   (c)   Guidelines for Storm Water Quality Protection
      (1)   Minimize land disturbance and preserve high-quality open space,
riparian corridors, and wetlands on the development site.
      (2)   Minimize the amount of impervious surface (e.g., buildings, roads,
driveways, parking lots, etc.).
      (3)   Minimize directly connected impervious areas by routing storm
runoff into vegetated swales and other landscaped areas before it reaches a
storm drain, street, or stream.
      (4)   Utilize minimum-impact street design standards (e.g., narrow
streets and sidewalks, permeable pavements, etc.).
      (5)   Utilize minimum-impact parking lot design standards (e.g., parking
lot island and perimeter landscaping for storm water drainage, permeable
pavements, etc.).
      (6)   Utilize minimum-impact driveway design standards (e.g., narrow
width, "Hollywood" strips, shared driveways, permeable pavements, etc.).
      (7)   Cluster structures, pavement and other impervious surfaces on the
development site.
      (8)   Route rain water leaders into landscaped areas through the use of
splash blocks or pop-up emitters, rather than directly to an underground storm
drain, in order to promote filtration and infiltration of roof runoff.
      (9)   Utilize microdetention techniques (e.g., bioretention planters,
cisterns, etc.) to slow and reduce storm runoff.
      (10)   Minimize changes to the volume, flow rate, timing, or duration of
storm runoff from the development site.
(Ord. 4934 § 3 (part), 2007)
18.40.160   Replacement Project or Discretionary Review Required
   (a)   Except where necessary for health and safety purposes (as determined
by the City’s Building Official), no permit required under Title 2
(Administrative Code), Title 12 (Public Works and Utilities), or Title 16
(Building Regulations) shall be issued:
      (1)   For demolition or deconstruction of a single family residence or
duplex in the Low-Density Residential District (
Chapter 18.10) or Single Family Residential District (
Chapter 18.12), unless building permit plans for a replacement project have
been approved. This subsection shall also apply to demolition of a single
family residence or duplex in the Multiple Family Residential District (
Chapter 18.13) when the replacement project does not require discretionary
review.
      (2)   For any project requiring discretionary review under Title 18 or
Title 21, unless the application for discretionary review has been approved.
      (3)   For demolition or deconstruction of a residential unit, unless a
replacement project has been approved that contains at least as many
residential dwelling units as will be demolished.
         (A)   If the proposed development project is not a housing development
project, the replacement housing units may be located on a site other than the
project site but shall be located within Palo Alto and shall be developed prior
to or concurrently with the proposed development project.
         (B)   If the existing residential unit(s) is a nonconforming use, it
shall be replaced in a manner consistent with the current zone district
regulations.
         (C)   Replacement of protected units, as those terms are defined in
California Government Code Section 66300.5, shall be subject to the additional
requirements of California Government Code Section 66300.6.
   (b)   Notwithstanding subdivision (a) of this section, a permit for
demolition or deconstruction may be issued before the approval of planning
entitlements or building permits for a replacement project in order to allow
for the remediation of hazardous conditions on the site.
      (1)   This subdivision (b) applies only to properties that are eligible
for inclusion on any list of hazardous materials release sites maintained
pursuant to California Government Code Section 65962.5 and are subject to a
remediation plan or similar that has been approved by the applicable oversight
agency, such as the California Department of Toxic Substances Control,
California Water Resources Control Board, or County of Santa Clara Department
of Environmental Health, and that requires demolition or deconstruction of the
existing site improvements for decontamination to proceed.
      (2)   No trees shall be removed unless required under the remediation
plan. Any tree removed shall be subject to Title 8 of this code. The Director
may defer any tree canopy replacement requirements until construction of the
replacement project on the site and require a performance bond or similar
security instrument.
      (3)   Sites granted an early demolition or deconstruction permit pursuant
to this subdivision (b) must remediate the hazardous site conditions to cleanup
levels compatible with residential use, as approved by the applicable
environmental oversight agency, such as the California Department of Toxic
Substances Control, California Water Resources Control Board, or County of
Santa Clara Department of Environmental Health.
      (4)   If the subject property is designated as a housing inventory site
in the City’s operative housing element, the site may be used only for a
housing development project as defined in California Government Code Section
65589.5. The property owner shall sign and record a covenant against the
property, in a form acceptable to the city attorney, which requires that the
property be used only as the site of a housing development project for as long
as the subject property is listed as a housing inventory site in the operative
housing element. The covenant shall be binding upon all successors in interest
to the property.
      (5)   This subdivision (b) does not apply if the subject property is
listed in, or is determined to be eligible for listing in, the California
Register of Historical Resources.
      (6)   This subdivision (b) does not apply if it would require demolition
of an existing residential use on a portion of the property in order to
complete remediation.
      (7)   This subdivision (b) shall be effective only through March 10,
2026, unless extended by the City Council or superseded by replacement
ordinance.
      (8)   Sites granted an early demolition or deconstruction permit pursuant
to this subdivision (b) must submit a Site Maintenance Plan and receive
approval from the Director of Planning prior to issuance of the demolition or
deconstruction permit. The Site Maintenance Plan shall address the proposed
condition of the site following the completion of remediation work and until a
building permit is issued for a replacement project. The Site Maintenance Plan
may include measures such as installation and maintenance of fencing to secure
the property as well as landscaping.
(Ord. 5648 § 2, 2025: Ord. 5646 § 6, 2025: Ord. 5587 § 13, 2023: Ord. 5542 §
12, 2022: Ord. 5538 § 12, 2021: Ord. 5406 § 3, 2017)
18.40.170   Deferral of Director's Action
The director shall have the authority to forward projects to City Council for
final action in the circumstances listed below. No action by the Director shall
be required, and the appeal process and or request for hearing process shall
not apply to such referred actions, provided, however, that the Director may
seek a recommendation from the Architectural Review Board or Planning and
Transportation Commission prior to action by the City Council.
   (a)   In the case of projects having multiple entitlements, where one
requires City Council approval, all entitlements may be referred to City
Council for final action;
   (b)   Projects involving leases or agreements for the use of City-owned
property; and
   (c)   Projects requiring a statement of overriding considerations, pursuant
to Section
18.31.010; and
   (d)   Projects, as deemed appropriate by the director.
(Ord. 5493 § 4, 2020: Ord. 5406 § 4, 2017)
18.40.180   Retail Preservation
   (a)   Conversion of Retail and Retail-Like Uses Prohibited.
      (1)   Any ground floor Retail or Retail-Like use permitted or operating
as of March 2, 2015 may be replaced only by another Retail or Retail-Like use,
as permitted in the applicable district.
         (A)   A ground floor Retail or Retail-Like use in the RT-35 district
on properties with frontage on Alma Street between Channing Avenue and Lincoln
Avenue may additionally be replaced by a Private Educational Facility use,
provided that such use shall not be thereafter replaced by an Office use.
      (2)   The phrase 'use permitted or operating' as used in this section
means:
         (A)   A lawfully established use conducting business, including legal
non-conforming uses.
         (B)   An established use conducting business without required city
approvals, but is a permitted or conditionally permitted use in district.
         (C)   For parcels vacant on March 2, 2015, the last use that was
lawfully established, or established without required permits, and permitted or
conditionally permitted in the district.
   (b)   Non-conforming Uses.
      (1)   The requirements imposed by subsection (a) shall not apply to
Retail or Retail-like uses that are no longer permitted or conditionally
permitted in the applicable district.
      (2)   Nothing in this section shall modify the provisions of
Chapter 18.70 regarding the expansion, change, discontinuance, or termination
of a non-conforming use.
   (c)   Waivers and Adjustments; and Exemptions.
      (1)   Grounds. The following shall be grounds for a request for waiver or
adjustment of the requirements contained in this section:
         (A)   Economic Hardship. An applicant may request that the
requirements of this section be adjusted or waived based on a showing that
applying the requirements of this section would effectuate an unconstitutional
taking of property or otherwise have an unconstitutional application to the
property; or
         (B)   Alternative Viable Active Use. Except in the GF or R combining
districts, an applicant may request that the requirements of this Section
18.40.160 be adjusted or waived based on a showing that: the permitted retail
or retail-like use is not viable; the proposed use will support the purposes of
the zoning district and Comprehensive Plan land use designation; and the
proposed use will encourage active pedestrian-oriented activity and
connections.
      (2)   Documentation. The applicant shall bear the burden of presenting
substantial evidence to support a waiver or modification request under this
Section and shall set forth in detail the factual and legal basis for the
claim, including all supporting technical documentation. Evidence in support of
a waiver under subsection (c)(1)(B) must demonstrate the viability of existing
and future uses on the site, based on both the site characteristics and the
surrounding uses; specifically whether a substitute use could be designed and/
or conditioned to contribute to the goals and purposes of the zoning district.
Examples of such evidence include:
         (A)   A 10-year history of the site's occupancy and reasons for
respective tenants vacating the site;
         (B)   A map that indicates all the existing surrounding uses, both
residential and non-residential, within one City-block; include the
corresponding zone district on the map;
      (3)   Any request under this section shall be submitted to the Director
together with supporting documentation. The Director, in his or her sole
discretion, may act on a request for waiver or refer the matter to the City
Council.
         (A)   A decision by the Director shall be placed on the City Council's
consent calendar within 45 days.
         (B)   Removal of the recommendation from the consent calendar shall
require three votes, and shall result in a new public hearing before the City
Council, following which the City Council shall take action on the waiver
request.
         (C)   The decision of the Council is final.
      (4)   Exemptions. The following uses shall be exempt or partially exempt
from the provisions of this Section
18.40.180, as provided below:
         (A)   A 100% affordable housing project not within the Ground Floor
(GF) and/or Retail (R) combining districts nor El Camino Real Node area as
depicted in Figure 5. A "100% affordable housing project" as used herein shall
have the same meaning as provided in Section
18.14.040(c).
         (B)   A 100% affordable housing project on a site abutting El Camino
Real outside the Retail (R) combining district. A "100% affordable housing
project" as used herein shall have the same meaning as provided in Section
18.14.040(c).
         (C)   A residential project located on a Housing Element Opportunity
Site listed in Appendix D of the Housing Element, except for projects located
within an El Camino Real Node area, as depicted in Figure 5, that utilize the
Housing Incentive Program to exceed the realistic capacity estimates identified
in Appendix D of the Housing Element.
         (D)   A high-density residential or mixed-use project shall be
required to replace only up to 1,500 square feet of an existing retail or
retail-like use and shall be exempt from minimum vehicle parking requirements
pursuant to
Chapter 18.52 (Table 1) for this retail or retail-like floor area. For the
purposes of this partial exemption, high-density shall mean 30 or more dwelling
units per acre. This reduction in retail square footage and minimum vehicle
parking requirements shall not apply for a site within the Ground Floor (GF) or
Retail (R) combining districts, or within an El Camino Real Retail Node area,
unless the site is a Housing Element opportunity site, as depicted in Figure 5.
         (E)   The El Camino Real Node map in Figure 5 may be updated by
resolution of the City Council or by administrative regulation issued by the
Director of Planning and Development Services.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9750.png]
 
   (d)   Reconstruction.
      Any ground floor Retail use existing on or after March 2, 2015 may be
demolished and rebuilt provided that the portion of square footage used as
Retail use on or after March 2, 2015 is not reduced except that Retail square
footage may be reduced by the minimum amount needed to provide access to any
new upper floor and/or lower level.
   (e)   Applicability to Current Requirements.
      Nothing in this section shall alter requirements of site-specific Planned
Community zoning ordinances or adopted conditions of approval. Nothing in the
section shall be construed to waive the requirement for a conditional use
permit or other entitlement where such requirements currently exist.
(Ord. 5650 § 9, 2025: Ord. 5512 § 5, 2020: Ord. 5460 § 9, 2019: Ord. 5407 § 6,
2017)
18.40.190   Application Withdrawal by Applicant or Director
   (a)   Applicant Withdrawal.
   The applicant may withdraw any rezoning, permit or other application
submitted pursuant to this title at any time before action to approve,
conditionally approve or deny the application has been taken by the decision
making body, by providing written notification to the director.
   (b)   Inactive Applications.
   Where there is inactivity on an application on the part of the applicant for
a period of at least six consecutive months, the director shall have the
authority to deem an application withdrawn after providing written notice as
provided herein. The director shall provide notice of his or her intent to deem
an application withdrawn at least thirty days prior to the proposed effective
date. Such notice shall be provided by first class mail to the last known
address of the applicant on record with the director. For purposes of this
section, “inactivity” on an application means that the director has requested
from the applicant or has provided the applicant with notice of additional
information, materials and/or fees needed by the director from the applicant to
continue to process the application and the applicant has failed to adequately
respond to that request or notice.
(Ord. 5432 § 11 (part), 2018)
18.40.200   New Application Submittal Required
   The director shall have the authority to require the filing of a new
application when a pending application project description, proposed land uses,
building design, or other aspects of the project are substantially modified as
to warrant a new review of the project to applicable code sections. The filing
of a new application shall be subject to new fees and shall render the previous
application withdrawn.
(Ord. 5432 § 11 (part), 2018)
18.40.210   Annual Office Limit
   (a)   Applicability
      The regulations set forth in this section shall apply to all office
annual limit land uses that are established by new construction or through the
conversion of existing development.
   (b)   Definitions
      For purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the
definitions below:
      (1)   "Office annual limit area" means the area shown in Exhibit A
(attached to Ordinance No. 5439), comprising portions of the commercial
districts of downtown, the California Avenue Area and the El Camino Real
corridor.
      (2)   "Office annual limit land uses" shall include any of the following
uses, each as defined in Section 18.04.030, in the office annual limit area:
         (A)   Research and development;
         (B)   Administrative office services;
         (C)   General business office;
         (D)   Medical office greater than 5,000 net new square feet; and
         (E)   Professional office.
   (c)   Office Annual Limit
      No more than 50,000 net new square feet of office annual limit land uses
per fiscal year (July 1 to June 30) shall be approved by the city in the office
annual limit area.
      (1)   The 50,000 square foot limit imposed by this section shall not
apply to exempt projects as defined in subsection (d) of this section and such
projects shall not be counted towards this limit. However, if an exempt medical
office project under subsection (d)(1) or exempt city office use under
subsection (d)(3) is subsequently converted to a non-exempt office annual limit
land use, the associated square footage shall be counted toward the 50,000
square foot limit for the fiscal year in which the conversion is requested or
occurs.
      (2)   The 50,000 square foot limit shall apply to existing building area
previously used by non-office annual limit land uses and converted to any of
the office annual limit land uses.
      (3)   The removal of existing office annual limit land uses through
demolition or conversion shall increase the amount of capacity available for
allocation in that fiscal year by the amount of square footage removed.
      (4)   Unallocated square footage of office annual limit land uses shall
be carried over to the next fiscal year and be available for allocation until
the end of that fiscal year only.
      (5)   Notwithstanding subsections (3) and (4) above, at no time shall the
annual office limit for a single fiscal year exceed 100,000 square feet.
      (6)   This restriction shall be in addition to any other applicable
growth restriction including but not limited to Comprehensive Plan Policy L-
1.10. In the event multiple policies apply to a project, the policy most
restrictive of growth shall apply.
   (d)   Exemptions
      The following projects shall be exempt from the office annual limit
established by this section, provided that only one exemption shall be
permitted per project site.
      (1)   Small Projects. Projects comprised of 2,000 net new square feet or
fewer of office annual limit land uses, including accessory office space that
is incidental to and customarily associated with a principal use or facility.
This exemption shall be increased to 5,000 net new square feet or fewer where
the net new square footage is devoted to medical office or nonprofit office use
with a deed restriction to maintain the use for and by a nonprofit
organization.
      (2)   Self-Mitigating Projects. Projects that would both: (1) provide
rental housing for more workers than would be employed in the project; and (2)
provide substantial transportation demand management strategies (individually
or in cooperation with other projects or programs) to improve the current
parking and traffic conditions.
      (3)   City Office Space. New office space used by the City of Palo Alto.
   (e)   Economic Hardship Waiver or Adjustment
      An applicant may request that the requirements of this section be
adjusted or waived based on a showing that applying the requirements of this
section would effectuate an unconstitutional taking of property or otherwise
have an unconstitutional application to the property.
      The applicant shall bear the burden of presenting evidence to support a
waiver or modification request under this section and shall set forth in detail
the factual and legal basis for the claim, including all supporting technical
documentation.
      Any such request under this section shall be submitted to the director
together with an economic analysis or other supporting documentation and shall
be acted upon by the city council.
   (f)   Allocation of Office Square Footage for Projects Subject to the Office
Annual Limit
      (1)   Office development capacity for office annual limit land uses shall
be allocated upon approval of a planning entitlement, or a building permit or
certificate of use and occupancy if no planning entitlement is required, in the
order that the projects are approved.
         (A)   If a planning entitlement approved by the director is appealed
to the city council, the project shall be allowed to retain the office
allocation provided that the director's approval decision is upheld by city
council. If the city council overturns the director's approval decision and
denies the project, the office allocation shall be forfeited and made available
to other projects.
         (B)   If the planning entitlement or building permit with which the
project received an office allocation expires, the office allocation shall be
forfeited and made available to other projects. A project that received an
office allocation at issuance of a certificate of use and occupancy for the
purposes of converting existing developed non-office space to one or more
office annual limit land uses, shall forfeit its office allocation if the
related building permit expires and the office allocation will be made
available to other projects. However, if the expiration of the planning
entitlement or building permit occurs in a later fiscal year than when the
office allocation was made, the forfeited office allocation will only be made
available to other projects if it would not cause the annual office limit for
that fiscal year to exceed 100,000 square feet.
      (2)   If more than one project will be considered for approval on the
same day, then the project with the earliest initial submittal date shall have
priority in receiving office allocation.
      (3)   Projects that cannot be approved due to the office annual limit
being reached for that fiscal year shall be considered for approval the
following fiscal year.
   (g)   Implementation
   The director shall have the authority to adopt rules or procedures for the
efficient and equitable implementation of these regulations.
(Ord. 5439 § 2, 2018)
18.40.220   Growth Management.
   This Section
18.40.200 adopts the citywide cap on office/R&D development that appears in
Policy L-1.10 of the City of Palo Alto Comprehensive Plan 2030 pursuant to the
Palo Alto Reduced Office/R&D Development Cap Initiative:
   Cap new square feet of office/R&D development citywide at 850,000 square
feet, exempting medical office uses in the Stanford University Medical Center
(SUMC) vicinity. Use January 1, 2015 as the baseline and monitor development
towards the cap on an annual basis. Continue to exempt medical, governmental
and institutional uses from the cap on office/R&D development; no other
exemptions are allowed.
   Notwithstanding anything in this Municipal Code or any other City ordinance
or resolution to the contrary, the City shall not approve any non-exempt
office/R&D development that would exceed this cap, or add further exemptions to
the cap, except to the extent permitted by the Palo Alto Reduced Office/R&D
Development Cap Initiative.
   Through December 31, 2030, this Section
18.40.220 may not be amended or repealed except by a vote of the people,
provided, however, that the Palo Alto City Council may reduce the citywide cap
of 850,000 new square feet of office/R&D development without a vote of the
people.
(Ord. 5446 § 2, 2018, adopting a citizen initiative)
18.40.230   Rooftop Gardens
   Where allowed under this Title, in order to qualify as usable open space, a
rooftop garden shall meet the following standards:
   (a)   Permanent fixtures on the rooftop shall be placed so as not to exceed
height limit for the applicable zoning district, except:
      (i)   Elevators, stairs and guardrails may exceed the height limit to
allow for access to the rooftop useable open space. These fixtures shall be
designed to the lowest height and size feasible in order to comply with
applicable building codes.
      (ii)   Permanent fixtures associated with the useable open space, such as
trellises, shade structures, furniture, and furnishings such as planters,
lighting and heaters, may exceed the height limit by up to 12 feet.
      (iii)   For the height limit exceptions in (i) and (ii) above, all
fixtures shall not intersect a plane measured at a forty-five degree angle from
the edge of the building starting at the rooftop garden surface sloping upward
and inward toward the center of the property.
   (b)   The rooftop garden shall be located on the third or higher story.
   (c)   The rooftop garden shall be accessible to all residents of dwelling
units on the parcel, but not to commercial tenants of a residential mixed-use
development.
   (d)   Structures or fixtures providing a means of access or egress (i.e.,
stairway, elevator) shall be located away from the building edge to the extent
feasible to minimize visibility from the public right-of-way and adjacent
buildings and privacy impacts. These access structures or fixtures, when
exceeding the height limit, shall be subject to the provisions of subsection
(a)(iii) above.
   (e)   Any lighting shall be shielded from public views and have full cutoff
fixtures that cast downward-facing light, or consist of low-level string
lights; no up-lighting is permitted. Lights shall be dimmable to control glare
and placed on timers to turn off after 10:00 p.m. Photometric diagrams must be
submitted by the applicant to ensure there are no spillover impacts into
windows or openings of adjacent properties.
   (f)   At least 15% but no more than 25% of the rooftop shall be landscaped
with raised beds for gardening, C.3 stormwater planters, or other landscaping.
All required landscaped areas shall be equipped with automatic irrigation
systems and be properly drained.
   (g)   Rooftop equipment that emit noise and/or exhaust, including but not
limited to vents, flues, generators, pumps, air conditioning compressors, and
other protrusions through the roof, shall be directed away and screened from
the useable open space areas.
   (h)   Rooftop open space noise levels shall not exceed exterior residential
noise level as defined by Section 9.10.030(a) of this code.
   (i)   The use of sound amplifying equipment shall be prohibited. Signs shall
be affixed adjacent to access elevators and stairs within the rooftop garden
providing notice of this prohibition.
(Ord. 5460 § 10, 2019)
18.40.240   Refuse Disposal Areas
   (a)   Purpose
   Assure that development provides adequate and accessible interior areas or
covered exterior enclosures for the storage of refuse in appropriate containers
with storage capacity for a maximum of one week, and that refuse disposal
structures and enclosures are located as far from abutting residences as is
reasonably possible. The following requirements apply to new construction,
change of use, additional uses, and/or renovating 30% or more existing floor
area.
   (b)   Requirements
      (1)   Location and Capacity
         (A)   Capacity shall meet or exceed standards pursuant to
Chapter 5.20: Collection, Removal, and Disposal of Refuse and current refuse
enclosure regulations identified in the "City of Palo Alto Refuse Enclosure
Area Guidelines for New Construction and Redevelopment Projects" and the
"Refuse Enclosure Design Guide" maintained by the Public Works Department.
         (B)   Refuse disposal and structures and enclosures shall be
accessible to all residents or users of the property.
         (C)   Mixed use development shall have separate enclosures for each
use classification (example: residential and commercial).
         (D)   Compostable materials and recyclable materials containers shall
be located adjacent to solid waste containers, sized, and designed to encourage
and facilitate convenient use.
         (E)   Refuse enclosures shall be no closer than 20 feet from any
dwelling unit (including those on abutting properties). No minimum distance
from dwellings is required if containers are located within a fully enclosed
utility room.
         (F)   Individual refuse containers may be used to serve residential
projects with one or two dwelling units. Shared containers shall service
residential projects with three or more units, unless otherwise approved by the
Public Works Director or any designee.
      (2)   Screening and Enclosures
         (A)   Enclosures shall be design pursuant to the current refuse
enclosure regulations found in the "City of Refuse Enclosure Area Guidelines
for New Construction and Redevelopment Projects" and "Refuse Enclosure Design
Guide" standards maintained by the Public Works Department.
         (B)    Refuse disposal areas shall be screened from public view by
masonry, wood, or other opaque and durable material, or located within a
building or covered enclosure.
         (C)   Enclosures shall have a roof, walls, and be at least six feet
tall. Enclosures shall include wheel stops or curbs to prevent dumpsters from
damaging enclosure walls.
         (D)   Gates or other controlled access shall be provided where
feasible.
         (E)   Chain link enclosures are prohibited.
         (F)   Refuse disposal structures and enclosures shall be
architecturally compatible with the design of the project.
         (G)   Notwithstanding, subsections (B) and (C) above, in lower density
residential districts (RE, R-1, R-2, and RMD), containers may be stored under
extended eaves at least three feet deep, without full enclosures.
         (H)   The design, construction and accessibility of refuse disposal
areas and enclosures shall be pursuant to Section
18.76.020.
(Ord. 5554 § 18, 2022)
18.40.250   Lighting
   (a)   Purpose:
   Exterior lighting of parking areas, pathways, and common open spaces,
including fixtures on building facades and free-standing lighting should aim
to:
      (1)   Minimize the visual impacts of lighting on abutting or nearby
properties and from adjacent roadways.
      (2)   Provide for safe and secure access on a site and adjacent
pedestrian routes.
      (3)   Achieve maximum energy efficiency.
      (4)   Complement the architectural design of the project.
   (b)   Guidelines:
      (1)   Lighting of the building exterior, parking areas and pedestrian
ways should be of the lowest intensity and energy use adequate for its purpose,
and be designed to focus illumination downward to avoid excessive illumination
above the light fixture.
      (2)   Interior lighting shall be designed to minimize nighttime glow
visible from and/or intruding into nearby properties.
      (3)   Unnecessary continued illumination, such as illuminated signs or
back-lit awnings, should be avoided. Internal illumination of signs, where
allowed, should be limited to letters and graphic elements, with the
surrounding background opaque. Illumination should be by low intensity lamps.
      (4)   Timing devices and dimmers should be used for exterior and interior
lights in order to minimize light glare at night and control lighting levels.
At the time of project approval, the project applicant should demonstrate how
interior and exterior lighting sources will be reduced after operating hours or
when the use of the facility is reduced.
   (c)   Requirements
      (1)   The use of high pressure sodium and metal halide are permitted
light sources. Low pressure sodium is not allowed.
      (2)   Exterior lighting fixtures shall be mounted less than or equal to
15 feet from grade to top of fixture in low activity or residential parking
lots and 20 feet in medium or high activity parking lots.
      (3)   Levels of exterior illumination for most uses range from 0.5 to 5
footcandles. Areas of higher or lower levels of illumination should be
indicated on project plans.
      (4)   Where the light source is visible from outside the property
boundaries on an abutting residential use, such lighting shall not exceed 0.5
foot-candle as measured at the abutting property line.
      (5)   Interior lighting shall be shielded to eliminate glare and light
spillover beyond the perimeter property line of the development.
      (6)   Light fixtures shall be located at least three feet from curbs and
ten feet from driveways or intersections, to avoid obstructing clear sight
distance triangles.
      (7)   Pedestrian and security lighting fixtures shall be fully shielded.
Architectural lighting that projects upward from the ground as used in
landscaping, courtyards, or building accent should be directed onto the
building face.
      (8)   Non-residential projects, adjacent to residential zoning districts
or residential uses, shall use timing devices, dimmers, and/or window shades
with timers in order to minimize light glare at night and control lighting
levels from exterior and interior lights.
(Ord. 5554 § 19, 2022)
18.40.260   Visual Screening and Landscaping
   (a)   Purpose
   Utilities, mechanical equipment, service areas, and other site fixtures
should be:
      (1)   Integrated into the site planning and architectural design of a
project and surrounding uses.
      (2)   Visually screened from public view and from adjacent properties
through architectural design, landscaping and screening devices.
   (b)   Requirements
      (1)   For non-residential properties abutting residential uses:
         (A)   A solid wall or fence between five and eight feet in height
shall be constructed and maintained along the residential property line.
         (B)   Walls facing residential properties shall incorporate
architectural design features and landscaping in order to reduce apparent mass
and bulk.
         (C)   Loading docks and exterior storage of materials or equipment
shall be screened from view from residential properties by fencing, walls or
landscape buffers.
         (D)   All required interior yards (setbacks) abutting residential
properties shall be planted and maintained as a landscaped screen.
      (2)   For all project types:
         (A)   All areas not covered by structures, service yards, walkways,
driveways, and parking spaces shall be landscaped with ground cover, shrubs,
and/or trees.
         (B)   Rooftop equipment shall be screened by a parapet or enclosure.
Rooftop equipment or rooftop equipment enclosures shall be set back at least 20
feet from the building edge or a minimum of 100 feet from the property line,
whichever is closer. Roof vents, flues and other protrusions through the roof
of any building or structure shall be obscured from ground-level public view
(when viewed from the sidewalk on the opposite side of a street), by a roof
screen or proper placement. See Section
18.40.090 (height limit exceptions) for further restrictions.
         (C)   A minimum ten-foot planting and screening strip shall be
provided adjacent to any façade abutting a low density residential district (R-
1, R-2, or RMD) or abutting railroad tracks.
         (D)   All exterior mechanical and other types of equipment, whether
installed on the ground or attached to a building roof or walls, shall be
obscured from public view, when viewed from the abutting opposite sidewalk,
except for residentially used EVSE and energy storage systems and associated
bollards.
         (E)   Windows, balconies or similar openings above the first story
should be offset so as not to have a direct line-of-sight into the interior
living areas of adjacent units within the project or into units on abutting
residential property.
   (c)   Guidelines
      (1)   For landscape buffers to provide a visual screen, trees and shrubs
in the buffer area shall be installed in a manner that provides maximum visual
separation of residential uses from the commercial or industrial use, taking
into consideration topography and sight lines from residences.
      (2)   Size and density of plant materials shall be in proportion to the
size of planting areas and the mass of the structure.
      (3)   Plant material selection shall take into consideration solar
orientation, drought tolerance, maintenance requirements and privacy screening.
      (4)   Plant material species and container sizes shall allow for a mature
appearance within five years.
      (5)   Roof vents, flues and other protrusions through the roof of any
building or structure should be clustered where feasible and where visual
impacts would thereby be minimized.
      (6)   Building elevations facing residential property should not have
highly reflective surfaces, such as reflective metal skin and highly reflective
glazing. The paint colors should be in subdued hues.
      (7)   Increased setbacks or more restrictive daylight planes may be
proposed by the applicant, or recommended by the architectural review board, as
mitigation for the visual impacts of massive buildings.
      (8)   Appropriate landscaping should be used to aid in privacy screening.
      (9)   Planting strips and street trees should be included in the project.
      (10)   Textured and permeable paving materials should be used, where
feasible, in pedestrian, driveway and parking areas in order to visually reduce
paved areas and to allow for retention and/or infiltration of storm water to
reduce pollutants in site runoff.
      (11)   Landscaping material associated with screening should have
adequate room to grow and be protected from damage by cars and pedestrian
traffic.
      (12)   Where rooftops are visible from offsite, they should be treated to
minimize aesthetic impacts, including the use of rooftop gardens or other green
spaces, where feasible.
(Ord. 5601 § 6, 2023: Ord. 5554 § 21, 2022)
18.40.270   Air Quality
   (A)   Purpose
   The requirements for air quality are intended to buffer residential uses
from potential sources of odor and/or toxic air contaminants.
   (B)   Requirements
      (i)   Cooking odors, smoke and other similar air contaminants shall be
controlled and prevented from leaving the property or becoming a nuisance to
neighboring properties.
      (ii)   For all commercial and industrial uses that may be objectionable
by reason of the production of emissions of odor, smoke, dust, or other similar
air contaminants, the applicant shall provide information showing proposed
methods to minimize those contaminants. Such provisions may include such means
as regular watering to minimize dust or air scrubbers to minimize smoke.
(Ord. 5554 § 24, 2022: Ord. 4933 § 4 (part), 2007)
Chapter 18.42
STANDARDS FOR SPECIAL USES
Sections:
   
18.42.010   Purposes
   
18.42.020   Application
   
18.42.030   Accessory Uses and Facilities
   
18.42.040   Late Night Uses and Activities
   
18.42.050   Temporary Uses
   
18.42.060   Home Occupations
   
18.42.070   Vehicle Equipment Repair and Storage
   
18.42.080   Reverse Vending Machines
   
18.42.090   Alcoholic Beverages
   
18.42.100   Mobile Homes (Manufactured Housing)
   
18.42.110   Wireless Communication Facilities
   
18.42.120   Resource Conservation Energy Facilities
   
18.42.140   Housing Inventory Sites Small Lot Consolidation
   
18.42.150   Cannabis Cultivation and Commercial Activities
   
18.42.160   Safe Parking
   
18.42.170   PF District Safe Parking
   
18.42.180   Standards for Two Units on Single Family Zoned Lots Pursuant to
Senate Bill 9
   
18.42.185   Standards for Up to Ten Units on Lots Subdivided Pursuant to Senate
Bill 684
   
18.42.190   Noise and Vibration
   
18.42.200   Hazardous Materials
   
18.42.210   Firearms Dealers
   
18.42.220   Standards for Up to Ten Units Pursuant to Senate Bills 684 and 1123
18.42.010   Purposes
   This chapter provides site planning and development standards for special
uses in multiple zoning districts (e.g., in residential, commercial and/or
industrial districts).
(Ord. 4934 § 4 (part), 2007)
18.42.020   Application
   The regulations set forth in this chapter shall apply to the special uses
set forth below, in addition to other applicable provisions of this chapter
including the standards of the zone district where the use is located.
(Ord. 4934 § 4 (part), 2007)
18.42.030   Accessory Uses and Facilities
   (a)   Examples of Accessory Uses and Facilities
   Accessory uses and facilities include, but are not limited to, the following
list of examples; provided that each accessory use or facility shall comply
with all provisions of this title:
      (1)   Residential garages, carports, and parking facilities, together
with access and circulation elements necessary thereto;
      (2)   Customer, visitor, and employee parking facilities, and off-street
loading facilities, together with access and circulation elements necessary
thereto;
      (3)   Facilities for storage incidental to a principal use;
      (4)   Recreational uses and facilities for the use and convenience of
occupants or employees, or guests thereof, of a principal use or facility;
      (5)   Newsstands, gift shops, drugstores, and eating and drinking
facilities, or similar services intended solely for the convenience of
occupants or employees, or guests thereof, of a principal use, when conducted
entirely within a principal facility;
      (6)   Building management offices when located within the principal
facility and limited to the management thereof;
      (7)   Refreshment and service facilities in parks, in playgrounds, and in
permitted public or private recreation facilities or schools;
      (8)   The operation of service facilities and equipment in connection
with schools, hospitals, and similar institutions or uses, when located on the
site of the principal use.
   (b)   If Associated with a Permitted Use or Facility
   Accessory uses and facilities shall be permitted in any district when
incidental to and associated with a permitted use or facility, or when
incidental to and associated with an allowable and authorized conditional use
therein, subject to the provisions of this section.
   (c)   Accessory Uses and Facilities are Conditional on Principal Use
Facility Permit
   No use or facility permitted as an accessory use or facility pursuant to
this section shall be construed to be permitted as a principal use or facility
unless specifically authorized as a permitted or conditional use in the
district in which it shall be located. Operation, occupancy, and continuance of
allowable accessory uses and facilities shall be conditioned upon the continued
occupancy or use of the principal use or facility being served.
   (d)   Relation to Principal Structures and Location
      (1)   Accessory uses and facilities shall be subordinate to the primary
activity of the principal use or the principal facility, respectively.
      (2)   Accessory uses and facilities shall contribute to the comfort,
convenience, efficiency, or necessity of the occupants or the activities of a
principal use, or the function of a principal structure.
      (3)   Accessory uses and facilities shall be located on the same site as
the principal use or structure served, except as otherwise authorized by this
title.
      (4)   Accessory buildings located within a required interior yard, as
permitted by this section, shall not individually or cumulatively occupy an
area exceeding fifty percent of the required rear yard.
(Ord. 4934 § 4 (part), 2007)
18.42.040   Late Night Uses and Activities
(a)   Purpose
   The purpose is to restrict retail or service commercial businesses abutting
(either directly or across the street) or within 50 feet of residentially zoned
properties or properties with existing residential uses
   located within nonresidential zones, with operations or activities between
the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. Operations subject to this code may
include, but are not limited to, deliveries, parking lot and sidewalk cleaning,
and/or clean up or set up operations, but does not include garbage pick up.
(b)   Requirements
   (1)   Retail (including restaurants) or service commercial businesses
abutting or within 50 feet of residentially zoned properties or properties with
existing residential uses located within nonresidential zones, that are open or
with operations or activities between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
shall be operated in a manner to protect residential properties from excessive
noise, odors, lighting or other nuisances from any sources during those hours.
   (2)   Where planning or building permits are required or for a change in use
that results in any such commercial business in the CN, CS, NV-MXM, and NV-MXH
zone districts, operating or with activities between the hours of 10:00 p.m.
and 6:00 a.m., a conditional use permit shall be obtained and conditions of
approval shall be applied as deemed necessary to ensure the operation is
compatible with the abutting (or within 50 feet of) residential property. Said
use permit shall be limited to operations or activities occurring between 10:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
   (3)   Truck deliveries shall not occur before 6:00 a.m. or after 10:00 p.m.,
except pursuant to the provisions of a conditional use permit.
(Ord. 5651 § 9, 2025: Ord. 5554 § 20, 2022)
18.42.050   Temporary Uses
   The director of planning and development services (“director”) may grant a
temporary use permit authorizing the use of a site in any district for a
temporary use, subject to the following provisions:
   (a)   Application shall be made to the director and shall be subject to the
fee prescribed by the municipal fee schedule.
   (b)   The permit may be granted by the director without a requirement for
public hearing and notice.
   (c)   The permit may include authorization to vary from specific
requirements of this title as may be solely related to the requested temporary
use.
   (d)   A temporary use permit, if granted by the director, shall be valid for
a specifically stated time period not to exceed forty-five days. The director
may impose such reasonable conditions or restrictions as he or she deems
necessary to secure the purposes of this title and to assure operation of the
use in a manner compatible with existing and potential uses on adjoining
properties and in the general vicinity.
   (e)   A temporary use permit may be granted by the director if, from the
application or the facts presented to him, he finds:
      (1)   The granting of the application will not be detrimental or
injurious to property or improvements in the vicinity, and will not be
detrimental to the public health, safety, general welfare, or convenience.
      (2)   The proposed use will be located and conducted in a manner in
accord with the Palo Alto Comprehensive Plan and the purposes of this title.
   (f)   Any person who obtains a temporary use permit as provided by this
section and fails to abide by its conditions is guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (g)   Any person who uses a site for a temporary use in violation of Title
18 and fails to obtain a temporary use permit as required by this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 5494 § 3, 2020: Ord. 4934 § 4 (part), 2007)
18.42.060   Home Occupations
   Where permitted, a home occupation shall be subject to the following
limitations:
   (a)   The home occupation shall be conducted in a manner that is compatible
with residential uses permitted in the same district, and in a manner which
does not change the character and appearance of the dwelling unit in which it
is conducted.
   (b)   No person shall be employed on the site in connection with the home
occupation except lawful occupants of the dwelling unit within which the home
occupation is conducted.
   (c)   No advertising shall be permitted on the site.
   (d)   Not more than twenty-five percent of the gross floor area of the
dwelling unit, or five hundred square feet of gross floor area on the site
including accessory buildings, whichever is less, shall be devoted to the home
occupation.
   (e)   The home occupation shall not be conducted in a manner which generates
traffic or parking demand or vehicular deliveries substantially greater than
customarily associated with residential occupancy of the dwelling unit.
   (f)   No mechanical, electrical, or other equipment shall be used, nor shall
a home occupation be conducted in any manner which is a nuisance or is noxious,
offensive, or hazardous by reason of vehicular traffic, noise, electrical or
magnetic interference, vibration, particulate matter, odor, heat, humidity,
glare, refuse, radiation, or other objectionable emissions or effects.
   (g)   No outdoor storage of any material, equipment or goods shall be
permissible in connection with any home occupation.
(Ord. 4934 § 4 (part), 2007)
18.42.070   Vehicle Equipment Repair and Storage
   (a)   Allowable hours and location for vehicle repair
   No person shall service, repair, assemble, disassemble, wreck, modify,
restore, or otherwise work on any vehicle, motor vehicle, camper, camp trailer,
trailer, trailer coach, motorcycle, motor-driven cycle, house car, boat, or
similar conveyance except when conducted within a garage or accessory building,
or during the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. when conducted in an area
screened from view from the street and adjoining lots by a legally located
fence, wall, or equivalent screening. Notwithstanding the foregoing, this
section shall not be construed to prohibit occasional minor maintenance such as
changing spark plugs, oil, belts and hoses.
   (b)   Vehicle storage
   No person shall store, place or park any of the conveyances designated in
subsection (a), or any part thereof, which is disabled, unlicensed,
unregistered, inoperative, or from which an essential or legally required
operating part is removed, including an unmounted camper, camp trailer,
trailer, trailer coach and similar nonmotorized conveyance, or any other
structure or device exceeding sixteen cubic feet in volume to be carried upon
or in any such conveyance, or any equipment, machinery, or similar material
unless conducted within a garage or accessory building, or in an area screened
from view from the street and adjoining lots by a legally located fence, wall,
or equivalent screening.
   (c)   Maximum Continuous Hours of Vehicle Repair
   No person shall service, repair, assemble, disassemble, wreck, modify,
restore, or otherwise work on, or store, place, and park any of the conveyances
designated in this section (excluding [1] passenger vehicles other than house
cars, and [2] "pickup" motor trucks on which no equipment other than a camper
is mounted), whether disabled or fully operative, for an aggregate period of
over seventy-two hours during any continuous period of ninety-six hours in any
open areas on a lot only in locations where an accessory building or principal
building of equivalent height or bulk would be permitted by the provisions of
this title.
   (d)   Refer to California Vehicle Code for Conveyance Definitions
   For the purpose of this section, references to types of conveyances shall
have the same meanings as defined in the Vehicle Code of the State of
California, where such definitions are available.
   (e)   
Chapter 18.70 shall not be Applicable to this Section.
   (f)   Limitations for Sleeping in Recreation Vehicles
   Subject to securing a permit therefore from the building official and
otherwise complying with applicable law, the use of a recreational vehicle, as
defined in this title, may be permitted for sleeping purposes only for a period
not to exceed thirty consecutive days in any calendar year for not more than
two nonpaying guests of the occupant of a single-family dwelling in accord with
all applicable regulations governing parking and storage of vehicles.
   (g)   Vehicle Visibility from Public Streets
   Except in the OS (open space) and AC (agricultural conservation) districts,
no person shall store, place, or park any of the conveyances designated in this
section, whether disabled or fully operative, in any areas visible from a
public street unless it is parked or stored upon either permeable or
impermeable paving surface.
   (h)   Parked Vehicles shall not Obstruct Traffic Views at Intersections
   No person shall store, place, or park any of the conveyances designated in
this section within the thirty-five foot triangle of property at the
intersection of streets improved for vehicular traffic.
            (i)   Parked Vehicles Maximum Coverage of Front Yard
   No person shall store, place, or park any of the conveyances designated in
this section in a manner that they cover more than 40 percent of any required
front yard.
   (j)   Each Day of Violation a Separate Offense
   Violation of this section is a misdemeanor, punishable as provided in this
code. Each day of violation constitutes a separate offense and may be
separately punished.
(Ord. 4934 § 4 (part), 2007)
18.42.080   Reverse Vending Machines
   Reverse vending machines may be established only in conjunction with an
otherwise allowed commercial or industrial use and may not exceed a maximum of
three machines per site or one hundred fifty cubic feet in volume per site.
Sites containing reverse vending machine(s) shall include a refuse container
adjacent to the machine(s) and shall be maintained in a litter free condition.
In addition, a reverse vending machine shall:
      (1)   Not exceed eight feet in height;
      (2)   Be located on the site in a manner which will assure compatibility
with surrounding uses;
      (3)   Be subject to the noise restrictions contained in
Chapter 9.10 of this code.
(Ord. 4934 § 4 (part), 2007)
18.42.090   Alcoholic Beverages
   (a)   Conditional Use Permit Required in Tandem with On-Sale License
   In any district where otherwise permitted by this title, any eating and
drinking establishment or other use having any part of its operation subject to
an on-sale license required by the State of California shall be subject to
securing a conditional use permit.
   (b)   Conditional Use Permit Required with New On-Sale License
   A conditional use permit shall be obtained in the case of premises for which
no conditional use permit is in force, whenever a new on-sale license is
required by the State of California.
   (c)   Amendment to Conditional Use Permit Required with Expansion
   In the case of premises for which a conditional use permit is in force,
which permits the sale of alcohol, an amendment to such permit shall be
required whenever such use is intensified or is expanded in square footage.
   (d)   Amendment to Conditional Use Permit Required with New On-Sale License
   In the case of premises for which a conditional use permit is in force, but
such use permit does not permit sales of alcohol, an amendment to such permit
shall be required whenever a new on-sale license is required by the State of
California.
   (e)   Alcohol Service in Parklets on Rights-of-Way
   Establishments that are allowed by the city to serve alcohol for onsite
consumption by issuance of a conditional use permit (“CUP”) as required in this
section or as a legal nonconforming use, and that have both an on-sale license
from the Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control (“ABC”) and are duly
authorized by ABC to serve alcohol in outdoor areas, shall be allowed to serve
alcohol for onsite consumption without an amendment of the CUP in parklets on
public property approved via permit per PAMC
Chapter 12.11 or other outdoor uses approved via permit per any other relevant
section of the PAMC. Outdoor alcohol service shall be in full compliance with
all applicable regulations, including ABC regulations, as may be amended.
(Ord. 5594 § 6, 2024: Ord. 4934 § 4 (part), 2007)
18.42.100   Mobile Homes (Manufactured Housing)
   In order to be located in any residential district or on any site in any
other district used for residential occupancy, a mobile home (manufactured
housing) must:
   (a)   National Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards
   Be certified under the provisions of the National Mobile Home Construction
and Safety Standards Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. Section 5401, et seq.) or any
successor legislation.
   (b)   Permanent Foundation System
   Be located on a permanent foundation system approved by the building
official pursuant to all applicable laws, including, but not limited to,
California Health and Safety Code Section 18551 or successor legislation.
   (c)   Site Regulations
   Must meet all of the application site regulations of the district in which
it is located.
   (d)   Not Allowed in Historical District of the City
   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this title, mobile homes
(manufactured housing) on permanent foundations shall not be allowed in any
historic district of the city as designated in
Chapter 16.49.
(Ord. 4934 § 4 (part), 2007)
18.42.110   Wireless Communication Facilities
   (a)   Purpose and Interpretation
      The purpose of this section is two-fold: (A) to implement within the
jurisdictional boundaries of the city the applicable zoning, land use and other
laws, rules, regulations and policies and procedures applicable to siting
applications filed with the city by wireless communications facilities
infrastructure owners and operators and wireless communications service
providers, which seek to install or attach their facilities at locations in
Palo Alto; and (B) to accommodate new wireless technologies and continued
improvements to existing wireless communications facilities while minimizing
their adverse visual and structural health and safety impacts. Consistent with
that purpose, the provisions of this section are to be construed in a manner
that is consistent with (1) the interest of consumers in receiving the benefits
of the deployment of ultra-high-speed and -capacity broadband wireless
communication facilities technology and innovations and the delivery of ultra-
high-speed and -capacity broadband wireless communications facilities services,
(2) the interest in safeguarding the environment, preserving historic
properties, and addressing aesthetics and other local values, and (3) the
interest in promoting the public health, safety and welfare in Palo Alto.
Although this section implements and references provisions of preemptive state
and federal law, nothing in this section shall be interpreted to create an
independent source of the rights provided an applicant by such state or federal
law.
      A wireless communications facility is permitted to be sited in Palo Alto
subject to applicable requirements imposed by this chapter. These processes are
intended to permit wireless communications facilities that blend with their
existing surroundings and do not negatively impact the environment, historic
properties, or public safety. The procedures prescribed by this section are
tailored to the type of wireless communication facility that is sought.
Building-mounted wireless communications facilities and collocation of
facilities are preferred and encouraged, subject to all other provisions of
this section.
   (b)   Definitions
      The following abbreviations, phrases, terms and words shall have the
meanings assigned in this section or, as appropriate, in Section
18.04.030 and Section
1.04.050 of the Palo Alto Municipal Code, as may be amended from time to time,
unless the context indicates otherwise. Words that are not defined in this
section or other chapters or sections of the Palo Alto Municipal Code shall
have the meanings as set forth in Chapter 6 of Title 47 of the United States
Code, Part 1 of Title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations, and, if not
defined therein, their common and ordinary meaning.
      (1)   "Antenna" means that part of a wireless communications facility
designed to radiate or receive radio frequency signals or electromagnetic waves
for the provision of personal wireless services, as defined in 42 U.S.C. § 332
(c)(7)(C)(i). This definition does not include antennas designed for amateur or
household use.
      (2)   "Associated equipment" means any and all on-site equipment,
including, without limitation, back-up generators and power supply units,
cabinets, coaxial and fiber optic cables, connections, shelters, radio
transceivers, regular power supply units, and wiring, to which a wireless
antenna is attached in order to facilitate mobile broadband service and
personal wireless service delivered on mobile broadband devices.
      (3)   "Base Station" means the same as defined by the FCC at 47 C.F.R. §
1.6100(b), as it may be amended from time to time. For the purpose of
convenience only, this definition is stated as follows: a structure or
equipment at a fixed location that enables FCC-licensed or authorized wireless
communications between user equipment and a communications network. The term
does not encompass a tower as defined herein or any equipment associated with a
tower. Base Station includes, without limitation:
         A.   Equipment associated with wireless communications services such
as private, broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed
wireless services and fixed wireless services such as microwave backhaul.
         B.   Radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable,
regular and backup power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of
technological configuration (including Distributed Antenna Systems ("DAS") and
small-cell networks).
         C.   Any structure other than a tower that, at the time the relevant
application is filed with the city under this section, supports or houses
equipment described in paragraphs (i)-(ii) above and has been previously
reviewed and approved by the city.
      (4)   "Collocation" means the same as defined in valid regulations
promulgated by the FCC, including 47 C.F.R. §§ 1.6002(g) or 1.6100(b), as those
sections may be amended from time to time. For the purpose of convenience only,
the definition provided in 47 C.F.R. § 1.6100(b), for eligible facilities
requests, is stated as follows: the mounting or installation of transmission
equipment on an eligible support structure for the purpose of transmitting and/
or receiving radio frequency signals for communications purposes.
      (5)   "Eligible Facilities Request" means the same as defined by the FCC
at 47 C.F.R. § 1.6100(b), as it may be amended from time to time. For the
purpose of convenience only, this definition is stated as follows: any request
for modification of an existing tower or base station that, within the meaning
of the Spectrum Act, does not substantially change the physical dimensions of
that tower or base station, and involves (a) the collocation of new
transmission equipment, (b) the removal of transmission equipment, or (c) the
replacement of transmission equipment.
      (6)   "Eligible Support Structure" means the same as defined by the FCC
at 47 C.F.R. § 1.6100(b), as it may be amended from time to time. For the
purpose of convenience only, this definition is stated as follows: any existing
tower or base station that exists at the time the application is filed with the
city.
      (7)   "Existing" means the same as defined by the FCC at 47 C.F.R. §
1.6100(b), as it may be amended from time to time. For the purpose of
convenience only, this definition is stated as follows: a constructed tower or
base station is existing for purposes of an eligible facilities request if has
been previously reviewed and approved under the applicable city zoning or
siting process, or under another applicable state or local regulatory review
process, provided that a tower that has not been reviewed and approved because
it was not in a zoned area when it was built, but was lawfully constructed, is
"Existing" for purposes of this definition.
      (8)   "FCC" means the Federal Communications Commission or successor
agency.
      (9)   "Project" means a WCF to be located in Palo Alto for which a permit
is required by the city.
      (10)   "RF" means radio frequency on the radio spectrum.
      (11)   "Spectrum Act" means Section 6409(a) of the Middle Class Tax
Relief Act and Job Creation Act of 2012, 47 U.S.C. § 1455(a) (providing, in
part, "… a State or local government may not deny, and shall approve, any
Eligible Facilities Request for a modification of any existing wireless Tower
or Base Station that does not substantially change the physical dimensions of
such Tower or Base Station.").
      (12)   "Small Wireless Facility" means the same as defined in any valid
regulations adopted by the FCC. For purposes of convenience only, the
definition provided at 47 C.F.R. Section 1.1312(e)(2) is stated here as
follows: a facility that meets each of the following conditions:
         A.   The structure on which antenna facilities are mounted:
            i.   Is 50 feet or less in height, or
            ii.   Is no more than 10 percent taller than other adjacent
structures, or
            iii.   Is not extended to a height of more than 10 percent above
its preexisting height as a result of the collocation of new antenna
facilities; and
         B.   Each antenna (excluding associated antenna equipment) is no more
than three cubic feet in volume; and
         C.   All antenna equipment associated with the facility (excluding
antennas) are cumulatively no more than 28 cubic feet in volume; and
         D.   The facility does not require antenna structure registration
under 47 C.F.R. Section 17; and
         E.   The facility is not located on Tribal lands, as defined under 36
C.F.R. § 800.16(x); and
         F.   The facility does not result in human exposure to radiofrequency
radiation in excess of the applicable safety standards specified by the FCC.
      (13)   "Substantially Changes" means the same as defined by the FCC at 47
C.F.R. § 1.6100(b), as it may be amended from time to time. For the purpose of
convenience only, this definition is stated as follows: in the context of an
eligible support structure, a modification of an existing tower or base station
where any of the following criteria is met:
         A.   For a tower not located in the public rights-of-way:
            i.   The height of the tower is increased by (I) more than ten (10)
percent, or (II) by the height of one additional antenna array with separation
from the nearest existing antenna not to exceed twenty (20) feet, whichever is
greater; or
            ii.   There is added an appurtenance to the body of the tower that
would protrude from the edge of the tower by (I) more than twenty (20) feet, or
(II) more than the width of the tower at the level of the appurtenance,
whichever is greater.
         B.   For a tower located in the public rights-of-way and for all base
stations:
            i.   The height of the tower or base station is increased by more
than ten (10) percent or ten (10) feet, whichever is greater; or
            ii.   There is added an appurtenance to the body of that structure
that would protrude from the edge of that structure by more than six (6) feet;
or
            iii.   It involves the installation of ground cabinets that are
more than ten (10) percent larger in height or overall volume than any other
ground cabinets associated with the structure; or
            iv.   It involves the installation of any new equipment cabinets on
the ground if there is no pre-existing ground cabinet associated with that
structure.
         C.   For any eligible support structure:
            i.   It involves the installation of more than the standard number
of new equipment cabinets for the technology involved, but not to exceed four
(4) cabinets; or
            ii.   There is entailed in the proposed modification any excavation
or deployment outside of the current site of the tower or base station; or
            iii.   The proposed modification would cause the concealment/
camouflage elements of the tower or base station to be defeated; or
            iv.   The proposed modification would not comply with the
conditions associated with the prior siting approval of construction or
modification of the tower or base station, unless the non-compliance is due to
an increase in height, increase in width, addition of cabinets, or new
excavation that does not exceed the corresponding thresholds in this section.
         D.   To measure changes in height for the purposes of this section,
the baseline is:
            i.   For deployments that are or will be separated horizontally,
measured from the original support structure;
            ii.   For all others, measured from the dimensions of the tower or
base station, inclusive of originally approved appurtenances and any
modifications that were approved by the city prior to February 22, 2012.
         E.   To measure changes for the purposes of this section, the baseline
is the dimensions that were approved by the city prior to February 22, 2012.
      (14)   "Tower" means any structure built for the sole or primary purpose
of supporting any FCC-licensed or -authorized antenna, including any structure
that is constructed for wireless communications service. This term does not
include a base station.
      (15)   "Transmission Equipment" means the same as defined by the FCC at
47 C.F.R. § 1.6100(b), as it may be amended from time to time. For the purpose
of convenience only, this definition is stated as follows: equipment that
facilitates transmission of any FCC-licensed or authorized wireless
communication service.
      (16)   "Wireless Communications Facility" or "WCF" means any antenna,
associated equipment, base station, small wireless facility, tower, and/or
transmission equipment located in Palo Alto, but does not include:
         A.   A facility that qualifies as an amateur station as defined by the
FCC, 47 C.F.R. Part 97, or its successor regulation;
         B.   An antenna facility that is subject to the FCC Over-The-Air-
Receiving Devices rule, 47 C.F.R. Section 1.4000, or any successor regulation;
         C.   Portable radios and devices including, but not limited to, hand-
held, vehicular, or other portable receivers, transmitters or transceivers,
cellular phones, CB radios, emergency services radio;
         D.   Mobile services providing public information coverage of news
events of a temporary nature;
         E.   Telecommunications facilities owned and operated by any
government agency or emergency medical care provider.
   (c)   Types of WCF Permits Required
      (1)   A Tier 1 WCF Permit shall be required for an eligible facilities
request, as defined in this section.
      (2)   A Tier 2 WCF Permit shall be required for:
         A.   Any modification of an eligible support structure, including the
collocation of new equipment, that substantially changes the physical
dimensions of the eligible support structure on which it is mounted; or
         B.   Any collocation of a small wireless facility; or
         C.   Any collocation not eligible for a Tier 1 WCF Permit.
      (3)   A Tier 3 WCF Permit shall be required for the siting of any WCF,
including a small wireless facility, that is not a collocation subject to a
Tier 1 or 2 WCF Permit. An application shall not require a Tier 3 WCF Permit
solely because it proposes the replacement in-place of an existing streetlight
or wood utility pole.
   (d)   WCF Application Requirements
      All applications for a WCF Permit shall include the following items:
      (1)   Any applicant for a WCF Permit shall participate in an intake
meeting with the Planning and Community Environment Department when filing an
application;
      (2)   The applicant must specify in writing whether the applicant
believes the application is for an eligible facilities request subject to the
Spectrum Act, and if so, provide a detailed written explanation as to why the
applicant believes that the application qualifies as an eligible facilities
request;
      (3)   The applicant shall complete the city's standard application form,
as may be amended from time to time;
      (4)   The applicant shall include a completed and signed application
checklist available from the city, including all information required by the
application checklist;
      (5)   Payment of the fee prescribed by the Municipal Fee Schedule;
      (6)   The application must be accompanied by all permit applications with
all required application materials for each separate permit required by the
city for the proposed WCF, including a building permit, an encroachment permit
(if applicable) and an electrical permit (if applicable);
      (7)   For Tier 2 and 3 WCF Permits, the applicant must host a community
meeting at a time and location designed to maximize attendance by persons
receiving notice under this subparagraph to provide outreach to the
neighborhood around the project site. The applicant shall give notice of the
community meeting to all residents and property owners within 600 feet of the
project site at least 14 days in advance of the community meeting. Applicants
are encouraged to host the meeting before submitting an application. Before an
application may be approved, the applicant shall provide a proof of notice
affidavit to the city that contains:
         A.   Proof that the applicant noticed and hosted the community meeting
no later than 15 days after filing the application;
         B.   A summary of comments received at the community meeting and what,
if any, changes were made to the application as a result of the meeting;
      (8)   For Tier 3 WCF Permits, the plans shall include a scaled depiction
of the maximum increase in the physical dimensions of the proposed project that
would be feasible and permitted by the Spectrum Act, using the proposed project
as a baseline; and
      (9)   Satisfy other such requirements as may be, from time to time,
required by the Planning and Community Environment Department Director
("Director"), as publically stated in the application checklist.
   (e)   Permit Review ("Shot Clock") Time Periods. The city shall review and
act upon application materials in a manner consistent with any timeframes
provided in controlling state or federal law, including valid regulations and
orders promulgated by the FCC.
   (f)   Tier 1 WCF Permit Process and Findings
      (1)   A Tier 1 WCF Permit shall be reviewed by the Director. The
Director's decision shall be final and shall not be appealable;
      (2)   The Director shall grant a Tier 1 WCF Permit provided that the
Director finds that the applicant proposes an eligible facilities request;
      (3)   The Director shall impose the following conditions on the grant of
a Tier 1 WCF Permit:
         A.   The proposed collocation or modification shall not defeat any
existing concealment elements of the support structure; and
         B.   The conditions of approval in Section
18.42.110(j).
   (g)   Tier 2 WCF Permit Process and Findings
      (1)   A Tier 2 WCF Permit shall be reviewed by the Director, who may, in
his or her sole discretion, refer an application to the Architectural Review
Board. For WCF installations in the public right of way, the Director shall
refer applications to the Architectural Review Board for review. The Director's
decision shall be appealable directly to the City Council. An appeal may be set
for hearing before the City Council or may be placed on the Council's consent
calendar, pursuant to the process for appeal of architectural review set forth
in Section
18.77.070(f).
      (2)   The Director, or Council on appeal, shall grant a Tier 2 WCF Permit
provided the proposed WCF complies with the conditions of approval in Section
18.42.110(j), the development standards in Section
18.42.110(i)and all of the architectural review findings in Section
18.76.020(d) can be made.
      (3)   The Director, or Council on appeal, shall deny a Tier 2 WCF Permit
if the above findings cannot be made.
   (h)   Tier 3 WCF Permit Process and Findings
      (1)   A Tier 3 WCF Permit shall be reviewed by the Director, who may, in
his or her sole discretion, refer an application to the Architectural Review
Board. For WCF installations in the public right of way, the Director shall
refer applications to the Architectural Review Board for review. The Director's
decision shall be appealable directly to the City Council. An appeal may be set
for hearing before the City Council or may be placed on the Council's consent
calendar, pursuant to the process for appeal of architectural review set forth
in Section
18.77.070(f).
      (2)   The Director or Council on appeal shall grant a Tier 3 WCF Permit
provided the conditional use permit findings in Section
18.76.010(c) can be made, the proposed WCF complies with the conditions of
approval in Section
18.42.110(j)and the development standards in Section
18.42.110(i), and all of the architectural review findings in Section
18.76.020(d) can be made.
      (3)   The Director, or Council on appeal, shall deny a Tier 3 WCF Permit
if the above findings cannot be made.
   (i)   Generally Applicable Development Standards
      Unless the City Council has adopted more specific standards, and except
as otherwise provided in this section, a proposed WCF Project shall comply with
the following standards:
      (1)   Shall utilize the smallest antennae, radio, and associated
equipment, as measured by volume, technically feasible to achieve a network
objective;
      (2)   Shall be screened from public view;
      (3)   When attached to an existing structure, shall be shrouded or
screened using materials or colors found on existing structure;
      (4)   Shall be placed at a location that would not require the removal of
any required landscaping or would reduce the quantity of landscaping to a level
of noncompliance with the Zoning Code;
      (5)   An antenna, base station, or tower shall be of a "camouflaged" or
"stealth" design, including concealment, screening, and other techniques to
hide or blend the antenna, base station, or tower into the surrounding area,
such as the use of a monopine design;
      (6)   Shall not be attached on a historic structure/site, as designated
by
Chapter 16.49;
      (7)   Except as otherwise permitted by the Spectrum Act, a building-
mounted WCF may extend no more than fifteen (15) feet beyond the permitted
height of the building in the zone district;
      (8)   Except as otherwise permitted by the Spectrum Act, a tower or other
stand-alone Tier 3 WCF Project shall not exceed beyond sixty-five (65) feet in
height; and
      (9)   A tower or other stand-alone Tier 3 WCF may encroach into the
interior/street side and rear setback.
   (j)   Conditions of Approval
      In addition to any other conditions of approval permitted under federal
and state law and this Code that the Director deems appropriate or required
under this Code, all WCF Projects approved under this chapter, whether approved
by the Director, City Council, or deemed granted by operation of law, shall be
subject to the following conditions of approval:
      (1)   Permit conditions. The grant or approval of a WCF Tier 1 Permit
shall be subject to the conditions of approval of the underlying permit, except
as may be preempted by the Spectrum Act.
      (2)   As-built plans. The applicant shall submit to the Director an as-
built set of plans and photographs depicting the entire WCF as modified,
including all transmission equipment and all utilities, within ninety (90) days
after the completion of construction.
      (3)   Applicant shall hire a radio engineer licensed by the State of
California to measure the actual radio frequency emission of the WCF and
determine if it meets FCC's standards. A report, certified by the engineer, of
all calculations, required measurements, and the engineer's findings with
respect to compliance with the FCC's radio frequency emission standards shall
be submitted to the Planning Division within one year of commencement of
operation.
      (4)   Indemnification. To the extent permitted by law, the applicant
shall indemnify and hold harmless the city, its City Council, its officers,
employees and agents (the "indemnified parties") from and against any claim,
action, or proceeding brought by a third party against the indemnified parties
and the applicant to attack, set aside or void, any permit or approval
authorized hereby for the Project, including (without limitation) reimbursing
the city for its actual attorneys' fees and costs incurred in defense of the
litigation. The city may, in its sole discretion and at Applicant's expense,
elect to defend any such action with attorneys of its own choice.
      (5)   Compliance with applicable laws. The applicant shall comply with
all applicable provisions of the Code, any permit issued under this Code, and
all other applicable federal, state and local laws (including without
limitation all building code, electrical code and other public safety
requirements). Any failure by the City to enforce compliance with any
applicable laws shall not relieve any applicant of its obligations under this
code, any permit issued under this code, or all other applicable laws and
regulations.
      (6)   Compliance with approved plans. The proposed Project shall be built
in compliance with the approved plans on file with the Planning Division.
      (7)   Subject to city uses. Any permit to install or utilize poles or
conduit in the public rights- of-way is subject to the city’s prior right to
use, maintain, expand, replace or remove from use such facilities in the
reasonable exercise of its governmental or proprietary powers. Such permit is
further subject to the city’s right to construction, maintain, and modify
streets, sidewalks, and other improvements in the public rights-of-way. The
city, in its sole discretion, may require removal or relocation of a
permittee’s equipment, at permittee’s sole cost and expense, if necessary to
accommodate a city use.
      (8)   Replacement. Where feasible, as new technology becomes available,
the applicant shall place above-ground equipment below ground and replace
equipment remaining above-ground with smaller equipment, as determined by
volume. The applicant shall obtain all necessary permits and approvals for such
replacement.
      (9)   Permit length. WCFs permits shall be valid for the time provided in
Section
18.42.110(n), except that a permit shall automatically expire after twelve
months from the date of approval if within such twelve month period, the
applicant has not obtained all necessary permits to commence construction. The
director may, without a hearing, extend such time for a maximum period of
twelve additional months only, upon application filed with him or her before
the expiration of the twelve-month limit.
   (k)   Exceptions
      (1)   The decision-making authority may grant exceptions to any provision
of this Section 18.42.110, upon finding that:
         A.   The proposed WCF complies with the requirements of this Section
18.42.110 and any other requirements adopted by the City Council to the
greatest extent feasible; and either
         B.   As applied to a proposed WCF, the provision(s) from which
exception is sought would deprive the applicant of rights guaranteed by federal
law, state law, or both; or
         C.   Denial of the application as proposed would violate federal law,
state law, or both.
      (2)   An applicant must request an exception at the time an application
is initially submitted for a WCF permit under this Section 18.42.110. The
request must include both the specific provision(s) from which exception is
sought and the basis of the request, including all supporting evidence on which
the applicant relies. Any request for exception after the City has deemed an
application complete constitutes a material change to the proposed WCF and
shall be considered a new application.
      (3)   The applicant shall have the burden of proving that federal law,
state law, or both compel the decision-making authority to grant the requested
exception(s), using the evidentiary standards applicable to the law at issue.
The City shall have the right to hire independent consultants, at the
applicant’s expense, to evaluate the issues raised by the exception request and
to submit rebuttal evidence where applicable.
   (l)   Removal of Abandoned Equipment
      A WCF (Tier 1, Tier 2, or Tier 3) or a component of that WCF that ceases
to be in use for more than ninety (90) days shall be removed by the applicant,
wireless communications service provider, or property owner within ninety (90)
days of the cessation of use of that WCF. A new WCF permit shall not be issued
to an owner or operator of a WCF or a wireless communications service provider
until the abandoned WCF or its component is removed.
   (m)   Revocation
      The Director may revoke any WCF Permit if the permit holder fails to
comply with any condition of the permit. The Director's decision to revoke a
Permit shall be appealable pursuant to the process applicable to issuance of
the Permit, as provided in subdivisions (f), (g), and (h) of this section.
   (n)   Expiration
      Except as otherwise provided in the permit or in a lease or license
agreement with the City of Palo Alto, WCF permits shall be valid for a period
of ten years from the date of approval. An applicant may seek extensions of an
approved WCF permit in increments of no more than ten years and no sooner than
twelve months prior to the expiration of the permit. The Director shall approve
an extension request upon finding that that applicant has complied with all
conditions of approval for the WCF permit and will comply with all other
requirements applicable to WCFs at the time the extension is granted. Prior to
issuing a decision on an extension request, the Director may seek additional
studies and information to be prepared at the applicant’s expense.
(Ord. 5655 § 3, 2025: Ord. 5465 § 2, 2019: Ord. 5432 § 12, 2018: Ord. 5340 § 1
(part), 2015)
18.42.120   Resource Conservation Energy Facilities
   Resource conservation energy facilities may be exempted from floor area
ratio and lot coverage requirements in commercial, industrial and public
facilities zoning districts, subject to the following regulations:
   (a)   Architectural review is required pursuant to the provisions of Section
18.76.020;
   (b)   All facilities shall comply with the performance criteria outlined in
Chapter 18.23;
   (c)   Floor area ratio (FAR) exemptions shall not exceed 3,000 square feet
or 2% (.02 FAR) of the site, whichever is less;
   (d)   Lot coverage exemptions shall not exceed 6,000 square feet or 5% of
the site; and
   (e)   All facilities shall meet the City of Palo Alto's technical
eligibility criteria as follows:
      (1)   Eligible technologies include cogeneration, fuel cells, waste heat
recovery, or renewable energy conversion;
      (2)   Eligible fuels include natural gas or renewable fuels;
      (3)   Cogeneration facilities must meet and maintain FERC and state
efficiency and thermal energy utilization criteria;
      (4)   All technologies must meet ultra-clean distributed generation
efficiency and emissions requirements;
      (5)   Single system maximum size is 10 megawatts (mW), and no larger than
the greater of on-site peak electric load or on-site peak thermal load; and
      (6)   Incremental water consumption shall be from reclaimed or
decontaminated groundwater.
(Ord. 4964 § 17, 2007)
18.42.140   Housing Inventory Sites Small Lot Consolidation
The following incentives and standards shall apply to sites listed in the 2015-
2023 Housing Element's Housing Inventory Sites list and identified as "small
lot, consolidation opportunity" that are merged to form a larger parcel for
development of a 100% affordable rental or ownership housing project. For
purposes of this section only, a "100% affordable rental or ownership housing
project" includes mixed use projects containing ground floor retail and retail
like use provided the residential square footage is at least 85% of the
project's gross floor area.
   (a)   All projects shall comply with the respective development standards
and allowable uses as specified in the underlying zone district, except as
modified below;
   (b)   For HIS properties not located in the RT 35 or RT 50 zones, the RT 35
development standards shall apply and development of a mixed use development is
not required;
   (c)   In the case of a conflict between the provisions of this section and
the RT development standards (Chapter V, SOFA 2), this section shall control;
   (d)   Any HIS property in excess of 10,000 square feet prior to
consolidation shall not be entitled to any of the incentives in this section;
   (e)   The applicable Housing Inventory Site (HIS) can be merged with both
HIS and non-HIS sites;
   (f)   The housing units shall be deed restricted as 100% affordable housing
units for no fewer than 55 years;
   (g)   Rental units shall be made affordable to households earning no more
than 80% of the County's Area Median Income (AMI) and ownership units shall be
made affordable to households earning no more than 120% of AMI;
   (h)   Application processing shall be prioritized throughout the planning
entitlement phase to the maximum extent feasible;
   (i)   All such projects shall be subject to Architectural Review. Site and
design review required in the Code for mixed use projects shall be waived for
such projects;
   (j)   All subdivisions, regardless of the number of parcels created, shall
be subject to the administrative Parcel Map subdivision process; however, maps
requiring exceptions as specified in PAMC
21.32 shall follow the standard review process;
   (k)   Parking requirements for residential units less than 500 sq. ft. shall
be reduced by 50%, regardless of bedroom count;
   (l)   Guest parking for the residential use, as required by PAMC
18.52.040, shall be reduced by 30%; fractional amounts shall be rounded down;
and
   (m)   Waiver of planning entitlement fees: Waive all planning application
fees except for direct costs for consultant fees associated with project
review. This waiver shall not include applicable parking in lieu or development
impact fees.
(Ord. 5406 § 5, 2017)
18.42.150   Cannabis Cultivation and Commercial Activities
   (a)   Prohibition of Commercial Activities.
      Commercial cannabis activity is not permitted.
   (b)   Exception for Qualified Delivery Services.
      Notwithstanding the prohibition in subsection (a) hereof, delivery of
cannabis from a business located outside the City of Palo Alto is permitted
subject to the conditions of California Business and Professions Code section
26090, as amended from time to time. This section does not permit any
temporary, persistent, or fixed physical presence used for commercial cannabis
activities besides delivery vehicles in the active state of making a delivery
to a specific person and location
   (c)   Prohibition of Medical Cannabis Dispensaries.
      Medical cannabis dispensaries are not permitted.
   (d)   Regulations.
      The City Manager is authorized to approve and enforce regulations
consistent with this section.
   (e)   Enforcement.
      The City may enforce this section and its regulations in any manner
permitted by law and is entitled to recover all costs, including attorneys
fees, related to enforcement. The violation of this section is hereby declared
to be a public nuisance and shall, at the discretion of the city, create a
cause of action for injunctive relief.
(Ord. 5419 § 5, 2017)
18.42.160   SAFE PARKING.
The following regulations apply to zoning districts where safe parking use is
permitted.
   (a)   Purpose. The intent of this section is to establish regulations to
govern the operation of safe parking programs at churches and religious
institutions within the city of Palo Alto. The safe parking programs provide
interim assistance to households using vehicles as their residence by providing
a safe place to park, access to restroom facilities, connection to social
service programs, and other support to transition households into permanent,
stable housing.
   (b)   Definitions
      (1)   "Safe parking" means the providing of shelter of homeless persons
as an incidental use to an existing, legal church or religious institution use
where the shelter is provided in vehicles located in designated paved safe
parking areas.
      (2)   "Safe parking area" means the paved area where the vehicles are
parked for the safe parking use.
      (3)   "Safe parking program operator" means an agency or organization
that facilitates, administers, oversees, and provides staffing for safe parking
uses in safe parking areas.
   (c)   Safe Parking Permit Required
      (1)   Permit required. No person shall operate, allow, permit or suffer a
safe parking use without approval of a valid safe parking permit.
      (2)   Application requirements. All applications pursuant to this section
shall be filed with the director in a form prescribed by the director. The
application form shall contain a list of information that must be submitted in
order for the application to be deemed complete.
      (3)   Receipt of application. No application shall be deemed received
until the following have been provided to the director:
         (i)   An application fee as set forth in the municipal fee schedule;
and
         (ii)   All documents specified as part of the application in this
section or on the application form.
   (d)   Decision and Appeal. Notwithstanding the provisions of
Chapter 18.77, the procedures of this section shall apply to all safe parking
permits.
      (1)   Authority and findings. The director may approve a safe parking
permit only after finding that:
         (i)   The proposed safe parking use complies with the standards listed
in subsection (f) of this Section
18.42.160.
         (ii)   The proposed safe parking use at the location requested will
not adversely affect the health, safety, or welfare of persons residing or
working in the surrounding area.
         (iii)   The proposed site is adequate in size and shape to accommodate
the safe parking use.
         The application shall be denied where the information which is either
submitted by the applicant or presented at the public hearing fails to
satisfactorily substantiate such findings.
      (2)   Decision by director.
         (i)   The director shall prepare a written decision to approve,
approve with conditions, or deny the application.
         (ii)   Notice of the director's decision shall be given by mail to
owners and residents of property within 600 feet of the subject property. The
notice shall include the address of the property, a brief description of the
proposed use, a brief description of the director's decision, and a description
of how to appeal the decision.
         (iii)   Following a community meeting, if one is held, or after the
director has made a tentative decision to issue a permit, notice of the
director's decision shall be given by mail to owners and residents of property
within 600 feet of the subject property. The notice shall include the address
of the property, a brief description of the proposed use, a brief description
of the director's decision, and a description of how to appeal the decision.
         (iii)   The director's decision shall become final fourteen (14) days
after the date the notice is mailed unless an appeal is filed. The director
may, for good cause, specify in writing a longer period for requesting a
hearing at the time the director issues the decision.
      (3)   Filing of appeal and withdrawal. Notwithstanding the provisions of
Chapter 18.78, the process set forth in this subsection (d)(3) and subsections
(d)(4)-(d)(5) below of this section shall apply to appeals of the director's
decision on safe parking permits.
         (i)   The applicant or subject property owner, or owners or residents/
tenants of a property within 600 feet of the subject property, may file an
appeal of the director's decision by filing a written request with the city
clerk before the date the director's decision becomes final. The written
request shall be filed in a manner prescribed by the director and shall be
accompanied by a fee, as set forth in the municipal fee schedule.
         (ii)   At any time prior to the hearing, the person requesting the
hearing may withdraw the request. If the hearing request is withdrawn and 14
days have lapsed from the mailing date of the notice under subsection (d)(2)
above, the proposed director's decision shall be final.
      (4)   Decision by the city council on appeal. If a timely appeal is
received by the city clerk, and not withdrawn, the director's decision shall be
placed on the consent calendar of the city council within 45 days. The city
council may:
         (i)   Adopt the findings and recommendation of the director; or
         (ii)   Remove the recommendation from the consent calendar, which
shall require three votes, following which the city council shall adopt
findings and take action on the application.
      (5)   Decision by the city council final. The decision of the city
council on appeal is final.
   (e)   Duration of Permits. Permits shall be valid as provided in Section
18.77.100.
   (f)   Standards and Conduct of Use. The following standards shall apply to
all safe parking uses:
      (1)   Qualifying site. Safe parking may be allowed on a parcel with an
existing, legal church or religious institution use.
      (2)   Number of vehicles. For the first 12 months following permit
issuance, the permit holder may host up to four vehicles for safe parking per
evening. After 12 months following permit issuance, the permit holder shall be
eligible to host up to six vehicles for safe parking per evening. After 24
months following permit issuance, the permit holder shall be eligible to host
up to eight vehicles for safe parking per evening. The Planning Director shall
mail notice of each scheduled increase in capacity to the permit holder and all
residents and owners of property within 600 feet of the subject property. The
increase in capacity shall become effective 14 days after this notice is mailed
unless an appeal is filed pursuant to subdivision (d)(3) above.
      (3)   Hours of operation. A safe parking use may only occur between the
hours of 6:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
      (4)   Noise. Audio, video, generator, or other amplified sound that is
audible outside the vehicles parked in the safe parking program is prohibited.
Additionally, participants shall observe quiet hours from 10:00 p.m. to 7:00
a.m.
      (5)   Shelter in vehicles. All persons receiving safe parking shall
shelter within the vehicles. No person shall be housed in tents, lean-tos, or
other temporary facilities.
      (6)   Required facilities. Accessible restroom facilities, including a
toilet and handwashing sink, shall be available to persons utilizing the site
for safe parking at all times during the hours of operation. These facilities
may be the existing onsite facilities or mobile facilities brought onsite on a
temporary basis to serve persons utilizing safe parking. Whenever feasible,
portable restroom facilities shall be located at least 25 feet from neighboring
residential buildings and 25 feet from street frontages. In the event that the
lot configuration does not allow such siting, the Director shall have
discretion to determine the location of the portable restroom and/or
handwashing facilities.
      (7)   Contact information. The following emergency contact information
shall be posted on site in a place readily visible to persons utilizing safe
parking: (i) a contact phone number for the safe parking program operator; (ii)
the police non-emergency phone number; and (iii) 911. The safe parking program
operator shall be available at all hours of operation at the posted phone
number and shall be the first contact for non-emergency matters. The contact
information described shall also be sent from the city by mail to the residents
and owners within 600 feet of the program site.
      (8)   Connection to county case management system. The safe parking use
shall be managed and operated by a safe parking program operator that
participates in the federal Homeless Management Information System with Santa
Clara County or other county.
      (9)   Safe, clean, orderly premises. The safe parking area and other
onsite areas accessed by persons utilizing safe parking shall be maintained in
a safe, clean and orderly condition and manner.
      (10)   Compliance with laws. The safe parking use shall be operated in a
manner that is fully in conformance with all state and local laws including
regulations and permit requirements.
      (11)   Annual reporting. The safe parking program operator shall submit a
report to the Director reflecting the prior calendar year’s activities. The
report shall be submitted electronically in a format approved by the Director.
The report shall include the number of individual participants in the calendar
year, the number of nights each space was occupied each year, the disposition
of each participant that exited the program during the calendar year (exit to
housing, exit to homelessness, and the like), the city in which the person was
last housed, and any complaints from neighbors communicated to the operator or
permit holder along with the resolution of the complaints. Where a safe parking
program operator operates multiple sites within the City of Palo Alto, the
annual report may be combined.
      (12)   Participant preferences. A safe parking program provider shall
award available parking spaces with preference given to students, or households
with students, enrolled in the Palo Alto Unified School District.
      (13)   Vehicle idling. Vehicle idling is not allowed except as allowed
under Chapter 10.62 of this code.
      (14)   No temporary structures. No temporary structures shall be erected
in relation to the safe parking program. Small amenities such as chairs may be
utilized during program hours, provided that they are stored in vehicles or
within the permit holder’s building(s) during quiet hours.
      (15)   Personal property. All personal property shall be stored in
participant vehicles.
      (16)   Fire. No open fires or open flames are allowed.
      (17)   Lot monitoring. The safe parking program operator shall deploy lot
monitors to occupied safe parking lots. Lot monitors shall make at least three
visits to the lots to ensure the safety of the participants and adherence to
the operational conditions. Lot monitors are advised to be deployed in the
early evening (lot opening – 10:00 p. m.), in the overnight hours (11 p. m. – 5
a. m.), and in the morning hours (6 a. m. – 8:00 a. m.).
   (g)   No Assignment of Permit. No person shall assign or transfer a safe
parking program permit issued under this section.
   (h)   Suspension, Revocation and Modification.
      (1)   Grounds for suspension, revocation or modification. The director
may suspend, revoke or modify a permit, according to the procedures set forth
in subsection (h)(2) below, if the director finds that:
         (i)   Operation of the safe parking program violates any provision of
the permit, this section, other applicable provision of this code, or state
law; or
         (ii)   Operation of the safe parking program is detrimental to public
health, safety or the general welfare.
      (2)   Procedure for suspension, revocation or modification of approval.
         (i)   Public hearing by director
            (a)   Notice to permit holder. Whenever the director believes that
grounds for the suspension, revocation, or modification of a permit exist, the
director shall give the permit holder written notice of the date, time and
place of a hearing to be held before the director on whether the permit should
be suspended, revoked, or modified. The notice shall state the alleged grounds
for the proposed revocation, suspension or modification of the permit, and the
notice shall be served on the permit holder by mail at least 10 days prior to
the hearing at the most recent home or business address on file with the
planning and development services department.
            (b)   Notice to public. Notice of the hearing shall be given at
least 10 days prior to the hearing by mailing to all residents and owners of
property within 600 feet of the subject property.
         (ii)   Decision of the director.
            (a)   Within 10 days following the hearing, the director shall
prepare a written decision to revoke, suspend, modify, or leave unchanged the
permit.
            (b)   Notice of the decision shall be provided by mail to the
permit holder, by posting on the planning and development services'
department's website and by email to other interested persons who requested
notice to the planning and development services department.
            (c)   The director's decision shall become final 10 days after the
notice is mailed to the permit holder unless a timely appeal is filed.
         (iii)   Request for appeal hearing. The permit holder or subject
property owner, or owners or residents of a property within 600 feet of the
subject property may file an appeal of the director's decision with the city
clerk. The appeal shall be filed in written form in a manner prescribed by the
director.
         (iv)   Decision by the city council on appeal. If a timely appeal is
received by the city clerk, and not withdrawn, the director's decision shall be
placed on the consent calendar of the city council within 45 days. The city
council may:
            (a)   Adopt the findings and recommendation of the director; or
            (b)   Remove the recommendation from the consent calendar, which
shall require three votes, following which the city council shall adopt
findings and take action on the application.
         (v)   Effective date of revocation, suspension or modification. The
decision of the city council is final. The revocation, suspension or
modification will be effective 5 days after mailing of the decision addressed
to the permit holder.
(Ord. 5609 § 2, 2024; Ord. 5490 § 10, 2020)
18.42.170   PF District Safe Parking
   The following regulations apply to safe parking in the PF district described
in
Chapter 18.28 of this Code.
   (a)   Purpose
      The intent of this section is to establish regulations to govern the
operation of safe parking programs in the PF district within the City of Palo
Alto. The safe parking programs provide interim assistance to households using
vehicles as their residence by providing a safe place to park, access to
restroom facilities, connection to social service programs, and other support
to transition households into permanent, stable housing.
   (b)   Definitions
      (1)   "Safe parking" means the providing of shelter of homeless persons
and where the shelter is provided in vehicles located in designated safe
parking areas.
      (2)   "Safe parking area" means the area where the vehicles are parked
for the safe parking use within a PF district.
      (3)   "Safe Parking Program Operator" means an agency or organization
that facilitates, administers, oversees, and provides staffing for safe parking
uses in safe parking areas.
   (c)   City Council Approval Required
      No person shall operate, allow, permit or suffer a safe parking use
without approval from the City Council through a contract, license, or lease
for safe parking use. Notice of the Council meeting shall be given by mail to
owners and residents of property within 600 feet of the subject property. The
notice shall include the address of the property, a brief description of the
proposed use, and the scheduled date and time of the meeting.
   (d)   Standards and Conduct of Use
      The following standards shall apply to all safe parking uses:
      (1)   Number of vehicles. The number of vehicles shall be limited to
those that can fit in the safe parking area while allowing for at least 10 feet
of open space in all directions between each vehicle. In addition, there shall
be sufficient clearance for emergency vehicles to access the site. The Fire
Department shall review and approve the maximum number of vehicles and the
configuration of those vehicles in accordance with the Fire Code and the
standards in this section.
      (2)   Noise. Audio, video, generator, or other amplified sound that is
audible outside the vehicles parked in the safe parking program is prohibited.
      (3)   Shelter in vehicles. All persons receiving safe parking shall
shelter within their vehicles overnight. No person shall be housed in tents,
lean-tos, pop-outs, or other temporary facilities outside of vehicles.
      (4)   Required facilities. Accessible restroom facilities, including a
toilet and handwashing sink, shall be available to persons utilizing the site
for safe parking at all times during the hours of operation. These facilities
may be the existing onsite facilities or mobile facilities brought onsite on a
temporary basis to serve persons utilizing safe parking.
      (5)   Contact information. The following emergency contact information
shall be posted on site in a place readily visible to persons utilizing safe
parking: (i) a contact phone number for the safe parking program operator; (ii)
the police non-emergency phone number; and (iii) 911. The safe parking program
operator shall be available at all hours of operation at the posted phone
number and shall be the first contact for non-emergency matters.
      (6)   Connection to county case management system. The safe parking use
shall be managed and operated by a safe parking program operator that
participates in the Santa Clara County Homeless Management Information System.
      (7)   Safe, clean, orderly premises. The safe parking area and other
onsite areas accessed by persons utilizing safe parking shall be maintained in
a safe, clean and orderly condition and manner.
      (8)   No leakage of contaminants. Black/grey water from vehicles shall be
properly disposed offsite in accordance with all relevant laws and regulations.
Vehicles that leak domestic sewage (including black/gray water) or other waste
fluids or solids, or other fluids (including, but not limited to, gasoline,
transmission or radiator fluid or engine oil), excluding potable water, are
prohibited.
      (9)   Compliance with laws. The safe parking use shall be operated in a
manner that is fully in conformance with all state and local laws and
regulations.
   (d)   No Assignment. No person shall assign or transfer a safe parking
program contract, license, or lease issued in compliance with this section
without written city approval.
(Ord. 5505 § 3, 2020)
18.42.180   Standards for Two Units on Single Family Zoned Lots Pursuant to
Senate Bill 9.
   (a)   Purpose.
      This section sets forth special regulations applicable to the
construction of two dwelling units on single family lots in the R-1 (and R-
1 subdistricts) and R-E zone districts, pursuant to California Government Code
Sections 65852.21 and 66411.7 (SB 9, 2021). In the event of a conflict between
the provisions of this section and the generally applicable regulations of
Chapters 18.10,
18.12, and
18.52-
18.80, inclusive, the more permissive provision shall prevail.
   (b)   Definitions. 
      As used in this section:
         (1)   Specific, adverse impact” means a significant, quantifiable,
direct, and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified written public
health or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date
the application was deemed complete. Inconsistency with the zoning ordinance or
general plan land use designation shall not constitute a specific, adverse,
impact.
         (2)   “Sufficient to allow separate conveyance” means the two dwelling
units constitute clearly defined, separate, and independent housekeeping units
without interior access points to the other dwelling unit.
         (3)   “Two dwelling units” means the development proposes two new
units on a vacant lot or proposes to add one new unit to one existing unit on a
lot. This does not include the development of a single dwelling unit on a
vacant lot.
         (4)   “Unit” means any dwelling unit, including, but not limited to a
primary dwelling unit, an accessory dwelling unit, or a junior accessory
dwelling unit.
   (c)   Applicability.
      When an application is submitted that includes both (1) the construction
of two dwelling units under this section and (2) other redevelopment work that
is not integral to creation of a new dwelling unit and would generally require
discretionary review, only the portions required for construction of dwelling
units shall be reviewed ministerially. In addition, this section shall not
apply in any of the following circumstances:
      (1)   Parcels described California Government Code Section 65913.4,
subdivisions(a)(6)(B) through (a)(6)(K) inclusive, as that section read on
September 16, 2021. Such parcels include, for example, parcels located in
wetlands, in very high fire severity zones (unless the site has adopted certain
fire hazard mitigation measures), and in special flood hazard areas or
regulatory floodways (unless the site meets certain federal requirements for
development).
      (2)   Parcels on which an owner of residential real property has
exercised the owner's rights under state law to withdraw accommodations from
rent or lease within the past 15 years.
      (3)   The development would require alteration or demolition of any of
the following types of housing:
         (A)   Housing that is subject to a recorded covenant, ordinance, or
law that restricts rents to levels affordable to persons and families of
moderate, low, or very low income.
         (B)   Housing that is subject to any form of rent or price control
through a public entity's valid exercise of its police power.
         (C)   Housing that has been occupied by a tenant in the last three
years.
      (4)   The development is located within a historic district or property
included on the State Historic Resources Inventory, as defined in California
Public Resources Code Section 5020.1, or within a site that is designated or
listed on the city's historic inventory.
      (5)   The building official finds that the development would have a
specific, adverse impact on public health and safety that cannot be feasibly
mitigated or avoided.
   (d)   Application Process.
      (1)   The Director is authorized to promulgate regulations, forms, and/or
checklists setting forth application requirements for the development of
dwelling units under this section.
      (2)   The city shall ministerially approve or disapprove an application
pursuant to this section.
      (3)   The director of planning shall consider and approve or deny an
application for a proposed housing development pursuant to this section within
60 days from the date the city receives a completed application. If the
director has not approved or denied the completed application within 60 days,
the application shall be deemed approved.
      (4)   If the director denies an application for a proposed housing
development pursuant to this section, the director shall, within 60 days of
receipt of the completed application, return in writing a full set of comments
to the applicant with a list of items that are defective or deficient and a
description of how the applicant can remedy the application.
   (e)   Development Standards.
      (1)   A project proposing two dwelling units on a parcel in the R-1 or RE
districts shall be subject to the development standards set forth in Chapters
18.12 and
18.10, respectively except as provided herein.
      (2)   All construction pursuant to this section shall comply with
objective design standards adopted by the City Council for two-story
development, except to the extent necessary to construct a unit of 800 square
feet. However, an applicant seeking to deviate from the objective design
standards may elect to submit an application for single family individual
review.
      (3)   If the application of any development standard or design standard
would necessarily require that one or more proposed units be less than 800
square feet, such standard shall be relaxed to the minimum extent necessary to
allow construction of a unit or units of at least 800 square feet. The Director
may publish regulations governing the order in which objective standards shall
be waived or relaxed in such circumstances.
      (4)   Setbacks from side and rear property lines, including street-side
property lines, shall be no less than four feet, except in the case of existing
non-complying structures or structures reconstructed in the same location and
to the same dimensions as an existing structure, in which case existing
setbacks less than four feet may be maintained. No setback is required from an
internal lot line newly created pursuant to
Chapter 21.10, for adjacent or connected structures separated by the new lot
line, provided that the structures meet building code safety standards and are
sufficient to allow separate conveyance.
      (5)   Off-street parking shall be provided pursuant to
Chapters 18.52 and
18.54.
      (6)   Accessory structures, such as garages and shed are permitted
consistent with the provisions of the zoning district.
      (7)   The Director of Public Works may promulgate standards for adjacent
public improvements, such as curb cuts and sidewalks, in relation to
development pursuant to this section.
   (f)   General Requirements.
      (1)   A maximum of two units may be located on any parcel that is created
by an Urban Lot Split under
Chapter 21.10. Accessory dwelling units and junior accessory dwelling units
shall not be permitted on any such parcel already containing two units.
      (2)   On parcels that are not the result of an Urban Lot Split under
Chapter 21.10, accessory dwelling units may be proposed in addition to the
primary dwelling unit or units, consistent with
Chapter 18.09.
      (3)   A rental of any unit created pursuant to this section shall be for
a term longer than 30 consecutive days.
      (4)   For residential units connected to an onsite wastewater treatment
system, a percolation test completed within the last 5 years, or, if the
percolation test has been recertified, within the last 10 years.
      (5)   Each unit shall have a permanent street address.
      (6)   The owner and all successors in interest in the subject property
shall agree to participate in any city survey of properties that have
constructed dwelling units pursuant to this section.
   (g)   Effective Dates.
   This section shall remain in effect until such time as Government Code
Section 65852.21 is repealed, superseded, or invalidated by a court of
competent jurisdiction, or its requirements for ministerial approval of no more
than two units on a single family zoned lot are materially amended, whether by
legislation or initiative, at which time this section shall become null and
void.
(Ord, 5645 § 7, 2025: Ord. 5641 § 7, 2024: Ord. 5587 § 16, 2023: Ord. 5546 § 2,
2022: Ord. 5542 § 15, 2022: Ord. 5538 § 15, 2021)
18.42.185   Standards for Up to Ten Units on Lots Subdivided Pursuant to Senate
Bill 684
   (a)   Purpose and Applicability.
      This section implements California Government Code Sections 65852.28,
65913.4.5, and 66499.41 (Senate Bill 684, 2023) by establishing regulations for
development of up to ten units on lots subdivided pursuant to
Chapter 21.11.
   (b)   Review Qualifying Development Proposals.
      (1)   Housing development projects on a lot or lots subdivided pursuant
to
Chapter 21.11 and California Government Code Section 66499.41 shall be
ministerially reviewed and processed through the City’s Ministerial and By
Right Review Process (set forth in PAMC Section 18.77.074), in accordance with
Government Code Section 68582.28.
      (2)   Building permits for such projects may be issued prior to
recordation of a final map, in accordance with Government Code Section
65913.4.5.
   (c)   Development and Design Standards.
      (1)   Housing development projects shall be subject to the development
standards set forth in the applicable zone district.
      (2)   Proposed parcels containing up to two units shall comply with all
objective standards for SB 9 projects, as adopted by the City Council, the
Director of Planning and Development Services, or the Director of Public Works,
except that no setback shall be required between units unless in accordance
with the California Building Code, as locally amended.
      (3)   Proposed parcels containing three or more residential units or
mixed uses shall comply with
Chapter 18.24 (Contextual Design Criteria and Objective Design Standards).
(Ord. 5651 § 2, 2025)
18.42.190   Noise and Vibration
   (A)   Purpose
   The requirements and guidelines regarding noise and vibration impacts are
intended to protect residentially zoned properties or properties with existing
residential uses located within nonresidential zones (residential properties)
from excessive and unnecessary noises and/or vibrations from any sources in
abutting industrial or commercially zoned properties. Design of new projects
should reduce noise from parking, loading, and refuse storage areas and from
heating, ventilation, air conditioning apparatus, and other machinery on nearby
residential properties. New equipment, whether mounted on the exterior of the
building or located interior to a building, which requires only a building
permit, shall also be subject to these requirements.
   (B)   Requirements
      (i)   All projects shall comply with
Chapter 9.10 of the Palo Alto Municipal Code (the Noise Ordinance).
      (ii)   Noise-producing equipment, including but not limited to
generators, pumps, and air conditioning compressors, shall be located out of
setbacks where abutting or within 50 feet of residential properties, and shall
be screened from view from the residential property.
      (iii)   At the time of building permit issuance for new construction or
for installation of any such interior or exterior mechanical equipment, the
applicant shall submit an acoustical analysis by an acoustical engineer
demonstrating projected compliance with the Noise Ordinance. The analysis shall
be based on acoustical readings, equipment specifications and any proposed
sound reduction measures, such as equipment enclosures or insulation, which
demonstrate a sufficient degree of sound attenuation to assure that the
prescribed noise levels will not be exceeded.
      (iv)   Upon completion of construction or installation, the city shall,
where the acoustical analysis projected noise levels at or within 5 dB less
than the Noise Ordinance limits, require demonstration of the installed
equipment and certification that it complies with the anticipated noise levels
and the Noise Ordinance prior to final building inspection approval.
   (C)   Guidelines
      (i)   Projects adjacent to major arterials, railroad tracks and more
intensive land uses should include, but not be limited to, the following: sound
walls, solid board fencing, and additional landscaping where appropriate to
reduce noise impacts on usable open space.
      (ii)   Parking areas, driveways, loading docks, mechanical equipment,
trash enclosures, on- site recreation areas and similar noise generating
elements should be sited as far away from residential property as is reasonably
possible. When conditions require noise generating elements to be sited within
close proximity to residential property, noise mitigation measures should be
implemented as deemed suitable by staff or the architectural review board.
These measures may include the following:
         (a)   Placement of building mass, and/or concrete or masonry walls at
the residential property line or around the noise generating element;
         (b)   Elimination of site access close to residential sites where
other access is available;
         (c)   Installation of an earth berm and landscape buffers where
appropriate;
         (d)   Discouragement of the use of open air loudspeakers and
compliance with the city’s loudspeakers ordinance (
Chapter 9.12 of the Palo Alto Municipal Code).
      (iii)   Auxiliary power sources should be included and used at loading
docks so that there is no needless engine idling of delivery trucks with
refrigerator or other engine-powered equipment. These sources should be shown
on drawings submitted for building permits.
      (iv)   All uses within 150 feet of a residential property should be
operated as not to generate vibration discernible without instruments at or
beyond the lot line upon which the source is located or within adjoining
enclosed space if more than one establishment occupies a structure. Vibration
caused by motor vehicles, trains, and temporary construction or demolition work
is exempted from this standard.
(Ord. 5554 § 22, 2022: Ord. 4933 § 4 (part), 2007)
18.42.200   Hazardous Materials
   (A)   Purpose
   In accordance with Titles 15 and 17 of the Palo Alto Municipal Code,
minimize the potential hazards of any use on a development site that will
entail the storage, use or handling of hazardous materials (including hazardous
wastes) on-site in excess of the exempt quantities prescribed in Health and
Safety Code Division 20, Chapter 6.95, and Title 15 of this code.
   (B)   Requirements
      (i)   The project shall be designed to comply with all safety, fire and
building codes for the storage, use and handling of the hazardous materials
involved.
      (ii)   Any new structure that is designated an “H” occupancy (storage,
use and handling of specified types and quantities of hazardous materials), or
any existing structure that is converted to an “H” occupancy, as specified by
the California Building Code, shall be designed in accordance with the
currently adopted California Building Code and Fire Code.
      (iii)   Where a use or building or area supporting such storage, use and/
or handling is located within 150 feet of a sensitive receptor, residential
zoning district or parcel with existing residential uses located within
nonresidential zones, the business owner shall provide a report to the fire
department addressing the adequacy of the emergency contingency plan, which
addresses safety of the nearby sensitive receptor or residential zones,
including but not limited to, procedures for accidental releases or other
emergencies, and other protective measures as required by Health and Safety
Code Division 20, Chapter 6.95, upon:
         (a)   A change in the types of hazardous materials stored, used or
handled on the site resulting in quantities above the reporting threshold
established in California Health and Safety Code Division 20, Chapter 6.95; or
         (b)   A 100% or greater increase in the quantities of a previously
disclosed hazardous material stored, used or handled on the site at buildings
or areas already above the reporting threshold established in California Health
and Safety Code Division 20, Chapter 6.95; or
         (c)   Release/threatened release incidents.
      (iv)   For any such use or facility outlined in (iii) above, upon
application for any building permit for improvements that would result in a
change in the types of hazardous materials stored, used or handled on the site
or an increase in the quantities of hazardous materials stored, used or handled
on the site, the city shall provide written notice to the owners, operators,
and occupants of all sensitive receptors and residentially zoned parcels within
150 feet from the property line, not later than ten days after issuance of the
building permit. The notice shall inform the sensitive receptor or
residentially zoned property owners, operators, and occupants that an
application has been received, the nature of the request (such as the type of
materials), that the fire department and building department have determined
the project to be in compliance with relevant hazardous materials regulations,
and that the application and details are on file with the fire department and/
or building department.
      (v)   New Hazardous Materials Tier 1 manufacturing uses and new
facilities (buildings or areas) or modifications to existing facilities
accommodating such uses shall be permitted subject to compliance with the
development standards prescribed for the relevant industrial/manufacturing
zoning district and the reporting and noticing requirements identified above in
Section 18.23.100(B)(iii).
      (vi)   New Hazardous Materials Tier 2 manufacturing uses and new
facilities (buildings or areas), or modifications to existing facilities
accommodating these uses shall be permitted subject to compliance with the
development standards prescribed for the relevant industrial/manufacturing
zoning district and the reporting and noticing requirements identified above in
Section 18.23.100(B)(iii), provided:
         (a)   Approval by the fire chief of an emergency response plan that
specifically addresses toxic and highly toxic hazardous materials that exceed
the quantities specified in Section
17.16.025 of the Municipal Code shall be required;
         (b)   Approval of a conditional use permit shall be required together
with notification by the City to owners, operators, and occupants of sensitive
receptors or residentially zoned land within 600 feet; and
         (c)   Notwithstanding the provisions above, in no event shall such
use, facility, or improvement be allowed in the MOR zoning district or be
allowed closer than 300 feet to a sensitive receptor or residentially zoned
land if such facility or improvement is located in a ROLM, ROLM(E), RP, RP(5),
or GM district.
      (vii)   No Hazardous Materials Tier 3 uses shall be permitted in the City
of Palo Alto.
   (viii)   No facility proposing the use of BioSafety Level 4 etiological
agents shall be permitted in the city of Palo Alto.
(Ord. 5554 § 25, 2022: Ord. 5381 § 6, 2016: Ord. 4933 § 4 (part), 2007)
18.42.210   Firearms Dealers
   (A)   Purpose
      The purpose of this section is to protect the public health, safety, and
welfare by imposing reasonable land use regulations on the sale of firearms
within the city.
   (B)   Definitions
      In addition to the definitions in Section
18.04.030 of this code, the definitions in Section
4.57.010 of the Palo Alto Municipal Code, as may be amended from time to time,
shall apply to this section, unless the context indicates otherwise.
   (C)   Conditional Use Permit Required in Tandem with Firearms Dealer Permit
      A conditional use permit shall be required to operate a firearms dealer
business in any district where such use is permitted. This requirement shall
apply in addition to the requirement for a firearms dealer permit issued by the
chief of police in accordance with
Chapter 4.57 (Firearms Dealers).
(Ord. 5586 § 2, 2023)
18.42.220   Standards for Up to Ten Units Pursuant to Senate Bills 684 and 1123
(a)   Purpose.
   This section sets forth regulations for housing development projects of up
to ten units on a lot that is subdivided pursuant to Government Code Section
66499.41 and Palo Alto Municipal Code
Chapter 21.11. This section implements Senate Bills 684 (2023) and 1123 (2024),
as codified in Government Code Section 65852.28, 65913.4.5, and 66499.41. In
the event of a conflict between the provisions of this section and the
generally applicable regulations of the sites’ respective zone district, or the
regulations contained in
Chapters 18.52-
18.80, inclusive, the more permissive provision shall prevail.
(b)   Applicability.
   This section shall apply to parcels zoned for multi-family use and to vacant
parcels zoned for single-family use that meet the criteria set forth in
Government Code Section 65852.28.
(c)   Application Process.
   (1)   The director is authorized to promulgate regulations, forms, and/or
checklists setting forth application requirements for the development of
dwelling units under this section.
   (2)   The city shall ministerially approve or disapprove an application
pursuant to this section.
   (3)   The Director of Planning shall consider and approve or deny an
application for a proposed housing development pursuant to this section within
60 days from the date the city receives a completed application. If the
director has not approved or denied the completed application within 60 days,
the application shall be deemed approved.
   (4)   If the director denies an application for a proposed housing
development pursuant to this section, the director shall, within 60 days of
receipt of the completed application, return in writing a full set of comments
to the applicant with a list of items that are defective or deficient and a
description of how the applicant can remedy the application.
(d)   Development Standards.
   (1)   A project proposing a small lot subdivision of up to 10 dwelling units
on a parcel in any zone district pursuant to California Government Code Section
65852.28 shall be subject to the development standards set forth in the
respective zone district, except as otherwise provided herein.
   (2)   An applicant may request waiver of a development or design standard to
the extent it physically precludes development at a density of 30 dwelling
units per acre, except that maximum height may not be waived for a project
proposed on a lot zoned single-family use.
   (3)   The average total area for the proposed housing units shall not exceed
1,750 net habitable square feet, as defined in Government Code section
66499.41.
   (4)   The height of the proposed structure shall not exceed the height of
the underlying zone district.
   (5)   Setbacks from side and rear property lines, including street-side
property lines, shall be no less than four feet, except in the case of existing
non-complying structures or structures reconstructed in the same location and
to the same dimensions as an existing structure, in which case existing
setbacks less than four feet may be maintained. No setback is required from an
internal lot line newly created pursuant to
Chapter 21.11, for adjacent or connected structures separated by the new lot
line, provided that the structures meet building code safety standards.
   (6)   At least one parking space shall be required per unit except that no
parking shall be required when the parcel is located within: one-half mile
walking distance of a high-quality transit corridor or a major transit stop; or
one block of a fixed location car share vehicle. Provided parking shall meet
the requirements set forth in 18.54 for parking design except that parking may
be covered or uncovered. Parking for accessory or junior accessory dwelling
units shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 18.09.
   (7)   Development under this code shall comply with the objective design
standards set forth in PAMC
Chapter 18.24 or, for development not exceeding two stories, the applicant may
elect to comply with the objective design standards adopted by the City Council
for two-story development.
   (8)   For a housing development project consistency of three to seven units,
inclusive, the floor area ratio shall be no more than 1.0.
   (9)   For a housing development project consisting of 8 to ten units,
inclusive, the floor area ratio shall be no more than 1.25.
   (10)   Up to one ADU or one JADU may be constructed on any resulting lot
greater than or equal to 2,400 square feet in size.
   (11)   The Director of Public Works may promulgate standards for adjacent
public improvements, such as curb cuts and sidewalks, in relation to
development pursuant to this section.
(e)   General Requirements.
   (1)   A maximum of 10 units, excluding accessory and junior accessory
dwelling units, may be constructed on no more than 10 parcels created by a
small lot subdivision under
21.11.
   (2)   Projects developing more than two units shall comply with the citywide
affordable housing requirements as set forth in PAMC Section
16.65
   (3)   Each unit shall have a permanent street address.
(Ord. 5659 § 2, 2025)
Chapter 18.44
GREEN DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
Sections:
   
18.44.010   Development standards for sustainable neighborhoods
   
18.44.020   Compliance with California Green Building Standards Code required
18.44.010   Development standards for sustainable neighborhoods.
   All new planning applications that fall under any of the thresholds below
submitted between January 1, 2011 and December 31, 2011 shall participate in a
pilot program utilizing the Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design
("LEED") for Neighborhood Development rating system.
   Table 1 - LEED-ND Pilot Program Requirement Thresholds
          Fixed Rail
Threshold (University,     Traffic Corridor Neighborhood Center All Other Sites
          California Ave., El Camino Real
          and San Antonio)
Threshold  Fixed Rail (University,           Traffic Corridor El Camino Real   Neighborhood Center               All Other Sites
           California Ave., and San Antonio)
                                                                                                                 All projects including an application for one of the following:
                                                                                                                 •   rezoning
Type       All new construction.             All new construction.             All new construction.             •   planned community
                                                                                                                 •   site and design review for a mixed use project
                                                                                                                 •   conditional use permit for change of use from commercial to
                                                                                                                 residential
Location   within ½ mile                    within ¼ mile                    n/a                               n/a
Parcel     ¼ acre or three or more dwelling ¼ acre or three or more dwelling ¼ acre or three or more dwelling ¼ acre or three or more dwelling units
Size       units                             units                             units
Compliance All pre-requisites, and achieve 30 points in the Smart Location and Linkage (SLL) and Neighborhood Pattern and Design (NPD) sections of LEED-ND. Projects retaining and
Level for  rehabilitating an existing historic building(s) shall receive a 5 point credit towards the minimum 30 points required.
Evaluation
 
 
Special Considerations:
If a project includes more than one parcel that are adjacent to one another,
and have the same owner or developer, they will be considered together under
LEED-ND review.
The requirements apply to cumulative or phased projects under review within a
five year period.
Single family residences that fall within the thresholds above, including
historic homes, and are not included in a planned community zone project, are
exempt.
 
   During the pilot year applicants will be required to submit LEED-ND
documentation for informational purposes only. A complete planning application
shall include materials showing how the project could meet the referenced
compliance levels. At the end of the pilot year staff will return to PT&C and
council to review if the thresholds of compliance were appropriate, to make any
necessary adjustments, and to consider for mandatory adoption.
(Ord. 5108 § 5 (part), 2010)
18.44.020   Compliance with California Green Building Standards Code required
   All development projects may be subject to additional requirements under the
green development regulations outlined in Chapter
16.14 (California Green Building Code) of Title 16 (Building Regulations) of
the Palo Alto Municipal Code. A complete application as described under Section
18.77.020 (Applications) and Section
18.77.030 (Determination of Completeness) shall include appropriate
documentation showing compliance with Chapter
16.14, and this chapter, as applicable.
(Ord. 5108 § 5 (part), 2010)
Chapter 18.46
REQUESTS FOR REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION FOR ACCESSIBILITY
Sections:
   
18.46.010   Purpose
   
18.46.020   Applicability
   
18.46.030   Application Requirements
   
18.46.040   Review Procedure
   
18.46.050   Required Criteria for Reasonable Accommodations
   
18.46.060   Decisions
   
18.46.070   Appeal
   
18.46.080   Effect of Chapter
18.46.010   Purpose.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide a formal procedure to request
reasonable accommodation for persons with disabilities seeking equal access to
housing under the Federal Fair Housing Act and the California Fair Employment
Act (the Acts) in the application of zoning laws and other land use
regulations, policies and procedures, and to establish relevant criteria to be
used when considering such requests.
(Ord. 5230 § 8, 2014)
18.46.020   Applicability.
   In order to make specific housing available to an individual with a
disability, any person may request a modification or exception to the rules,
standards and practices for the siting, development and use of housing or
housing-related facilities that would eliminate regulatory barriers and provide
a person with a disability equal opportunity to housing of their choice.
Typical improvements which may be considered for reasonable accommodation
provisions include ramps, walls, handrails, elevators or lifts, or other
similar physical improvements necessary to accommodate a person’s disability.
The reasonable accommodation would allow exceptions to setback, lot coverage
and floor area provisions of the zoning code that are deemed necessary to
accommodate these improvements.
   A person with a disability is a person who has a physical or mental
impairment that limits or substantially limits one or more major life
activities, anyone who is regarded as having such impairment, or anyone who has
a record of such impairment. This chapter applies only to those persons who are
defined as disabled under the Acts.
(Ord. 5230 § 8, 2014)
18.46.030   Application Requirements.
   (a)   Requests for reasonable accommodation shall be initiated by submitting
a completed application form to the Director of Planning and Development
Services, signed by the property owner, together with the appropriate fee, as
established by resolution adopted by the city council, and shall be filed in
the office of the planning division of the Department of Planning and
Development Services. The following information shall be included with the
application:
      (1)   The applicant’s name, address and telephone number;
      (2)   Address of the property for which the request is being made;
      (3)   The current use of the property;
      (4)   The basis for the claim that the individual is considered disabled
under the Acts, including supporting medical documentation from a qualified
medical expert in support of the request for accommodation;
      (5)   The zoning code provision or other city regulation or policy from
which the reasonable accommodation is being requested; and
      (6)   An explanation of why the reasonable accommodation is necessary to
make the specific property accessible to the individual.
   (b)   Any information identified by an applicant as confidential shall be
retained in a manner so as to respect the privacy rights of the applicant and
shall not be made available for public inspection.
   (c)   A request for reasonable accommodation in regulations, policies,
practices and procedures may be filed at any time that the accommodation may be
necessary to ensure equal access to housing. A reasonable accommodation does
not affect an individual’s obligations to comply with other applicable
regulations not at issue in the requested accommodation.
   (d)   If an individual needs assistance in making the request for reasonable
accommodation, the Planning and Community Environment Department will provide
assistance to ensure that the process is accessible.
   (e)   Review with other planning applications.  If the project for which the
request for reasonable accommodation is being made also requires some other
discretionary approval under this Title (including but not limited to
architectural review, conditional use permit, or variance), the application
shall be submitted and reviewed at the same time as the related applications.
(Ord. 5494 § 3, 2020: Ord. 5230 § 8, 2014)
18.46.040   Review Procedure.
   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, the Director of
Planning and Development Services shall have the authority to consider and take
action on requests for reasonable accommodation. The application shall be
reviewed ministerially without discretionary review or public hearing. If the
application is granted because the requirements and criteria are met, the
applicant may proceed with a building permit. If the application is submitted
concurrent with an application requiring discretionary review, the procedures
for the discretionary review shall be followed.
(Ord. 5494 § 3, 2020: Ord. 5230 § 8, 2014)
18.46.050   Required Criteria for Reasonable Accommodations.
   Any decision on an application under this chapter shall be supported by a
written statement addressing the criteria set forth in this section. In making
a determination regarding the reasonableness of a requested accommodation, the
determination shall be consistent with fair housing laws and based on the
following criteria:
   (a)   Whether the housing that is subject to the request for reasonable
accommodation will be used for an individual with a disability under the Acts.
   (b)   Whether the request for reasonable accommodation is necessary to make
specific housing available to an individual with a disability under the Acts.
   (c)   Whether the requested reasonable accommodation would impose an undue
financial or administrative burden on the community.
   (d)   Whether the requested accommodation would require a fundamental
alteration to the city’s zoning requirements, development standards, policies
or procedures.
   (e)   Whether the requested reasonable accommodation would adversely impact
surrounding properties or uses.
   (f)   Whether there are reasonable alternatives that would provide an
equivalent level of benefit without requiring a modification or exception to
the city’s applicable rules, standards and practices.
(Ord. 5230 § 8, 2014)
18.46.060   Decisions.
   The Director of Planning and Development Services shall issue a written
determination of the action and may grant or deny the accommodation request
based on the criteria outlined in this chapter. The written decision on the
request for reasonable accommodation shall explain in detail the basis of the
decision including compliance with the criteria set forth in Section
18.46.050 of this chapter. The written decision of the Director shall be final
unless an applicant submits an appeal following the appeal procedure
established in Section
18.46.070.
(Ord. 5494 § 3, 2020: Ord. 5230 § 8, 2014)
18.46.070   Appeals.
   (a)   The applicant requesting the reasonable accommodation may appeal the
Director of Planning and Development Services adverse decision. The appeal
shall be in writing and shall be submitted to the Planning and Community
Environment Department within ten (10) calendar days of the Director of
Planning and Development Services’ decision.
   (b)   If an individual needs assistance in filing an appeal on an adverse
decision, the Department will provide assistance to ensure that the appeals
procedure is accessible.
   (c)   All appeals shall contain a statement of the grounds for the appeal.
Any information identified by an applicant as confidential shall be retained in
a manner so as to respect the privacy rights of the applicant and shall not be
made available for public inspection.
   (d)   The appeal shall be heard by the Planning and Transportation
Commission in a public hearing pursuant to the procedures established for
discretionary actions in Chapter 18.77.
   (e)   Notice of the hearing shall be given by publication but need not be
sent to nearby property owners.
(Ord. 5494 § 3, 2020: Ord. 5230 § 8, 2014)
18.46.080   Effect of Chapter.
   This chapter shall be interpreted and applied in accordance with the Acts;
nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to create greater rights than exist
under the Acts.
(Ord. 5230 § 8, 2014)
Chapter 18.52
PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS
Sections:
   
18.52.010   Purpose
   
18.52.020   Definitions
   
18.52.030   Basic Parking Regulations
   
18.52.040   Off-Street Parking, Loading, and Bicycle Facility Requirements
   
18.52.045   Adjustments to Existing Parking Facilities
   
18.52.050   Adjustments by the Director
   
18.52.060   Parking Assessment Districts and Areas - General
   
18.52.070   Parking Regulations for CD Assessment District
   
18.52.080   Adjustments to Parking Assessment Area Requirements by the Director
18.52.010   Purpose
   Off-street parking, loading and bicycle facilities are required for new uses
and enlargements of existing uses, proportional to the need created by each
use, in order to alleviate traffic congestion. Development regulations and
design standards are intended to ensure the usefulness of parking, loading, and
bicycle facilities, protect the public safety, and, where appropriate, to
mitigate potential adverse impacts on adjacent land uses. The city establishes
parking criteria to approximate an average peak demand condition.
(Ord. 4964 § 3 (part), 2007)
18.52.020   Definitions
   For purposes of this chapter:
   (a)   "Accessible"
   "Accessible" means the ability to be used by persons with disabilities as
defined in the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990.
   (b)   "Construction of Floor Area"
   "Construction of floor area" means the construction or building of "floor
area" except for new floor area added to an existing, restored, or partially
reconstructed building to meet the minimum requirements of federal, state or
local laws relating to fire prevention and safety, handicapped access, and
building and seismic safety;
   (c)   "Design Approval"
   “Design approval” means approval pursuant to Sections
18.76.020 and
18.77.070 by the director of planning and development services (the “director”)
upon recommendation of the architectural review board.
   (d)   “Electric Vehicle Supply Equipment (EVSE)”
   “Electric Vehicle Supply Equipment (EVSE)” is defined to be consistent with
the California Electrical Code and applies to any level or capacity of supply
equipment installed specifically for transferring energy between the premises
wiring and electric vehicles.
   (e)   “Motorcycle Parking”
   “Motorcycle Parking” means a parking space designed for any motor vehicle
designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the ground.
This includes mopeds and motor scooters.
   (f)   “Parking Assessment Areas”
   “Parking assessment areas” means either:
      (1)   The “downtown parking assessment area,” which is that certain area
of the city delineated on the map of the University Avenue parking assessment
district entitled Proposed Boundaries of University Avenue Off-Street Parking
Project No. 75-63 Assessment District, City of Palo Alto, County of Santa
Clara, State of California, dated October 30, 1978, and on file with the city
clerk; or
      (2)   The “California Avenue area parking assessment district,” which is
that certain area of the city delineated on the map of the California Avenue
area parking assessment district entitled Proposed Boundaries, California
Avenue Area Parking Maintenance District, dated December 16, 1976, and on file
with the city clerk;
   (g)   “Shared (Joint Use) Parking”
      “Shared (joint use) parking” means parking intended to accommodate
multiple uses, whether residential or non-residential or both, and to minimize
the number of parking spaces needed by allowing some spaces to be used for
different uses at different times of the day or night.
   (h)   “Within One Block of a Car Share Vehicle”
      “Within one block of a car share vehicle” means within 600 feet of a
parking space permanently reserved for use by a car share vehicle.
   (i)   Definitions for other parking-related terms can be found in Section
18.04.030(a) (Definitions), including “Parking as a principal use,” “Parking
facility,” and “Parking space.”
(Ord. 5587 § 14, 2023: Ord. 5542 § 13, 2022: Ord. 5538 § 13, 2021: Ord. 5504 §
2, 2020: Ord. 5494 § 3, 2020: Ord. 4964 § 3 (part), 2007)
18.52.030   Basic Parking Regulations
   (a)   Applicability
   The regulations of this chapter apply to all parking areas in all districts
established by this title.
   (b)   Parking Required
   Off-street parking, loading and bicycle facilities shall be provided for any
new building constructed and for any new use established, for any addition or
enlargement of an existing building or use, and for any change in the occupancy
of any building or the manner in which any use is conducted that would result
in additional spaces being required, subject to the provisions of this chapter.
   (c)   Non-Conformance Due to Parking Requirements
   No use of land lawfully existing on July 20, 1978 is nonconforming solely
because of the lack of off-street parking, loading, or bicycle facilities
prescribed in this chapter; provided, that facilities being used for off-street
parking on July 20, 1978, shall not be reduced in capacity to less than the
number of spaces prescribed in this chapter or altered in design or function to
less than the minimum standards prescribed in this chapter except for the
allowed reductions in parking and the modifications to existing facilities
allowed pursuant to Sections
18.52.045 and
18.52.050.
   (d)   Additions or Changes of Use
   For additions or enlargements of any existing building or use, or any change
of occupancy or manner of operation that would increase the number of parking,
loading or bicycle spaces required, the additional parking shall be required
only for such addition, enlargement, or change and not for the entire building
or use.
   (e)   Parking Spaces Exclusive
   Parking, loading or bicycle spaces required by this chapter for any building
or use shall not be considered to meet the requirement for any other building
or use, except where a joint facility serving more than one building or use
contains the total number of spaces required for each building or use
separately, or where adjusted parking requirements for joint use parking
facilities are specifically authorized pursuant to Section
18.52.050.
   (f)   Design of Parking Spaces
   Parking, loading or bicycle facilities required by this chapter, or provided
optionally in addition to the minimum requirements prescribed by this chapter,
shall conform to the design standards set forth in
Chapter 18.54.
   (g)   Term of Parking Requirement
   Parking, loading and bicycle facilities required by this chapter shall be
maintained for the duration of the use requiring such facilities, except as
authorized pursuant to Section
18.52.050.
   (g)   Location of Parking Spaces
   All off-street parking facilities required by this chapter shall be located
on the same site as the use for which such facilities are required, except as
authorized pursuant to Section
18.52.050.
   (h)   Parking Provided in Excess of Requirement
   No use shall be required to provide more spaces than prescribed by this
chapter, or prescribed by the director in accord with this chapter, or
prescribed by any conditional use permit, variance, or planned community
district. Where additional spaces are provided, such spaces may be considered
as meeting the requirements for another use, subject to Sections
18.52.050 and
18.52.080.
   (i)   Transportation Demand Management Plan
      (1)   Requirement for TDM Plan: A Transportation Demand Management (TDM)
Plan to reduce and manage the number of single-occupant motor vehicle trips
generated by the project shall be prepared and submitted by the applicant in
the following circumstances:
         A.   For all projects that generate 50 or more net new weekday (AM or
PM peak hour) or weekend peak hour trips;
         B.   For all projects claiming a reduction in net new trips due to
proximity to public transit or the implementation of a TDM plan; and
         C.   For all projects requesting a parking reduction.
         D.   For all projects with reduced parking pursuant to California
Government Code Section 65863.2 (AB 2097, 2022).
      (2)   The Director shall have the authority to adopt guidelines for
preparing TDM plans and when applicable shall coordinate such guidelines with
the Transportation Management Association.
(Ord. 5651 § 6, 2025: Ord. 5504 § 3, 2020: Ord. 5432 § 13 (part), 2018: Ord.
5406 § 11, 2017: Ord. 4964 § 3 (part), 2007)
18.52.040   Off-Street Parking, Loading and Bicycle Facility Requirements
   (a)   Parking Requirements
   In each district, off-street parking, loading and bicycle facilities for
each use shall be provided in accordance with Tables 1 and 2, shown in
subsection (c) of this Section
18.52.040. For affordable housing developments qualifying for density bonuses
under
Chapter 18.15 of the Palo Alto Municipal Code, adjustments to parking
requirements will be calculated in accordance with
Chapter 18.15. The requirement for any use not specifically listed shall be
determined by the director on the basis of requirements for similar uses, and
on the basis of evidence of actual demand created by similar uses in Palo Alto
and elsewhere, and such other traffic engineering or planning data as may be
available and appropriate to the establishment of a minimum requirement.
      (1)   For projects within one-half mile of public transit, as defined in
California Government Code Section 65863.2:
         A.   The project shall provide loading and bicycle parking facilities
in accordance with this Section.
         B.   The project shall provide the number of EVSE-installed parking
spaces and parking spaces that are accessible to persons with disabilities
required by Title 16 of this code.
         C.   Except as provided in this subdivision (a)(1), no off-street
vehicle parking shall be required.
   (b)   Calculation of Required Parking
   Off-street parking, loading and bicycle facility requirements established by
subsection (a) shall be applied as follows:
      (1)   Where the application of the schedule results in a fractional
requirement, a fraction of 0.5 or greater shall be resolved to the next higher
whole number.
      (2)   For purposes of this chapter, gross floor area shall not include
enclosed or covered areas used for off-street parking or loading, or bicycle
facilities.
      (3)   Where uses or activities subject to differing requirements are
located in the same structure or on the same site, or are intended to be served
by a common facility, the total requirement shall be the sum of the
requirements for each use or activity computed separately, except as adjusted
by the director under the provisions of Table 1 or Section
18.52.050. The director, when issuing a permit(s) for multiple uses on a site,
may restrict the hours of operation or place other conditions on the multiple
uses so that parking needs do not overlap and may then modify the total parking
requirement to be based on the most intense combination of uses at any one
time.
      (4)   Where requirements are established on the basis of seats or person
capacity, the building regulations provisions applicable at the time of
determination shall be used to define capacity.
      (5)   Where residential use is conducted together with or accessory to
other permitted uses, applicable residential requirements shall apply in
addition to other nonresidential requirements, except as provided by Sections
18.52.050 and
18.52.080.
      (6)   The parking requirements outlined in Tables 1 and 2 are inclusive
of parking spaces that fulfill accessibility requirements set forth in Title 16
(Building Code) of the Municipal Code in compliance with the Americans with
Disabilities Act (ADA).
      (7)   A parking space served by EVSE or a parking space designated for
future installation of EVSE (EV Ready) shall count as one standard automobile
parking space for purposes of the parking requirements outlined in Tables 1 and
2.
      (8)   A van-accessible parking space or accessible parking space with an
adjacent accessible path of travel shall count as at least two standard
automobile parking spaces for purposes of the parking requirements outlined in
Tables 1 and 2, inclusive of van-accessible parking spaces served by EVSE or
designated as EV Ready.
      (9)   Motorcycle parking shall not count towards the vehicle parking
requirements outlined in Tables 1 and 2.
   (10)   The area of a parklet permitted per
Chapter 12.11 shall not be counted toward a business’ gross floor area for the
calculation of minimum off-street parking requirements whether within a parking
assessment district or outside of parking assessment districts.
   (c)   Tables 1, 2 and 3: Parking, Bicycle, and Loading Requirements
   Tables 1 and 2 below outline vehicle and bicycle parking requirements in
general and for Parking Assessment Districts, respectively. Table 3 outlines
loading requirements for each land use. For mixed-use projects, the
requirements for each land use shall be applied and required for the overall
project.
Table 1
Minimum Off-Street Parking Requirements
    Vehicle Parking
Use Requirement     Bicycle Parking Requirement
    (# of spaces)
                    Spaces Class 1 Long Term (LT) and Short Term (ST)
                                                                           Vehicle
Use                                                                        Parking        Bicycle Parking
                                                                           Requirement    Requirement
                                                                           (# of spaces)
                                                                                                       Class 1
                                                                                                       Long Term
                                                                                          Spaces       (LT) and
                                                                                                       Short Term
                                                                                                       (ST)
RESIDENTIAL USES
Single-Family Residential (Primary Unit)                                   Tandem Parking              
                                                                           Allowed
                                                                           4 spaces, of
(a)   In the OS district                                                which at least None
                                                                           one space must
                                                                           be covered
                                                                           2 spaces, of
(b)   In all other districts                                            which at least
                                                                           one space must
                                                                           be covered
(c)   Underground parking for single famly uses is prohibited, except pursuant to a
variance granted in accordance with the provisions of                                                  
Chapter 18.76 (Permits and Approvals) of this title, in which case the area of the
underground garage shall be counted toward the gross floor area.
Accessory Dwelling Unit                                                    No parking     None
                                                                           required
Junior Accessory Dwelling Units                                            No parking     None
                                                                           required
                                                                           1.5 spaces per
                                                                           unit, of which
                                                                           at least one
                                                                           space per unit
                                                                           must be
                                                                           covered

                                                                           Tandem Parking
Two-Family Residential                                                     Allowed, with  1 space per  100% - LT
(R-2 & RMD Districts)                                                      one tandem     unit
                                                                           space per
                                                                           unit,
                                                                           associated
                                                                           directly with
                                                                           another
                                                                           parking space
                                                                           for the same
                                                                           unit
                                                                           At least one
                                                                           space per
                                                                           unit. No
                                                                           spaces
                                                                           required if
                                                                           the unit is
                                                                           located within
                                                                           one-half mile
                                                                           walking
                                                                           distance of
                                                                           either a high-
                                                                           quality
                                                                           transit        1 space per
(R-1 and RE Districts, pursuant to Section 18.42.180)                      corridor or a  unit         100% - LT
                                                                           major transit
                                                                           stop, as
                                                                           defined in
                                                                           California
                                                                           Public
                                                                           Resources Code
                                                                           Sections 21155
                                                                           and 21064.3
                                                                           respectively,
                                                                           or located
                                                                           within one
                                                                           block of a car
                                                                           share vehicle
                                                                           1 per micro
                                                                           unit (2)
                                                                           1 per studio
                                                                           unit
                                                                           1 per 1-
                                                                           bedroom unit
                                                                           2 per 2-
                                                                           bedroom or
                                                                           larger unit At
                                                                           least one
                                                                           space per unit
                                                                           must be
                                                                           covered

                                                                           Tandem parking
                                                                           allowed for
Multiple-Family Residential                                                any unit       1 per unit   100% - LT
                                                                           requiring two
                                                                           spaces (one
                                                                           tandem space
                                                                           per unit,
                                                                           associated
                                                                           directly with
                                                                           another
                                                                           parking space
                                                                           for the same
                                                                           unit, up to a
                                                                           maximum of 25%
                                                                           of total
                                                                           required
                                                                           spaces for any
                                                                           project with
                                                                           more than four
                                                                           (4) units)
                                                                           No additional  1 space for
(a)   Guest Parking                                                     guest parking  each 10      100%-ST
                                                                           required       units
Senior Housing (3) (5)                                                     0.75 per unit               
EDUCATIONAL, RELIGIOUS, AND ASSEMBLY USES
                                                                           1 space per 4- 1 per 40-
                                                                           person         person
                                                                           capacity, or 1 capacity, or
Business and Trade Schools                                                 per 250 sf of  1 per 2,500  40% LT 60%
                                                                           gross floor    sf,          Covered ST
                                                                           area,          whichever is
                                                                           whichever is   greater
                                                                           greater
                                                                           1 space for
                                                                           each 4 seats
                                                                           or 4-person    1 space per
                                                                           capacity,      40 seats or  20% - LT
                                                                           based on       40 person    80%-ST, or
                                                                           maximum use of capacity,    as adjusted
Religious Institutions                                                     all facilities based on     by the
                                                                           at the same    maximum use  director as
                                                                           time, or as    of all       part of a
                                                                           adjusted by    facilities   conditional
                                                                           the director   at the same  use permit
                                                                           as part of a   time
                                                                           conditional
                                                                           use permit.
                                                                           1 space for
                                                                           each 4 seats
                                                                           or 4-person
Mortuaries                                                                 capacity, plus 2 spaces     100%-ST
                                                                           funeral
                                                                           procession
                                                                           queue capacity
                                                                           of 5 cars
Private Schools and Educational Facilities:
                                                                           2 spaces per   1 space for  100%-ST,
(a)   Elementary (K-5)                                                  teaching       every 5      enclosed
                                                                           station        students
                                                                           2 spaces per   1 space for
(b)   Grades 6-8                                                        teaching       every 5       
                                                                           station        students
                                                                           4 spaces per   1 space for
(c)    Grades 9-12                                                      teaching       every 5       
                                                                           station        students
                                                                           1 space for
                                                                           each 4 seats
                                                                           or 4-person    1 space for
                                                                           capacity based each 40
                                                                           on maximum use seats or 40-
                                                                           of all space   person       20% - LT
Private Clubs, Lodges, and Fraternal Organizations                         at one time,   capacity     80% - ST
                                                                           or as adjusted based on
                                                                           by the         maximum use
                                                                           director as    of all space
                                                                           part of a      at onetime
                                                                           conditional
                                                                           use permit
RECREATION USES
                                                                           1 space for
                                                                           each 4-person  1 space per  20% - LT
                                                                           capacity, or   16-person    80%-ST or
                                                                           as adjusted by capacity, or as adjusted
                                                                           the director   as adjusted  by the
Commercial Recreation, including health and fitness clubs                  as part of a   by the       director as
                                                                           conditional    director as  part of a
                                                                           use permit,    part of a    conditional
                                                                           not to exceed  conditional  use permit
                                                                           a 30%          use permit
                                                                           reduction
Community Facilities, including swim club, tennis club, golf course,                                  
community centers, neighborhood centers, and similar activities
HEALTH CARE SERVICES
                                                                                                       2 LT
Convalescent Facilities                                                    1 per 2.5      1 per 25     spaces,
                                                                           patient beds   patient beds remainder
                                                                                                       ST
                                                                           1 space for    1 per 15     60% - LT
Hospitals                                                                  each 1.5       patient beds 40% - ST
                                                                           patient beds
SERVICE USES
                                                                           1 per 350 sq.  1 per 3,500
Animal Care Facilities                                                     ft. of gross   sf (1 space  80% - LT
                                                                           enclosed floor minimum)     20%-ST
                                                                           area
                                                                           1 per 400 sq.
                                                                           ft. of sales,
                                                                           service and
                                                                           office
                                                                           administration
                                                                           area, and 1
                                                                           per 500 sq.    1 per 10
Automobile Dealerships                                                     ft. of         employees    100%-ST
                                                                           exterior sales
                                                                           or display
                                                                           area,
                                                                           excluding
                                                                           automobile
                                                                           storage (not
                                                                           on display)
Automotive Services & Service Stations:                                                               
                                                                           1 per 350 sq.
                                                                           ft. of gross
                                                                           enclosed floor
                                                                           area, plus     1 per 10
(a)   Service Station                                                   queue capacity employees    100%-ST
                                                                           equivalent to
                                                                           the service
                                                                           capacity of
                                                                           gasoline pumps
                                                                           1 per 350 sq.
                                                                           ft. of
                                                                           enclosed
                                                                           space; and 1
                                                                           per 500 sq.ft. 1 per 10
(b)   Services, Enclosed                                                of exterior    employees    100%-ST
                                                                           sales, display
                                                                           or storage
                                                                           site area
                                                                           (open lot
                                                                           area)
Day Care Centers                                                           1 per 1.5      1 per 6      100%-ST
                                                                           employees      employees
                                                                           2 per dwelling
Day Care Homes, Adult (Small)                                              unit, one of   None
                                                                           which shall be
                                                                           covered
                                                                           2 per dwelling
                                                                           unit, one of
                                                                           which shall be
                                                                           covered, plus
                                                                           any additional
                                                                           spaces
Day Care Homes, Adult (Large)                                              required by    None
                                                                           conditional
                                                                           use permit to
                                                                           serve visitors
                                                                           and employees
                                                                           not residing
                                                                           at the home
                                                                           2 per dwelling
Day Care Homes, Family (Small)                                             unit, one of   None
                                                                           which shall be
                                                                           covered
                                                                           2 per dwelling
                                                                           unit, one of
                                                                           which shall be
Day Care Homes, Family (Large)                                             covered, plus  None
                                                                           one for each
                                                                           employee not
                                                                           residing at
                                                                           the home
                                                                           1 per employee
Emergency Shelters for the Homeless                                        not residing   None
                                                                           at the shelter
Financial Services:                                                         
Financial services including: banks and savings and loan offices           1 per 250 sq.  1 per 2,500  40% - LT
                                                                           ft.            sf           60% - ST
General Business Services:                                                                            
(a)   Enclosed                                                          1 per 250      1 per 2,500  80%- LT
                                                                           sq.ft.         sf           20%-, ST
                                                                           1 per 500 sq.
                                                                           ft. of sales,  1 per 5,000
(b)   Open lot                                                          display or     sf           100%- ST
                                                                           storage site
                                                                           area
                                                                           1 per 200 sq.  1 per 2,000  20%-LT 80%-
Personal Services                                                          ft. of gross   sf           ST
                                                                           floor area
                                                                           2 spaces (for
                                                                           the
                                                                           residential
Residential Care Homes                                                     owners or      None
                                                                           tenants), one
                                                                           of which shall
                                                                           be covered
Recycling Center                                                           1 space for    None
                                                                           each attendant
RETAIL USES (4)
Retail:                                                                     
                                                                           1 per 200 sq.  1 per 2,000  20% - LT
(a)   Intensive (retail not defined as extensive)                       ft. of gross   sf           80%-ST
                                                                           floor area
(b)   Extensive (retail with more than 75% of gross floor area used for 1 per 350 sq.  1 per 3,500  20% - LT
display, sales and related storage, with demonstrably low parking demand   ft. of gross   sf           4080% - ST
generation per square foot of gross floor area)                            floor area
                                                                           1 space for
                                                                           each 500
                                                                           square feet of 1 per 5,000
(c)   Open lot                                                          sales,         sf           100%-ST
                                                                           display, or
                                                                           storage site
                                                                           area
                                                                           Queue line for
                                                                           5 cars, not
                                                                           blocking any
                                                                           parking        None
Drive-up windows providing services to occupants in vehicles               spaces, in     additional    
                                                                           addition to
                                                                           other
                                                                           applicable
                                                                           requirements
Eating and Drinking Services:                                                                         
                                                                           3 per 100 sq.               40% - LT
(a)   With drive-in or take-out facilities                              ft. of gross   3 per 400 sf 60% - ST
                                                                           floor area
                                                                           1 space for
                                                                           each 60 gross  1 per 600 sf
                                                                           sq. ft. of     of public
                                                                           public service service
(b)   All others                                                        area, plus 1   area, plus 1  
                                                                           space for each per 2,000 sf
                                                                           200 gross sq.  for other
                                                                           ft. for all    areas
                                                                           other areas.
                                                                           1 space per
                                                                           guestroom;
                                                                           plus the
                                                                           applicable
                                                                           requirement
                                                                           for eating and
                                                                           drinking,      1 space per
                                                                           banquet,       10
                                                                           assembly,      guestrooms,
                                                                           commercial or  plus
                                                                           other as       requirements
                                                                           required for   for
Hotel/Motel/Inn                                                            such uses,     accessory    100%-ST
                                                                           less up to 75% uses
                                                                           of the spaces  (drinking,
                                                                           required for   banquet,
                                                                           guestrooms,    assembly,
                                                                           upon approval  commercial
                                                                           by the         or other)
                                                                           director based
                                                                           on a parking
                                                                           study of
                                                                           parking
                                                                           generated by
                                                                           the mix of
                                                                           uses.
                                                                           1 per 275 sq.  1 per 2,750  40%-LT 60%
Shopping Center                                                            ft. of gross   sf           - ST
                                                                           floor area
OFFICE USES
Administrative Offices                                                                                
                                                                           1 per 300 sq.  1 per 3,000  80%-LT 20%
(a)   In the RP and ROLM districts                                      ft. of gross   sf           - ST
                                                                           floor area
                                                                           i per 250 sq.  1 per 2,500
(b)   In all other districts                                            ft. of gross   sf            
                                                                           floor area
Medical, professional, and general business offices                         
                                                                           1 per 300 sq.  1 per 3,000  60% - LT
(a)   In the RP and ROLM districts                                      ft. of gross   sf           40% - ST
                                                                           floor area
                                                                           1 per 250 sq.  1 per 2,500
(b)   In all other districts                                            ft. of gross   sf            
                                                                           floor area
MANUFACTURING AND PROCESSING
Manufacturing                                                                                         
                                                                           1 per 300 sq.  1 per 3,000  80% - LT
(a)   In the RP, and ROLM districts                                     ft. of gross   sf           20% - ST
                                                                           floor area
                                                                           1 per 500 sq.  1 per 5,000
(b)   In all other districts                                            ft. of gross   sf            
                                                                           floor area
Research and Development                                                                              
                                                                           1 per 300 sq.  1 per 3,000  80% - LT
(a)   In the RP and ROLM districts                                      ft. of gross   sf           20% - ST
                                                                           floor area
                                                                           1 per 250 sq.  1 per 2,500
(b)   In all other districts                                            ft. of gross   sf            
                                                                           floor area
Warehousing and Distribution                                                                          
                                                                           1 per 300 sq.  1 per 3,000  80% - LT
(a)   In the RP and ROLM districts                                      ft. of gross   sf           20% - ST
                                                                           floor area
                                                                           1 per 1,000
(b)   In all other districts                                            sq. ft. of     1 per 10,000  
                                                                           gross floor    sq. ft.
                                                                           area
OTHER USES
Any use not specified                                                      To be determined by the director
 
   1.   Long Term (LT) and Short Term (ST) bicycle spaces as described in
Section
18.54.060.
   2.   A "micro-unit" as used herein means a residential unit of 450 square
feet or less.
   3.   Senior housing for purposes of this provision means an independent
living facility, not a convalescent or residential care facility.
   4.   For residential mixed-use developments in the CD-C zone, CC(2) zone, on
CN and CS zoned sites abutting El Camino Real, and on CS zoned sites abutting
San Antonia Road between Middlefield Road and East Charleston Road, the first
1,500 square feet of ground-floor retail uses shall not be counted toward the
vehicle parking requirement.
   5.   Because these parking standards are reduced from the standards
otherwise applicable to multiple-family residential development, projects that
utilize these reduced parking standards shall not be eligible for further
parking reductions through adjustments under Section
18.52.050, Table 4.
Table 2
Minimum Off-Street Parking Requirements for Parking Assessment Districts
(IF USE IS NOT LISTED, REFER TO TABLE 1 FOR REQUIREMENTS)
Use Vehicle Parking Requirement {'{'}# of spaces) Bicycle Parking Requirement
                                                  Class1 Spaces
                                                                                Vehicle Parking    Bicycle Parking
Use                                                                             Requirement {'{'}# Requirement
                                                                                of spaces)
                                                                                                   Class1    Spaces
For Downtown University Avenue Parking Assessment District:
                                                                                                   1 per     40% -
All uses (except residential) 2                                                 1 per 250 square   2,500     LT 60%
                                                                                feet               square    - ST
                                                                                                   feet
For California Avenue Parking Assessment District:
                                                                                1 per 310 square
                                                                                feet of gross
                                                                                enclosed floor
Automobile Service Stations                                                     area, plus queue   1 per 10  100%-
                                                                                capacityequivalent employees ST
                                                                                to the service
                                                                                capacity of
                                                                                gasoline pumps
                                                                                1 per 150 square
                                                                                feet of gross      1 per 10  100%-
Automotive Services                                                             floor area,        employees ST
                                                                                display, or
                                                                                storage on site
Eating and Drinking Services:                                                                               
                                                                                3 per 100 sf of    3 per 400 40% -
(a) With drive-in or take-out facilities                                        gross floor area   sf        LT
                                                                                                             60%-ST
(b) All others                                                                  1 per 155 sf of    1 per      
                                                                                gross floor area   1,550 sf
Financial services:                                                              
(a)   Bank, savings and loan offices with 7,500 square feet of floor area or 1 per 180 sf of    1 per     40%-LT
less:                                                                           gross floor area   1,800 sf  60% -
                                                                                                             ST
(b)   Banks, savings and loan offices with more than 7,500 square feet of flo1 per 310 sf of              
area:                                                                           gross floor area
(c)   Others                                                                 1 per 180 sf of    1 per      
                                                                                gross floor area   1,800 sf
General Business Services:                                                       
                                                                                                             80%-
(a)   Enclosed                                                               1 per 360 sf of    1 per     LT
                                                                                gross floor area   3,600 sf  20%-
                                                                                                             ST
                                                                                1 per 500 sf of    1 per     100%-
(b)   Open lot                                                               sales, display or  5,000 sf  ST
                                                                                storage site area
                                                                                1 per 310 sf of    1 per     60%-LT
Medical, professional, and general business offices                             gross floor area   3,100 sf  40% -
                                                                                                             ST
                                                                                1 per 450 sf of    1 per     20% -
Personal Services                                                               gross floor area   4,500 sf  LT 80%
                                                                                                             - ST
Retail:                                                                          
                                                                                1 per 240 sf of    1 per     20%-LT
(a)   Intensive                                                              gross floor area   2,400 sf  80% -
                                                                                                             ST
(b)   Extensive                                                              1 per 350 sf of    1 per      
                                                                                gross floor area   3,500 sf
                                                                                1 for each 500
(c)   Open lot                                                               square feet of     1 per     100%-
                                                                                sales, display, or 5,000 sf  ST
                                                                                storage site area.
OTHER USES
Any use not specified                                                           See Table 1
 
   1.   Long Term (LT) and Short Term (ST) bicycle spaces as described in
Section
18.54.060.
   2.   For residential mixed-use developments in the CD-C zone, CC(2) zone,
and on CN and CS zoned sites abutting El Camino Real, the first 1,500 square
feet of ground-floor retail uses shall not be counted toward the vehicle
parking requirement.
Table 3
Minimum Off-Street Loading Requirements
Use Gross Floor Area Loading Spaces Required
                                                                                                      Loading
Use                                                                           Gross Floor Area        Spaces
                                                                                                      Required
RESIDENTIAL USES
∙ Single-family residential use                                             No requirement
∙ Two-family residential use                                                established             0
∙ Multiple-family residential use
∙ Dormitory, Fraternity/Sorority, or group housing where meals are provided
in common dining facilities
                                                                              0 - 9,999 sq. ft.       0
∙ Housing for the elderly or other community facility, where meals are
provided in common dining facilities
                                                                             10,000-99,999 sq.ft.    1
                                                                             100,000 sq. ft. or      2
                                                                              greater
HEALTH CARE SERVICES
∙ Hospitals                                                                 0 - 9,999 sq. ft.       0
∙ Convalescent facilities
                                                                             10,000-99,999 sq.ft.    1
                                                                             100,000-199,999 sq.ft.  2
                                                                             200,000 sq. ft. or      3
                                                                              greater
SERVICE USES
Automotive Uses                                                               0 - 29,999 sq. ft.      1
                                                                             .30,000-69,999. sq.ft.  2
                                                                             70,000-120,000 sq. ft   3
                                                                              Each additional 50,000  1
                                                                             sq. ft. over 120,000    additional
                                                                              sq.ft.                  space
∙ Financial services
∙ Personal services                                                         0 - 9,999 sq. ft.       0
∙ Administrative office services
                                                                             10,000-99,999 sq.ft.    1
                                                                             100,000- 199,999 sq.    2
                                                                              ft.
                                                                             200,000 sq. ft. or      3
                                                                              greater
RETAIL USES
∙ Hotel/Motel/Inn                                                           0 - 9,999 sq. ft.       0
                                                                             10,000-99,999 sq.ft.    1
                                                                             100,000 – 199,999 sq. 2
                                                                              ft.
                                                                             200,000 sq. ft. or      3
                                                                              greater
∙ Retail Services                                                           0 - 4,999 sq. ft.       0
∙ Eating and Drinking Services
                                                                             5,000 – 29,999 sq. ft.1
                                                                             30,000 - 69,999 sq. ft. 2
                                                                             70,000-120,000 sq. ft.  3
                                                                              For each additional     1
                                                                             50,000 sq. ft. over     additional
                                                                              120,000 sq.ft.          space
OFFICE USES
∙ Medical offices
∙ Professional offices                                                      0 - 9,999 sq. ft.       0
∙ General business offices
                                                                             10,000-99,999 sq.ft.    1
                                                                             100,000-199,999 sq.ft.  2
                                                                             200,000 sq. ft. or      3
                                                                              greater
MANUFACTURING AND PROCESSING USES
∙ Warehousing and Manufacturing distribution                                0 - 4,999 sq. ft.       0
                                                                             5,000 – 29,999 sq. ft.1
                                                                             30,000 - 69,999 sq. ft. 2
                                                                             70,000-120,000 sq. ft.  3
                                                                              For each additional     1
                                                                             50,000 sq. ft. Over     additional
                                                                              120,000 sq.ft.          space
∙ Research and development                                                  0-9,999 sq.ft.          0
                                                                             10,000-99,999 sq.ft.    1
                                                                             100,000-199,999 sq. ft. 2
                                                                             200,000 sq. ft. or      3
                                                                              greater
OTHER USES
All uses not specifically listed                                              To be determined by the director
 
    (d)   Residential and mixed use structures with fifty (50) or more dwelling
units shall provide at least one (1) on-site, short-term loading space for
passenger vehicles, to be used by taxicabs and similar transportation and
delivery services. Unless an adjustment is approved pursuant to Section
18.52.050, projects providing only the automobile parking required by
subdivision (a)(1)B. shall provide one (1) on-site, short-term loading space
for passenger vehicles, to be used by taxicabs and similar transportation and
delivery services.
(Ord. 5651 § 6, 2025: Ord. 5646 § 3, 2025: Ord. 5594 § 7, 2024: Ord. 5587 § 15,
2023: Ord. 5554 § 31, 2022: Ord. 5542 § 14, 2022: Ord. 5538 § 14, 2021: Ord.
5524 § 2, 2021: Ord. 5512 § 6, 2020: Ord. 5504 § 4, 2020: Ord. 5460 § 11, 2019:
Ord. 5412 § 21, 2017: Ord. 5406 § 6, 2017: Ord. 4964 § 3 (part), 2007)
18.52.045   Adjustments to Existing Parking Facilities
   (a)   The following minor adjustments may be made to existing parking
facilities that are intended to remain in substantially the same form after
restriping.
      (1)   Accessibility and EVSE-related equipment.
      For sites with existing development, the number on-site parking spaces
may be reduced to the minimum extent necessary to: (1) Achieve state or
federally mandated accessibility requirements or (2) permit installation of
electric vehicle charging stations, as defined in California Government Code
Section 65850.7. A maximum of 10% of the existing automobile parking stalls, or
one stall, whichever is greater, may be removed to accommodate accessibility
requirements. Electrical equipment required for EVSE should be placed in a
location that minimizes visibility from the public right-of-way.
      (2)   Substitution of bicycle parking.
      For sites with existing development, where additional bicycle parking
facilities cannot reasonably be located outside of the parking facility area,
existing automobile parking stalls may be substituted with long- or short-term
bicycle parking facilities. The maximum number of substitutions shall be two
existing automobile parking spaces, or 10% of the existing automobile parking
stalls, whichever is greater. A minimum of four long-term or eight short-term
bicycle parking spaces is required per automobile parking space. The bicycle
parking spaces are to be located in the same physical location as the
automobile spaces they are replacing, which shall be near primary entries of
the building on-site or in locations that meet best practices for bicycle
parking facilities.
   (b)   Substitution of religious-use parking for housing development
projects.
      (1)   This subdivision applies to religious institution affiliated
housing development projects, as defined by Section 65913.6(a)(5) of the
California Government Code.
      (2)   The developer of a religious institution affiliated housing
development project is not required to replace religious-use parking spaces
which the developer eliminates as a part of that housing development project.
Such a reduction may not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the number of religious-
use parking spaces that are available at the time the request is made.
      (3)   Religious-use parking spaces may count towards parking spaces
required for the religious institution affiliated housing development project
if:
         (A)   There is at least one space per unit,
         (B)   The parcel is within one-half mile walking distance of public
transit, or
         (C)   There is a car share vehicle located within one block of the
parcel.
(Ord. 5651 § 6, 2025: Ord. 5524 § 3, 2021: Ord. 5504 § 5, 2020)
18.52.050   Adjustments by the Director
Automobile parking and off-street loading requirements prescribed by this
chapter may be adjusted by the director in the following instances and in
accord with the prescribed limitations in Table 4, when in his/her opinion such
adjustment will be consistent with the purposes of this chapter, will not
create undue impact on existing or potential uses adjoining the site or in the
general vicinity, and will be commensurate with the reduced parking demand
created by the development, including for visitors and accessory facilities
where appropriate. No reductions may be granted that would result in provision
of less than ten (10) spaces on a site. The following are adjustments that
apply to developments not located within a parking assessment district.
Adjustments within the parking assessment districts are contained in Section
18.52.080. The decision of the regarding parking adjustments may be appealed as
set forth in
Chapter 18.78 (Appeals).
Table 4
Allowable Parking Adjustments
Purpose of Adjustment Amount of Adjustment Maximum Reduction 2
Purpose of Adjustment                                             Amount of Adjustment                                                        Maximum Reduction 2
                                                                  Square footage of commercial or industrial uses to be used for an on-site
On-Site Employee Amenities                                        cafeteria, recreational facility, and/or day care facility, to be provided  100% of requirement for on-site employee amenities
                                                                  to employees or their children and not open to the general public, may be
                                                                  exempted from the parking requirements
                                                                  For any site or sites with multiple uses where the application of this
                                                                  chapter requires a total of or more than ten (10) spaces, the total number
                                                                  of spaces otherwise required by application of Table 1 may be reduced when
                                                                  the joint facility will serve all existing, proposed, and potential uses as
                                                                  effectively and conveniently as would separate parking facilities for each
                                                                  use or site. In making such a determination, the director shall consider a
Joint Use (Shared) Parking Facilities                             parking analysis using criteria developed by the Urban Land Institute (ULI) 20% of total spaces required for the site
                                                                  or similar methodology to estimate the shared parking characteristics of
                                                                  the proposed land uses. The analysis shall employ the city's parking ratios
                                                                  as the basis for the calculation of the base parking requirement and for
                                                                  the determination of parking requirements for individual land uses. The
                                                                  director may also require submittal and approval of a TDM program 1 to
                                                                  further assure parking reductions are achieved.
100% Affordable Housing (4)                                       Based on maximum anticipated demand; applicant may request up to a 100%
                                                                  reduction in parking.
                                                                  The total number of spaces required may be reduced for affordable housing
                                                                  and single room occupancy (SRO) units, commensurate with the reduced        a.   40% for
Affordable Housing Units and Single Room Occupancy (SRO) Units   parking demand created by the housing facility, including for visitors and  Extremely Low Income and SRO Units
(3)                                                               accessory facilities. The reduction shall consider proximity to transit and b.   30% for Very Low Income Units
                                                                  support services and the director may require traffic demand management     c.   20% for Low Income Units
                                                                  measures 1 in conjunction with any approval.
                                                                  The total number of spaces required may be reduced for housing located
                                                                  within a designated Pedestrian/Transit Oriented area or elsewhere in
                                                                  immediate proximity to public transportation facilities serving a
Housing Near Transit Facilities                                   significant portion of residents, employees, or customers, when such        20% of the total spaces required for the site.
                                                                  reduction will be commensurate with the reduced parking demand created by
                                                                  the housing facility, including for visitors and accessory facilities, and
                                                                  subject to submittal and approval of a TDM program.1
                                                                  Where effective alternatives to automobile access are provided, other than
                                                                  those listed above, parking requirements may be reduced to an extent
                                                                  commensurate with the permanence, effectiveness, and the demonstrated
Transportation and Parking Alternatives                           reduction of off-street parking demand effectuated by such alternative      20% of the total spaces required for the site
                                                                  programs. Examples of such programs may include, but are not limited to,
                                                                  transportation demand management (TDM) programs or innovative parking
                                                                  pricing or design solutions.1 (note: landscape reserve requirement is
                                                                  deleted).
                                                                  Parking reductions may be granted for any combination of the above          a.   30% reduction of the total parking demand otherwise required
Combined Parking Adjustments                                      circumstances as prescribed by this chapter, subject to limitations on the  b.   40% reduction for affordable housing projects
                                                                  combined total reduction allowed.
                                                                  The director may modify the quantity or dimensions of off-street loading
                                                                  requirements for non-residential development based on existing or proposed
                                                                  site conditions; availability of alternative means to address loading and
                                                                  unloading activity; and, upon finding that: 1) the off-street loading
Modification to Off-Street Loading Requirements                   requirement may conflict with Comprehensive Plan goals and policies related One loading space may be waived
                                                                  to site design planning, circulation and access, or urban design
                                                                  principles; and 2) the use of shared on-street loading would not conflict
                                                                  with Comprehensive Plan goals and policies related to site design planning,
                                                                  circulation and access or urban design principles; maximum reduction in one
                                                                  loading space.
                                                                  Existing parking facilities may be restriped in accordance with applicable
                                                                  provisions of the municipal code. The Director may approve a reduction in
                                                                  the number of required on-site parking spaces to achieve the City’s waste
                                                                  management objectives, make improvements to on-site circulation that would  10% of the total spaces required for the site, or 2 spaces,
Restriping Existing Parking Facilities                            reduce or eliminate a hazard, or bring substandard parking stalls into      whichever is greater.
                                                                  compliance with current design requirements. This provision applies only to
                                                                  sites with existing structures and existing parking facilities that are
                                                                  intended to remain in substantially the same form after re-striping of the
                                                                  facility.
 
   1.   See Section
18.52.050(d) below regarding requirements for TDM programs.
   2.   No parking reductions may be granted that would result in provision of
less than ten (10) parking spaces on site.
   3.   No parking reductions may be granted for projects that are entitled to
the reduced parking standards in Table 1 of Section
18.52.040 for senior housing.
   4.   Applies to 100% affordable housing projects and the residential
component of 100% affordable housing mixed-use projects. "100% affordable
housing" as used herein means a multiple-family housing project consisting
entirely of affordable units, as defined in Section
16.65.020 of this code, available only to households with income levels at or
below 120% of the area median income, as defined in
Chapter 16.65, except for a building manager's unit.
   (a)   Combining Parking Adjustments
   Parking reductions may be granted for any combination of circumstances,
prescribed by this chapter, so long as in total no more than a 30% reduction of
the total parking demand otherwise required occurs, or no less than a 40%
reduction for affordable housing projects (including Single Room Occupancy
(SRO) units).
   (b)   Deferral of Meeting Full Requirement by Landscape Reserve
   Where the expected need for off-street parking or bicycle facilities for a
particular use is uncertain, due to unknown or unusual operating
characteristics of the use and unavailability of comparable data to establish
need, the director, upon recommendation of the architectural review board, may
authorize that construction and provision of not more than fifty percent of the
required off-street parking stalls and not more than twenty-five percent of the
bicycle parking spaces be deferred. The number of bicycle parking spaces
deferred shall be apportioned by construction type (long term or short term) in
the same percentages as indicated in Table 1 of Section
18.52.040. The director may set such conditions as necessary to guarantee
provision of such deferred spaces whenever the director determines the need to
exist. Land area required for provision of deferred parking or bicycle spaces
shall be maintained in reserve and shall be landscaped pursuant to a plan
approved by the architectural review board demonstrating that ultimate
provision of the deferred spaces will meet all requirements of this chapter.
Upon use of the parking area at near build-out (at least 90% occupancy) over a
period of at least ten years, the director may allow the reserve area to be
used for other uses that do not generate parking demand, subject to
restrictions and conditions to prevent conversion to a more intense use unless
sufficient additional on-site parking is provided.
   (c)   Off-Site Parking
   Except in parking assessment areas, the director may authorize all or a
portion of the required parking for a use to be located on the site not more
than 500 feet from the site of the use for which such parking is required,
where in the director's judgment, such authorization will be in accord with the
purposes of this chapter. The distance to the off-site parking shall be
measured from the nearest corner of the parking facility to the nearest public
entrance to the building via the shortest pedestrian route.
   (d)   Transportation Demand Management (TDM)
      (1)   A Transportation Demand Management (TDM) program may be (a)
proposed by an applicant, or may be (b) required by the director for any
project requesting a reduction in parking or generating 50 or more net new
weekday (AM or PM peak hour) or weekend peak hour trips, or (c) may be required
as CEQA mitigation for identified potential significant parking impacts.
      (2)   Where a Transportation Demand Management (TDM) program is proposed
or required, the TDM program shall outline parking and/or traffic demand
measures to be implemented to reduce parking need and trip generation. The
Director shall have the authority to adopt guidelines for preparing TDM plans.
Required measures may include, but are not limited to: participation in the
Transportation Management Association or similar organization, limiting
“assigned” parking to one space per residential unit, providing for transit
passes, parking cash-out, enhanced shuttle service (or contributions to extend
or enhance existing shuttle service or to create new shared or public shuttle
service), car-sharing, traffic-reducing housing, providing priority parking
spaces for carpools/vanpools or “green” vehicles (zero emission vehicles,
inherently low emission vehicles, or plug-in hybrids, etc.), vehicle charging
stations, additional bicycle parking facilities, or other measures to encourage
transit use or to reduce parking needs. The program shall be proposed to the
satisfaction of the director, shall include proposed performance targets for
parking and/or trip reduction and indicate the basis for such estimates, and
shall designate a single entity (property owner, homeowners association, etc.)
to implement the proposed measures.
      (3)   Monitoring reports shall be submitted to the director two years
after building occupancy and again every year thereafter, noting the
effectiveness of the proposed measures as compared to the initial performance
targets, and implementing modifications if necessary to enhance parking and/or
trip reductions.
      (4)   Where the monitoring reports indicate that performance measures are
not met, the director may require program modifications and may impose
administrative penalties if identified deficiencies are not addressed within
six months.
   (e)   Shared Parking Agreements
      Notwithstanding the limitations set forth in Table 4, subdivision (a),
and subdivision (c) of this Section, the Director shall approve a parking
adjustment where the applicant meets all of the requirements of California
Government Code Section 65683.1, including but not limited to, preparation of a
parking analysis and a recorded shared parking agreement.
(Ord. 5651 § 6, 2025: Ord. 5504 § 6, 2020: Ord. 5460 § 12, 2019: Ord. 5432 § 13
(part), 2018: Ord. 5406 §§ 7 and 12, 2017: Ord. 4964 § 3 (part), 2007)
18.52.060   Parking Assessment Districts and Areas - General
   (a)   Definitions
      (1)   "Parking Assessment Areas"
         “Parking assessment areas” means either:
            The “downtown parking assessment area,” which is that certain area
of the city delineated on the map of the University Avenue parking assessment
district entitled Proposed Boundaries of University Avenue Off-Street Parking
Project No. 75-63 Assessment District, City of Palo Alto, County of Santa
Clara, State of California, dated October 30, 1978, and on file with the city
clerk; or
            The “California Avenue area parking assessment district,” which is
that certain area of the city delineated on the map of the California Avenue
area parking assessment district entitled Proposed Boundaries, California
Avenue Area Parking Maintenance District, dated December 16, 1976, and on file
with the city clerk;
   (b)   In-lieu fees
      Within any parking assessment district established by the city for the
purpose of providing off-street parking facilities, all or a portion of the
off-street parking requirement for a use may be satisfied by payment of
assessments or fees levied by such district on the basis of parking spaces
required but not provided.
(Ord. 5373 § 21 (part), 2016; Ord. 5213 § 2, 2014: Ord. 4964 § 3 (part), 2007)
18.52.070   Parking Regulations for CD Assessment District
With respect to on-site and off-site parking space requirements for
nonresidential uses within an assessment district wherein properties are
assessed under a Bond Plan G financing pursuant to Title 13, the requirements
of this Section
18.52.070 shall apply in the CD Assessment district in lieu of comparable
requirements in this
Chapter 18.52. Requirements for the size and other design criteria for parking
spaces shall continue to be governed by the provisions of
Chapter 18.54.
(a)   On-Site Parking Requirement
   Any new development, any addition or enlargement of existing development, or
any use of any floor area that has never been assessed under any Bond Plan G
financing pursuant to Title 13, shall provide one parking space for each 250
gross square feet of floor area, except as may be exempt from such requirement
by the provisions of subsection (b) of this section. The purpose of this
subsection is to regulate the number of parking spaces required.
(b)   Exceptions to On-Site Parking Requirement
   The requirement for on-site parking provided in subsection (a) of this
section shall not apply in the following circumstances:
   (1)   The following square footage shall be exempt from the on-site parking
requirement of subsection (a):
      (A)   Square footage for handicapped access which does not increase the
usable floor area, as determined by Section
18.18.060(e);
      (B)   Square footage for at or above grade parking, though such square
footage is included in the FAR calculations in Section
18.18.060(a).
   (2)   A conversion to commercial use of a historic building in Categories 1
and 2 shall be exempt from the on-site parking requirement in subsection (a),
provided that the building is fifty feet or less in height and has most
recently been in residential use. Such conversion, in order to be exempt, shall
be done in conjunction with exterior historic rehabilitation approved by the
director of planning and community environment upon the recommendation of the
architectural review board in consultation with the historic resources board.
Such conversion must not eliminate any existing on-site parking.
   (3)   Vacant parcels shall be exempt from the requirements of subsection (a)
of this section at the time when development occurs as provided herein. Such
development shall be exempt to the extent of 0.3 parking spaces for every one
thousand square feet of site area, provided that such parcels were at some time
assessed for parking under a Bond Plan E financing pursuant to
Chapter 13.16 or were subject to other ad valorem assessments for parking.
   (4)   No new parking spaces will be required for a site in conjunction with
the development or replacement of the amount of floor area used for
nonresidential use equal to the amount of adjusted square footage for the site
shown on the engineer's report for fiscal year 1986-87 for the latest Bond Plan
G financing for parking acquisition or improvements in that certain area of the
city delineated on the map of the University Avenue parking assessment district
entitled, Proposed Boundaries of University Avenue Off-Street Parking Project
#75-63 Assessment District, City of Palo Alto, County of Santa Clara, State of
California, dated October 30, 1978, and on file with the city clerk. No
exemption from parking requirements shall be available where a residential use
changes to a nonresidential use, except pursuant to subdivision (b)(2) of this
subsection.
(c)   Off-Site Parking
   Parking required by this chapter may be provided by off-site parking,
provided that such off-site parking is within 500 feet of the site using it and
approved in writing by the director of planning and community environment. The
director shall assure that sufficient covenants and guarantees are provided to
ensure use and maintenance of such parking facilities, including an enforceable
agreement that any development occurring on the site where parking is provided
shall not result in a net reduction of parking spaces provided, considering
both the parking previously provided and the parking required by the proposed
use.
(d)   In-Lieu Parking Provisions
   In connection with any expansion of the supply of public parking spaces
within the CD commercial downtown district, the city shall allocate a number of
spaces for use as "in-lieu parking" spaces to allow development to occur on
sites which would otherwise be precluded from development due to parking
constraints imposed by this chapter. Off-site parking on such sites may be
provided by payment of an in-lieu monetary contribution to the city to defray
the cost of providing such parking. Contributions for each required parking
space shall equal the incremental cost of providing a net new parking space in
an assessment district project plus cost for the administration of the program,
all as determined pursuant to
Chapter 16.57 of Title 16 of this code, by the director, whose decision shall
be final. Only sites satisfying one or more of the following criteria, as
determined by the director, shall be eligible to participate in the in-lieu
parking program:
   (1)   Construction of on-site parking would necessitate destruction or
substantial demolition of a designated historic structure;
   (2)   The site area is less than ten thousand square feet and it would not
be physically feasible to provide the required on-site parking;
   (3)   The site is greater than ten thousand square feet, but of such an
unusual configuration that it would not be physically feasible to provide the
required on-site parking;
   (4)   The site is located in an area where city policy precludes curb cuts
or otherwise prevents use of the site for on-site parking;
   (5)   The site has other physical constraints, such as a high groundwater
table, which preclude provision of on-site parking without extraordinary
expense.
   Office uses above the ground floor shall not be eligible to participate in
the in-lieu parking program from the effective date of Ordinance No. 5460
through August 1, 2025.
(e)   Underground Parking
   Underground parking deeper than two levels below grade shall be prohibited
unless a soils report or engineering analysis demonstrates that regular pumping
of subsurface water will not be required.
(f)   Minor Adjustments to Existing Parking Facilities
   The following minor adjustments may be made to existing parking facilities
that are intended to remain in substantially the same form after restriping.
   (1)   Accessibility and EVSE-related equipment. For sites with existing
development, the number on-site parking spaces may be reduced to the minimum
extent necessary to: (1) achieve state or federally mandated accessibility
requirements or (2) permit installation of electric vehicle charging stations,
as defined in California Government Code Section 65850.7. A maximum of 10% of
the existing automobile parking stalls, or one stall, whichever is greater, may
be removed to accommodate accessibility requirements. Electrical equipment
required for EVSE should be placed in a location that minimizes visibility from
the public right of way.
   (2)   Substitution of bicycle parking. For sites with existing development,
where additional bicycle parking facilities cannot reasonably be located
outside of the parking facility area, existing automobile parking stalls may be
substituted with long- or short-term bicycle parking facilities. The maximum
number of substitutions shall be two existing automobile parking spaces, or 10%
of the existing automobile parking stalls, whichever is greater. A minimum of
four long-term or eight short-term bicycle parking spaces is required per
automobile parking space. The bicycle parking spaces are to be located in the
same physical location as the automobile spaces they are replacing, which shall
be near primary entries of the building on-site or in locations that meet best
practices for bicycle parking facilities.
(Ord. 5651 § 6, 2025: Ord. 5554 § 33, 2022: Ord. 5552 § 3, 2022: Ord. 5513 § 2,
2021: Ord. 5504 § 10, 2020: Ord. 5460 § 13, 2019: Ord. 5373 § 21 (part), 2016;
Ord. 5356 § 5, 2015: Ord. 5214 § 5, 2013: Ord. 4964 § 3 (part), 2007)
18.52.080   Adjustments to Parking Assessment Area Requirements by the Director
Automobile parking requirements prescribed in this chapter may be adjusted by
the director for properties within parking assessment areas in the following
instances and in accord with the prescribed limitations where, in his/her
opinion, such adjustment will be in accord with purposes of this chapter and
will not create undue impact on existing or potential uses adjoining the site
or in the general vicinity. The decision of the director regarding parking
adjustments may be appealed as set forth in
Chapter 18.78 (Appeals).
   (a)   Tandem Parking
   Tandem parking (a multiple parking configuration locating one stall behind
another) may be allowed where in the judgment of the director the parking will
serve all proposed uses conveniently. The director shall require such covenants
and guarantees as deemed necessary to ensure use and maintenance of such
parking facilities.
   (b)   Percentage of Compact Parking Stalls
   For parking facilities exceeding five stalls and with architectural review
approval prior to June 1, 2007, a maximum of fifty percent compact parking
stalls may be allowed. For any project approved subsequent to June 1, 2007,
compact parking is not allowed.
   (c)   Shared Parking Facilities
   For any site or sites with multiple uses where joint use of on-site private
or nearby public parking facilities can occur without conflict, and the use is
exempt from parking assessment, the total number of spaces otherwise required
by application of the schedule may be reduced when the joint facility will
serve all existing, proposed, and potential uses as effectively and
conveniently as would separate parking facilities for each use or site. In
making such a determination, the director shall consider a parking analysis
using criteria developed by the Urban Land Institute (ULI) or similar
methodology to estimate the shared parking characteristics of the proposed land
uses. The analysis shall employ the city's parking ratios as the basis for the
calculation of the base parking requirement and for the determination of
parking requirements for individual land uses. The number of parking stalls
required for any new development or addition may be reduced by no more than
twenty percent (20%) of the total number of spaces otherwise required for the
site or sites.
   (d)   Off-Site Parking
   Within parking assessment areas, the director may authorize all or a portion
of the required parking for a use to be located on a site within the parking
assessment area or not more than 500 feet from the boundaries of the parking
assessment area, where the zoning of such site permits parking as a use. The
director shall require such covenants and guarantees as deemed necessary to
ensure use and maintenance of such parking facilities.
   (e)   Modifications to Off-Street Loading Requirements
   The director may modify the quantity or dimensions of off-street loading
requirements for non-residential development based on existing or proposed site
conditions; availability of alternative means to address loading and unloading
activity; and, upon finding that: 1) the off-street loading requirement may
conflict with Comprehensive Plan goals and policies related to site design
planning, circulation and access, or urban design principles; maximum reduction
is one loading space; and 2) and the use of shared on-street loading would not
conflict with Comprehensive Plan goals and policies related to site design
planning, circulation and access or urban design principles; maximum reduction
in one loading space.
   (f)   Affordable Housing
      For 100% affordable housing projects, the director may waive up to 100%
of the parking requirement based on maximum anticipated demand. "100%
affordable housing" as used herein means a multiple-family housing project
consisting entirely of affordable units, as defined in Section
16.65.020 of this code, available only to households with income levels at or
below 120% of the area median income, as defined in
Chapter 16.65, except for a building manager's unit.
   (g)   Adjustments to Existing Parking Facilities
      The director may approve a reduction in existing on-site parking spaces
to achieve the city’s waste management objectives, make improvements to on-site
circulation that would reduce or eliminate a hazard, or bring substandard
parking stalls into compliance with current design requirements. This provision
applies only to sites with existing structures and existing parking facilities
that are intended to remain in substantially the same form after re-striping of
the facility. A maximum of 10% of the existing automobile parking stalls, or
two stalls, whichever is greater, may be removed pursuant to this section.
(Ord. 5504 § 7, 2020: Ord. 5460 § 14, 2019: Ord. 5406 § 8, 2017: Ord. 4964 § 3
(part), 2007)
Chapter 18.54
PARKING FACILITY DESIGN STANDARDS
Sections:
   
18.54.010   Purposes
   18.54.015   Definitions
   
18.54.020   Vehicle Parking Facilities
   
18.54.030   Accessible Parking Facilities
   
18.54.040   Landscaping of Parking Areas
   
18.54.050   Miscellaneous Design Standards
   
18.54.060   Bicycle Parking Facilities
   
18.54.070   Parking Tables and Figures
18.54.010   Purpose
   Design standards are established to ensure safe and accessible parking
facilities for vehicle parking, bicycle parking, accessible parking and loading
facilities. Such standards shall be used by the building official, the director
of planning and development services (the “director”), the planning commission,
the architectural review board, and any other authorities, departments, boards
or commissions responsible for application and administration of parking,
bicycle, and loading requirements established by 
Chapter 18.52.
(Ord. 5494 § 3, 2020: Ord. 4964 § 3 (part), 2007)
18.54.015   Definitions
The definitions provided in Section 18.52.020 shall apply to this
Chapter 18.54.
(Ord. 5554 § 32, 2022)
18.54.020   Vehicle Parking Facilities
   (a)   Parking Facility Design
   Parking facilities shall be designed in accordance with the following
regulations:
      (1)   Requirements for dimensions of parking facilities at, above, and
below grade are contained in this section and in Figures
1-
6 and Tables
3-
6 of Section
18.54.070.
      (2)   Stalls and aisles shall be designed such that columns, walls, or
other obstructions do not interfere with normal vehicle parking maneuvers. All
required stall and aisle widths shall be designed to be clear of such
obstructions except as otherwise provided in subsection (a)(4) below.
      (3)   The required stall widths shown in
Table 3 of Section
18.54.070 shall be increased by 0.5 foot for any stall located immediately
adjacent to a wall, whether on one or both sides. The director may require that
the required stall widths be increased by 0.5 foot for any stall located
immediately adjacent to a post, where such post limits turning movements into
or out of the stall.
      (4)   For property owners or tenants seeking to install EVSE, the
required stall widths shown in
Table 3 of Section
18.54.070 may be reduced by no more than eighteen inches below the code
required minimum dimensions in order to accommodate EVSE or associated
electrical utility equipment. For parking lots and garages other than for one-
and two-family use, this reduction may be applied to 10% of the total required
parking stalls, or two stalls, whichever is greater. The director may approve a
reduction in width for a greater number of stalls through a director’s
adjustment pursuant to Section
18.52.050. For one- and two-family residential garages and carports, 18-inch
reductions are allowed for both stall width and depth to enable Electrification
Equipment and protective bollards, as long as (i) the reduced width is not
continuous along the side of the stall, to provide a six-foot length near the
middle of the stall for opening two vehicular side doors, and (ii) the proposed
garage has an interior clearance depth of 20 feet in compliance with
18.54.020 (b)(2) or an existing substandard garage has a depth of at least 19
feet-six inches. For a garage depth less than 19 feet-six inches but greater
than 18 feet, such equipment may be installed on the back wall of the garage at
a location at least four feet above the finished floor.
      (5)   Dead-end aisles shall be avoided to the greatest extent feasible.
      (6)   Except for at-grade parking facilities serving a maximum of two
dwelling units, all parking facilities shall be set back a sufficient distance
from the street so that vehicles need not back out into or over a public street
(not including an alley) or sidewalk.
      (7)   Surface parking areas shall be located so that garages or carports
are not predominantly facing the street; parking locations behind the building
(s) are preferable.
      (8)   Carport structures shall be architecturally compatible with the
main structures in the project and should utilize substantial support posts.
Landscaping material associated with the carport shall have adequate room to
grow and be protected from damage by cars and pedestrian traffic.
      (9)   Except for single-family uses, parking should be underground, semi-
depressed, enclosed or concealed for all projects to the extent feasible.
      (10)   Where feasible, parking shall be broken into smaller groupings of
spaces to avoid large expanses of parking and to provide for more opportunities
to intercept and filter drainage from the parking areas.
      (11)   Proximity of underground parking garages to residentially zoned
properties should take into consideration the need for landscaping along the
perimeter of the site. In instances where substantial planting is necessary,
the placement of parking garages should be adequately setback from the property
line to provide for the landscaping.
   (b)   Off-Street Parking Stalls
      (1)   Each off-street parking stall shall consist of a rectangular area
not less than eight and one-half (8.5) feet wide by seventeen and one-half
(17.5) feet long (uni-class stall), or as otherwise prescribed for angled
parking by Table
3 in Section
18.54.070.
      (2)   Garages and carports for single-family and two-family development
shall provide a minimum interior clearance of ten (10) feet wide by twenty (20)
feet long for a single car and a minimum of twenty (20) feet wide by twenty
(20) feet long for two cars to allow sufficient clearance, except as otherwise
provided in subsection (a)(4) above.
      (3)   Dimensions of parking stalls for parallel parking shall be as
follows. The minimum dimensions of such a stall located adjacent to a wall
shall be ten feet wide and twenty feet long. The minimum dimensions of such a
stall located adjacent to a curb with a minimum two-foot clearance to a wall
shall be eight feet wide and twenty feet long. These required stall widths are
in addition to the required width of the access driveway or aisle.
      (4)   Mechanical lifts may be used to satisfy off-street parking
requirements in accordance with the following provisions:
         A.   The regulations in this section apply to mechanical lifts,
elevators and turn-around devices specified for vehicle use, and other
mechanical devices that facilitate vehicle parking;
         B.   Mechanical vehicle lifts may be used for multi-family
residential, office, hotel, automotive, industrial or institutional uses. Other
uses may use mechanical vehicle lifts subject to approval from the Director of
Planning and Community Development and may be required to provide dedicated on-
site valet assistance for no fee to the user.
         C.   The location of mechanical lifts shall be located within an
enclosed parking facility. All lifts and associated equipment shall be screened
from public views and the screening shall be architecturally compatible with
the site conditions;
         D.   Applicant shall submit an analysis and report, prepared by a
qualified professional, for review and approval by the Director of Planning and
Development Services that demonstrates the effectiveness of the proposed
parking lift system; operational details; schematic or technical drawings;
regular and emergency maintenance schedule, procedures and backup systems;
vehicle queuing, access and retrieval efficiency; and potential impacts,
delays, or inconveniences to all of the following:
            i.   site residents, workers, and visitors
            ii.   pedestrian and bicycle movement and safety on and nearby the
site
            iii.   vehicular movement and safety on and nearby the site
         E.   Mechanical car lifts shall not be used for accessible parking
spaces or loading spaces;
         F.   Mechanical car lifts shall accommodate mid-size sport utility
vehicles and full-size cars.
         G.   For all non-residential uses, a minimum of two spaces or 10% of
the total number of parking spaces provided, whichever is greater, shall be
provided as standard non-mechanical parking spaces. The required accessible
spaces shall not be counted as one of the standard spaces for this requirement;
         H.   Additional information, reports and analysis may be required and
conditions may be imposed to ensure the use, operation and function of the lift
system is not detrimental to the public welfare, property, land uses and users
of the property, other properties, or the public right of way, in the general
vicinity.
         I.   Lift design must allow for removal of any single vehicle without
necessitating the temporary removal of any other vehicle.
         J.   The Director shall have authority to adopt regulations to
implement this provision.
      (5)   Each off-street motorcycle parking stall shall consist of a
rectangular area not less than five feet wide by ten feet long, as illustrated
in Figure
7 of Section
18.54.070.
   (c)   Off-Street Loading Spaces
      (1)   Each off-street loading space shall consist of a rectangular area
not less than twelve (12) feet wide and forty-five (45) feet long, with a
vertical clearance of not less than fifteen (15) feet.
      (2)   Each parking and loading space shall have adequate drives, aisles,
and turning and maneuvering areas for access and usability, and shall at all
times have access to a public street or alley.
   (d)   Tandem Parking
   Tandem parking shall be allowed in the R-1 and other low density residence
districts and in parking assessment areas as specified in Section
18.52.080. Tandem parking shall be allowed in multiple family residence
districts for any unit requiring two parking spaces, provided that both spaces
in tandem are intended for use by the same residential unit. For projects with
more than four (4) units, not more than 25% of the required parking spaces
shall be in a tandem configuration.
   (e)   Slope of Driveways in the Hazardous Fire Area
   The slope of driveways shall not exceed fifteen percent in the hazardous
fire area (i.e., that area west of Interstate 280).
   (f)   Figures and Tables
   
Figures 1-
7 and
Tables 3-
6 are located at the end of this chapter in Section
18.54.070 and depict design requirements for parking stalls, aisles, driveways,
accessibility, and parking lots.
(Ord. 5601 § 7, 2023: Ord. 5554 § 34, 2022: Ord. 5504 § 8, 2020: Ord. 5494 § 3,
2020: Ord. 5432 § 14, 2018: Ord. 5406 § 9, 2017: Ord. 4964 § 3 (part), 2007)
18.54.030   Accessible Parking Facilities
   (a)   Compliance with Other Laws
   The requirements for accessible parking facilities as described in this
section are in conformance with the California Code of Regulations, Title 24,
and the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, as amended.
   (b)   Requirements for Residential Facilities
   In addition to parking for non-residential facilities, the requirements set
forth in this section shall apply to common parking in residential facilities
of four (4) or more units. These requirements shall not apply to parking which
is restricted by design for the exclusive use of a single unit.
   (c)   Number of Stalls Required
   The following table establishes the number of accessible parking stalls
required.
Table 1
Accessible Parking Requirements
Total Number of Stalls in Lot or Structure Number of Accessible Stalls Required
Total Number of Stalls in Lot or Number of Accessible Stalls Required
Structure
1-25                             1
26-50                            2
51-75                            3
76-100                           4
101-150                          5
151-200                          6
201-300                          7
301-400                          8
401-500                          9
501-1,000                        2% of total
More than 1,000                  20 spaces + 1 space for each 100 spaces
                                 over 1,000.
 
   (d)   Van-Accessible Stalls
      (1)   When at least five (5) total parking spaces are provided at
buildings and facilities subject to these regulations, one in every eight
accessible stalls, but not less than one, shall be "van accessible," and shall
be specially signed as such .When fewer than five total parking spaces are
provided at buildings and facilities subject to these regulations, one
accessible parking space shall be provided and shall be a minimum of fourteen
(14) feet wide and be lined to provide a minimum nine-foot (9') parking area
and a five-foot (5') loading and unloading area, as illustrated in
Figure 1 of Section
18.54.070. However, there is no requirement that this stall be van-accessible
and no requirement that it be reserved exclusively or identified for use only
by persons with disabilities.
      (2)   All "van accessible" parking stalls may be grouped on one level of
a parking structure.
      (3)   Van-Accessible Parking Stall Size. If only one van-accessible stall
is provided, it shall be seventeen (17) feet wide and lined to provide a nine
(9) foot parking area and an eight (8) foot loading and unloading area on the
passenger side of the vehicle. When more than one van-accessible stall is
provided, in lieu of providing a seventeen (17) foot wide space for each
parking stall, two stalls may be provided within a twenty-six (26) foot wide
area lined to provide a nine (9) foot parking area on each side of an eight (8)
foot loading and unloading area in the center. The minimum length of each
parking stall shall be eighteen (18) feet. Refer to
Figures 1 and
2 of Section
18.54.070
   (e)   Required Number of Stalls for Medical Facilities
   At facilities providing medical care and other services for persons with
mobility impairments, accessible parking stalls shall be provided in accordance
with the table in subsection (c) above, except as follows:
      (1)   Ten percent (10%) of the total number of parking stalls provided
serving each outpatient unit or facility shall be accessible.
      (2)   For units and facilities that specialize in treatment or services
for persons with mobility impairments, twenty percent (20%) of the total number
of parking stalls provided serving each such unit or facility shall be
accessible.
   (f)   Non-Van Accessible Parking Stall Sizes
   If only one non-van-accessible stall is provided, it shall be fourteen (14)
feet wide and lined to provide a nine (9) foot parking area and a five (5) foot
loading and unloading area on the passenger side of the vehicle. When more than
one stall is provided, in lieu of providing a fourteen (14) foot wide space for
each parking stall, two stalls can be provided within a twenty-three (23) foot
wide area lined to provide a nine (9) foot parking area on each side of a five
(5) foot loading and unloading area in the center. The minimum length of each
parking stall shall be eighteen (18) feet. Refer to
Figures 1 and
2 of Section
18.54.070.
   (g)   Parking Stall Location
   Accessible parking stalls serving a particular building shall be located on
the shortest accessible route of travel from adjacent parking to an accessible
entrance. In parking facilities that do not serve a particular building,
accessible parking shall be located on the shortest accessible route of travel
to an accessible pedestrian entrance of the parking facility. In buildings with
multiple accessible entrances with adjacent parking, accessible parking stalls
shall be dispersed and located closest to the accessible entrances.
   (h)   Arrangement of Parking Stalls
   In each parking area, a bumper or curb shall be provided and located to
prevent encroachment of cars over the required width of walkways. The stalls
shall also be located so that a person with a disability is not compelled to
wheel or walk behind parked cars other than his/her own. Accessible pedestrian
ways shall be provided from each such parking stall to related facilities,
including curb cuts or ramps as needed. Ramps shall not encroach into any
parking stall. The following exceptions apply:
      (1)   Ramps located at the front of accessible parking stalls may
encroach into the length of such stalls when such encroachment does not limit
the capability of a person with a disability to leave or enter his/her vehicle,
thus providing equivalent facilitation. Refer to
Figures 1 and
2 of Section
18.54.070.
      (2)   Where the city's accessibility coordinator determines that
compliance with any regulation of this subsection (h) would create an
unreasonable hardship, an exception or waiver may be granted, when equivalent
facilitation is provided.
      (3)   Parking stalls may be provided which would require a person with a
disability to wheel or walk behind other than accessible parking stalls when
the city's accessibility coordinator determines that compliance with these
regulations or providing equivalent facilitation would create an unreasonable
hardship.
            (i)   Slope of Parking Stall
   Surface slopes of accessible parking stalls and passenger loading zones
shall be a minimum of 1:100 (one percent, for drainage purposes) and shall not
exceed 1:50 (two percent) gradient in any direction.
   (j)   Identification
   Each accessible parking stall shall be identified by a permanently affixed
reflectorized sign constructed of porcelain on steel, beaded text, or its
equivalent, displaying the international symbol of accessibility. The sign
shall not be smaller than seventy (70) square inches in area and shall be
centered at the interior end of the parking space at a minimum height of eighty
(80) inches from the bottom of the sign to the finished grade of the parking
space, or centered on the wall at the interior end of the parking space at a
minimum height of thirty-six (36) inches from the finished grade of the parking
space, ground, or sidewalk. Van-accessible parking stalls as described in
subsection (d)(3) above shall have an additional sign "Van-accessible" mounted
below the symbol of accessibility.
   A sign shall also be posted, in a conspicuous place, at each entrance to the
off-street parking facility. The sign shall be no less than seventeen (17)
inches by twenty-two (22) inches in size with lettering no less than one inch
in height, clearly and conspicuously stating the following:
   Unauthorized vehicles parked in designated accessible spaces not displaying
distinguishing placards or license plates issued for disabled persons may be
towed away at owner's expense. Towed vehicles may be reclaimed at ___________
or by telephoning __________.
   Blank spaces are to be filled in with appropriate information as a permanent
part of the sign.
   In addition to the above requirements, the surface of each accessible
parking stall shall have a surface identification duplicating either of the
following schemes: by outlining or painting the stall in blue and painting on
the ground in the stall, in white or suitable contrasting color, the
international symbol of accessibility (a profile view depicting a wheelchair
with occupant); or by painting the international symbol of accessibility on the
ground in the stall in white on a blue background. The symbol shall be at least
three feet by three feet square and be located so that it is visible to a
traffic enforcement officer when a vehicle is properly parked in the space, as
illustrated in
Figures 1 and
2 of Section
18.54.070.
   (k)   Vertical Clearance
   Entrances to and areas within parking structures shall have a minimum
vertical clearance of eight feet two inches (8'2") where required for access to
accessible parking stalls. The minimum vertical clearance at accessible
passenger loading zones and along at least one vehicle access route to such
areas from site entrance(s) and exit(s) shall be nine feet six inches (9'6").
The following exceptions apply:
      (1)   Where the city's accessibility coordinator determines that
compliance with this subsection would create an unreasonable hardship, an
exception may be granted, when equivalent facilitation is provided.
      (2)   This section shall not apply to existing buildings where the city's
accessibility coordinator determines that, due to legal or physical
constraints, compliance with these regulations or equivalent facilitation would
create an unreasonable hardship.
   (l)   Accessible Passenger Loading Zones
   If passenger loading zones are provided, then at least one passenger loading
zone shall be accessible. Accessible passenger loading zones shall provide an
access aisle at least five feet wide and twenty feet long adjacent and parallel
to the vehicle pull-up space (refer to
Figure 2 of Section
18.54.070). If there are curbs between the access aisle and the vehicle pull-up
space, then a curb ramp shall be provided.
   (m)   Valet Parking
   Valet parking facilities shall provide a passenger loading zone complying
with subsection (l) above, located on an accessible route to the entrance of
the facility. The requirements of this section apply to facilities with valet
parking.
(Ord. 4964 § 3 (part), 2007)
18.54.040   Landscaping of Parking Areas
   The following minimum standards shall be observed; however, additional
landscaping may be recommended by the architectural review board and required
by the director of planning and development services pursuant to Sections
18.76.020 and
18.77.070 of the Palo Alto Municipal Code. Landscape requirements of Section
18.40.130 (Landscaping) shall also be considered in the design of parking lot
landscaping.
   (a)   Perimeter Landscaping
   Each unenclosed parking facility shall provide a perimeter landscaped strip
at least five feet wide between and adjacent to a line defining the exterior
boundary of the parking area and the nearest adjacent property line, not
separated by a building. The perimeter landscaped strip may include any
landscaped yard or landscaped area otherwise required, and shall be continuous
except for required access to the site or to the parking facility. Where the
landscaped strip adjoins a public street or pedestrian walkway, the landscaped
strip may be required to include a fence, wall, berm, or equivalent feature.
Where the parking facility adjoins another site, a fence, wall, or other
equivalent screening feature may be required.
   (b)   Interior Landscaping - Amount Required
   Interior landscaping is required within the parking facility between the
perimeter landscaped area and the edge of pavement adjacent to any building on
the site. Each unenclosed parking facility shall provide a minimum of interior
landscaping in accord with
Table 2. Where the total parking provided is located in more than one location
on a site separated by differences in grade or by at least ten feet of unpaved
area, each such area shall be considered a separate facility for the purpose of
this requirement.
Table 2
Minimum Interior Landscaping Requirements for Parking Facilities
 
Size of Facility (Square Feet) Minimum Required Interior Landscaping
                               (Percentage of Total Parking Facility Area)
Under 14,999                   5%
15,000-29,999                  7.5%
30,000                         10%
 
   (c)   Interior Landscaping - Layout
      (1)   Interior landscaped islands within a parking area shall have a
minimum dimension of five feet by five feet, excluding curbing.
      (2)   Landscaped islands shall exist for every ten spaces in a single
row.
      (3)   Parking lot trees shall be planted or exist for each six parking
stalls. Only fifty percent of the trees located along the perimeter of the
parking area may count toward the required number of trees.
   (d)   Tree Canopy and Sizes
   Landscaping within surface parking areas shall include tree plantings
designed to result in 50 percent shading of parking lot surface areas within 15
years. Trees required to meet any section of this title shall be a minimum
fifteen gallon size, and at least twenty-five percent (25%) shall be twenty-
four-inch box or larger. Fifty percent (50%) of shrubs shall be a minimum of
five-gallon size. Provided, in the Site and Design Review (D) combining
district, the minimum plant size requirements set forth in this section may be
decreased, as set forth in
Chapter 18.30(G).
   (e)   Impervious Surfaces
   Areas required to be landscaped may contain no more than twenty-five percent
impervious surface, exclusive of driveways and walkways needed for access to
the site.
   (f)   Landscape Screens
   Where this title requires a landscaped screen or buffer, a combination of
trees and shrubs shall be used and the following minimum standards shall apply:
      (1)   On sites abutting or located opposite a residential site, a dense
visual buffer shall be provided. In addition, trees shall be planted or shall
exist at a ratio of not less than one tree per three hundred square feet of the
landscape screen or fraction thereof, and supplemented with shrubs and
groundcover.
      (2)   Landscape screens required by
Chapter 18.16 (CN, CS, and CC Districts) and areas subject to
Chapter 18.70 (Landscape Combining District) shall provide a dense visual
buffer. In addition, trees shall be planted or in existence at a ratio of not
less than one tree per six hundred square feet of the landscape screen area or
fraction thereof, and supplemented with shrubs and groundcover.
   (g)   Irrigation and Landscape Maintenance
      (1)   Provision shall be made for automatically irrigating all planted
areas, unless the director determines that irrigation is not necessary (e.g.,
for xeriscape plantings).
      (2)   All landscaping shall be continuously maintained.
   (h)   Wheel Stops
   A permanent curb, bumper wheel stop or similar devices shall be installed
which shall be adequate to protect the required sidewalks, planters, landscaped
areas and structures from vehicular damage. If such protection is provided by
means of a method designed to stop the wheel, rather than the bumper of the
vehicle, the stopping edge shall be placed no closer than two feet from the
edges of the required sidewalks or any building. The innermost two feet of each
parking space (between the curb and any planter or sidewalk) may remain
unpaved, be planted with low groundcover, and added to landscaping, to allow
for bumper overhang.
   (j)   Planters
   Architectural planters built on top of a deck covering a below-grade parking
structure, and proposed to meet minimum requirements for landscaped areas,
shall have a soil depth dimension of at least eighteen inches for shrubs and
thirty-six inches for trees, and have drainage outlet(s) connected to a storm
drain system.
   (k)   Requirements for Temporary Parking Facilities
   The landscaping standards set forth above shall not apply to temporary
parking facilities; however, the architectural review board, through its
review, may require minimum landscaping for such facilities.
   (l)   Sight Lines
   Landscaping height must meet the requirements of Section
18.54.050(b) (sight distance) within a parking lot and at the intersection of a
parking facility driveway or ramp and a public street.
(Ord. 5494 § 3, 2020: Ord. 4964 § 3 (part), 2007)
18.54.050   Miscellaneous Design Standards
   (a)   Vertical Clearance
   All parking stalls shall have a vertical clearance of not less than seven
and one-half feet, except in the R-E and R-1 single-family residence districts,
where the vertical clearance shall be seven feet or greater. Accessible parking
stalls and access to such stalls, must meet the requirements for vertical
clearance of Section
18.54.030.
   (b)   Sight Distance
      (1)   For residential uses of three or more units, and for all
nonresidential uses, including public facilities, clear sight distance
triangles for exiting driveways shall be provided as shown in
Figure 6 of this Section
18.54.070. In the non-zero setback zone only, if a stop sign is provided at the
driveway exit, the director may decrease the required dimensions of the sight
distance triangles. For cases not covered by
Figure 6, sight distance triangles shall be provided as required by the
director. Neither the sight distance triangles nor any portion of the public
right of way shall contain any wall, sign, berm, or other obstruction that is
greater than three feet high above driveway grade, unless its width (measured
in any direction or diameter) is eighteen inches or less. Nor shall the sight
distance triangles or any portion of the public right of way contain any
landscaping, except trees, that is greater than two feet in height above top of
curb grade (refer also to Sections
8.04.050(h) and
9.56.030(a)(10)). The height of landscaping shall be its maximum untrimmed
natural growth height.
      (2)   In a parking lot, within the twenty-foot triangle of public or
private property, measured from the projected curb or edge lines, at the
intersection of a parking lot aisle with another aisle, driveway, or pedestrian
walkway, there shall be no wall, sign, berm, landscaping (except trees), or
other obstruction that is greater than three feet high above parking lot grade,
unless its width is eighteen inches or less. The height of landscaping shall be
its maximum untrimmed natural growth height.
   (c)   Additional Parking Facility Design Requirements
      (1)   Site design shall assure that connections to adjacent existing or
planned bicycle or pedestrian facilities (sidewalks, bike paths or lanes, etc.)
allow for ready access for residents and other users of the site.
      (2)   The location of driveways, shipping and receiving areas, and
loading docks should be sited as far away from residentially zoned properties
or properties with existing residential uses located within nonresidential
zones as is reasonably feasible while recognizing site constraints and traffic
safety issues.
      (3)   Employee ingress and egress to a site should be located to avoid
the use of residential streets wherever feasible.
      (4)   Late hour and early morning truck traffic to a site located in or
near a residential area should be discouraged.
      (5)   Vehicular access points should not conflict with pedestrian and
bicycle walkways and facilities.
      (6)   Pedestrian and bicycle facilities (sidewalks, bike paths, etc.)
should, where feasible, be provided through sites to provide connections to
other pedestrian and bicycle routes and to allow for safe access to schools,
recreation facilities and services.
      (7)   Additional requirements for parking facility design, internal
layout, acceptable turning radii and pavement slope, vehicular and pedestrian
circulation, and other design features may be adopted by the director when
deemed appropriate.
   (d)   Paving and Drainage
   The following basic standards shall be observed:
      (1)   In all districts, parking and loading facilities shall be surfaced
and maintained with permanent pervious or impervious surfacing material
sufficient to prevent mud, dust, loose material, and other nuisances, subject
to approval by the city engineer.
      (2)   In the OS and AC districts, and for temporary parking facilities in
any district, gravel surfacing shall be permitted as approved by the city
engineer.
      (3)   All parking and loading facilities shall be graded and provided
with permanent storm drainage facilities, meeting the construction
specifications set by the city engineer. Surfacing, curbing, and drainage
improvements shall be sufficient to preclude free flow of water onto adjacent
properties or public streets or alleys, and to preclude standing pools of water
within the parking facility.
      (4)   Paving and drainage approaches for parking facilities shall be
integrated with storm water protection approaches, consistent with Section
18.40.150 (Storm Water Quality Protection) of this title.
   (e)   Safety Features
   Parking and loading facilities shall meet the following standards:
      (1)   Safety barriers, protective bumpers or curbing, and directional
markers shall be provided to assure safety, efficient utilization, protection
to landscaping, and to prevent encroachment onto adjoining public or private
property.
      (2)   Visibility of and between pedestrians, bicyclists, and motorists
shall be assured when entering individual parking spaces, when circulating
within a parking facility, and when entering and exiting a parking facility.
      (3)   Internal circulation patterns, and the location and traffic
direction of all access drives shall be designed and maintained in accord with
accepted principles of traffic engineering and traffic safety.
   (f)   Lighting
   Lights provided to illuminate any parking facility or paved area shall, to
the maximum extent feasible, be designed to reflect away from any residential
use or any riparian corridor.
   (g)   Noise
   Areas used for primary circulation, for frequent idling of vehicle engines,
or for loading activities shall be designed and located to minimize impacts on
adjoining properties, including provisions for screening or sound baffling.
   (h)   Maintenance
   All parking and loading facilities shall be maintained to assure
desirability and usefulness of the facility. Such facilities shall be
maintained free of refuse, debris, or other accumulated matter and shall at all
times be available for the intended off-street parking or loading use for which
they are required or intended.
   (i)   Application of Design Standards to Other Paved Areas
   The standards of this section apply to all paved areas used for outdoor
display, storage, sales, or other purposes associated with permitted and
conditional office, commercial, or industrial uses.
(Ord. 5557 § 9, 2022: Ord. 5554 § 35, 2022: Ord. 4964 § 3 (part), 2007)
18.54.060   Bicycle Parking Facilities
   Bicycle parking facilities shall be provided for new buildings, addition or
enlargement of an existing building, or for any change in the use that results
in the need for additional vehicle parking facilities consistent with the
parking requirements contained within Section
18.52.040. Bicycle parking facilities required by Section
18.52.040 may contain bicycle parking elements of the types described in
subsection (a) below, and arranged according to the layout requirements
described in (b) below. The department of planning and development services
maintains a list of Approved, Conditionally Approvable, and Prohibited types of
bicycle racks and bicycle lockers. Bicycle racks and lockers not on the
"Approved" list must be approved by the director. Likewise layout diagram
examples specifying clearances and other aspects of bicycle parking areas are
also available from the department of planning and development services.
(a)   Types of Facilities
   Bicycle parking is designed for two types of uses: long-term and short-term.
Depending on use, a bicycle parking facility may be a bicycle rack, a bicycle
locker, or a multifamily dwelling unit storage locker, a restricted access
enclosure, or a school bicycle enclosure as described below.
   (1)   Short-Term Bicycle Parking (Bicycle Racks)
      Short-term bicycle parking is intended for shoppers, customers, and
visitors who require bicycle storage for up to several hours.
      (A)   Bicycle Rack
         An acceptable bicycle rack is a stationary object to which the bicycle
user can lock the frame and one or both wheels of a bicycle with a user-
provided high-security U-shaped lock (“U-lock”) or cable, and which is either
anchored to an immovable surface or is heavy enough that it cannot be easily
moved.
         (i)   Intended Use
            Bicycle racks located in publicly accessible areas are intended for
short- term parking, to encourage shoppers, customers, and visitors to use
bicycles.
         (ii)   Performance
            All bicycle racks provided pursuant to this ordinance shall support
a bicycle by its frame in a stable upright position with both tires on the
ground or floor, without damage to the bicycle or its finish. The parts of the
rack that secure the bicycle shall resist disassembly and cutting with manual
tools. Bicycle racks should provide independent access to parked bicycles
without the need for awkward movements even when the rack is fully loaded.
   (2)   Long-Term Bicycle Parking
      Long-term bicycle facilities are intended for bicyclists who need to park
a bicycle and its components and accessories for extended periods during the
day, overnight or for a longer duration. Long-term bicycle storage is typically
for employees, students, residents and commuters. The facility frequently
protects the bicycle from inclement weather. Four design alternatives for these
facilities are as follows:
      (A)   Bicycle Locker
         A bicycle locker is a fully enclosed space for one bicycle, accessible
only to the owner or operator of the bicycle. It protects the entire bicycle,
its components and accessories from theft and inclement weather, including
wind-driven rain. Bicycle lockers may be pre-manufactured or may be designed
for individual sites.
         (i)   Intended Use
            Bicycle lockers are the preferred long-term storage option for
employees or residents.
         (ii)   Locking Device
            Internal Lock. A bicycle locker must be equipped with an internally
mounted key-actuated or electronic locking mechanism, and not lockable with a
user-provided lock. Groups of internal-lock bicycle lockers may share a common
electronic access mechanism provided that each locker is accessible only to its
assigned user.
            External Lock. An external-lock such as padlock hasps are not
acceptable for most uses. External lock bike lockers may be permitted in
shopping centers with the approval of the director on a case-by-case basis.
      (B)   Restricted-Access Bicycle Enclosure
         A restricted-access bicycle enclosure is a locked area containing
within it one bicycle rack space for each bicycle to be accommodated, and
accessible only to the owners or operators of the bicycles parked within it.
The maximum capacity of each restricted-access bicycle enclosure shall be 20
bicycles unless approved by Transportation Division staff. The doors of such
enclosures must be fitted with key or electronic locking mechanisms that admit
only users and managers of the facility. The enclosure doors must close and
lock automatically if released.
         In multiple-family residential developments, a common locked garage
area incorporating bicycle racks shall be deemed a restricted-access bicycle
enclosure provided that the garage is accessible only to the residents of the
units for whom the garage is provided. In such cases it is preferable that the
bicycle storage area within the garage be separately enclosed and secured to
enable access only by bicycle owners.
         Intended Use
         A restricted access enclosure is an alternative long term bicycle
storage option for commercial and multifamily residential projects.
      (C)   Multifamily Dwelling Unit Storage Locker
         A multifamily dwelling unit storage locker is a locked area separate
from the dwelling unit, secured by a lock that can be opened only by the
occupants of the respective dwelling unit.
         Intended Use
         A multifamily dwelling unit storage locker is intended for long-term
storage of household possessions that are not kept in the dwelling unit,
including bicycles.
         Configuration
         In multiple-family developments, the required bicycle storage and
household storage areas for each dwelling unit may be combined into a
multifamily dwelling unit storage locker assigned to that unit, provided that
the total space requirement shall be the sum of the household storage and
bicycle storage requirements computed separately. A usable space 2' wide by 6'
long shall be provided for each stored bicycle.
      (D)   School Bicycle Enclosure
         A school bicycle enclosure is a locked area at a primary, middle or
secondary school, containing within it one bicycle rack space for each bicycle
to be accommodated. The doors of such enclosures must be fitted with locking
mechanisms that admit only school and maintenance staff, and must close and
lock automatically if released. School bicycle enclosures should be kept locked
except during student arrival and departure periods. The student bicycle
parking requirement for a school may be provided by two or more enclosures
where students arrive on bicycles from two or more points along the school
perimeter.
(b)   Bicycle Facility Design Standards
   (1)   Location
      (A)   Neither short-term nor long-term bicycle parking areas shall be
located inside occupied buildings.
      (B)   All bicycle parking areas shall be located at street floor level,
or equivalent in a parking garage. In underground garages, only long-term
bicycle parking is allowed and such bicycle parking facilities must be located
near employee elevators or stairwells.
      (C)   Short-term bicycle parking shall be located within 50 feet of a
main visitor entrance(s). Where there is more than one building on a site or
where a building has more than one main entrance, the short-term bicycle
parking must be distributed to serve all buildings or main entrance(s).
      (D)   Long-term bicycle parking shall be situated at least as
conveniently as the nearest convenient vehicle parking area.
   (2)   Layout
      (A)   Convenient access to bicycle parking areas shall be provided. Where
access is via a sidewalk or pathway, or where the bicycle parking area is next
to a street, curb ramps shall be installed where appropriate. A twenty-four-
inch side clearance shall be provided between walls or other obstructions and
the centerline of the bicycles parked on the nearest bicycle rack.
      (B)   Bicycle facilities shall be separated from vehicle parking and
circulation areas by a physical barrier or by a distance sufficient to protect
parked bicycles from damage by vehicles, including front and rear overhangs of
parked or moving vehicles.
      (C)   If more than 10 short-term spaces are required, at least fifty
percent (50%) must be covered.
      (D)   A four foot (4') wide aisle shall be provided to allow bicycles to
maneuver in and out of the bike parking areas and between rows of bicycle
parking facilities. An aisle into which the door of a bicycle locker opens
shall be at least 5' wide. Aisle width shall be measured between the
rectangular areas that bicycles will occupy when parked on bicycle racks and/or
the surface area occupied by bicycle lockers
      (E)   Where a public sidewalk or walkway serves as an aisle of a bicycle
parking area and bicycles are parked perpendicular to that sidewalk or walkway,
an additional 12" of paved area shall be provided between the sidewalk and the
area occupied by adjacent parked bicycles.
      (F)   Where a public sidewalk or walkway serves as an aisle of a bicycle
parking area and the doors of bicycle lockers open toward that sidewalk or
walkway, the lockers shall be set back so an open door does not encroach onto
the main travel width of the sidewalk or walkway.
   (3)   Paving
      Bicycle parking areas shall be paved. Aisles and primary access areas
shall be paved with asphalt or concrete. Bicycle parking areas may be surfaced
with alternate paving materials as approved by the director.
   (4)   Lighting
      Lighting of not less than one foot-candle of illumination at ground level
shall be provided in both exterior and interior bicycle parking areas.
   (5)   Signage
      (A)   Where bicycle parking areas are not clearly visible to approaching
bicyclists, signs shall be posted at the building entrance to direct cyclists
to the facilities. (MUTCD sign D4-3 for bicycle parking). For bicycle parking
areas intended for visitors, that entrance shall be the building’s main
entrance. For bicycle parking areas intended for employees, that entrance shall
be the employee entrance served by the bicycle parking area.
      (B)   Long-term bicycle parking areas that incorporate bicycle lockers
shall be identified by a sign at least 12"x12" in size that lists the name or
title, and the phone number or electronic contact information, of the person in
charge of the facility.
      (C)   Signs for restricted-access bicycle enclosures shall state that the
enclosure shall be kept locked at all times.
   (6)   Approval
      (A)   The director shall have the authority to review the design of all
bicycle parking facilities required by this chapter with respect to safety,
security, and convenience.
      (B)   Where bicycle lockers or restricted access bicycle enclosures are
required for a use, the director may approve secure bicycle storage facilities
providing the same level of security. The Transportation Division must approve
bicycle parking areas located in parking garages.
(Ord. 5494 § 3, 2020: Ord. 4964 § 3 (part), 2007)
18.54.070   Parking Design Tables and Figures
   Parking design tables and figures referred to elsewhere in this chapter are
provided on the following pages.
Figure 1
Accessible Stalls, Double and Single
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6189.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6192.jpg]
 
Figure 2
Accessible Stalls, Double Diagonal and Access Aisles
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6195.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6198.jpg]
 
Figure 3
Parking Lot Layout
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6201.jpg]
 
Table 3
Parking Lot Layout Dimensions for Uni-Class Parking Stalls A for Various Stall
Widths (feet)
Dimension On Diagram (Figure 3
A       B     C        D/D    E     F         G            H      I         J
Paikmg Dimensions (Feetb)
Parking       Stall           Stall                        Module
Angle   Stall Width    Stall  Depth Stall     Aisle Width  Wall   Module    Module,
and     Width Parallel Length to    Depth to  BetweenStall to     Wall to   Interlockto
Vehicle       to Aisle        Waif  Interlock lines        Wall   interlock Interlock
Size
Dimension On Diagram (Figure 3
A       B     C        D/D    E     F         G            H      I         J
Paikmg Dimensions (Feetb)
Parking       Stall           Stall                        Module
Angle   Stall Width    Stall  Depth Stall     Aisle Width  Wall   Module    Module,
and     Width Parallel Length to    Depth to  BetweenStall to     Wall to   Interlockto
Vehicle       to Aisle        Waif  Interlock lines        Wall   interlock Interlock
Size
45 PARKING
        8.5   12.0     24.4/  17.25 15.00     13.0         48     46        43
                       21.2
        9.0   12.7     24.4/  17.25 15.00     12.0         47     45        42
                       21.2
        9.5   13.4     24.4/  17.25 15.00     11.0         46     44        41
                       21.2
60 PARKING
        8.5   9.8      21.4/  18.50 17.00     18.0         55     54        .. 52
                       19.7
        9.0   10.4     21.4/  18.50 17.00     16.0         53     52        50
                       19.7
        9.5   11.0     21.4/  18.50 17.00     15.0         52     51        49
                       19.7
75 PARKING
        8.5 . 8.8      20.9/  18.50 18.00     23.0         60     59        58
                       20.2
        9.0   9.3      20.9/  18.50 18.00     22.0         59     58        57
                       20.2
        9.5   9.8      20.9/  18.50 18.00     21.0         58     57        56
                       20.2
90 PARKING
        8.5   8.5      17.5/  17.50 17.50     25.0         60     60        60
                       17.5
        9.0   9.0      17.5/  17.50 17.50     24.0         59     59        59
                       17.5
        9.5   9.5      17.5/  17.50 17.50     23.0         58     58        58
                       17.5
 
   a.   The required stall widths shall be increased by 0.5 foot if a stall is
immediately adjacent to a wall on one or both sides. If there are walls on both
sides of a stall, the increase shall still be 0.5 foot.
   b.   Module widths rounded to whole foot.
Table 4
Driveway Dimensions For Multiple-Family Residential Uses of 3 to 10 Units
Dimension (Feet) Urban Rural
Dimension (Feet)                Urban Rural
Width, excluding flares or curb radiusa,b
        Minimum (one-way)
        paved width             8     12
        total widthc            10    12
        Minimum (two-way)
        paved width             14    24
        total width c           16    24
        Maximum (one-way)       20    30
        Maximum (two-way)       33    35
Right turn radius d
        Minimum                 10    15
        Maximum                 30    50
Minimum Spacing e,f
        From side property line 5     0
        From street corner      10    15
Angle g                         75°  75°
 
   a.   Two-way ramps for above or below ground parking facilities must meet
the requirements of Figure 5 except that the minimum width may be 16 feet
instead of 18 feet.
   b.   In special cases, the Uniform Fire Code, Section 10.207, may require
two-way driveways to be a minimum of 20 feet wide.
   c.   The total width shall be free of obstacles to vehicular and pedestrian
use.
   d.   On the side of driveway exposed to entry or exit by right-turning
vehicles. Applicable only to driveways with curb radius.
   e.   Minimum spacing is measured along the front property line from the
driveway throat to the side property line, or to a line passing through the
intersection curb return (see Figure 5). For additional requirements regarding
driveway location, including spacing between two driveways on the same
property, refer to Section 12.08.060(9).
   f.   For driveways on collector or arterial streets, the chief
transportation official may require increased spacing from the street corner.
   g.   Minimum acute angle measured from edge of pavement.
Table 5
Driveway Dimensions For Multiple-Family Residential Uses of 11 Units or More
and For All Nonresidential Uses
Dimension (Feet) Urban Rural
Dimension (Feet)               Urban Rural
Width, excluding flares or curb radius
       Minimum (one-way)       12    15
       Minimum (two-way)a      20    30
       Maximum (one-way)       20    30
       Maximum (two-way)       33    35
Right turn radius b
       Minimum                 10    15
       Maximum                 30    50
Minimum Spacing c, d
       From side property line 5     0
       From street corner      10    15
Anglee                         75°  75°
 
   a.   For ramp width for above or below ground parking facilities, please
refer to Figure 5.
   b.   On the side of driveway exposed to entry or exit by right-turning
vehicles. Applicable only to driveways with curb radius.
   c.   Minimum spacing is measured along the front property line from the
driveway throat to the side property line, or to a line passing through the
intersection curb return (see Figure 5). For additional requirements regarding
driveway location, including spacing between two driveways on the same
property, refer to Section 12.08.060(9).
   d.   For driveways on collector or arterial streets, the chief
transportation official may require increased spacing from the street corner.
   e.   Minimum acute angle measured from edge of pavement.
Table 6
Driveway Dimensions For Single Family and Two-Family Residential Uses
 
Dimension (Feet)    Urban Rural
Width, excluding flaresa
       Minimum
       paved width  8     8
       total widthb 10    10
       Maximum      20    30
Anglec              75°  75°
 
   a.   Minimum driveway widths for flag lots in "Urban" and in "Rural" area
shall be 15 feet.
   b.   The total width shall be free of obstructions to vehicular and
pedestrian use.
   c.   Minimum acute angle measured form edge of pavement.
   Note: For additional requirements regarding driveway location, including
spacing between two driveways on the same property, refer to Section
12.08.060(9).
Figure 4
Measurement of Minimum Spacing
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6204.jpg]
 
Figure 5
Driveway Ramp Design
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6207.jpg]
 
   1.   A distance of 5 feet shall be maintained at the same slope as the
sidewalk from the back edge of the sidewalk to the starting point of the ramp.
   2.   The first and last 10 feet of the slope grade (transition length) shall
not exceed 11 percent.
   3.   The remaining portion of the ramp shall not have a slope greater than
22 percent and the breakover angle (see Figure 5) shall not exceed ten degrees
(100).
   4.   Minimum ramp width (two-way) for above or below ground parking
facilities shall be 18 feet.
   5.   The slope of all parking areas shall not exceed seven percent.
Figure 6
Driveway Ramp Setback Zones
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6210.jpg]
 
Figure 7
Motorcycle Parking Dimensions
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/32a8d9a9ea5adcccd056b7dbd89bfa58fe820217/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8951.png]
(Ord. 5504 § 9, 2020)
Chapter 18.60
ALTERNATIVE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR STANFORD LANDS
Sections:
   
18.60.010   Purpose.
   
18.60.020   Definitions.
   
18.60.030   Applicability.
   
18.60.040   Relation of Overlay District to Other Land Use Regulations.
   
18.60.050   Alternative Standards Overlay District One (AS1): Housing and Mixed
Use at El Camino Site.
   
18.60.060   Alternative Standards Overlay District Two (AS2): Housing at Upper
California Site.
   
18.60.070   Alternative Standards Overlay District Three (AS3): Community
Soccer Fields at Mayfield Site.
18.60.010   Purpose
   The Alternative Standards Overlay Districts provide alternative development
standards for specific sites in order to implement the terms of the 2005
Development Agreement between the City of Palo Alto and Stanford University
adopted by Ordinance No. 4870. Unless otherwise specified in the Development
Agreement, these standards are intended to be optional, rather than mandatory,
for those sites. The provisions of this
Chapter 18.60 shall be applied in a manner consistent with Stanford's rights
under the Development Agreement.
(Ord. 4871 § 3 (Exh A [part]), 2005)
18.60.020   Definitions
   Capitalized terms not otherwise defined in this
Chapter 18.60 shall be those defined in either the Development Agreement or the
2003 Rules. As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
   (a)   "El Camino Site" means the combined leaseholds commonly known as 2450,
2470, and 2500 El Camino Real. "Extended El Camino Site" means the El Camino
Site and the leasehold commonly known as 505 California Avenue.
   (b)   "Gross Area" means the total land area of a site without deductions
for streets or easements.
   (c)   "Mayfield Site" means real property commonly known as 2650, 2700, and
2780 El Camino Real owned by Stanford University and leased to the city for
community recreation purposes as provided in the Development Agreement.
   (d)   "Required Housing" means 250 units of housing that Stanford is
required to build under the 2005 Development Agreement.
   (e)   "Upper California Site" means the Combined leaseholds commonly known
as 1451, 1501, and 1601 California Avenue.
(Ord. 4871 § 3 (Exh A [part]), 2005)
18.60.030   Applicability
   These Alternative Standards Districts are only applicable to the sites
identified in this
Chapter 18.60. Under the terms of the Development Agreement, Stanford may
choose to be subject to the AS1 District, or the AS2 District, or neither, or
both. However, if Stanford chooses to have the AS2 District apply, it will be
applicable to the entire Upper California Site. The AS1 District may be applied
to either the entire El Camino Site or the entire Extended El Camino Site. If
the AS1 District is initially applied to the El Camino Site, Stanford may later
choose to have it apply to. the Extended El Camino Site. The AS3 District
applies to the Mayfield Site as a whole.
(Ord. 4871 § 3 (Exh A [part]), 2005)
18.60.040   Relation of Overlay District to Other Land Use Regulations
   At the time that application is made to the city for a discretionary review
of a Required Housing project on land eligible for development under an AS
Alternative Standards Overlay District, the applicant shall file a notice
specifying whether it elects to be subject to the applicable Alternative
Standards Overlay District. The applicant may rescind its choice of an
Alternative Standards Overlay District at any time prior to the issuance of a
building permit for construction of the approved project. Definitions and
procedures for application of the Alternative Standards shall be those
described in the Development Agreement as the Modified 2003 Rules.
(Ord. 4871 § 3 (Exh A [part]), 2005)
18.60.050   Alternative Standards Overlay District One (AS1): Housing and Mixed
Use at El Camino Site
   The purpose of this overlay district is to accommodate the construction of a
housing development adjacent to the Stanford Research Park that takes advantage
of the site's location on El Camino Real and is compatible with-the adjacent
development. It may also include limited commercial uses. This district may be
applied to the El Camino Site or the Extended El Camino Site. The underlying
zoning shall not apply if the applicant elects to be subject to the AS1
District.
   A.   AS1 Alternative Development Standards
              Residential:
              a)   multiple-family housing and accessory indoor and outdoor uses customarily
              incidental to it;
              b)   non-profit or government social services supportive of residential use;
              c)   child care center.

              In the sale or rental of Required Housing, neither Stanford nor its assignees
Permitted     shall discriminate against households with children or on the basis of the age of
uses          renters, buyers, or occupants.
              Non-Residential:
              a)   retail service;
              b)   personal service;
              c)   eating and drinking service including outdoor eating areas incidental to the
              interior use;
              d)   child care center;
              e)   live/work lofts.
Conditionally
permitted     None
uses
Site area and a)   Minimum site to be developed is the El Camino Site.
dimensions    b)   Site area and dimensions shall include that portion of the site subject
(minimum)     to access easements existing as of June 10,2003.
              a)   First floor residential uses shall be set back 13 to 17 feet from property
              line; a wall no more than four feet high may be placed behind the effective
              sidewalk to create privacy while maintaining a relationship with the street.
              Balconies, porches, stairways, and similar elements may extend up to eight feet
              into the setback. Cornices, eaves, fireplaces, and similar architectural features
              may extend up to four feet into the setback.
              b)   Non-residential uses and residential uses above commercial uses shall be set
              back a minimum of five feet from the property line.
              c)   No parking is permitted in the front setback area; structured parking shall
              not be visible to pedestrians from El Camino Real.
El Camino     d)   City may require a right in/right out driveway on El Camino Real.
Real frontage e)   A minimum 12-foot wide effective sidewalk, including the public sidewalk,
              shall be provided and maintained. At least 7 feet of this sidewalk shall be in the
              public right-of way, with the remainder to be provided on the El Camino Site (or
              Extended Site). If, however, the sidewalk provided in the public right-of-way is
              less than 7 feet, the required sidewalk shall be reduced by the same measure.
              f)   To the extent they do not currently exist, street trees shall be provided in
              the public sidewalk area; a second row of. trees shall be provided in a
              residential setback area.
              g)   Primary pedestrian orientation for residential uses shall be located on El
              Camino Real.
              h)   Non-residential uses shall have entrances on El Camino Real or California
              Avenue (with Extended El Camino Site) or both.
              a)   Commercial uses and residential uses which are above commercial uses have no
California    minimum setback.
Avenue        b)   Ground floor residential uses shall be set back a minimum of eight feet from
frontage      the property line. Balconies, porches, stairways, and similar elements may extend
Pertains only up to six feet into the setback. Cornices, eaves, fireplaces, and similar
to Extended   architectural features may extend up to four feet into the setback.
El Camino     c)   No surface parking is permitted along the California Avenue frontage, but a
Site          curbcut for access to the site is permitted in addition to the existing access
              easement curbcut.
Interior side None
setback
              No structures, architectural features, building elements, or surface parking shall
Rear setback  be permitted in the portion of the site subject to an access easement as of June
              10,2003. Completely below-grade construction may extend under the access easement,
              provided an underground easement does not prevent this construction.
Residential   50 dwelling units per acre of Gross Area, calculated on total site area
density       irrespective of the portion that is devoted to commercial use. No additional
(maximum)     density bonus for affordable housing is permitted.
              Gross floor area shall include all floors of any building measured to the outside
              surface of the stud walls, and including all of the following;
              •   halls and stairways;
              •   elevator shafts;
              •   service and mechanical equipment areas;
              •   basement, cellar and attic areas deemed by the director of planning and
              development services to be usable;
              •   any porches, arcades, balconies, courts, .walkways, breezeways or similar
              features when located above the ground floor and used for required access; and
              •   permanently roofed areas, either partially enclosed or unenclosed, building
Gross floor   features used for sales, service, display, storage or similar uses.
area
              Gross floor area shall not include:
              •   parking facilities accessory to permitted uses on the site, (excluding area
              used for storage, mechanical equipment, and other uses as noted above);
              •   unroofed exterior areas accessible to the general public and not devoted to
              sales, service, display, storage or similar uses, including, but not limited to
              areas above podium parking;
              •   roofed arcades, balconies, plazas, courts, walkways, porches, breezeways,
              porticos, and similar features that are 50% or less enclosed by exterior walls
              •   areas designated for resource conservation such as trash compactors, recycling
              and thermal storage facilities.
Floor area
ratio
(maximum) of  Mixed Use: 2.0 to 1 Residential: 1.75 to 1
gross floor   Non-residential: 0.25 to 1, as part of mixed use development
area to Gross
Area of site
Site coverage One hundred percent of the site
(maximum)
Building
height        50 feet, measured pursuant to Section 18.04.030(b)(67) of the 2003 Rules.
(maximum)
Daylight      None required
plane
Multiple
family design Chapter 18.28 of the 2003 Rules shall not apply.
guidelines
Parking
Except as     Residential:
otherwise
provided in   2- or more bedroom units: 2 spaces, 1 of which must be covered; the spaces may be
this chapter, tandem
parking shall 1 -bedroom: 1.5 spaces, one of which must be covered
be governed   Studio units: 1 covered space
by Chapter    Guest parking: 0.25 covered spaces per dwelling unit
18.83 of the
2003 Rules.
              Non-residential:

              1 space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area
              Bicycle parking and loading spaces: As required by Chapter 18.83.120 of the 2003
              Rules.
              As part of Architectural Review of a project on the site, total required parking
              may be reduced by up to twenty percent by the Director upon a finding that the
              reduced parking will be adequate for the project.
              a)   Total: A minimum of twenty percent of the gross site area.
              b)   Privale: No minimum amount or dimensions. Private open space should be
              considered where feasible although it is not required for each dwelling unit nor
              is there a minimum size requirement when it is provided. Design of private open
              space is flexible and can include, but is not limited to: patios, decks, balconies
              and French balconies.
              c)   Common: No minimum amount or dimensions.
Usable open   d)   "Usable open space" is an outdoor or unenclosed space located on the ground
space         or roof of a structure, or the top of podium parking, or a balcony, deck, porch,
              patio or terrace, designed and accessible for outdoor living, recreation,
              pedestrian access, landscaping, or a required yard. It does not include parking
              areas, (whether covered or uncovered) driveways, roads, or utility or service
              areas.
              e)   The Site may include open space areas with an Ldn in excess of 60 dB, but
              they shall not be counted towards required common or private "usable open space"
              unless they are sited, .designed, and constructed to reduce the maximum Ldn to 60
              dB.
Signs         Commercial signs shall be permitted in accordance with the South El Camino Real
              Design Guidelines
Architectural Review.
The City shall limit its architectural review as provided in Section 6.4.10 of the Development
Agreement. The South El Camino Real Design Guidelines approved by the Architectural Review Board
on June 6,2002 are the only applicable local design standards for this site.
 
   B.   AS1 Alternative Base Zoning Standards
   At the applicant's option, the El Camino Site in its entirety, or the
Extended El Camino Site, may be developed in compliance with the RM-40 High
Density Multiple Family Residential District, (including
Chapter 18.28) under the 2003 Rules as more particularly described in the
Development Agreement.
   C.   Zoning if Alternative Site Needed
   If, after a building permit has been issued. for the construction of an
approved project under the AS1 Overlay District on the El Camino Site, it is
determined to be an Infeasible Site because of environmental contamination,
then, under the conditions and in the manner described in Section 6.4.2 of the
Development Agreement, Stanford may have the AS1 Overlay District removed from
its lands and the previous zoning restored.
(Ord. 5494 § 3, 2020: Ord. 4871 § 3 (Exh A [part]), 2005)
18.60.060   Alternative Standards Overlay District Two (AS2): Housing at Upper
California Site
   The purpose of this overlay district is to accommodate single or multiple
family housing, or both, on the Upper California Site that benefits from its
proximity to an employment center and benefits from its proximity to an
employment center and is compatible both with the College Terrace neighborhood
across California Avenue, the adjacent office/research uses to the south and
south-east, and Stanford University's residential neighborhood to the
northwest. Stanford may develop the Upper California Site in phases. The
underlying zoning on the Upper California Site, LM Limited Industrial/Research
Park with a fifty-foot L Landscape Combining District on the California Avenue
frontage, does not apply to the Upper California Site if the property owner
elects to proceed under the AS2 standards.
   Stanford shall be allowed to develop any portion of the Required Housing on
the Upper California Site in such order and sequence as Stanford shall
determine, except for Stanford's phasing and timing obligations with respect to
Required Housing under the Development. Agreement. It is anticipated that at
times during the construction of the Required Housing, portions of the Upper
California Site will be occupied with pre-existing limited industrial/research
park. non-residential buildings. These buildings will remain legal uses and
complying facilities until dates set forth below. Upon completion of the
Required Housing developments, the Upper California Site shall be exclusively
residential, with child care centers a permitted use, unless Stanford needs to
provide a substitute Site for all or a portion of the Upper California Site, as
provided in the Development Agreement.
   A.   AS2 Alternative Development Standards
   1.   Continuing Standards.
   These continuing standards apply to the Upper California Site as a whole.
The Upper California Site housing shall at all times during its development,
and subsequently, be in compliance with the continuing standards.
              a)   Single-family, two-family, and multiple family residential uses and indoor
              and outdoor accessory uses customarily incidental to those uses. In the sale or
Permitted     rental of Required Housing, neither Stanford nor its assignees shall discriminate
Uses          against households with children or on the basis of the age of renters, buyers,
              or occupants.
              b)   child care center
Conditionally
permitted     None
uses
Below-market- Below-market-rate units shall be provided on- or off-site as provided in the
rate housing  Development Agreement.
Site area,
width, and
depth per
individual
dwelling
unit, two-
family unit,  No minimum
multiple-
family
residential
project or
individual
development
phase
California    20 feet from the property line.
Avenue        a)   No building element or architectural feature (excluding landscape features,)
frontage      may extend or project into the setback.
setback       b)   No parking may. be located in the setback area.
(minimum)     c)   No frontage roads are permitted in the setback area, but roads and driveways
              generally perpendicular to California Avenue are permitted.
Upper
California
Site
perimeter
side and rear 10 feet
setback       a)   No structures or parking areas are permitted in the setback area.
(applied to   b)   No perimeter roads or driveways are permitted in the setback area.
entire Upper
California
Site's outer
envelope)
Interior      None. (Minimum setbacks established by Title 24 of the California Code of
setbacks      Regulations, Parts 1 through 9, as adopted and modified by the City of Palo Alto
              on a uniform basis, shall apply.)
              a)   California Avenue frontage: 30 feet within 100 feet of property line,
              measured from grade to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof or to the
              deck line of a mansard roof, or to the height of the peak or highest ridge line
              of a pitched or hipped roof directly above point on grade from which height is
              being measured.
              b)   Balance of Upper California Site: 50 feet, measured from grade to the
Building      highest point of the coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof,
height        or to the average height of the highest gable of a pitched or hipped roof.
              c)   The height of a stepped or terraced building is the maximum height of any
              segment of the building.
              d)   "Grade" shall mean the adjacent ground elevation of the finish or existing
              grade as of December 1,2004, whichever is lower. Existing grade as of December
              1,2004 is presumed to be as shown on grading plans and spot elevation surveys on
              file with the City as of that date.
Daylight      None required
plane
Multiple
family design Chapter 18.28 shall not apply.
guidelines
Parking
Except as     2 or more bedrooms - 2.0 spaces, one of which shall be covered, which may be
otherwise     tandem
provided in
this chapter, 1 bedroom -1.5 spaces, one of which shall be covered Studio unit - 1 covered
parking shall space Guest parking - 0.25 spaces per unit.
be governed
by Chapter    Guest parking shall be clearly marked as reserved for guests and shall be in an
18.83 of the  area provided for guests with unrestricted access to guest parking.
2003 Rules
              Bicycle parking and loading spaces: as required by Chapter 18.83.120 of the 2003
              Rules.
Streets       Interior streets may be public or private. If private, they shall be subject to a
              public access easement for vehicles and pedestrians.
Orientation   Buildings along California Avenue shall approximate the horizontal rhythm of
for buildings building-to-side yard setback and facade areas of California Avenue residential
along         properties located across the street from, or in the vicinity of the Upper
California    California Site. At the applicant's election, some or all buildings along
Avenue        California Avenue may be two stories.
Architectural The City shall limit its architectural review as provided in Section 6.4.10 of
review        the Development Agreement. No adopted local design guidelines apply to this site.
              All non-residential uses shall cease and all non-residential structures be
              removed no later than 24 months following all Subsequent Approvals, (as defined
Commercial    in the Development Agreement) for all Required Housing on the Upper California
Buildings on  Site. After that time, the Upper California Site shall be exclusively
Upper         residential, with child care centers as a permitted use, unless Stanford needs to
California    provide substitute Site for all or a portion of the Upper California Site as
Site on June  provided in the Development Agreement. Until that time, those non-residential
10, 2003      structures in existence on June 10,2003 shall be treated as permitted structures
              and may be used for any use permitted under the LM Limited Industrial/Research
              Park District under the 2003 Rules.
 
   2.   Phased Standards.
   These phased standards apply to the Upper California Site as a whole.
Required Housing may be developed in phases on portions of the Upper California
Site; individual phases need not meet the phased standards. For example, an
individual phase could have a residential density of thirty dwelling units per
acre and no open space. However, when all Required Housing on the Upper
California Site is complete, and after, the Upper California Site shall conform
to all the phased standards. In addition, for each phase, Stanford shall
demonstrate that sufficient land remains on the Upper California Site to permit
it to meet the Phased Standards upon completion of the Required Housing.
Upper
California  16.96 acres
Site area
Residential 15 dwelling units per acre of Gross Area. No additional density bonus for
density     affordable housing is permitted.
(maximum)
            Gross floor area shall include all floors of any building measured to the outside
            surface of the stud walls, and including all of the following:

            •   halls and stairways;
            •   elevator shafts;
            •   service and mechanical equipment areas;
            •   covered parking when located partially or completely above ground; basement,
            cellar and attic areas deemed by the director of planning and development services
            to be usable;
            •   open porches, arcades, balconies, courts, walkways, breezeways or similar
            features when located above the ground floor and used for required access; and
            •   all roofed porches, arcades, balconies, porticos, breezeways or similar
Gross floor features when located above the ground floor; and
area        •   permanently roofed, but either partially enclosed or unenclosed, building
            features used for storage or similar uses.

            Gross floor area shall not include:
            •   parking that is completely underground (excluding area used for storage,
            mechanical equipment, and other uses as noted above);
            •   unroofed exterior areas accessible to the general public, including, but not
            limited to areas above podium parking;
            •   roofed arcades, balconies, plazas, courts, walkways, porches, breezeways,
            porticos, and similar features that are 50% or less enclosed by exterior walls and
            located on the ground floor;
            •   areas designated for resource conservation such as trash compactors, recycling
            and thermal storage facilities.
Floor area
ratio
(maximum)
of gross    The ratio of gross floor area to the Upper California Site Area shall be 0.75 to
floor area  1.
to Gross
Area of
site
Upper       40% of the Gross Area of the Upper California Site. Site coverage is that portion
California  of a site that is covered by permanent, usable buildings or structures, excluding
Site        landscape features, fountains, planters, sculptures, open play equipment,
coverage    uncovered sports courts, and similar elements.
(maximum)
            Total:25% of the Gross Area of the Upper California Site Private: No minimum

            Common: 10% of the Gross Area of the Upper California Site

Usable open "Usable open space" is an outdoor or unenclosed space located on the ground or
space       roof of a structure, or on the top of podium parking, or a balcony, deck, porch,
(minimum)   patio or terrace, designed and accessible for outdoor living, recreation,
            pedestrian access, or landscaping, including those portions of the required
            California Avenue and perimeter setbacks not used for roads or driveways.

            "Usable open space" does not include covered or uncovered parking areas, roads,
            driveways, or utility or service areas.
            All non-residential uses shall cease and all non-residential structures be removed
Commercial  no later than 24 months following all Subsequent Approvals, (as defined in the
Buildings   Development Agreement) for all Required Housing on the Upper California Site.
on Upper    After that time, the Upper California Site shall be exclusively residential, with
California  child care centers as a permitted use, unless Stanford needs to provide Substitute
Site on     Site for all or a portion of the Upper California Site as provided in the
June 10,    Development Agreement. Until that time, those non-residential structures in
2003        existence on June 10, 2003 shall be treated as permitted structures and may be
            used for any use permitted under the LM Limited Industrial/Research Park District
            under the 2003 Rules.
 
   B.   AS2 Alternative Base Zoning Standards
   At the applicant's option, the Upper California Site, in its entirety, may
be developed in compliance with the RM-20 Low Density Multiple Family
Residential District, subject to the L Landscape Combining District, both as
defined in the 2003 Rules. Provided, no conditional use permit shall be
required for up to four public or private streets crossing the Landscape
Combining District to provide access to the Upper California Site. All non-
residential uses shall cease and all non-residential structures be removed no
later than 24 months following all Subsequent Approvals, (as defined in the
Development Agreement) for all Required Housing. After that time, the Upper
California Site shall be exclusively residential, with child care centers as a
permitted use, unless Stanford needs to provide Substitute Site for all or a
portion of the Upper California Site as provided in the Development Agreement.
Until that time, those non-residential structures in existence on June 10, 2003
shall be treated as permitted structures and may be used for any use permitted
under the LM Limited Industrial/Research Park District under the 2003 Rules.
   C.   Zoning if Alternative Site Needed
   If, after a building permit for construction of an approved project under
the AS2 Overlay District has been issued for any part of the Upper California
Site, it is determined to be an Infeasible Site because of environmental
contamination, then,. under the conditions and in the manner described in
Section 6.4.2 of the Development Agreement, Stanford may have the AS2 Overlay
District removed from its lands and the previous zoning restored.
(Ord. 5494 § 3, 2020: Ord. 5460 § 15, 2019: Ord. 4871 § 3 (Exh A [part]), 2005)
18.60.070   Alternative Standards Overlay District Three (AS3): Community
Soccer Fields at Mayfield Site
   The purpose of this overlay district is to accommodate the development and
use of a community soccer complex on land leased to the City of Palo Alto by
Stanford University at the corner of El Camino Real and Page Mill Road on
parcels commonly knows as 2650, 2700, and 2780 El Camino Real. The land was
redistricted from RM (D) Multiple Family Residential to PF Public Facilities in
connection with its acquisition for a period of fifty-one years by the City.
 
Modified Development Standard
Height  Lighting standards up to seventy feet high are permitted
Fencing Ball-control fencing up to fourteen (14) feet in height is permitted on
        the site
 
(Ord. 4871 § 3 (Exh A [part]), 2005)
Chapter 18.62
SPECIAL REGULATIONS FOR HAZARDOUS WASTE FACILITIES
Sections:
   
18.62.010   Purpose and applicability.
   
18.62.020   Definitions.
   
18.62.030   Hazardous waste facility combining district.
   
18.62.040   Zoning map designation.
   
18.62.050   Site development regulations.
   
18.62.060   Residuals repositories prohibited.
18.62.010   Purpose and applicability.
   (a)   The purpose of this chapter is to require all proposals for new or
expanded hazardous waste facilities to comply with certain siting criteria,
contained in the Santa Clara County Hazardous Waste Management Plan, in order
to assure compatibility with neighboring land uses, adequate mitigation for any
identified environmental impacts, and consistency with the city's Comprehensive
Plan and zoning and the county hazardous waste management plan.
   (b)   This chapter shall apply to any proposal for a new or expanded
hazardous waste facility.
   (c)   No new hazardous waste facility shall be constructed or established,
nor shall any existing such facility be expanded, unless such facility is
located in a hazardous waste facility (HW) combining district.
(Ord. 4286 § 2 (part), 1995)
18.62.020   Definitions.
   The following words and phrases, whenever used in this chapter, shall be
construed as defined in this section:
   (a)   "Hazardous waste" means a waste as defined in California Health and
Safety Code Section 25117.
   (b)   "Hazardous waste facility" means a facility, as defined in California
Health and Safety Code Section 25117.1, which accepts hazardous wastes that are
generated at another location (i.e. off-site) and serves more than one producer
of hazardous waste. Types of such facilities include, but are not limited to:
      (1)   Treatment facilities, which absorb, precipitate, recycle, resource
recover, neutralize, distill, stabilize, and/or incinerate the wastes;
      (2)   Transfer and storage facilities, which provide a location for
collecting and consolidating wastes prior to treatment; and
      (3)   Residuals repositories, which are specially designed, long-term
disposal sites for residuals from treated wastes.
(Ord. 4286 § 2 (part), 1995)
18.62.030   Hazardous waste facility combining district.
   The hazardous waste facility (HW) combining district is intended to provide
a mechanism for application for the siting criteria contained in the county
hazardous waste management plan to all applications for a new or expanded
hazardous waste facility. The hazardous waste facility (HW) combining district
may be combined with the LM District in the Stanford Research Park, in accord
with Chapters
18.08 and
18.80 of this title.
(Ord. 4286 § 2 (part), 1995)
18.62.040   Zoning map designation.
   The hazardous waste facility (HW) combining district shall apply to
properties designated on the zoning map by the symbol "HW" within parentheses,
following the limited industrial/research park (LM) designation with which it
is combined.
(Ord. 4286 § 2 (part), 1995)
18.62.050   Site development regulations.
   Within the hazardous waste facility (HW) combining district, the siting
criteria set forth in this section shall apply to all new or expanded hazardous
waste facilities:
   (a)   A minimum buffer zone of two thousand feet should be provided between
the portion of a hazardous waste facility where hazardous waste will be stored,
treated, or disposed and an existing or planned residence or immobile
population. Based on the risk assessment and analysis of environmental impacts,
a buffer zone of greater or less than two thousand feet may be required to
protect the present and future public health, safety, and welfare.
   (b)   A minimum buffer zone of two thousand feet should be provided between
the portion of a hazardous waste facility where hazardous waste will be stored,
treated, or disposed and an existing or planned public facility. Based on the
risk assessment and analysis of environmental impacts, a buffer zone of greater
or less than two thousand feet may be required to protect the present and
future public health, safety, and welfare.
   (c)   Siting of hazardous waste facilities will require an analysis of local
emergency response capability - including fire, police, medical, and hazardous
materials incident response personnel to ensure adequate protection in the
event of an accident at the proposed facility. It may be necessary for the
facility developer to supplement these capabilities by maintaining additional
emergency response equipment and/or personnel onsite, by financially upgrading
the local capabilities to provide these needed services, and/or by providing
additional facility design features to limit the impact of potential accidents
at the facility.
   (d)   To the maximum extent possible, hazardous waste facilities shall be
located in close proximity to major paved roads designed and constructed to
accommodate heavy vehicles, with good access to divided highways or freeways.
All designated routes should preclude the transport of hazardous waste on
residential streets and in areas housing immobile populations.
   (e)   The applicant for a hazardous waste facility to be sited within three
thousand feet of a known or suspected fault, as established by the Alquist-
Priolo maps of the state of California or identified in the most recently
available local maps or information, shall conduct a subsurface exploration to
determine that there are no active faults within two hundred feet of the
portions of the facility where hazardous waste will be stored, treated, or
disposed.
   (f)   The portions of a hazardous waste facility where hazardous waste will
be stored, treated, or disposed shall not be located within two hundred feet of
an active (Holocene Period) earthquake fault, as established by the Alquist-
Priolo maps of the state of California or identified in the most recently
available local maps or information.
   (g)   Hazardous waste facilities should not be located in areas below a dam
or levee structure that would be inundated by the flow of water, if the dam or
levee structure were to fail. Facilities locating in such areas shall be
designed, constructed, operated, and maintained to preclude failure due to such
an event.
   (h)   Hazardous waste facilities should not be located in areas subject to
inundation by floods having a 100-year return period or by flash flooding or
major surges from storms, river flooding or rainfall (as identified on Federal
Flood Insurance Rate Maps). Facilities locating in such areas shall be
designed, constructed, operated, and maintained to preclude failure due to such
an event.
            (i)   Hazardous waste facilities should not be located in areas
where slope exceeds fifteen percent unless site-specific factors mitigate the
impact of the site's slope. Facilities locating in such areas shall require
appropriate land use designations.
   (j)   Hazardous waste facilities should not be located in areas of potential
rapid geologic change (such as landslide, soil creep, earth flow, other mass
movement of earth material, subsidence or liquefaction) unless the applicant
demonstrates and the local jurisdiction makes a finding that an overriding
public need is served by allowing the facility to be located on the proposed
site. Facilities locating in such areas shall be designed, constructed,
operated and maintained to preclude failure as a result of rapid geologic
change.
   (k)   All applicants for a hazardous waste facility are required to obtain
written comments from the Santa Clara Valley Water District (SCVWD) regarding
the potential for a proposed facility to adversely impact water quality or
resources. Based on the SCVWD letter and other information obtained during the
land use decisionmaking process, the proposed facility may be disallowed,
further hydrogeological investigation may be required of the applicant, or, if
the facility is allowed, appropriate environmental protection measures may be
required.
   (l)   Hazardous waste facilities should not be located in watershed areas
tributary to any reservoirs as well as those drainage basins supplying water to
major recharge areas. Facilities locating in such areas shall have appropriate
engineered containment features, inspection measures, and other environmental
protection controls necessary to minimize any risks to watershed areas.
   (m)   Hazardous waste facilities should not be located in areas known to be,
or suspected of, supplying principal recharge to a major aquifer. Facilities
locating in such areas shall have appropriate engineered containment features,
inspection measures and other environmental protection controls necessary to
minimize any risks to recharge areas.
   (n)   Hazardous waste facilities should not be located within the cone of
depression created by pumping a well or well field (included are drinking
water, irrigation, and remediation and monitoring wells) for ninety days,
unless an effective hydrogeological barrier to vertical flow exists.
   (o)   Hazardous waste facilities should not be located on highly permeable
soils or sediment. Facilities locating in such areas shall have appropriate
engineered containment features, inspection measures, and other environmental
protection controls provided in accordance with the requirements of the State
Water Resources Control Board.
   (p)   Hazardous waste facilities should not be located in areas posing a
threat of contamination to useable surface water supplies or groundwater.
Facilities locating in such areas shall have appropriate engineered containment
features, inspection measures, and other environmental protection controls
necessary to minimize any risks to surface or groundwater.
   (q)   Hazardous waste facilities should not be precluded from locating in
non-attainment areas unless the risk assessment shows that emissions will
significantly contribute to non-attainment of standards, that such emissions
cannot be mitigated, and that the emissions from such facilities are
significantly greater than those associated with the transport of hazardous
waste out of the area.
   (r)   Hazardous waste facilities shall demonstrate that air emissions can be
adequately mitigated in order to be established in PSD ("prevention of
significant deterioration") areas.
   (s)   Hazardous waste facilities shall not be located within an area
designated by the United States Department of Defense or the Santa Clara County
Airport Land Use Commission as having the greatest potential for aircraft
accidents, generally defined as the area immediately surrounding a public or
military airport, including the immediate approach and take-off paths.
   (t)   Low-volume transfer and storage facilities may be allowed in areas
having particular cultural, aesthetic, historical, or archaeological
significance or within other designated open space identified in the applicable
general plan or in any regional or state plan, if necessary, to handle
hazardous waste generated by visitors, workers, or residents, thereof.
Treatment and incineration facilities shall not be located within these areas.
   (u)   Hazardous waste facilities should not be located on prime agricultural
lands, specifically areas designated by the Soil Conservation Service as Class
1 or Class 2 soils or designated as prime agricultural land in the applicable
general plan or in any regional or state plan. Facilities locating on such
areas shall be allowed only if the local jurisdiction makes a finding that an
overriding public need is served by allowing the facility to be located on the
proposed site.
            (v)   Hazardous waste facilities shall not be sited so as to
preclude extraction of mineral resource deposits that may be suitable for
commercial development or hold outstanding scientific significance. Facilities
shall be carefully planned so as not to prevent or restrict the preservation or
use of mineral deposits in areas identified under the California Surface Mining
and Reclamation Act of 1975 with classifications of MRZ-2, MRZ-3, or SZ.
   (w)   Hazardous waste facilities shall not be located in wetland areas as
defined by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service.
   (x)   Hazardous waste facilities shall not be located within critical
habitats of endangered species, as defined or designated in the applicable
general plan or in any regional or state plan.
   (y)   Hazardous waste facilities shall be consistent with the goals and
policies of the Santa Clara County Hazardous Waste Management Plan, and
specifically, shall be designed and sized to meet the needs of hazardous waste
generators located in Santa Clara County, or to meet the county's broader
commitments under any interjurisdictional agreements.
   (z)   Hazardous waste facilities shall be located only in areas which meet
all the siting criteria set forth in this section and are consistent with the
city's Comprehensive Plan. These facilities shall be located only in areas
consistent with existing and proposed industrial areas. An applicant may seek a
general plan amendment for a site that appears to meet all other siting
criteria.
(Ord. 4642 § 41, 2000: Ord. 4286 § 2(part), 1995)
18.62.060   Residuals repositories prohibited.
   Because no locations exist in the city where a residuals repository could be
located in a manner consistent with the siting criteria for such facilities
contained in the county hazardous waste management plan, no such facility shall
be permitted.
(Ord. 4286 § 2 (part), 1995)
Chapter 18.66
CREATION OF EASEMENTS THROUGH THE EXECUTION AND RECORDATION OF COVENANTS
Sections:
   
18.66.010   Purpose and Authority
   
18.66.020   Creation
   
18.66.030   Purposes of Easement
   
18.66.040   Common Ownership
   
18.66.050   Enforcement
   
18.66.060   Contents
   
18.66.070   Execution
   
18.66.080   Recordation and Effect
   
18.66.090   Release of Covenant
   
18.66.100   Fees
18.66.010   Purpose and Authority
   The purpose of this chapter is to implement California Government Code
sections 65870 - 65875, inclusive, regarding the creation of easements through
the execution and recordation of covenants.
(Ord. 4904 § 2 (part), 2006)
18.66.020   Creation
   In addition to any other method for the creation of an easement, an easement
may be created by a recorded covenant of easement made by an owner of real
property to the city, in accordance with the procedures set forth in this
chapter.
(Ord. 4904 § 2 (part), 2006)
18.66.030   Purposes of Easement
   An easement may be created pursuant to this chapter for one or more of the
following purposes: Parking, ingress, egress, emergency access, light and air
access, landscaping, or open space purposes.
(Ord. 4904 § 2 (part), 2006)
18.66.040   Common Ownership
   At the time of recording of the covenant of easement, all the real property
benefited or burdened thereunder shall be in common ownership. The covenant
shall be effective when recorded and shall act as an easement pursuant to
Chapter 3 (commencing with Section 801) of Title 2 of Part 2 of Division 2 of
the Civil Code, except that it shall not merge any other interest in real
property. Section 1104 of the Civil Code, Easements Passing with Property,
shall be applicable to the conveyance of the affected real property.
(Ord. 4904 § 2 (part), 2006)
18.66.050   Enforcement
   A covenant executed pursuant to this chapter shall be enforceable by the
successors in interest to the real property benefited by the covenant.
(Ord. 4904 § 2 (part), 2006)
18.66.060   Contents
   A covenant of easement recorded pursuant to this chapter shall include the
following:
   (a)   Legal descriptions of the real property subject to the easement and
the real property benefited by the easement; and
   (b)   An identification of the approval, permit, or designation granted
which relied upon or required the covenant; and
   (c)   A maintenance provision for the easement; and
   (d)   A provision providing that the burdens of the covenant of easement
shall be binding upon, and the benefits of the covenant shall inure to, all
successors in interest of the real property.
(Ord. 4904 § 2 (part), 2006)
18.66.070   Execution
   The covenant of easement shall be executed and acknowledged by the record
owner[s] of the real property subject to, and benefited by, the easement.
(Ord. 4904 § 2 (part), 2006)
18.66.080   Recordation and Effect
   The covenant of easement shall be recorded with the Santa Clara County
recorder's office. The recorded covenant of easement shall impart notice
thereof to all persons to the extent afforded by the recording laws of the
state of California. Upon recordation, the burdens of the covenant shall be
binding upon, and the benefits of the covenant shall inure to, all successors
in interest to the real property.
(Ord. 4904 § 2 (part), 2006)
18.66.090   Release of Covenant
   (a)   The covenant of easement may be released in accordance with the
procedure set forth in this section.
   (b)   Any person, whether or not that person has title to the real property
burdened or benefited by the easement, may file a written request for a public
hearing on the release of the covenant of easement. The request for hearing
shall be filed with the city clerk and shall include the following: (1) A
conformed copy of the recorded easement; (2) legal descriptions of the real
property benefited and burdened by the easement; (3) a statement that the
request for hearing is being filed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter;
and (4) a fee prescribed by the municipal fee schedule.
   (c)   Upon notification and receipt of the request for release of covenant,
the city council shall hold a public hearing regarding a release of covenant of
easement recorded pursuant to this chapter. At the conclusion of the public
hearing, the city council shall determine and make a finding by resolution,
based upon substantial evidence contained in the request and/or presented at
the public hearing, whether the restriction imposed by the covenant of easement
is still necessary to achieve the land use goals of the city. If the council
determines that the covenant may be released, the city shall cause to be
recorded with the Santa Clara County recorder's office a release of the
covenant of easement.
(Ord. 4904 § 2 (part), 2006)
18.66.100   Fees
   The city council may adopt by resolution a fee to recover the reasonable
cost of processing the release of the covenant from those persons requesting
the release pursuant to Section
18.66.090 of this chapter.
(Ord. 4904 § 2 (part), 2006)
18.66.110   Standing to enforce or challenge
   Nothing in this chapter shall create in any person other than the city and
the owner of the real property burdened or benefited by the covenant of
easement standing to enforce or to challenge the covenant or any amendment
thereto or release therefrom. The city shall have the right, but not the
obligation, to enforce the covenant.
(Ord. 4904 § 2 (part), 2006)
Chapter 18.70
NONCONFORMING USES AND NONCOMPLYING FACILITIES
Sections:
   
18.70.010   General application.
   
18.70.020   Nonconforming use - Expansion.
   
18.70.030   Nonconforming use - Change.
   
18.70.040   Nonconforming use - Discontinuance.
   
18.70.050   Nonconforming use - Maintenance and repair of facility.
   
18.70.060   Nonconforming use - Replacement of facility.
   
18.70.070   Nonconforming use - Required termination.
   
18.70.080   Noncomplying facility - Enlargement.
   
18.70.090   Noncomplying facility - Maintenance and repair.
   
18.70.100   Noncomplying facility - Replacement.
   
18.70.110   Determination of value.
   
18.70.120   Determination of age.
   
18.70.130   Certificate of use and occupancy.
   
18.70.140   Unsafe buildings.
18.70.010   General application.
   Except as provided by this Title or otherwise provided by law, a
nonconforming use may be continued, and a structure containing or used by one
or more nonconforming uses may be maintained, or a noncomplying facility may be
maintained. A nonconforming use is a use which existed legally under the
provisions of its zoning classification prior to a rezoning action or
annexation which rendered such use not in conformance with the provisions of
such new zoning classification. A noncomplying facility is a facility which
existed legally under the provisions of its zoning classification prior to a
rezoning action or annexation which rendered such facility not in compliance
with the provisions of such new zoning classification.
(Ord. 5373 § 22 (part), 2016: Ord. 3890 § 19, 1989: Ord. 3048 (part), 1978)
18.70.020   Nonconforming use - Expansion.
   (a)   A nonconforming use shall not be altered, enlarged, expanded, or
extended, except as provided in subsection (b) this prohibition shall include
any moving, enlargement, extension, expansion or alteration of a nonconforming
use which:
      (1)   Increases the site area or floor area occupied by such use on the
same or any additional site;
      (2)   Increases the number of structures or the size of any structure
housing such nonconforming use or portion thereof.
   (b)   A nonconforming use which occupies a portion of a building may be
expanded to include additional floor area within the same building; provided
that:
      (1)   Without substantial remodeling or reconstruction, the portion of
building into which expansion is proposed is not reasonably susceptible to use
or occupancy by a conforming use. The determination of whether a portion of a
building is reasonably susceptible to use or occupancy by a conforming use
shall be made by the building official and shall take into consideration, but
not be limited to, the following:
         (A)   Whether any required remodeling or reconstruction would involve
structural alterations;
         (B)   Whether the building was designed and constructed for the
nonconforming use occupying the building or portion thereof, or uses of similar
intensity or classification;
         (C)   The degree of privacy, separation, and protection afforded the
portion of the building into which expansion is proposed from intrusion,
interference, noise, and similar effects resulting from or generated by the
nonconforming use;
         (D)   Availability of access to the portion of the building into which
expansion is proposed.
      (2)   Such expansion within the building does not create, cause, or
increase any additional nonconformance or noncompliance with the requirements
of this title.
      (3)   Nothing contained in this section authorizes a change in the nature
of a nonconforming use contrary to the provision of Section
18.70.030.
(Ord. 5381 § 7, 2016: Ord. 3048 (part), 1978)
18.70.030   Nonconforming use - Change.
   (a)   Except as provided in subsection (b), a nonconforming use shall not be
changed to or replaced by any use except a conforming use.
   (b)   A nonconforming use may be changed to or replaced by another
nonconforming use which would have been permitted under the most recent zoning
classification of the property under which the nonconforming use was a
conforming use and which is of no higher occupancy rating than the existing
nonconforming use as defined by Title 16 subject to the following limitations:
      (1)   The change or replacement shall not increase the extent of the
nonconformity, or the nature of the activity, or the site area or floor area
occupied by the nonconforming use on the site, except as may be provided by
Section
18.70.020(b).
      (2)   Any period of temporary vacancy or discontinuance associated with
such change or replacement shall not exceed the limitations established by
Section
18.70.040.
      (3)   Such change or replacement of nonconforming use to or by another
nonconforming use shall be permitted only if the building, or portion of a
building, presently occupied by the nonconforming use is not reasonably capable
of conversion to accommodate use and occupancy by a conforming use, without
substantial reconstruction or remodeling. The building official shall determine
whether the building, or portion of a building, is reasonably capable of such
conversion. Said determination shall take into consideration, but not be
limited to, the following:
         (A)   Whether changes in the nature of the building or a portion of
the building would be required by Title 16 or similar regulations in order to
convert the use of the building, or portion of the building, to a conforming
use;
         (B)   Whether any reconstruction or remodeling necessary to convert
the use and occupancy of the building, or a portion of the building, involves
structural alterations;
         (C)   Whether the building, or portion of the building, was originally
designed and constructed for the particular existing nonconforming use or uses
of similar character.
   (c)   A nonconforming use which is changed to or replaced by a conforming
use shall not be reestablished, and any portion of a site or any portion of a
building, the use of which changes from a nonconforming to a conforming use,
shall not thereafter be used except to accommodate a conforming use.
(Ord. 5381 § 7, 2016: Ord. 3048 (part), 1978)
18.70.040   Nonconforming use - Discontinuance.
   (a)   On any site having facilities thereon valued at less than one thousand
dollars, any nonconforming use, other than a residential use, which is
discontinued or abandoned or otherwise ceases operation and use of the site for
a period of six months or longer shall not be resumed, reestablished, or
continued, and all subsequent use of such site and facilities thereon shall
conform to this title.
   (b)   On any site not subject to subsection (a), a nonconforming use of
facilities designed and constructed for nonresidential purposes which is
discontinued or abandoned or otherwise ceases operation and use of the site for
a period of one year or more shall not be resumed, and all subsequent use of
such site and facilities thereon shall conform to this title. Notwithstanding
the foregoing, a nonconforming use within the North Ventura Coordinated Area
Plan boundaries may be reestablished unless the use is discontinued or
abandoned or otherwise ceases operation and use of the site for a period of two
years or more.
   (c)   Notwithstanding the provisions of Section
18.70.030, or the provisions of subsections (a) and (b) of this section, in any
residential district, a nonresidential, nonconforming use occupying facilities
originally designed and constructed for residential use which is discontinued
or abandoned or otherwise ceases operation and use of the site for a period of
ninety days or greater shall not be continued or recommenced, and any
subsequent use of the site and facilities shall conform to this title. This
provision shall not be construed to prevent a change of ownership or management
of such nonconforming use; provided, that any cessation of operation of the use
is solely in connection with the transfer of ownership or management to a
specifically designated person or entity and is solely for the purpose of
accomplishing any transfer of title, equipment, operational control, or similar
purpose.
   (d)   The timeframes provided in this section apply only when a use is both
nonconforming and discontinued or abandoned or otherwise cease operation and
use of the site. Only the most recently operating nonconforming use may be
reestablished within the timeframes provided in this section.
(Ord. 5634 § 5, 2024: Ord. 5381 § 7, 2016: Ord. 4016 § 43, 1991: Ord. 3048
(part), 1978)
18.70.050   Nonconforming use - Maintenance and repair of facility.
Facilities occupied or used by a nonconforming use permitted by this chapter
shall be subject to the following provisions governing maintenance, repairs,
alterations, or replacement:
   (a)   Normal and routine maintenance of any structure for the purpose of
preserving its existing condition, retarding or eliminating wear and tear or
physical depreciation, or complying with the requirements of law, shall be
permitted.
   (b)   Incidental alteration shall be permitted, provided the value of the
incidental alterations in any one-year period shall not exceed twenty percent
of the value of the facility prior to such alterations.
   (c)   Structural alterations or enlargement of the facility shall be
permitted only to accommodate a conforming use, or when made to comply with the
requirements of law.
(Ord. 5381 § 7, 2016: Ord. 3048 (part), 1978)
18.70.060   Nonconforming use - Replacement of facility.
   A facility, used or occupied wholly or partly by one or more nonconforming
uses, which is damaged or destroyed by any means except ordinary wear and tear
and depreciation, may be reconstructed or replaced only for occupancy or use by
a conforming use, except in the following instances:
   (a)   Where none of the nonconforming uses is subject to termination as
provided by Section
18.70.070, reconstruction or replacement for continued occupancy or use by such
nonconforming use shall be permitted only in accord with the following
limitations:
      (1)   The extent of nonconformity, or the intensity of activity, or the
site area or floor area occupied by the nonconforming use subsequent to
reconstruction or replacement of the facility shall not exceed that existing
prior to reconstruction or replacement.
      (2)   Reconstruction or replacement shall be subject to all applicable
laws, regulations, and procedures otherwise governing construction on the site.
   (b)   When one or more of the nonconforming uses is subject to termination
as provided by Section
18.70.070, reconstruction or replacement for continued occupancy or use by such
nonconforming use shall be permitted only in accord with the following
limitations:
      (1)   During the first one-third of the applicable termination period of
such use, the facility may be reconstructed or replaced; provided the value of
such reconstruction or replacement shall not exceed seventy-five percent of the
value of the facility prior to damage or destruction.
      (2)   During the second one-third of the applicable termination period of
such use, the facility may be reconstructed or replaced; provided the value of
such reconstruction or replacement shall not exceed fifty percent of the value
of the facility prior to damage or destruction.
      (3)   During the last one-third of the applicable termination period of
such use, the facility may be reconstructed or replaced; provided the value of
such reconstruction or replacement shall not exceed twenty-five percent of the
value of the facility prior to damage or destruction.
      (4)   Any reconstruction or replacement permitted in this chapter shall
not extend or otherwise modify the required termination date established by
Section
18.70.070 and applied to the nonconforming use prior to such reconstruction or
replacement. Said termination date shall apply to all portions of the site or
structure, including those portions reconstructed or replaced.
(Ord. 5381 § 7, 2016: Ord. 4016 § 44, 1991: Ord. 3048 (part), 1978)
18.70.070   Nonconforming use - Required termination.
   (a)   In any district, a nonconforming, nonresidential use occupying a site
having facilities thereon valued at less than one thousand dollars, shall be
terminated within five years from the effective date of this section, or within
five years from the date such use becomes nonconforming, whichever date is
later, and within such time the improvements shall either be removed, or
converted or modified to accommodate a conforming use.
   (b)   In any district, a nonconforming, nonresidential use of a site not
subject to subsection (a) of this section shall be terminated in accord with
the following provisions and schedules:
      (1)   When occupying or using facilities designed and built for
residential use, the nonconforming use shall be terminated within ten years
from July 20, 1978, or within ten years from the date such use becomes
nonconforming, whichever date is later, and within such time the improvements
shall either be removed, or converted or modified to accommodate a conforming
use.
      (2)   When occupying or using facilities designed or built for
nonresidential use, the nonconforming use shall be terminated, and the
facilities shall be converted or modified to accommodate a conforming use, or
shall be removed at or before the time limit prescribed in subdivision (3) of
this subsection; provided, however, that unless a site-specific amortization
study is prepared, no such termination, removal, or conversion shall be
required within fifteen years from July 30, 1978, or within fifteen years from
the date such use became nonconforming, whichever date is later; provided,
however, that uses which were made non-conforming as a result of the 1974 Fire
Zone 1 Study, by Ordinance No. 2777, adopted March 25, 1974, shall terminate on
November 23, 1990; and provided, further, that any use made nonconforming by
said Ordinance No. 2777, the primary purpose of which is to prepare and deliver
food to senior citizens, shut-ins and others with limited mobility may remain
and shall not be subject to termination pursuant to this section. Such uses
shall be permitted to remodel, improve or replace site improvements in
accordance with applicable site development regulations, provided that any such
remodeling, improvement or replacement shall not result in any increased floor
area.
   Notwithstanding the dates of termination of uses required by this subsection
(b)(2), the required termination dates of the following uses shall be as
hereinafter set forth:
         (A)   The nonconforming use(s) of the property at 440-460 Page Mill
Road for nonprofit orthomolecular and molecular medical research functions
shall terminate on or before July 20, 1998.
         (B)   The nonconforming use of the property at 464 Colorado Avenue for
a dance studio and associated parking shall terminate on or before July 20,
2003.
         (C)   The nonconforming use of the property at 440 Pepper Street for
an art studio specializing exclusively in the medium of monotype printmaking
and associated instructional uses shall terminate on or before July 20, 2018.
Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed to create a vested right for the
nonconforming uses to remain after July 20, 2003.
         (D)   The nonconforming use of the property at 4277 Miranda for a
gero-psychiatric skilled nursing facility shall terminate on or before January
20, 1994.
         (E)   The nonconforming uses of the property at 3200 Park Boulevard/
340 Portage Avenue/Olive Avenue for retail, research and development,
warehouse, and storage uses are permitted in approximately the same ratio of
uses existing as of October 16, 2006, subject to the following limitations: (1)
retail uses shall not exceed 60,000 square feet, and (2) truck deliveries and
other noisy outdoor activities shall be limited to the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 9:
00 p.m. weekdays and 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. weekends.
         (F)   The nonconforming use of the property at 2011 El Camino Real for
tire sales and installation shall terminate on or before April 26, 2009.
   Such uses shall be permitted to remodel, improve or replace site
improvements in accordance with applicable site development regulations,
provided that any such remodeling, improvement or replacement shall not result
in any increased floor area or increase in intensity of the use, nor any loss
of parking.
         (G)   (i)   The non-conforming hazardous materials uses located within
the plating shop in Building 2 and the associated chemical storage area at 811
Hansen Way shall terminate or be relocated greater than 300 feet from sensitive
receptors and residentially zoned parcels on or before December 31, 2026. The
non-conforming hazardous materials uses located within Buildings 1A and 1B at
607 Hansen Way shall terminate or be relocated greater than 300 feet from
sensitive receptors and residentially zoned parcels on or before December 31,
2052.
            (ii)   As an incentive for the owner of the facilities at 811
Hansen Way to pursue new technologies and terminate the non-conforming
hazardous materials uses in the plating shop in Building 2 and the associated
chemical storage area rather than relocating them on site to a location greater
than 300 feet from sensitive receptors and residentially zoned parcels, the
owners may elect in writing, no later than December 31, 2021, to terminate the
non-conforming hazardous materials uses in the plating shop in Building 2 and
the associated chemical storage area rather than relocating them on the site.
The election shall be irrevocable. If the owner makes the election above, the
termination date shall be extended to and the termination shall occur no later
than December 31, 2031. The City may enforce the termination of the uses
effective December 31, 2031 by injunctive relief or other lawful means. This
subsection
18.70.070(b)(2)(G)(ii) is contingent on the City and the owner entering into a
binding implementation agreement no later than the effective date of this
section.
      (3)   The following schedule shall govern the period of time for
termination of nonconforming uses specified in subdivision (2) of this
subsection unless a site-specific amortization study is prepared:
 
Type of Construction Defined by Building Code     Age of Structure Computed
                                                  From Date of Construction
Type I – Totally noncombustible                 35 years
Type II – Fire resistive                        35 years
Type III – Noncombustible exterior, combustible 30 years
interior
Type IV – Heavy timber                          30 years
Type II – Nonrated                              25 years
Type V – Wood frame                             20 years
 
   (4)   Nothing contained in this subsection shall extend or otherwise modify
any termination date provided by any previously existing ordinance for any use
which became nonconforming under such ordinance prior to the effective date of
this section. Such termination dates for such previously existing nonconforming
uses are incorporated in this section and shall remain in effect.
   (c)   The director of planning and development services shall determine
those properties the use of which were lawfully existing uses permitted or
conditionally permitted, in the districts in which they were located
immediately prior to July 20, 1978, and which uses were rendered nonconforming
by reason of the adoption of this title on July 20, 1978, and those properties
which, prior to July 20, 1978, were located in an R-1 district which was
imposed by reason of annexation of the property to the city without benefit of
prezoning, the uses of which were lawfully existing uses permitted or
conditionally permitted operating subject to a conditional use permit prior to
the date of annexation. Written notice of such nonconformance shall be mailed
to the owner of record of each such property and to the occupant of the
property. Within two years of the date of mailing of such notice, any owner of
such property, lessee of such property with the written consent of owners, or
purchaser of such property when acting pursuant to a contract of sale in
writing duly executed and acknowledged by both the buyer and the owner of
record, may apply to have such property excepted from the termination
provisions of this section. Said application may be made to the director of
planning and development services in such form as may be prescribed by the
director of planning and development services. Said application shall include,
but not be limited to, a statement of the location and size of the property,
the nature of its use on July 20, 1978, a statement of reasons establishing
that the use is compatible with and will not be detrimental to the uses
designated in the Comprehensive Plan for the surrounding area and properties, a
map of the subject property indicating the location of all parcels of real
property within a distance of three hundred feet from the exterior boundary of
the subject property, a list as shown in the last equalized assessment roll, of
the name and address of the owner of record of each such parcel, and such other
information as may be required by the director of planning and development
services.
   (1)   Such application shall be accompanied by such fee as is prescribed in
the municipal fee schedule.
   (2)   Upon receipt of such application, the director of planning and
development services shall so inform the chairperson of the planning commission
who shall set a date for a public hearing on the application which shall be
held within a reasonable time from the date of filing of the application.
Notice of the hearing shall be given by publication once in a local newspaper
at least twelve days prior to the hearing and by mail to owners and occupants
of real property within 300 feet of the subject property.
   (3)   Upon the date set for hearing, the planning commission shall conduct a
public hearing thereon, unless, for cause, the commission shall on that date
continue the matter. Upon conclusion of the hearing, the commission shall
determine whether the use of the property on July 20, 1978, is compatible and
not detrimental to the land uses designated in the Comprehensive Plan for the
surrounding areas of properties. In the event the commission so finds, it shall
recommend to the city council that the use shall be exempted from the
termination provisions of this section. The commission may recommend such
conditions as it may find necessary to insure compatibility including, but not
limited to, required improvement of or modifications to existing improvements
on the property, limitations on hours of operation, limitation on the nature of
operations, and a specified term of years for which the exception shall be
granted.
   (4)   Upon receipt of the recommendation of the planning commission, the
city council shall consider the application within a reasonable time. The
council may, at its option, conduct a public hearing on the matter.
   In the event the council finds the use of the subject property to be
compatible with and not detrimental to those land uses designated in the
Comprehensive Plan for the surrounding area and properties, it shall, by
motion, except said use from the termination provisions of this section. In
granting such exception, the council may include such conditions as are deemed
necessary to insure such compatibility, including, but not limited to, the
conditions set out in subsection (c)(3) of this section.
   (5)   Any use which is excepted from the termination provisions of this
section, and which is changed pursuant to Section
18.70.030 shall be subject to the termination provisions of this section as
though no exception had been granted.
   (6)   Any use excepted from the termination provisions of this section shall
be permitted to remodel, improve, or replace site improvements on the same
site, without the necessity to comply with site development regulations, for
continual use and occupancy by the same use; provided, that any such
remodeling, improvement, or replacement shall not result in increased floor
area, number of dwelling units, height, length, or any other increase in the
size of the improvement.
   (d)   Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, any off-street parking
lot which was lawfully existing and not subject to any required termination
provisions of any predecessor ordinance on the effective date of this section,
and which on that date was and continues to be used accessory to a lawful
conforming permitted use, shall be permitted to continue in existence and use
for the life of the principal use to which it is accessory, regardless of
whether said parking lot and principal use are located in the same district.
(Ord. 5494 § 3, 2020: Ord. 5382 § 2, 2016: Ord. 5381 § 7, 2016: Ord. 4923 § 5,
2006: Ord. 4826 § 135, 2004: Ord. 4803 § 2, 2003: Ord. 4594 § 2, 1999: Ord.
4314 § 1, 1995: Ord. 4175 § 1, 1993: Ord. 4174 § 1, 1993: Ord. 4142 § 1, 1993:
Ord. 4141 § 1, 1993: Ord. 4081 § 18, 1992: Ord. 4016 § 45, 1991: Ord. 3886 § 1,
1989: Ord. 3536 § 39, 1984: Ord. 3273 § 3, 1981: Ord. 3204 § 1, 1980: Ord. 3187
§ 6, 1980: Ord. 3171 § 1, 1979: Ord. 3130 § 25(e), 1979: Ord. 3108 § 7, 1979:
Ord. 3070 § 2, 1978: Ord. 3048 (part), 1978)
18.70.080   Noncomplying facility - Enlargement.
   (a)   Except as specifically permitted by subsections (b) and (c) hereof or
by Section
18.12.050(a), no enlargement, expansion, or other addition or improvement to a
noncomplying facility shall be permitted which increases the noncompliance.
This section shall not be construed to prohibit enlargement or improvement of a
facility, otherwise permitted by this title, which does not affect the
particular degree of or manner in which the facility does not comply with one
or more provisions of this title.
   (b)   Except in areas designated as special study areas, the director of
planning and development services may permit minor additions of floor area to
noncomplying facilities in the commercial CC, CS and CN zones and in the
industrial MOR, ROLM, RP and GM districts, subject to applicable site
development regulations, for purposes of on-site employee amenities, resource
conservation, or code compliance, upon the determination that such minor
additions will not, of themselves, generate substantial additional employment.
Such additions may include, but not be limited to, the following:
      (1)   Area designed and used solely for providing on-site services to
employees of the facility, such as recreational facilities, credit unions,
cafeterias and day care facilities;
      (2)   Area designated for resource conservation, such as trash
compactors, recycling and thermal storage facilities; and
      (3)   Area designed and required for hazardous materials storage
facilities, handicapped access, and seismic upgrades.
(Ord. 5494 § 3, 2020: Ord. 5381 § 7, 2016: Ord. 5373 § 22 (part), 2016: Ord.
3890 § 20, 1989: Ord. 3683 § 18, 1986: Ord. 3048 (part), 1978)
18.70.090   Noncomplying facility - Maintenance and repair.
   (a)    Normal and routine maintenance of a noncomplying facility shall be
permitted for the purpose of preserving its existing condition, retarding or
eliminating wear and tear or physical depreciation, or complying with the
requirements of law.
   (b)   Incidental alterations to a noncomplying facility shall be permitted,
provided such alterations do not increase the degree of noncompliance, or
otherwise increase the discrepancy between existing conditions and the
requirements of this title.
   (c)   Structural alterations to a noncomplying facility shall be permitted
when necessary to comply with the requirements of law, or to accommodate a
conforming use when such alterations do not increase the degree of
noncompliance, or otherwise increase the discrepancy between existing
conditions and requirements of this title.
(Ord. 5381 § 7, 2016: Ord. 3683 § 17, 1986: Ord. 3048 (part), 1978)
18.70.100   Noncomplying facility - Replacement.
   A noncomplying facility which is damaged or destroyed by any means except
ordinary wear and tear and depreciation may be reconstructed only as a
complying facility, except as follows:
   (a)   When the damage or destruction of a noncomplying facility affects only
a portion of the facility that did not constitute or contribute to the
noncompliance, said portion may be repaired or reconstructed to its previous
configuration.
   (b)   When the damage or destruction of a noncomplying facility affects a
portion of the facility that constituted or contributed to the noncompliance,
any replacement or reconstruction to such damaged portion shall be accomplished
in such manner as not to reinstate the noncompliance or degree of noncompliance
caused by the destroyed or damaged portion of the facility, and otherwise in
full compliance with this title; however, if the cost to replace or reconstruct
the noncomplying portion of the facility to its previous configuration does not
exceed fifty percent of the total cost to replace or reconstruct the facility
in conformance with this subsection, then the damaged noncomplying portion may
be replaced or reconstructed to its previous configuration. In no event shall
such replacement or construction create, cause, or increase any noncompliance
with the requirements of this title.
   (c)   Notwithstanding subsections (a) and (b) hereof, a noncomplying
facility in the commercial CS, CN and CC zones and the industrial MOR, ROLM, RP
and GM districts, except for those areas designated as special study areas,
existing on August 1, 1989, which when built was a complying facility, shall be
permitted to be remodeled, improved or replaced in accordance with applicable
site development regulations other than floor area ratio, provided that any
such remodeling, improvement or replacement shall not result in increased floor
area.
   (d)   Notwithstanding subsections (a), (b) and (c) hereof, a noncomplying
facility housing a conforming use in the R-1 and RE zones, which when built was
a complying facility, which is damaged or destroyed by non-willful means (i.e.,
acts of God) shall be permitted to be replaced, on the same site, and in its
previous configuration, without necessity to comply with the current site
development regulations, provided that any such replacement shall not result in
increased floor area, height, length or any other increase in the size of the
facility.
   (e)   Except as otherwise provided in this section with regard to
replacement or reconstruction of a portion of a facility to its previous
noncomplying condition, all reconstruction shall be subject to all applicable
laws, regulations, and procedures otherwise governing construction on the site
at the time said construction is undertaken.
(Ord. 5381 § 7, 2016: Ord. 4102 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 4016 § 46, 1991: Ord.
3905 § 18, 1989: Ord. 3890 § 21, 1989: Ord. 3048 (part), 1978)
18.70.110   Determination of value.
   Value, as used in this chapter with respect to value of a facility, or to
the value of improvements on a site, or to the value of reconstruction or
replacement, means the current cost of construction, or the current cost of
replacement in kind of existing facilities or improvements, excluding
consideration of the value of land. Estimates or determinations of such cost
for purposes of this chapter shall be made by or shall be reviewed and approved
by the building official.
(Ord. 3048 (part), 1978)
18.70.120   Determination of age.
   The age of a facility shall be computed from the recorded date of its
completion, if available, or otherwise shall be deemed to be one year
subsequent to the date of issuance of a building permit for such facility. In
any case where, in a single construction phase, an addition to a facility was
commenced prior to July 20,1978, which had at the time of its completion a
value in excess of seventy-five percent of the full cash value of the original
facility, or which increased the gross floor area of the facility by more than
seventy-five percent, the age of the facility shall be computed from the
recorded date of the completion of such addition, if available, or otherwise
such date shall be deemed to be one year subsequent to the date of issuance of
a building permit for such addition. When the age of a facility cannot be
determined by any of the foregoing means, the building official shall estimate
the age for purposes of this chapter.
(Ord. 3048 (part), 1978)
18.70.130   Certificate of use and occupancy.
   The owner or occupant of any site occupied or used entirely or partially by
a nonconforming use shall make application for a certificate of use and
occupancy under the provisions of Title 16 and shall annually thereafter apply
for renewal of such certificate.
(Ord. 3048 (part), 1978)
18.70.140   Unsafe buildings.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as repealing, abrogating, or
modifying any provision of
Chapter 16.40, or any other provision of this code, or of any law relating to
requirements for construction, maintenance, repair, demolition, or removal of
structures.
(Ord. 3048 (part), 1978)
Chapter 18.76
PERMITS AND APPROVALS
Sections:
   
18.76.010   Conditional Use Permit (CUP)
   
18.76.015   Additional Findings for Specified Retail Uses
   
18.76.020   Architectural Review
   
18.76.025   Multi-Family Residential Projects Exempt from Architectural Review
   
18.76.030   Variance
   
18.76.040   Neighborhood Preservation Exception
   
18.76.050   Design Enhancement Exception (DEE)
   
18.76.060   Reserved
18.76.010   Conditional Use Permit (CUP)
   (a)   Purpose
   The purpose of a conditional use perrnit is to provide for uses and
accessory uses that are necessary or desirable for the development of the
community or region but cannot readily be classified as permitted uses in
individual districts by reason of uniqueness of size, scope, or possible effect
on public facilities or surrounding uses.
   (b)   Applicability
      (1)   A conditional use permit may be granted for any use or purpose for
which such permit is required or permitted by the provisions of this title; or
      (2)   Any expansion in the building size or site area of an existing
conditional use shall necessitate the amendment of the conditional use permit.
Denial of an application for amendment of a conditional use permit does not
constitute a revocation of the original conditional use permit.
      (3)   No application for a conditional use permit is necessary for
existing uses which were lawful conforming permitted uses and which were
rendered conditional by reason of rezoning or changes to this title, provided
that any expansion in the building site or site area of such a use shall be
subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit.
   (4)   Establishments that are allowed by the city to serve alcohol for
onsite consumption by issuance of a conditional use permit (“CUP”) as required
in this section or as a legal nonconforming use, and that have both an on-sale
license from the Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control (“ABC”) and are duly
authorized by ABC to serve alcohol in outdoor areas, shall be allowed to serve
alcohol for onsite consumption without an amendment of the CUP in parklets on
public property approved via permit per PAMC
Chapter 12.11 or other outdoor uses approved via permit per any other relevant
section of the PAMC. Outdoor alcohol service shall be in full compliance with
all applicable regulations, including ABC regulations, as may be amended.
   (c)   Findings
   Neither the director, nor the city council on appeal, shall grant a
conditional use perrnit, unless it is found that the granting of the
application will:
      (1)   Not be detrimental or injurious to property or improvements in the
vicinity, and will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, general
welfare, or convenience;
      (2)   Be located and conducted in a manner in accord with the Palo Alto
Comprehensive Plan and the purposes of this title (Zoning).
   (d)   Conditions
   In granting conditional use permits, reasonable conditions or restrictions
may be imposed if appropriate or necessary to protect the public health,
safety, genera! welfare, or convenience, to secure the purposes of this title,
and to assure operation of the use in a manner compatible with existing and
potential uses on adjoining properties and in the general vicinity.
   (e)   Application Review and Action
   Applications for conditional use permits shall be reviewed and acted upon as
set forth in Section
18.77.060 (Standard Staff Review Process).
(Ord. 5594 § 8, 2024: Ord. 4826 § 117 (Exh. 2 (part)), 2004)
18.76.015   Additional Findings for Specified Retail Uses
   A conditional use permit shall not be granted in a R-Combining district for
a formula retail business, or a beauty shop, nail salon, barbership, or
financial services use, unless it is found, in addition to the findings
required by section
18.76.010, that:
      (1)   The retail or personal service business will offer merchandise and/
or services that meet the underserved needs of the City’s residents and
visitors.
      (2)   The type of retail or personal service business will enhance the
balance and diversity of businesses in the district and in the City as a whole.
      (3)   The retail or personal service business will enhance the economic
vitality of the district where the business is proposed to be located and of
the City as a whole. In considering this finding, the director or city council
may consider existing retail vacancy rates within the district and in the City
as a whole.
      (4)   The retail or personal service business is consistent with the
character of the district where the business is proposed to be located.
      (5)   The design of the retail or personal service business will be
compatible with the architectural and aesthetic character of the district where
the business is proposed to be located.
(Ord. 5358 § 8, 2015)
18.76.020   Architectural Review
   (a)   Purpose
   The purpose of architectural review is to:
      (1)   Promote orderly and harmonious development in the city;
      (2)   Enhance the desirability of residence or investment in the city;
      (3)   Encourage theattainment of the most desirable use of land and
improvements;
      (4)   Enhance the desirability of living conditions upon the immediate
site or in adjacent areas; and
      (5)   Promote visual environments which are of high aesthetic quality and
variety and which, at the same time, are considerate of each other.
   (b)   Applicability
   No permit required under Title 2, Title 12 or Title 16 shall be issued for a
major or minor project, as set forth in this section, unless an application for
architectural review is reviewed, acted upon, and approved or approved with
conditions as set forth in Section
18.77.070.
      (1)   Exempt Projects. The following projects do not require
architectural review:
         (A)   Single-family and two-family residences, except as provided
under subsections (b)(2)(C) and (b)(2)(D).
         (B)   Projects determined by the director of planning and development
services to be substantially minor in nature and have inconsequential visual
impacts to the adjacent properties and public streets. These exempt projects
are referred to as "over the counter projects". The director shall have the
authority to promulgate a list of such exempt projects under this subsection.
         (C)   Housing development projects, as defined in Government Code
section 65589.5(h)(2) (the Housing Accountability Act), but only if such
projects qualify for ministerial review under Government Code section 65913.4
or 65951, or if they comply with all applicable objective standards, and the
city’s discretion is thereby limited by Government Code section 65589.5. Such
projects shall be subject to the processes set forth in Sections
18.77.073 or
18.77.074, as applicable.
      (D)   Parklets as defined in
Chapter 18.04 and permitted per permit under
Chapter 12.11, and signs that comply with the city’s adopted parklet standards
affixed to parklets shall not require architectural review approval.
Notwithstanding PAMC Sections
18.76.020 and
18.77.077, architectural review shall not be required for proposed outdoor
eating and drinking service areas or signage affixed to such parklets.
      (2)   Major Projects. The following are "major projects" for the purposes
of the architectural review process set forth in Section
18.77.070, and are subject to review by the architectural review board:
         (A)   New construction, including private and public projects, that:
            (i)   Includes a new building or building addition of five thousand
square feet or more; or
            (ii)   Is not exempt under the California Environmental Quality Act
(CEQA) (Section 21000 et seq. of the California Public Resources Code); or
            (iii)   Requires one or more variances or use permits and, in the
judgment of the director, will have a significant effect upon the aesthetic
character of the city or the surrounding area;
         (B)   Any multiple-family residential construction project that
contains three or more units;
         (C)   Construction of three or more adjacent single-family homes or
duplexes;
         (D)   In the Neighborhood Preservation Combining District (NP),
properties on which two or more residential units are developed or modified,
except when one of those units is an “accessory dwelling unit," as described in
Section
18.10.140(d);
         (E)   Any project using transferred development rights, as described
in
Chapter 18.18;
         (F)   A master sign program, pursuant to
Chapter 16.20;
         (G)   Signs that do not meet all applicable design guidelines adopted
by the city council or do not conform to a previously approved master sign
program;
         (H)   Signs requiring a sign exception pursuant to
Chapter 16.20;
         (I)   Any minor project, as defined in subsection (3), that the
director determines will significantly alter the character or appearance of a
building or site.
      (3)   Minor Projects. The following are "minor projects" for the purposes
of the architectural review process set forth in Section
18.77.070, except when determined to be major pursuant to subsection (2)(I) or
exempt pursuant to subsection (1)(B):
         (A)   New construction, including private and public projects, that
involves a new building or building addition of fewer than 5,000 square feet,
and which is exempt under the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA)
(division 13 of the Public Resources Code, commencing with section 21000);
         (B)   Signs that meet all applicable guidelines and conform to any
previously approved master sign program;
         (C)   Landscape plans, fences, exterior remodeling, and design of
parking areas, when not part of a major project;
         (D)   Any project relating to the installation of cabinets containing
communications service equipment or facilities, pursuant to any service subject
to
Chapter 2.11,
Chapter 12.04,
Chapter 12.08,
Chapter 12.09,
Chapter 12.10, or
Chapter 12.13.
         (E)   Minor changes to the following:
            (i)   Plans that have previously received architectural review
approval;
            (ii)   Previously approved planned community district development
plans;
            (iii)   Plans that have previously received site and design
approval;
            (iv)   Previously approved plans for projects requiring council
approval pursuant to a contractual agreement, resolution, motion, action or
uncodified ordinance;
            (v)   Existing structures requiring council site and design
approval or approval pursuant to a contractual agreement, resolution, motion,
action, or uncodified ordinance.
   As used in this subsection (b)(3)(E), the term "minor" means a change that
is of little visual significance, does not materially alter the appearance of
previously approved improvements, is not proposed for the use of the land in
question, and does not alter the character of the structure involved. If the
cumulative effect of multiple minor changes would result in a major change, a
new application for Architectural Review approval of a major project, Site and
Design approval, Planned Community District approval, or other applicable
approval is required.
         (F) Any changes to previously approved plans requiring architectural
review as a minor project as part of the conditions of a permit or approval.
   (c)   Preliminary Review
   For the purpose of securing the advice of the architectural review board
prior to making an application for the board's recommendation on a project, an
applicant, upon paying a preliminary application fee, as set forth in the
municipal fee schedule, may bring a design before the board for preliminary
review. If the applicant wishes to proceed with the project, he or she must
then file an application and pay a regular application fee. The comments of the
architectural review board members during a preliminary review shall not be
binding on their formal recommendation.
   (d)   Findings
   Neither the director, nor the city council on appeal, shall grant
architectural review approval, unless it is found that each of the following
applicable findings is met:
      (1)   The design is consistent with applicable provisions of the Palo
Alto Comprehensive Plan, Zoning Code, coordinated area plans (including
compatibility requirements), and any relevant design guides.
      (2)   The project has a unified and coherent design, that:
         (A)   Creates an internal sense of order and desirable environment for
occupants, visitors, and the general community,
         (B)   Preserves, respects and integrates existing natural features
that contribute positively to the site and the historic character including
historic resources of the area when relevant,
         (C)   Is consistent with the context-based design criteria of the
applicable zone district,
         (D)   Provides harmonious transitions in scale, mass and character to
adjacent land uses and land use designations,
         (E)   Enhances living conditions on the site (if it includes
residential uses) and in adjacent residential areas.
      (3)   The design is of high aesthetic quality, using high quality,
integrated materials and appropriate construction techniques, and incorporating
textures, colors, and other details that are compatible with and enhance the
surrounding area.
      (4)   The design is functional, allowing for ease and safety of
pedestrian and bicycle traffic and providing for elements that support the
building's necessary operations (e.g. convenient vehicle access to property and
utilities, appropriate arrangement and amount of open space and integrated
signage, if applicable, etc.).
      (5)   The landscape design complements and enhances the building design
and its surroundings, is appropriate to the site's functions, and utilizes to
the extent practical, regional indigenous drought resistant plant material
capable of providing desirable habitat that can be appropriately maintained.
      (6)   The project incorporates design principles that achieve
sustainability in areas related to energy efficiency, water conservation,
building materials, landscaping, and site planning.
   (e)   Conditions
   In granting architectural review approval, reasonable conditions or
restrictions may be imposed if appropriate or necessary to protect the public
health, safety, general welfare, or convenience, to secure the purposes of this
title, and to:
      (1)   Promote the internal integrity of the design of the project;
      (2)   Assure compatibility of the proposed project's design with its site
and surroundings;
      (3)   Minimize the environmental effects of the proposed project;
provided, however, that the architectural review board's sole responsibility
with respect to the storage of hazardous materials is to require compliance
with Title 17 (Hazardous Materials Storage).
   (f)   Application Review and Action
   Applications for Architectural Review shall be reviewed and acted upon as
set forth in Section
18.77.070 (Architectural Review Process).
   (g)   Phased Projects and Enforcement of Approval Conditions
   An application for a phased project may be submitted and a specific
development schedule may be considered and approved. In no event, however,
shall such a development schedule exceed five years from the original date of
approval. Approved project plans and conditions of approval imposed through the
architectural review process shall be enforceable as approved unless the
application is revised or withdrawn in accordance with this title.
   (h)   Architectural Review Approval Prior to Demolition
   No building demolition, except for tenant improvements or where necessary
for health and safety purposes (as determined by the director), shall be
permitted on any site requiring architectural review approval, until such
architectural review approval is granted by the director, including review of
subsequent conditions by the architectural review board, where required.
(Ord. 5594 § 8, 2024: Ord. 5615 § 3, 2024: Ord. 5613 § 3, 2024: Ord. 5554 § 36,
2022: Ord. 5494 § 3, 2020: Ord. 5432 § 15, 2018: Ord. 5412 § 22, 2017; Ord.
5403 § 2, 2016; Ord. 5373 § 23, 2016; Ord. 4966 § 1, 2007: Ord. 4964 §§ 19, 20,
2007: Ord. 4959 § 1, 2007: Ord. 4826 § 117 (Exh. 2 (part)), 2004)
18.76.025   Multi-Family Residential Projects Exempt from Architectural Review
   No permit required under
Title 2,
Title 12 or
Title 16 shall be issued for a multi-family residential project that is exempt
from Architectural Review under Section
18.76.020, subdivision (b)(1)(C), unless it first receives a planning approval
from the Planning Director under this section. Projects subject to ministerial
review or that are defined as a “use by right” under state law shall be
reviewed under section
18.77.074. Projects that are not subject to ministerial review, but that comply
with all applicable objective standards, shall be reviewed under Section
18.77.073.
(Ord. 5615 § 4, 2024: Ord. 5613 § 4, 2024)
18.76.030   Variance
   (a)   Purpose
   The purpose of a variance is to:
      (1)   Provide a way for a site with special physical constraints,
resulting from natural or built features, to be used in ways similar to other
sites in the same vicinity and zoning district; and
      (2)   Provide a way to grant relief when strict application of the zoning
regulations would subject development of a site to substantial hardships,
constraints, or practical difficulties that do not normally arise on other
sites in the same vicinity and zoning district.
   (b)   Applicability
   Variances may be granted to the following:
      (1)   Site development regulations (except limitations on residential
density and size of establishment) and parking and loading regulations (except
those accessible parking regulations mandated by state and/or federal law and
contained in
Chapter 18.54) applicable within any district established by this title
(Zoning);
      (2)   The special requirements that apply to site development and parking
and loading regulations applicable within any district established by this
title (Zoning), except provisions which restrict expansion of grandfathered
uses that are subject to the special requirements of a specific zoning
district. Special requirements in any district do not include special
provisions and exceptions as set forth in
Chapters 18.40 and
18.42 except for the location of accessory buildings;
      (3)   The requirements of Title 20 (Precise Plans);
      (4) The requirements of
Chapter 16.24 (Fences) except Sections
16.24.040 (Fences at Intersections) and
16.24.070 (Prohibited Fences);
   (c)   Findings - General
   Neither the director, nor the city council on appeal, shall grant a
variance, unless it is found that:
      (1)   Because of special circumstances applicable to the subject
property, including (but not limited to) size, shape, topography, location, or
surroundings, the strict application of the requirements and regulations
prescribed in this title substantially deprives such property of privileges
enjoyed by other property in the vicinity and in the same zoning district as
the subject property. Special circumstances that are expressly excluded from
consideration are:
         (A)   The personal circumstances of the property owner, and
         (B)   Any changes in the size or shape of the subject property made by
the property owner or his predecessors in interest while the property was
subject to the same zoning designation.
      (2)   The granting of the application shall not affect substantial
compliance with the regulations or constitute a grant of special privileges
inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the vicinity and in
the same zoning district as the subject property, and
      (3)   The granting of the application is consistent with the Palo Alto
Comprehensive Plan and the purposes of this title (Zoning), and
      (4)   The granting of the application will not be detrimental or
injurious to property or improvements in the vicinity, will not be detrimental
to the public health, safety, general welfare, or convenience.
   (d)   Findings - Flag Lot
   In addition to the above-listed findings, in the case of a flag lot, neither
the director, nor the city council on appeal, shall grant a variance, unless it
is found that:
      (1)   The granting of the application will not disrupt established
neighborhood character and aesthetics, and will not affect the health of the
residents by significantly blocking out light and air;
      (2)   The granting of the application will not result in excessive
paving, parking, potential traffic conflicts on busy streets, street tree
removal or loss of private landscaping;'
      (3)   The granting of the application will not negatively impact the
privacy and quiet enjoyment of adjoining single-family residences, for both
indoor and outdoor use.
   (e)   May Not be Granted for Unauthorized Use
   A variance shall not be granted for a parcel that authorizes a use or
activity that is not otherwise expressly authorized by the zone regulations
governing the subject property.
   (f)   Conditions
   In granting variances, reasonable conditions or restrictions may be imposed
if appropriate or necessary to protect the public health, safety, general
welfare, or convenience, and to secure the purposes of this title (Zoning).
   (g)   Application Review and Action
   Applications for variances shall be reviewed and acted upon as set forth in
Section
18.77.060 (Standard Staff Review Process).
(Ord. 4826 § 117 (Exh. 2 (part)), 2004)
18.76.040   Neighborhood Preservation Exception
   (a)   Purpose
   The purpose of the neighborhood preservation exception is to foster
retention of existing single-family structures and to maintain the existing
historic and general character of neighborhoods in the neighborhood
preservation (NP) combining district.
   (b)   Applicability
   For properties within the neighborhood preservation (NP) combining district,
a neighborhood preservation exception may be granted to site development
regulations (except limitations on residential density), parking regulations,
and special setback requirements of Title 20 (Precise Plans).
   (c)   Findings
   Neither the director, nor the city council on appeal, shall grant a
neighborhood preservation exception unless it is found that:
      (1)   The granting of the application will facilitate the preservation of
an existing residential structure on the same property and will be of benefit
in maintaining the existing historic and general character of the surrounding
neighborhood; and
      (2)   The granting of the application will not be detrimental or
injurious to property or improvements in the vicinity and will not be
detrimental to the public health, safety, general welfare, or convenience.
   (d)   Conditions
   In granting neighborhood preservation exceptions, reasonable conditions or
restrictions may be imposed as deemed appropriate or necessary to protect the
public health, safety, general welfare, or convenience, and to secure the
purposes of this title.
   (e)   Application Review and Action
   Applications for neighborhood preservation exceptions shall be reviewed as
set forth in Section
18.77.060 (Standard Staff Review Process).
(Ord. 4826 § 117 (Exh. 2 (part)), 2004)
18.76.050   Design Enhancement Exception (DEE)
   (a)   Purpose
   The purpose of a design enhancement exception is to permit a minor exception
to zoning regulations when doing so will:
      (1)   Enhance the design of a proposed project without altering the
function or use of the site, or its impact on surrounding properties; or
      (2)   Enable the preservation of the architectural style of existing
improvements on the site.
   (b)   Applicability
      (1)   Design enhancement exceptions may be granted to the site
development and parking and loading requirements otherwise applicable under
this title (Zoning), as part of the architectural review process, when such
exceptions will enhance the appearance and design of commercial and multiple-
family development and other development subject to architectural review.
      (2)   Items for which design enhancement exceptions may be granted
include, but are not limited to, dormers, eave lines, roof design, bay windows,
cornices, parapets, columns^ ¦ arcades, fountains, art, ornamentation, atriums,
balconies, trellises, moldings, balustrades, stairs, entry features, and other
minor architectural elements and design features.
      (3)   Generally, design enhancement exceptions are limited to minor
changes to the setback, daylight plane, height, lot coverage limitations,
parking lot design and landscaping configuration, and additional flexibility in
the required proportion between private and common open space.
      (4)   No design enhancement exception shall be granted under this section
that would increase floor area, decrease the number of required parking spaces,
decrease the amount of required on-site landscaping, or decrease the required
open space.
   (c)   Findings
   Neither the director, nor the city council on appeal, shall grant a design
enhancement exception unless it is found that:
      (1)   There are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions
applicable to the property or site improvements involved that do not apply
generally to property in the same zone district;
      (2)   The granting of the application will enhance the appearance of the
site or structure, or improve the neighborhood character of the project and
preserve an existing or proposed architectural style, in a manner which would
not otherwise be accomplished through strict application of the minimum
requirements of this title (Zoning) and the architectural review findings set
forth in Section
18.76.020(d); and
      (3)   The exception is related to a minor architectural feature or site
improvement that will not be detrimental or injurious to property or
improvements in the vicinity and will not be detrimental to the public health,
safety, general welfare or convenience.
   (d)   Conditions
   In granting design enhancement exceptions, reasonable conditions or
restrictions may be imposed if appropriate or necessary to protect the public
health, safety, general welfare, or convenience, and to secure the purposes of
this title.
   (e)   Application Review and Action
   Applications for a design enhancement exception shall be reviewed and acted
upon as set forth in Section
18.77.070 (Architectural Review).
18.76.060   Reserved
   Editor's Note: Former Section 18.76.060, Home improvement exception (HIE),
derived from Ord. 4826 § 117 (Exh. 2), was repealed by § 38 of Ord. 4869.
Chapter 18.77
PROCESSING OF PERMITS AND APPROVALS
Sections:
   
18.77.010   Purpose and Scope
   
18.77.020   Applications
   
18.77.030   Determination of Completeness
   
18.77.040   Time Limits for Review
   
18.77.050   Review Procedures – Summary
   
18.77.060   Standard Staff Review Process
   
18.77.070   Architectural Review Process
   
18.77.073   Streamlined Housing Development Project Review Process
   
18.77.074   Ministerial and By Right Review Process
   
18.77.075   Low-Density Residential Review Process
   
18.77.077   Over the Counter Project Review Process
   
18.77.080   Notice
   
18.77.090   Expiration of Approvals
   
18.77.100   Duration of Permits
   
18.77.110   Revocation or Modification of Approvals
   
18.77.120   Reserved
18.77.010   Purpose and Scope
   (a)   The purpose of this chapter is to establish common procedures for the
filing, review, and action on applications, notice of public hearings, appeals
of decisions, and enforcement of permits and approvals governed by
Chapter 18.76 (Permits and Approvals)
   (b)   The procedures of this chapter apply to all permits and approvals
governed by
Chapter 18.76 (Permits and Approvals), unless specifically modified by another
section of this title (Zoning).
(Ord. 4826 § 118 (Exh. 3 (part)), 2004)
18.77.020   Applications
   (a)   Filing of application and application contents
   All applications pursuant to this chapter shall be filed with the director
in a form prescribed by the director. The application form shall contain a list
of information that must be submitted in order for the application to be deemed
complete. This may include, but is not limited to, information determined
necessary by the director to conduct a review of the application pursuant to:
      (1)   State law (including the California Environmental Quality Act
(CEQA) (Section 21000 et seq. of the California Public Resources Code) and the
Digital Infrastructure and Video Competition Act of 2006, Assembly bill 2987
(Ch. 700, Stats. 2006) (DIVCA), and city compliance with the Political Reform
Act (Title 9 of the Government Code, Section 81000 et seq.);
      (2)   The Palo Alto Comprehensive Plan;
      (3)   The Palo Alto Municipal Code; and
      (4)   This title (Zoning).
   (b)   Signature of applications
   A separate application shall be filed for each site, and each application
shall be signed by:
      (1)   All owners of the real property included in the site or sites; or
      (2)   A purchaser of the real property included in the site or sites,
when acting pursuant to a contract in writing duly executed and acknowledged by
both the buyer and the owner of record; or
      (3)   A lessee in possession of the real property included in the site or
sites, when acting with the written consent of the owner of record; or
      (4)   An agent of the owner of record of the real property included in
the site or sites, when duly authorized by the owner in writing.
   (c)   Receipt of application
   No application shall be deemed received until the following have been
provided:
      (1)   All fees for the application as set forth in the schedule of fees
established by resolution of the city council have been paid; and
      (2)   All documents specified as part of the application in this chapter
or on the application form have been filed.
   (d)   Resubmittal of applications
   If an application is denied, the director or city council may specify that a
substantially similar application may not be accepted within 12 months
following the date of such denial, unless it is shown that the circumstances
surrounding the application have changed substantially.
(Ord. 5432 § 16 (part), 2018: Ord. 4959 § 2, 2007: Ord. 4826 § 118 (Exh. 3
(part)), 2004)
18.77.030   Determination of Completeness
   (a)   Notification of Completeness
   Not later than thirty days after an application has been received, the
director shall notify the applicant in writing whether the application is
complete. If the application is determined not to be complete, the director
shall specify those parts of the application that are incomplete and shall
indicate the manner in which it can be made complete, including a list and
thorough description of specific information needed to complete the
application. Upon receipt of any resubmittal of the application, a new thirty-
day period shall begin, during which the director shall determine the
completeness of the application.
   (b)   Submittal of Additional Information
   Not later than thirty days after receipt of the submitted materials, the
director shall notify the applicant in writing whether the application is
complete. The director shall specify those parts of the application that are
incomplete and shall indicate the manner in which it can be made complete,
including a list and thorough description of specific information.
   (c)   Failure to Make a Determination
   If the director fails to make a written determination within thirty days,
the application, together with the submitted materials, will be deemed complete
and the application shall be eligible to be acted upon on its merits.
   (d)   Appeal of the Director's Decision – Filing
   Any applicant aggrieved by the director's determination regarding the
completeness of an application may file an appeal with the planning division,
as set forth in
Chapter 18.78.
   (e)   Inadequate Information
   Nothing in this section shall preclude the director or city council from
denying the application on the grounds that the information provided is
inadequate to demonstrate that the application should be approved in accordance
with this title (Zoning).
   (f)   Waiver of Time Limits
   Nothing in this section precludes an applicant from waiving the right to a
determination of incompleteness or from extending the period of time for a
determination of completeness.
(Ord. 4826 § 118 (Exh. 3 (part)), 2004)
18.77.040   Time Limits for Review
   All applications governed by the procedures of this chapter shall be acted
upon in accordance with state law (including the provisions of the Permit
Streamlining Act (Chapter 4.5 of Title 7 of the Government Code, commencing
with Section 65920) and the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA)
(Division 13 of the Public Resources Code, commencing with Section 21000)).
(Ord. 4826 § 118 (Exh. 3 (part)), 2004)
18.77.050   Review Procedures – Summary
Table 1 describes the action to be taken by each review or decision-making body
involved in granting a land use permit. The actions are described in further
detail in Sections
18.77.060 and
18.77.070.
Table 1
Summary of Review Procedures
 Staff Architectural Review Board Director Planning Commission City Council
                               Staff       Architectural  Director   Planning       City
                                           Review Board              Commission     Council
Standard Staff Review Process
∙  Variance                                                                       Final
∙  Conditional Use Permit    Review                     Tentative  Hearing and    Decision
∙  Neighborhood Preservation application                Decision   Recommendation (upon
Exception                                                            (upon request) request)

Architectural Review
                                           Hearing and    Decision                  Final
∙  Architectural Review      Tentative   Recommendation (if ARB                   Decision
(Minor)                        Decision    (upon request) hearing is                on
                                                          requested)                Appeal
                                                                                    Final
∙  Architectural Review                  Hearing and    Decision                  Decision
(Major)                                    Recommendation                           on
                                                                                    Appeal
 
(Ord. 4826 § 118 (Exh. 3 (part)), 2004)
18.77.060   Standard Staff Review Process
   (a)   Applications Subject to Standard Staff Review Process
   The following applications are subject to the review process set forth in
this section:
      (1)   Variances, conditional use permits, neighborhood preservation
exceptions; and
      (2)   Other permits and approvals for which such review process is
required by the provisions of Title 2, Title 12 or Title 18.
   (b)   Notice of Application Completeness
      Not later than thirty days after an application has been received, the
director shall notify the applicant in writing whether the application is
complete. If the application is determined not to be complete, procedures
outlined in Section
18.77.030 shall apply.
   (c)   Decision by the Director
      Not less than twenty-one days following the date an application is deemed
complete:
      (1)   The director shall prepare a proposed written decision to approve,
approve with conditions, or deny the application.
      (2)   Notice of the proposed director’s decision shall be given by mail
to owners and residents of property within 600 feet of the property, and by
posting in a public place. The notice shall include the address of the
property, a brief description of the proposed project, a brief description of
the proposed director’s decision, the date the decision will be final if no
hearing is requested, and a description of how to request a hearing.
      (3)   The proposed director’s decision shall become final fourteen days
after the date notice is mailed unless a request for a hearing is filed. The
director may, for good cause, specify in writing a longer period for requesting
a hearing at the time he or she issued the proposed decisions.
      (4)   Any party, including the applicant, may request a hearing of the
planning and transportation commission on the proposed director’s decision by
filing a written request with the planning division.
   (d)   Withdrawal of Hearing Request
      (1)   At any time prior to the hearing, the applicant and the person or
persons requesting a hearing may meet to discuss ways to address the concerns
with the application. The applicant may then modify the application to address
such concerns. With the consent of the applicant and the person or persons
requesting a hearing, the director may issue a revised proposed decision. The
revised proposed decision shall identify the modifications made to the
previously issued decision. Upon the issuance of a revised proposed decision by
the director, the person or persons requesting a hearing shall withdraw such
request.
      (2)   Notice of the proposed director’s decision shall be given by mail
to owners and residents of property within 600 feet of the property, and by
posting in a public place. Notice shall include the address of the property, a
brief description of the proposed project, the specific modifications made to
the application, the date the decision will be final, a description of how to
request a hearing, and a statement that any request for a hearing on the
revised decision is limited to those modifications.
      (3)   The revised proposed director’s decision shall become final
fourteen days after the date notice is mailed unless a request for a hearing is
filed. The director may, for good cause, specify in writing a longer period for
requesting a hearing at the time he or she issues the proposed decision.
   (e)   Hearing and Recommendation (Upon Request) by the Planning and
Transportation Commission
      (1)   Within 45 days following the filing of a timely hearing request of
a proposed director’s decision or revised proposed director’s decision the
planning and transportation commission shall hold a hearing on the application,
unless the request is withdrawn as described above.
      (2)   Notice of the revised director’s decision shall be given by mail to
owners and residents of property within 600 feet of the property, and by
posting in a public place. Notice shall include the address of the property, a
brief description of the proposed project, and the date, time and location of
the hearing.
      (3)   Following the hearing, the planning and transportation commission
shall make a recommendation on the application, which shall be forwarded to the
city council.
   (f)   Decision by the Council
      The recommendation of the planning and transportation commission on the
application shall be placed on the consent calendar of the council within 45
days. The council may:
         (1)   Adopt the findings and recommendation of the planning and
transportation commission; or
         (2)   Remove the recommendation from the consent calendar, which shall
require three votes, and direct that the application be set for a new noticed
hearing before the city council, following which the city council shall adopt
findings and take action on the application:
   (g)   Final Decision by the Council
      The decision of the Council is final.
(Ord. 5493 § 5, 2020: Ord. 5432 § 16 (part), 2018: Ord. 5373 § 24 (part), 2016;
Ord. 4959 § 3, 2007: Ord. 4826 § 118 (Exh. 3 (part)), 2004)
18.77.070   Architectural Review Process.
   (a)   Applications Subject to Architectural Review Process
   The following applications are subject to the review processes set forth in
this section:
      (1)   Any major or minor project requiring architectural review approval,
as set forth in Section
18.76.020 (Architectural Review);
      (2)   Any project requiring a design enhancement exception; and
      (3)   Other permits and approvals for which such review process is
required by the provisions of Title 2, Title 12 or Title 18.
   (b)   Tentative Director's Decision and Hearing Upon Request for Minor
Projects
   For a minor project, as defined in Section
18.76.020(b)(3), once the application is deemed complete:
      (1)   The director shall prepare a proposed written decision to approve,
approve with conditions, or deny the application.
      (2)   Notice of the proposed director’s decision shall be mailed to
property owner or applicant and posted in a public place. The notice shall
include the address of the property, a brief description of the proposed
project, a brief description of the proposed director’s decision, the date the
decision will be final if no hearing is requested, and a description of how to
request a hearing.
      (3)   The proposed director’s decision shall become final 10 days after
the date notice is mailed unless a request for a hearing is filed. The director
may, for good cause, specify in writing a longer period for requesting a
hearing at the time he or she issues the proposed decision.
         (i)   When there is more than one entitlement required for a project,
the longer appeal or request for hearing period shall govern the effective date
for the minor architectural review decision.
      (4)   The applicant or the subject property owner, or owners or tenants
of an adjacent property may request a hearing by the architectural review board
on the proposed director’s decision by filing a written request with the
planning division. There shall be no fee required for requesting such a
hearing.
      (5)   The right to a hearing set forth in Section
18.77.070(b)(4) will not be made available to any party, including the
applicant, with respect to the minor project referred to in Section
18.76.020(b)(3)(D).
   (c)   Hearing and Recommendation for Major Projects, and for Minor Projects
Upon Request
      (1)   Upon receipt of a completed application for a major project (as
defined in Section
18.76.020(b)(2)), or upon receipt of a timely request for a hearing for a minor
project (as defined in Section
18.76.020(b)(3)), the architectural review board shall set a hearing date to
review the application.
      (2)   Notice of the hearing shall be given at least 10 days prior to the
hearing by publication in a local newspaper, by posting in a public place, and
by mailing to the applicant, the hearing requestor, if applicable, and all
residents and owners of property within 600 feet of the project. Notice shall
include the address of the property, a brief description of the proposed
project, and the date and time of the hearing.
      (3)   Following the hearing, the architectural review board shall make a
recommendation on the application, which shall be forwarded to the director.
      (4)   A housing development project that is subject to major
architectural review under Section
18.76.020 shall be limited to two meetings before the Architectural Review
Board, unless the applicant requests additional hearings.
   (d)   Decision by the Director
   Upon receipt of a recommendation of the architectural review board:
      (1)   Within 5 working days, the director shall prepare a written
decision to approve the application, approve it with conditions, or deny it.
      (2)   Notice of the director’s decision shall be given by mailing to
owners and residents of property within 600 feet of the property, and by
posting in a public place. Notice shall include the address of the property, a
brief description of the proposed project, a brief description of the action to
be taken, the date the decision will be final, and a description of how to
request a hearing.
      (3)   The director’s decision shall become final 14 days after the date
notice is mailed unless an appeal is filed. The director may, for good cause,
specify in writing a longer period for requesting a hearing at the time he or
she issues the proposed decision.
      (4)   If the architectural review board continues a minor project or
housing development project more than once, or a major project more than twice,
the director may make a decision on the application prior to receiving the
final recommendation of the board.
   (e)   Appeal of the Director's Decision - Filing
      Any party, including the applicant, may file an appeal of the director’s
decision with the planning division for projects reviewed by the architectural
review board. The appeal shall be filed in written form in a manner prescribed
by the director.
   (f)   Decision by the City Council
      The appeal of the director’s decision shall be placed on the consent
calendar of the city council within 45 days. The city council may:
         (1)   Adopt the findings and decision of the director; or
         (2)   Remove the appeal from the consent calendar, which shall require
three votes, and direct that the appeal be set for a new noticed hearing before
the city council, following which the city council shall adopt findings and
take action on the application:
   (g)   Final Decision by the Council
      The decision of the council on the appeal is final.
(Ord. 5646 § 4, 2025: Ord. 5432 § 16 (part), 2018: Ord. 5373 § 24 (part), 2016;
Ord. 4959 § 4, 2007: Ord. 4826 § 118 (Exh. 3 (part)), 2004)
18.77.073   Streamlined Housing Development Project Review Process
    (a)   Applicability
   This section shall apply to applications for residential mixed-use and
multifamily housing development projects, as defined in Government Code section
65589.5(h)(2), that comply with all applicable objective standards and for
which the City’s discretion is thereby limited by Government Code section
65589.5.
   (b)   Preliminary Board Review
   Applicants are encouraged to seek preliminary review by the Architectural
Review Board pursuant to Section 18.76.020(c) prior to submitting a formal
application.
   (c)   Public Study Session
      (1)   Prior to preparing a written decision, the Director may, in his or
her sole discretion, refer the application to the Architectural Review Board or
to other advisory boards or committees for the purpose of determining whether
minor adjustments to the application would result in closer adherence to the
contextual design criteria and/or objective design standards contained in
Chapter 18.24. An application should normally not be considered at more than
one meeting of the Architectural Review Board.
      (2)   Notice of a public meeting to consider the application shall be
given at least seven days prior to the meeting by mailing to the applicant and
all residents and owners of property within 600 feet of the project. Notice
shall include the address of the property, a brief description of the proposed
project, and the date and time of the hearing.
   (d)   Decision by the Director
      (1)   The Director shall prepare a written decision to approve the
application, approve it with conditions, or deny it.
      (2)   Neither the Director, nor the City Council on appeal, shall approve
an application unless it is found that:
         (A)   The application complies with all applicable and objective
standards in the Comprehensive Plan, the Palo Alto Municipal Code, and other
City plans or policies.
         (B)   Approving the application will not result in a specific,
adverse, impact upon the public health or safety, which cannot feasibly be
mitigated or avoided in a satisfactory manner. As used in this Section, a
"specific, adverse impact" means a significant, quantifiable, direct, and
unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified written public health or
safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date the
application was deemed complete.
      (3)   Notice of the proposed director's decision shall be given by mail
to owners and residents of property within 600 feet of the property, and by
posting in a public place. The notice shall include the address of the
property, a brief description of the proposed project, a brief description of
the proposed director's decision, the date the decision will be final if it is
not appealed, and a description of how to file an appeal.
      (4)   The Director's decision shall become final ten days after the date
notice is mailed unless an appeal is filed.
   (e)   Appeals
      (1)   Any party, including the applicant, may file an appeal of the
Director's decision in written form in a manner prescribed by the director.
      (2)   An appeal seeking disapproval of a project or a reduction in
density shall be limited to the grounds that both of the following exist:
         (A)   The project would have a specific, adverse impact upon the
public health or safety unless the project is disapproved or approved upon the
condition that the project be developed at a lower density. And
         (B)   There is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid
the adverse impact identified pursuant to subsection (d)(2)(B)(i), other than
the disapproval of the housing development project or the approval of the
project upon the condition that it be developed at a lower density.
   (f)   Decision by the City Council
      At the Director's discretion, an appeal may be set for hearing before the
city council or may be placed on the Council's consent calendar, within 45
days. The city council may:
      (1)   Adopt the findings and decision of the director; or
      (2)   If the item is on the consent calendar, city council may remove the
appeal from the consent calendar, which shall require three votes, and direct
that the appeal be set for a new noticed hearing before the city council,
following which the city council shall adopt findings and take action on the
application.
   (g)   Final Decision by the Council
      The decision of the council on the appeal is final.
(Ord. 5615 § 5, 2024: Ord. 5613 § 5, 2024: Ord. 5554 § 37, 2022)
18.77.074    Ministerial and By Right Review Process
   (a)   Purpose and Applicability
   (1)   This section is intended to define a streamlined, ministerial review
process for qualifying Housing Development Projects that are submitted pursuant
to streamlining provisions of state law, such as AB 2162 (2018), AB 1397
(2017), and SB 35 (2017). This section shall apply to multi-family residential
projects that are subject to ministerial review or defined as a “use by right”
in state law, including, but not limited to, Government Code sections 65651,
65583, 65583.2, and 65913.4. This section does not apply to the creation of an
accessory dwelling unit and/or junior accessory dwelling unit.
      (2)   The review required by this section shall not involve the exercise
of discretion in a manner that would constitute a “project” for purposes of the
California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). This section does not, however,
excuse a project involving a subdivision from compliance with Title 21 and the
subdivision map processes set forth therein, which may result in a “project”
for purposes of CEQA.
   (b)   Staff Level Review.
      Applications under this section shall be reviewed by city staff for
compliance with applicable objective standards in the city’s Comprehensive
Plan, Specific Plans, Area Plans, Municipal Code, and other rules and
regulations. A decision on the application shall be made by the Planning
Director within any timeframes dictated by applicable state law.
   (c)   Public Study Session.
      Prior to preparing a written decision, the Director may, in his or her
sole discretion, refer the application to the Architectural Review Board or to
other advisory boards or commissions for informal review. The recommendations
of such boards and commissions shall not be binding.
   (d)   Public notices.
      Notice of a public meeting to consider the application shall be given at
least seven days prior to the meeting by mailing to the applicant and all
residents and owners of property within 600 feet of the project. Notice shall
include the address of the property, a brief description of the proposed
project, and the date and time of the hearing.
(Ord. 5651 § 3, 2025: Ord. 5615 § 6, 2024: Ord. 5613 § 6, 2024)
18.77.075   Low-density Residential Review Process
   (a)   Applications Subject to Low-density Residential Review Process
   The following applications are subject to the review process set forth in
this section:
      (1)   Individual review applications, home improvement exception
applications; and
      (2)   Other permits and approvals for which such review process is
required by the provisions of this title (Zoning).
   (b)   Notice of Application Submittal
   Within three days of submittal of an application, notice that the
application has been submitted shall be given by mail to owners and residents
of property adjacent to the subject property, and shall be posted at the
subject property until approval, denial or withdrawal of the application. The
notice shall include the name of the applicant; the address of the proposed
project; and information on when and how comments will be accepted by the city.
The mailed notice shall also include a description of the project.
   (c)   Comment Period
   The comment period shall be twenty-one days beginning on the third business
day after an application is submitted. If notice is mailed or posted on a later
date, the comment period shall begin on the later date. Written comments
received by the city during this period shall be considered as part of the
staff review. Only one comment period is required. If plans are revised during
or following the comment period, a statement that the plans have been revised
shall be included in the notice of the proposed director's decision set forth
in subsection (e).
   (d)   Decision by the Director
   Following completion of the comment period and any staff review:
      (1)   The director shall prepare a proposed written decision to approve,
approve with conditions, or deny the application.
      (2)   Notice of the proposed director's decision shall be mailed to
owners and residents of property adjacent to the subject property, and any
person who has made a written request for notice of the decision. The notice
shall include the address of the property, a brief description of the proposed
project, a brief description of the proposed director's decision, the date the
decision will be final if no hearing is requested, and a description of how to
request a hearing.
      (3)   The proposed director's decision shall become final fourteen days
after the date notice is mailed unless a request for a hearing is filed.
      (4)   The applicant or the owner or occupier of an adjacent property may
request a director's hearing on the proposed director's decision by filing a
written request with the planning division before the date the proposed
director's decision becomes final. There shall be no fee required for
requesting such a hearing.
      (5)   The time limits set forth in this subsection (d) may be extended
upon the written request of the applicant.
   (e)   Director's Hearing (Upon Request)
      (1)   Following the filing of a timely hearing request of a proposed
director's decision the director shall hold a hearing on the application. A
hearing request received after the expiration of the time limits set forth in
subsection (d)(3) shall not be considered.
      (2)   Notice of the director's hearing shall be mailed ten days prior to
the hearing to the project applicant, to owners and residents of property
adjacent to the subject property, and to any person who has made a written
request for such notice. Notice shall include the address of the property, a
brief description of the proposed project, and the date, time and location of
the hearing.
      (3)   At the time and place set for hearing the director shall hear
evidence for and against the application or its modification. The hearing shall
be open to the public.
   (f)   Final Director's Decision
      (1)   The director shall issue a written decision approving, approving
with conditions, or denying the project application within fourteen days of the
hearing.
      (2)   Notice of the director's decision shall be mailed to the project
applicant, the owners and occupants of all adjacent properties, and any person
requesting notice of the decision. The notice shall include the address of the
property, a brief description of the proposed project, a brief description of
the proposed director's decision, the date the decision will be final if no
appeal is filed, and a description of how to file an appeal.
      (3)   The director's decision shall become final fourteen days after the
date notice is mailed unless an appeal is filed. The director may, for good
cause, specify in writing a longer period for filing an appeal at the time he
or she issues the proposed decision.
      (4)   The applicant or the owner or occupier of an adjacent property may
file an appeal of the director's decision by filing a written request with the
City Clerk before the date the director's decision becomes final. The written
request shall be accompanied by a fee, as set forth in the municipal fee
schedule.
   (g)   Decision by the City Council
      If a timely appeal is received by the City, the director’s decision on
the application shall be placed on the consent calendar of the city council
within 45 days. The city council may:
      (1)   Adopt the findings and recommendation of the director; or
      (2)   Remove the recommendation from the consent calendar, which shall
require three votes, and direct that the application be set for a new noticed
hearing before the city council, following which the city council shall adopt
findings and take action on the application.
   (h)   Decision by the City Council Final
      The decision of the city council is final.
(Ord. 5373 § 24 (part), 2016; Ord. 4869 § 39, 2005)
18.77.077   Over the Counter Project Review Process
The director of planning and development services shall be authorized to adopt
guidelines, rules, and procedures to implement the over the counter project
review process for projects exempt from architectural review under Section
18.76.020(b)(1)(B) of this title.
(Ord. 5494 § 3, 2020: Ord. 5432 § 16 (part), 2018)
18.77.080   Notice
   (a)   General Provisions
   When notice is required by provisions of this chapter, it shall be given in
accordance with this section. Compliance with the procedures set forth in this
chapter shall constitute a good faith effort to provide notice, and the failure
of any owner or occupant to receive notice shall not prevent the city from
proceeding with the hearing or from taking any action or affect the validity of
any action. Typographical and/or publishing errors shall not invalidate the
notice or any city action if the error is not prejudicial.
   (b)   Content of Notice
   As used in this chapter, "notice" means a notice that includes, but is not
limited to: a general description, in text or by diagram, of the location of
the real property that is the subject of an application; a general explanation
of the nature of the application; a brief description of the tentative decision
by the director and how to request a hearing, if applicable; and the date,
time, and place of a public hearing, if applicable.
   (c)   Notice by Publication
   When notice by publication is required, the publication shall be in a local
newspaper of general circulation.
   (d)   Notice by Mail
   When notice by mail is required, the notice shall be mailed to owners of
real property as shown on the latest equalized assessment rolls or such other
interim record as may be provided by the county assessor. When mailing notice
to occupants, using the addresses listed in the city's Geographic Information
System (GIS) constitutes a good faith effort to provide such notice. When
notice by mail to adjacent property owners and residents is required, "adjacent
properties" means those properties sharing a common boundary with the subject
property, the property or properties located directly across the street, and
the next properties located diagonally across the street from the subject
property.
   (e)   Notice by Electronic Mail (E-mail)
   When notice by e-mail is required, notice shall be sent to the e-mail
addresses of those persons requesting such notice. The director shall
establish, by administrative policy, when and how such notice will be given.
Multiple e-mail notices may be consolidated and sent in the form of an e-mail
newsletter, if the director chooses.
   (f)   Notice by Posting in a Public Place
   When notice by posting in a public place is required, notice shall be posted
in one or more locations accessible to the public, which may include posting on
the city’s website. The director shall determine the location or locations for
posting.
   (g)   Notice by Posting at the Site
   When notice by site posting is required, notice shall be posted in one or
more prominent places at the subject site.
   (h)   Additional Notice
   They director may provide, but is not required to provide, additional notice
of hearings and other actions on applications by posting in a public place, by
site posting, or through any other means the director chooses. Notice given
under this subsection is in addition to, and may not be substituted for, notice
required under other provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 5432 § 16 (part), 2018: Ord. 4869 § 40, 2005: Ord. 4826 § 118 (Exh. 3
(part)), 2004)
18.77.090   Expiration of Approvals
   (a)   Expiration – General
   Permits and approvals shall automatically expire after twelve months, unless
otherwise provided in the permit or approval, from and after the date of
issuance of the permit or approval if within such twelve month period, the
proposed use of the site or the construction of buildings has not commenced,
pursuant to and in accordance with the provisions of the permit or approval.
The director may, without a hearing, extend such time for a maximum period of
twelve additional months only, upon application filed with him or her before
the expiration of the twelve-month limit, or the expiration of such limit as
may be specified by the conditions of the approval.
   (b)   Effect of Amendments to Approvals
   Amendments to approvals shall not extend the time limits in subsection (a)
unless so stated in the amendment.
   (c)   Expiration – Approvals in Conjunction with a Vesting Tentative Map
   Whenever a vesting tentative map is approved or conditionally approved
pursuant to
Chapter 21.13 and the Subdivision Map Act, the approval pursuant to this
chapter shall be valid until the expiration of the vesting tentative map or
expiration of development rights under the final map. Applications may be made
for extensions, but only in conjunction with applications for extensions of the
vesting tentative map or the final vesting map pursuant to
Chapter 21.13 and the Subdivision Map Act.
(Ord. 4826 § 118 (Exh. 3 (part)), 2004)
18.77.100   Duration of Permits
   If a use authorized by a permit or approval is discontinued for a period of
twelve months, the permit or approval will no longer be in effect. If a
building or structure that is subject to a permit or approval is destroyed or
demolished, the permit or approval will no longer be in effect.
(Ord. 4826 § 118 (Exh. 3 (part)), 2004)
18.77.110   Revocation or Modification of Approvals
   (a)   Notice of Noncompliance or Public Nuisance
   The director may issue a notice of noncompliance for any failure to comply
with any condition of any permit or approval, or when a use conducted pursuant
to a conditional use permit is being conducted in a manner detrimental to the
public health, safety and welfare. The notice of noncompliance shall be sent by
certified mail to the address of the subject property and to the owner of the
property as shown on the latest equalized assessment roll or such other interim
record as may be provided by the county assessor. Such notice shall set forth
the action necessary to come into compliance and a timeframe for compliance.
   (b)   Public Hearing by the director
      (1)   If the noncompliance is not abated, corrected or rectified within
the time specified by the director in the notice of noncompliance, the director
may issue an order to show cause why such a permit or approval shall not be
revoked, suspended or modified. An order to show cause shall be set for a
public hearing before the director.
      (2)   Notice of the hearing shall be given at least ten days prior to the
hearing by publication in a local newspaper and by mailing to the applicant and
all residents and owners of property within 600 feet of the project. Notice
shall include the address of the property, a brief description of the
noncompliance, and the date and time of the hearing.
   (c)   Decision by the director
   Within ten days following the hearing:
      (1)   The director shall prepare a written decision to revoke, suspend,
modify, or leave unchanged, any permit or approval upon finding that:
         (A)   A violation of any condition of the permit or approval was not
abated, corrected or rectified within the time specified on the notice of
noncompliance; or
         (B)   A violation of any city ordinance or state law was not abated,
corrected or rectified within the time specified on the notice of
noncompliance; or
         (C)   A use as presently conducted is detrimental to the public
health, safety and welfare.
      (2)   Notice of the director’s decision shall be given by mailing to
owners and residents of property within 600 feet of the property, and by
posting in a public place. Notice shall include the address of the property, a
brief description of the noncompliance, a brief description of the action to be
taken, the date the decision will be final, and a description of how to appeal
the decision.
      (3)   The director's decision shall become final fourteen days after
notice is mailed unless a timely appeal is filed.
   (d)   Appeal of the director's Decision – Filing
   Any party, including the applicant, may file an appeal of the director's
decision with the planning division. The appeal shall be filed in written form
in a manner prescribed by the director.
   (e)   Hearing and Recommendation by the Planning and Transportation
Commission
      (1)   Following the filing of a timely appeal of a director's decision,
the planning and transportation commission shall hold a hearing on the appeal.
      (2)   Notice of the hearing shall be given at least ten days prior to the
hearing by publication in a local newspaper and by mailing to the applicant,
the hearing requestor, and all residents and owners of property within 600 feet
of the project. Notice shall include the address of the property, a brief
description of the decision of the director, and the date, time and place of
the hearing.
      (3)   Following the hearing, the planning and transportation commission
shall make a recommendation on the appeal, which shall be forwarded to the city
council.
   (f)   Decision by the City Council
   The recommendation of the planning and transportation commission on the
appeal shall be placed on the consent calendar of the city council within
thirty days. The city council may:
      (1)   Adopt the findings and recommendation of the planning and
transportation commission; or
      (2)   Remove the appeal from the consent calendar, which shall require
three votes, and:
         (A)   Discuss the appeal and adopt findings and take action on the
appeal based upon the evidence presented at the hearing of the planning and
transportation commission; or
         (B)   Direct that the appeal be set for a new hearing before the city
council, following which the city council shall adopt findings and take action
on the application.
   (g)   Decision by the City Council Final
   The decision of the city council is final.
(Ord. 5432 § 16 (part), 2018: Ord. 4826 § 118 (Exh. 3 (part)), 2004)
18.77.120   Reserved
   Editor's Note: Former Section
18.77.120, Home improvement exception process, derived from Ord. 4826 § 118
(Exh. 3), was repealed by § 41 of Ord. 4869.
Chapter 18.78
APPEALS
Sections:
   
18.78.010   Purpose and scope.
   
18.78.020   Filing.
   
18.78.030   Planning and transportation commission review and recommendation.
   
18.78.040   Action by the city council.
18.78.010   Purpose and scope.
   The purpose of this chapter is to establish a single procedure for the
filing, review, and action on appeals of the following determinations of the
director:
   (a)   Appeals of decisions on tree removal permits, as set forth in
Chapter 8.10, parking adjustments, as set forth in Sections 18.54.120 and
18.54.130, and determinations of incomplete applications, as set forth in
Section
18.77.030; and
   (b)   Other permits and approvals for which such appeals process is
authorized by the provisions of this title (Zoning), or other titles of this
municipal code.
   Where the provisions of this title permit an appeal from a determination of
the director, it shall be processed as provided in this chapter, unless
otherwise provided.
(Ord. 4826 § 119 (Exh. 4 (part)), 2004)
18.78.020   Filing.
   An appeal shall be filed with the planning division in written form in a
manner prescribed by the director.
(Ord. 4826 § 119 (Exh. 4 (part)), 2004)
18.78.030   Planning and transportation commission review and recommendation.
   Within thirty days of the filing of a timely appeal from a director's
determination, the planning and transportation commission shall review the
appeal at a public meeting and issue a recommendation to the city council to
uphold, overturn, or modify the action or determination of the director.
(Ord. 4826 § 119 (Exh. 4 (part)), 2004)
18.78.040   Action by the city council.
   (a)   Action by the City Council. The recommendation of the planning and
transportation commission on the application shall be placed on the consent
calendar of the city council within thirty days. The city council may:
      (1)   Adopt the recommendation of the planning and transportation
commission; or
      (2)   Remove the appeal from the consent calendar, which shall require
three votes, and take action to uphold, overturn, or modify the action or
determination of the director.
   (b)   Decision by the City Council Final. The decision of the city council
is final.
(Ord. 4826 § 119 (Exh. 4 (part)), 2004)
Chapter 18.79
DEVELOPMENT PROJECT PRELIMINARY REVIEW PROCEDURES
Sections:
   
18.79.010   Purposes.
   
18.79.020   Supplemental procedures.
   
18.79.030   Applicability and initiation.
   
18.79.040   Reserved.
   
18.79.050   Preliminary review public study session procedure.
   
18.79.060   Voluntary compliance.
18.79.010   Purposes.
This chapter establishes procedures for preliminary screening of development
projects ("prescreening"). This chapter is intended to achieve, and shall be
implemented to accomplish, the following purposes:
   (a)   To maximize opportunities for meaningful public discussion of
development projects, at the earliest feasible time, for the guidance of the
public, project proponents and city decision makers. Prescreening is intended
to focus on purpose, scope, conceptual design and other similar matters and is
not intended to involve review of complete drawings and documentation.
   (b)   To focus public and environmental review of development projects on
the issues of greatest significance to the community, including, but not
limited to, planning concerns, neighborhood compatibility, Comprehensive Plan
consistency, economics, social costs and benefits, fiscal costs and benefits,
technological factors, and legal issues. These procedures are not intended to
permit or foreclose debate on the merits of approval or disapproval of any
given development project.
   (c)   To provide members of the public with the opportunity to obtain early
information about development projects in which they may have an interest.
   (d)   To provide project proponents with the opportunity to obtain early,
non-binding preliminary comments on development projects to encourage sound and
efficient private decisions about how to proceed.
   (e)   To encourage early communication between elected and appointed public
officials and staff with respect to the implementation of city policies,
standards, and regulations on particular development projects.
   (f)   To facilitate orderly and consistent implementation of the City's
Comprehensive Plan and development regulations.
(Ord. 5359 § 1 (part), 2015)
18.79.020   Supplemental procedures.
   These procedures are supplemental to any other authority under state or
local law which permits preliminary screening of development projects,
including, but not limited to, the California Environmental Quality Act, Public
Resources Code Section 21000, et seq., and the State Planning and Zoning Law,
Government Code Section 65000, et seq.
(Ord. 5359 § 1 (part), 2015)
18.79.030   Applicability and initiation.
   (a)   Preliminary screening is required for development projects that
include any of the following applications:
      (1)   Planned Community (PC);
      (2)   Development Agreement;
      (3)   Comprehensive Plan Amendment and Specific Plans, including Specific
Plan Amendments;
      (4)   District Map Amendment;
      (5)   Zoning Text Amendment, except as provided for in section (c) below.
   (b)   Preliminary screening is initiated by filing an application and
payment of applicable fees. Preliminary screening applications shall be
scheduled for a study session before the City Council. Notice of the study
session and the opportunity for public participation shall be provided in the
same manner as may be required by law for action on the underlying development
project application. The City Council shall conduct the study session.
   (c)   Preliminary screening is not required for zoning text amendments under
the following circumstances:
      (1)   The project does not include a request for an application in
section (a)(1) through (a)(4) above; and
      (2)   The Director of Planning and Development Services determines the
requested amendment would not have significant policy implications. Such zoning
amendments include, but are not limited to, projects requiring a hotel or
automobile combining district.
   (d)   Preliminary screening may be initiated for any application not
included in section (a)(1) through (a)(4) above that results in a major
alteration or expansion of an existing use, which implicates major land use or
other policy or planning concerns, subject to the following requirements:
      (1)   Development project preliminary review may be initiated by motion
of the City Council, with the concurrence of the project proponent, or upon
request of the city manager and project proponent with the concurrence of the
City Council, at any time after the City has received a development project
application and before the development project is noticed for public hearing on
the merits of the application, if any is required.
      (2)   Development project preliminary review may also be initiated prior
to the filing of an application, upon the request of the project proponent with
the concurrence of the City Council. The project proponent shall pay a
preliminary review fee as set forth in the municipal fee schedule. If the
project proponent wishes to proceed with the project after preliminary review,
he or she must then file an application and pay a regular application fee.
      (3)   The City Council will conduct the pre-screening as a noticed public
study session.
      (4)   Notice of the study session and the opportunity for public
participation shall be provided in the same manner as may be required by law
for action on the underlying development project application.
   (e)   The City may from time to time establish application forms, submittal
requirements, fees, and such other requirements, guidelines and informal
regulations as will aid in the efficient implementation of this section.
   (f)   No formal action may be taken during preliminary review.
   (g)   Development project preliminary review under this
Chapter 18.79 shall not preclude a project proponent from applying for
preliminary review before the Architectural Review Board as provided in section
18.76.020(c). Project proponents shall pay the applicable fee for each type of
review sought.
(Ord. 5494 § 3, 2020: Ord. 5359 § 1 (part), 2015)
18.79.040   Reserved.
18.79.050   Preliminary review public study session procedure.
   (a)   Preliminary review study sessions may be conducted in any manner
deemed appropriate by the City Council.
   (b)   City staff will prepare a summary outline of the proposed project
which highlights any information relevant to the purposes identified in Section
18.79.010, including but not limited to any initial study prepared for the
project. In addition, the project proponent or any interested person may
provide oral or written comments consistent with the purposes of these
procedures during a preliminary review study session. Subsequent city staff
reports on development projects which have been subject to preliminary review
should summarize any comments made during the process.
   (c)   Preliminary review study sessions shall not be for the purpose of
taking evidence with respect to a development project. Neither the City
Council, nor any City board, commission, committee, or staff person may rely
upon information obtained or comments made during the preliminary review
process for any final decision, unless such information or comments are
reintroduced during a subsequent noticed public hearing on the merits of the
development project.
(Ord. 5359 § 1 (part), 2015)
18.79.060   Voluntary compliance.
   (a)   Compliance with any development project revisions, alterations, or
conditions suggested during the preliminary review process shall be voluntary.
Failure to comply with any such revisions, alterations, or conditions shall not
affect consideration of the project by the City.
   (b)   Nothing in these procedures is intended, nor shall any provision be
construed, to constitute, permit or result in any binding determination of the
rights, interests, or entitlements of the City, project proponent, or any
interested person with respect to a development project upon which preliminary
review is conducted.
   (c)   Development project preliminary review shall be without prejudice to
the ability of the City, project proponent, or any interested person to proceed
with a development project in any manner, notwithstanding any suggested
revisions, alterations, or conditions.
   (d)   When preliminary review has been initiated, a project proponent shall
have the right to withdraw a development project application at any time before
commencement of a public hearing on the first discretionary permit, license, or
entitlement for the project. Such withdrawal shall be without prejudice to the
project proponents ability to reapply for the same or a substantially similar
development project at a future date, subject to the regulations, standards,
and policies in effect upon reapplication. Upon such withdrawal, the City shall
refund any application processing deposits to the project proponent which have
not yet been expended.
(Ord. 5359 § 1 (part), 2015)
Chapter 18.80
AMENDMENTS TO ZONING MAP AND ZONING REGULATIONS
Sections:
   
18.80.010   Amendments
   
18.80.020   Changes in District Boundaries
   
18.80.030   Application by Property Owner
   
18.80.035   Application for Single-Story Overlay Districts
   
18.80.040   Initiation by City
   
18.80.050   Action by Director
   
18.80.060   Notice of Public Hearing
   
18.80.070   Action by Commission
   
18.80.080   Changes in Regulations
   
18.80.090   Recommendations by Planning Commission
   
18.80.100   Action by City Council
   
18.80.110   Resubmittal of Application
   
18.80.120   Prezoning
18.80.010   Amendments
   This title may be amended by changing the boundaries of districts, or by
changing the regulations applicable within one or more districts, or by
changing any other provision of this title, whenever the public interest or
general welfare may so require.
(Ord. 3048 (part), 1978)
18.80.020   Changes in District Boundaries
   Changes in the boundaries of districts established by this title may be
initiated by any one of the following actions:
   (a)   By application of a property owner as provided by Section
18.80.030.
   (b)   By motion of the city council, or by motion of the planning
commission, as provided by Section
18.80.040.
   (c)   For creating or removing a single-story combining district (S), by
application of an affected property owner as provided by Section
18.80.035, or by motion of the city council or planning commission, as provided
by Section
18.80.040.
(Ord. 4869 § 47, 2005: Ord. 3048 (part), 1978)
18.80.030   Application by Property Owner
   (a)   Application for a change in district boundaries may be made by the
owner of record of property for which a change is sought, or by one of the
following:
      (1)   A purchaser of property for which a change is sought, when acting
pursuant to a contract in writing duly executed and acknowledged by both the
buyer and the owner of record;
      (2)   A lessee in possession of property for which a change is sought,
when acting with the written consent of the owner of record;
      (3)   An agent of the owner of record of property for which a change is
sought, when duly authorized by the owner in writing.
   (b)   Application shall be made to the director on a form prescribed by the
director, and shall contain the following:
      (1)   A description and map showing the boundaries of existing and
requested districts, and identifying the property for which a change of
district is requested;
      (2)   A written statement setting forth the reasons for the application
and all facts relied upon by the applicant in support thereof;
      (3)   Such additional information as the director may deem pertinent and
essential to the application.
   (c)   Application for a change in district boundaries shall be accompanied
by the fee prescribed by the municipal fee schedule, no part of which shall be
returnable to the applicant.
(Ord. 3048 (part), 1978)
18.80.035   Application for Single-Story Overlay Districts
   An application for creation or removal of a single-story combining district
may be made by an owner of record of property located in the single-story
overlay district to be created or removed, in accordance with the requirements
of
18.12.100 (Regulations for the Single Story Overlay (S) Combining District).
Such applications shall be considered in accordance with the provisions of this
Chapter 18.80.
(Ord. 4869 § 48, 2005)
18.80.040   Initiation by City
   (a)   Upon its own initiative, either the city council or the planning
commission may by motion initiate application and proceedings for a change in
district boundaries.
   (b)   A motion of the city council or the planning commission pursuant to
this section may include any public or private property, and shall be
accompanied by such maps or descriptions as may be necessary to define existing
and proposed boundaries of districts, and by a statement, describing in general
terms, the reasons for consideration of a change in district boundaries. The
motion shall be directed to the director, who shall process the application,
without fee, as otherwise prescribed in this chapter.
(Ord. 3048 (part), 1978)
18.80.050   Action by Director
   (a)   Upon receipt of an application for change in boundaries, or upon
receipt of the motion of the city council or the planning commission, or upon
the expiration of a development schedule in a PC zone, the director shall
notify the chairman of the planning commission.
   (b)   Upon receipt of such notice, the chairman of the commission shall, on
or before the fifteenth day of the month following the month in which the
application or motion was filed, set a date for a public hearing upon the
matter at either a regular or special meeting of the commission, unless the
application is a minor change to a planned community district development plan
diverted to minor architectural review under Section
18.76.020(b)(3)(D). Nothing contained in this section modifies any provision of
or authority granted by Section
18.76.020(b)(3)(D). The hearing before the commission shall commence within
ninety days of the date of filing.
(Ord. 4826 § 136, 2004: Ord. 3345 § 22, 1982; Ord. 3048 (part), 1978)
18.80.060   Notice of Public Hearing
   (a)   The planning commission shall give a notice of hearing on a proposed
change of district boundaries in the following manner:
      (1)   Notice of the hearing shall be given by publication once in a local
newspaper of general circulation not less than ten days prior to the date of
the hearing.
      (2)   Additionally, excepting a city-wide change in the zoning map, the
city shall mail written notice of such hearing at least ten days prior to the
date of the hearing to each owner of real property and to each residential
occupant within 600 feet of the exterior boundary of the property for which
classification is sought. Notice shall be provided as specified in Section
18.77.080. Compliance with the procedures set forth in this section shall
constitute a good faith effort to provide notice, and the failure of any owner
or occupant to receive notice shall not prevent the city from proceeding with
the hearing or from taking any action nor affect the validity of any action.
   (b)   The notice of public hearing shall contain the following:
      (1)   The exact address of the property, if known, or the location of the
property, if the exact address is not known, and the existing and requested
district or districts applicable;
      (2)   The time, place and purpose of the hearing;
      (3)   A brief description, the content of which shall be in the sole
discretion of the city, of the change in district boundaries or regulations
sought;
      (4)   Reference to the application or motion on file for particulars; and
      (5)   A statement that any interested person, or agent thereof may appear
and be heard.
   Typographical and/or publishing errors shall not invalidate the notice nor
any city action.
(Ord. 5432 § 17, 2018: Ord. 4964 § 22, 2007: Ord. 3536 § 40, 1984: Ord. 3465 §
60, 1983: Ord. 3273 § 4,1981: Ord. 3048 (part), 1978)
18.80.070   Action by Commission
   (a)   On the basis of evidence and testimony presented to the commission at
the public hearing, the commission may determine that the public interest will
be served either by revising the area being considered for reclassification to
include properties not originally part of the application, or by giving
consideration to district classifications not originally requested by the
application. The commission may, solely at its option, consider additional
properties or district classifications, or both.
   (b)   If the area proposed for reclassification is enlarged, or the district
proposed for any parcel is changed to a district of a less restrictive nature
than originally cited in the notice of public hearing, additional notice shall
be given in accord with Section
18.80.060, and the hearing shall be continued, allowing public consideration of
and comment upon the enlarged or less restrictive proposal.
   (c)   If the modifications, if any, considered by the commission involve the
same or a reduced area, or involve alternative districts of a generally
equivalent or more restrictive nature than originally cited in the notice of
public hearing, no additional notice or hearings shall be required.
   (d)   If, from the facts presented at the public hearing, including public
testimony and reports and recommendations from the director of planning and
development services or other appropriate city staff, the commission finds that
a change of district boundaries would be in accord with the purposes of this
title and in accord with the Palo Alto Comprehensive Plan, the commission may
recommend such change as it deems appropriate to the council.
   (e)   If the commission finds that a change of district boundaries, either
as requested by an application or as modified by the commission pursuant to
this section, would not be in accord with the purposes of this title, or would
not be in accord with the Palo Alto Comprehensive Plan, the commission shall
recommend against any such reclassification.
   (f)   The decision of the commission shall be rendered within a reasonable
time following the close of any public hearing or hearings and the written
recommendation of the commission shall be forwarded to the council within
thirty days thereof. The recommendation of the commission shall set forth fully
the findings and determinations of the commission with respect to the
application.
(Ord. 5494 § 3, 2020: Ord. 3048 (part), 1978)
18.80.080   Changes in Regulations
   Changes in the provision of this title other than the boundaries of
districts may be initiated from time to time, by one of the following actions:
   (a)   Changes in the provision of this title other than the boundaries of
districts may be initiated from time to time, by one of the following actions:
      (1)   By motion of the city council on its own initiative;
      (2)   By motion of the planning commission on its own initiative; or
      (3)   By application of the owner of property that would be subject to
the proposed text amendment.
   (b)   Changes initiated by motion of the council shall be forwarded to the
commission, and may be supplemented by such explanatory material as the council
may deem appropriate to facilitate review and recommendation by the commission.
A request by a property owner shall be supplemented by an application,
statement and explanatory material as required by the director under Section
18.80.030. Changes initiated by application of a property owner shall require
consideration by the planning and transportation commission first as an
initiation request to determine whether to proceed with the rezoning request
and public hearing. If the commission so directs, the text revisions shall be
reviewed pursuant to the provisions of Section
18.80.090.
(Ord. 4964 § 23, 2007: Ord. 3048 (part), 1978)
18.80.090   Recommendations by Planning Commission
   The commission shall review any proposed change in the provisions of this
title, whether initiated by the council or the commission. The planning
commission shall hold a public hearing on any changes proposed to the zoning
regulations. Notice of the time and place of such hearing and the purpose
thereof shall be given by publication once in a local newspaper of general
circulation not less than twelve days prior to the date of hearing.
   In the case of proposed changes initiated by the council, the commission
shall forward its recommendations to the council within a reasonable time
period, but not to exceed one hundred eighty days in any event unless extended
by the council.
   In the case of proposed changes initiated by the commission, the commission
shall forward its recommendations to the council at such time as it deems
appropriate.
   The written recommendation of the planning commission shall be submitted to
the council, and shall set forth the findings and determinations of the
commission with respect to the proposed change.
   Nothing in this section shall prevent the city council from changing or
suspending operation of any provision of this title for temporary periods when
in the determination of the council such suspension or change is necessary for
the public health, safety or welfare. In such case, planning commission review
shall not be required.
(Ord. 4181 § 5, 1993: Ord. 3465 § 61, 1983: Ord. 3273 § 5, 1981: Ord. 3130 §
21,1979: Ord. 3048 (part), 1978)
18.80.100   Action by City Council
   Upon receipt of the recommendation of the planning commission on a change of
district boundaries, or on a change to the provisions of this title other than
a change in district boundaries, the council may, at its option, give notice of
a hearing in the manner provided by Sections
18.80.060 or
18.80.090, whichever is applicable.
   After consideration of the recommendation of the planning commission, and
the completion of a public hearing, if any, the council may approve, modify, or
disapprove the proposed change of-district boundaries or change of any other
provisions of this title. Should the council determine that a change of
district boundaries or change of any other provisions of this title shall be
appropriate, such change shall be accomplished by ordinance.
(Ord. 4826 § 137, 2004: Ord. 3273 § 6, 1981: Ord. 3048 (part), 1978)
18.80.110   Resubmittal of Application
   When an application for change of district boundaries has been submitted by
a property owner and subsequently denied by the council, no new application by
a property owner for the same change, or for substantially the same change,
either with respect to properties included within the proposed change or with
respect to proposed district classifications, or both, shall be filed or
accepted by the director within one year of the date of closing of the hearing
before the commission, except upon a showing to the satisfaction of the
director of a substantial change of circumstances. This provision shall not be
construed to prevent the initiation of proceedings by either the planning
commission or city council in accord with Section
18.80.040 at any time.
(Ord. 3048 (part), 1978)
18.80.120   Prezoning
   The determination of district classifications and district boundaries
appropriate for property located outside the city, but potentially subject to
annexation, may be made in the same manner as prescribed in this chapter for
any property within the city; provided, that any ordinance duly passed by the
city council establishing or changing such classification shall become
effective only upon the effective date of annexation of such property to the
city.
   Upon passage of such an ordinance, the zoning map shall be revised to show
the prezoned or potential classification to become effective upon annexation,
and shall identify the district or districts applicable to such property with
the label or nomenclature "PREZONED."
(Ord. 3048 (part), 1978)
Title 19 MASTER PLAN*
Chapters:
   
19.04   Planning Commission
   
19.06   Specific Plans
   
19.10   Coordinated Area Plans
   *   For state law authorizing the establishment of a planning commission -
See Gov. Code § 65100 et seq.; see also, generally, Gov. Code Title 7, Division
1, Chapter 3, Local Planning.
Chapter 19.04
PLANNING COMMISSION*
Sections:
   
19.04.010   Duties of planning commission.
   
19.04.020   Statute adopted.
   
19.04.030   Review of general plan.
   
19.04.040   Capital improvement program reviewed.
   
19.04.050   Physical development of city - Conformity with master plan.
   
19.04.060   Industrial or manufacturing zoning or rezoning.
   
19.04.070   Additional duties.
   
19.04.080   Provisions of statute.
   *   Editor's Note: Chapter 19.04, Planning Commission, was adopted by
Initiative Ordinance No. 2090, effective July 23, 1962. In regard to initiative
ordinances, Article VI, Section 2, of the Palo Alto Charter, states that: "Any
ordinance adopted by the electors under the provisions of this section cannot
be repealed or amended, except by a vote of the people obtained in the manner
hereinabove stated, unless such ordinance shall otherwise provide."
   *   For provisions relating to members of the planning commission, see 
Chapter 2.20.
19.04.010   Duties of planning commission.
   The planning commission shall have the primary duty to prepare, adopt and
recommend to the city council for their adoption, a long-range, comprehensive
general plan to guide the future development of Palo Alto and of any land
outside its boundaries which in the commission's judgment bears relation to its
planning. Such plan may contain basic recommendations as to the distribution of
land use areas within the city, each logically and properly related to each
other, standards for population distribution and density, and standards and
recommendations for circulation routes as between the various land use areas
and through and around the city. In addition to the above, the general plan may
contain other elements including a recreation plan, a transportation plan, a
community design plan, a housing plan and such additional plans which in the
commission's judgment relate to the physical development of the city. The
comprehensive general plan may comprise any, all, or any combination of these
plans.
(Initiative Ord. 2090 (part), 1962)
19.04.020   Statute adopted.*
   The provisions of Articles 7 and 8, Chapter 3 of Title 7 of the Government
Code of the State of California, as enacted in 1953, as amended through 1959,
and entitled Local Planning, are hereby expressly adopted as part of this code.
(Initiative Ord. 2090 (part), 1962)
*   See Section
19.04.080.
19.04.030   Review of general plan.
   The planning commission shall annually review the general plan and recommend
to the city council such extensions, changes or additions to the plan as the
commission may consider necessary in the view of any change in conditions.
(Initiative Ord. 2090 (part), July 23,1962)
19.04.040   Capital improvement program reviewed.
   The general plan shall be the guide for the capital improvement program
insofar as the capital improvement program affects the physical development of
the city. The planning commission shall submit an annual report to the council
regarding the capital improvement program, which shall review each project for
its conformity to the master plan; review the program as a whole in order to
suggest any improvement in economy or efficiency which might be effected
through the combining of various projects; and suggest any needed improvements
which do not appear in the program.
(Initiative Ord. 2090 (part), 1962)
19.04.050   Physical development of city - Conformity with master plan.
   All matters affecting the physical development of the city shall be
submitted to the planning commission for a report to the city council as to
conformity to the master plan. Such report shall be made to the council within
thirty days after presentation of the matter to the planning commission,
provided the time may be extended by the council. If the report is not
submitted to the council within said thirty day period or any extension
thereof, the matter shall be deemed approved by the planning commission.
(Initiative Ord. 2090 (part), 1962)
19.04.060   Industrial or manufacturing zoning or rezoning.
   Until such time as a comprehensive general plan is presented to the city
council and approved by the council pursuant to the procedures of Article 8,
Chapter 3, Title 7 of the Government Code, no industrial or manufacturing
zoning or rezoning for industrial or manufacturing uses not embraced within the
1955 Interim General Plan shall be enacted or permitted.
(Initiative Ord. 2090 (part), July 23,1962)
19.04.070   Additional duties.
   The commission shall have such other duties as may be prescribed by the
ordinances of the city or resolutions and motions of the council.
(Initiative Ord. 2090 (part), 1962)
19.04.080   Provisions of statute.
   (ARTICLES 7 and 8, CHAPTER 3 OF TITLE 7 OF THE GOVERNMENT CODE OF THE STATE
OF CALIFORNIA, AS AMENDED THROUGH 1959).
   ARTICLE 7. AUTHORITY FOR AND SCOPE OF MASTER OR GENERAL PLANS.
   (Heading amended by Stats. 1955, Ch. 1644)
   65460. Each commission or planning department shall prepare and the
commission shall adopt a comprehensive, long term general plan for the physical
development of the city, county, area, or region, and of any land outside its
boundaries which in the commission's judgment bears relation to its planning.
The plan may be referred to as the master or general plan and shall be
officially certified as the master or general plan upon its adoption by the
planning commission and the legislative body.
   65461. The master or general plan shall be so prepared that all or portions
of it may be adopted by the legislative body as a basis for the development of
the city, county, area, or region.
   (Amended by Stats. 1955, Ch. 1644)
   65462. The master or general plan shall consist of a map and a statement
describing it and a statement covering objectives, principles, and standards
used to develop it; and shall include all of the following elements:
   (a)   A land use element which designates the proposed general distribution
and general location and extent of the uses of the land for housing, business,
industry, recreation, education, public buildings and grounds, and other
categories of public and private uses of land.
   (b)   A circulation element consisting of the general location and extent of
existing and proposed major thoroughfares, transportation routes, terminals,
and other local public utility and facilities, all correlated with the land use
element of the plan.
   (c)   A statement of the standards of population density and building
intensity recommended for the various districts and other territorial units,
and estimates of future population growth, in the territory covered by the
plan, all correlated with the land use element of the plan.
   (d)   Supporting maps, diagrams, charts, descriptive material and reports.
   (Amended by Stats. 1955, Ch. 1644)
   65463. A master or general plan may include a conservation element of the
plan for the conservation, development, and utilization of natural resources,
including water and its hydraulic force, forests, soils, rivers and other
waters, harbors, fisheries, wild life, minerals, and other natural resources.
The conservation element of the plan may also cover:
   (a)   The reclamation of land and waters.
   (b)   Flood control.
   (c)   Prevention and control of the pollution of streams and other waters.
   (d)   Regulation of the use of land in stream channels and other areas
required for the accomplishment of the conservation plan.
   (e)   Prevention, control, and correction of the erosion of soils, beaches,
and shores.
   (f)   Protection of watersheds.
   (Amended by Stats. 1955, Ch. 1644)
   65464. (Repealed by Stats. 1955, Ch. 1644)
   65465. A master or general plan may include a recreation element of the
plan, showing a comprehensive system of areas and public sites for recreation,
including the following and, when practicable, their locations and proposed
development:
   (a)   Natural reservations.
   (b)   Parks.
   (c)   Parkways.
   (d)   Beaches.
   (e)   Playgrounds.
   (f)   Other recreation areas.
   (Amended by Stats. 1955, Ch. 1644)
   65466. The circulation element of the master or general plan as set forth in
subdivision (b) of Section 65462 may also include studies and recommendations
concerning parking facilities and building setback lines and the delineations
of such systems on the land; a system of street naming, house and building
numbering; and such other matters as may be related to the improvement of
circulation of traffic.
   (Amended by Stats. 1955, Ch. 1644)
   65467. A master or general plan may include a transportation element of the
plan, showing a comprehensive transportation system, including locations of
rights of way, terminals, viaducts, and grade separations. This element of the
plan may also include port, harbor, aviation, and related facilities.
   (Amended by Stats. 1955, Ch. 1644)
   65468. A master or general plan may include a transit element of the plan,
showing a proposed system of transit fines, including rapid transit, streetcar,
motor coach and trolley coach lines, and related facilities.
   (Amended by Stats. 1955, Ch. 1644)
   65469. A master or general plan may include a public services and facilities
element of the plan, showing general plans for sewerage, refuse disposals,
drainage, and local utilities, and rights of way, easements, and facilities for
them.
   (Amended by Stats. 1955, Ch. 1644)
   65470. A master or general plan may include a public buildings element of
the plan, showing locations and arrangements of civic and community centers,
public schools, libraries, police and fire stations, and all other public
buildings, including their architecture and the landscape treatment of their
grounds.
   (Amended by Stats. 1955, Ch. 1644)
   65471. A master or general plan may include a community design element of
the plan, consisting of standards and principles governing the subdivision of
land within the scope of the Subdivision Map Act, Chapter 2 of Part 2 of
Division 4 of the Business and Professions Code, and showing recommended
designs for community and neighborhood development and redevelopment, including
sites for schools, parks, playgrounds and other uses.
   (Amended by Stats. 1955, Ch. 1644)
   65472. A master or general plan may include a housing element of the plan,
consisting of a survey and reports upon housing conditions and needs, standards
and plans for the elimination of substandard dwelling conditions, the
improvement of housing and for provision of adequate sites for housing.
   (Amended by Stats. 1955, Ch. 1644)
   65473. A master or general plan may include a redevelopment element of the
plan comprising surveys, plans, procedure, and reports for the elimination of
slums and blighted areas and for community redevelopment, including housing
sites, business and industrial sites, public building sites, and for other
purposes authorized by law.
   (Amended by Stats. 1955. Ch. 1644)
   65474. As a part of the master or general plan the commission may prepare,
receive and adopt additional elements and studies dealing with other subjects
which in its judgment relate to the physical development of the city, county,
area, or region.
   (Amended by Stats. 1955. Ch. 1644)
   65475. During the formulation of a master or general plan, the planning
commissions shall inform and, to such an extent as may be necessary, confer and
cooperate with such school boards, departments, or agencies as may have
jurisdiction over the territory or facilities for which plans are being made,
to the end that maximum coordination of plans may be secured and properly
located sites for all public purposes may be indicated on the master or general
plan.
   (Amended by Stats. 1955, Ch. 1644)
   65476. Whenever a city planning commission has adopted a master or general
plan or any major section or unit covering any land outside the boundaries of
the city, which in the judgment of the commission bears relation to its
planning, such plan, section or unit shall be certified to the planning
commission of every county or city, the land of which is included in said plan.
   (Amended by Stats. 1955, Ch. 1644)
   65477. Whenever a county planning commission has adopted a master or general
plan or any major section or unit covering any land adjoining or within a city
such plan, section or unit shall be certified to the planning commission of
such city or cities.
   (Amended by Stats. 1955, Ch. 1644)
   ARTICLE 8. PROCEDURE FOR ADOPTION OF MASTER OR GENERAL PLAN.
   (Heading amended by Stats. 1955, Ch. 1644)
   65500. The planning commission or the planning department may prepare and
the commission may adopt all or any part of the master or general plan or any
subject of it for all or any part of the city, county, area, or region. Master
or general regional plans shall be coordinated with similar plans of adjoining
regions, and area, county, and city master or general plans shall be
coordinated so as to fit properly into the master or general plan for the
region.
   (Amended by Stats. 1955, Ch. 1644)
   65501. Before adopting all or part of the master or general plan the
commission shall hold at least two public hearings. Before adopting any
amendment to the master or general plan the commission shall hold at least one
public hearing.
   (Amended by Stats. 1955, Ch. 1644)
   65502. Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given by
publication pursuant to Section 6061 in the city, county or in each city or
county in an area, at least 10 days before the hearing.
   (Amended by Stats. 1957, Ch. 357)
   65503. The adoption of the master or general plan, or of any amendment,
extension, or addition to it, shall be by resolution of the commission carried
by the affirmative votes of not less than a majority of its total voting
members.
   (Amended by Stats. 1959, Ch. 745)
   65504. The resolution shall refer expressly to the maps and descriptive and
other matter intended by the commission to constitute the plan or amendment,
addition, or extension of it. The action shall be recorded on the map and plan
and descriptive matter by the identifying signatures of the chairman of the
commission, and of such other officials as the commission may designate.
   (Amended by Stats. 1955, Ch. 1644)
   65505. When changed conditions or further studies by the commission require,
the commission may amend, extend, or add to all or part of the master or
general plan in the manner provided in this article for its adoption.
   (Amended by Stats. 1955, Ch. 1644)
   65506. A copy of any part, amendment, extension of, or addition to the
master or general plan adopted by a county or city planning commission shall be
certified to the legislative body of the city or county.
   (Amended by Stats. 1955, On. 1644)
   65507. A copy of any part, amendment, extension of, or addition to, the
master or general plan adopted by an area or regional planning commission shall
be certified to each county and city planning commission and to the legislative
bodies of each county and city within the area or region.
   (Amended by Stats. 1955, Ch. 1644)
   65508. The adoption of the master or general plan, or any amendment,
extension or addition to it, as certified by a regional, an area, a county or
city planning commission shall be by resolution of the legislative body or
bodies affected.
   (Amended by Stats. 1955, Ch. 1644)
   65509. Before adopting all or any part of, or amendment or addition to, a
master or general plan, the county or city legislative body shall hold at least
one public hearing. Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be
published pursuant to Section 6061 in the city or county at least 10 days
before the hearing.
   (Amended by Stats. 1957, Ch. 357)
   65510. In adopting all or any part of, or amendment or addition to, a master
or general plan adopted by the planning commission, the legislative body shall
not make any change or addition until the proposed change or addition has been
referred to the planning commission for a report and a copy of the report has
been filed with the legislative body. Failure of the planning commission to
report within forty days after the reference or such longer period as may be
designated by the legislative body, shall be deemed to be approval of the
proposed change or addition.
   (Amended by Stats. 1955, Ch. 1644)
   65511. When it deems it to be for the public interest, the legislative body
may change or add to all or part of an adopted master or general plan.
   (Amended by Stats. 1955, Ch. 1644)
   65512. The legislative body shall first refer the proposed change or
addition to the planning commission for a report. Before making a report, the
planning commission shall hold at least one hearing on the proposed change or
addition. It shall give notice of any such hearing, pursuant to the procedure
prescribed by this article for the adoption of the master or general plan or
any part, amendment, or addition by the planning commission.
   (Amended by Stats. 1955, Ch. 1644)
   65513. Failure of the planning commission to report to the legislative body
on the proposed change or addition within ninety days after the reference or
such longer period as may be designated by the legislative body, shall be
deemed to be approval of the proposed change or addition by the planning
commission.
   (Amended by Stats. 1955, Ch. 1644)
   65514. After the receipt of such report, the legislative body shall hold at
least one public hearing on the proposed change or addition. Notice of the time
and place of the hearing shall be published pursuant to Section 6061 in the
city or county at least l0 days before the hearing.
   (Amended by Stats. 1957, Ch. 357)
   65515. The master or general plan or any part, amendment, or addition shall
be endorsed to show that it has been adopted by the legislative body.
   (Amended by Stats. 1955, Ch. 1644)
   65516. Any master or general plan of a county, or of any metropolitan or
urban area of a county shall be certified to all city planning commissions and
said plan or any portion thereof may be adopted as a part of the city master or
general plan.
   (Amended by Stats. 1955, Ch. 1644)
(Initiative Ord. 2090 (part), 1962)
Chapter 19.06
SPECIFIC PLANS
Sections:
   
19.06.010   Adoption of Government Code.
19.06.010   Adoption of Government Code.
   The provisions of Articles 8, 9, and 10, Division 1, Chapter 3 of Title 7
(Sections 65450 et seq.) and as they may hereafter be amended, of the
Government Code of the state of California, entitled "Authority For and Scope
of Specific Plans, Procedure for Adoption of Specific Plans and Regulations,
and Administration of Specific Plans and Regulations," are adopted as part of
this code.
(Ord. 3326 § l, 1982)
Chapter 19.10
COORDINATED AREA PLANS
Sections:
   
19.10.010   Purposes.
   
19.10.020   Initiation.
   
19.10.030   Procedures.
   
19.10.040   Contents of coordinated area plans.
   
19.10.050   Coordinated development permit required.
   
19.10.060   Development must be consistent with coordinated area plan.
19.10.010   Purposes.
   This chapter establishes procedures for preparation of coordinated area
plans. This chapter is intended to achieve, and shall be implemented to
accomplish, the following purposes:
   (a)   To create enhanced opportunities for building a sense of community
through public involvement in planning processes which are designed not only to
satisfy constitutional due process requirements, but also to provide residents,
and business and property owners with early, meaningful opportunities to help
shape the physical components of their neighborhoods and community.
   (b)   To emphasize and enhance architectural qualities, public improvements,
and site design by providing a graphic, visual linkage between policies and
programs established in the Comprehensive Plan and specific development
entitlements and public improvements.
   (c)   To facilitate physical change by each of the following methods:
   (1)   Accelerating and coordinating the planning process within selected
areas so that private development and re-use can proceed under streamlined city
review processes.
   (2)   Encouraging rational private investment by providing specific,
dependable information about the design requirements, development standards,
and uses allowed on a particular site.
   (3)   Analyzing and considering the economic environment so that the
planning process works in conjunction with the marketplace, rather than
independent of it.
   (4)   Coordinating and timing public infrastructure investment to facilitate
desirable private land uses.
   (d)   To assure Palo Alto's environmental quality by using the Comprehensive
Plan Environmental Impact Report to focus environmental review on area and
site-specific issues and changed circumstances.
   (e)   To facilitate orderly and consistent implementation of the city's
Comprehensive Plan and development regulations.
(Ord. 4454 § 2 (part), 1997)
19.10.020   Initiation.
   Coordinated area plans shall be initiated as set forth in this section.
   (a)   Initiation. Coordinated area plans shall be initiated by motion of the
city council, upon its own initiative or upon request of the planning
commission. Planning commission or council action may be based upon the request
of any person or the director of planning and development services. The council
will consider support or opposition from residents, and property and business
owners, but such support or opposition shall not compel or preclude council
action. The council will further consider whether the area has been identified
in the comprehensive plan for coordinated area planning.
   (b)   Minimum Area Size. Coordinated area plans may be prepared for any area
that includes more than one parcel.
   (c)   The city may from time to time establish application forms, submittal
requirements, fees, and such other requirements, administrative guidelines and
regulations as will aid in the efficient preparation and implementation of
coordinated area plans.
(Ord. 5494 § 3, 2020: Ord. 4454 § 2 (part), 1997)
19.10.030   Procedures.
   Coordinated area plans shall be prepared in accordance with the procedures
set forth in this section.
   (a)   Council Goals and Policies. Council will establish goals, objectives,
and a schedule for each coordinated area plan at the time the plan is initiated
or shortly thereafter. The goals and objectives will be supplemental to
existing Comprehensive Plan policies and programs. Council may establish goals,
objectives, and a schedule during preliminary review pursuant to Chapter 18.97.
   (b)   Community Involvement. Each coordinated area plan will be prepared
pursuant to a program for city-facilitated interaction between residents,
business and property owners, and other interested persons. The program shall
contain, at a minimum, the following elements:
   (1)   Working Group Formation. The city council shall appoint a seven-to-
fourteen-member working group comprising residents, business and property
owners, and persons representing broader community interests including, but not
limited to, environmental, community design, and business perspectives. The
working group shall be advisory to the staff, planning commission, and city
council. The working group shall be assisted by a city-designated facilitator
who may be a consultant.
   (2)   Working Group Tasks. The working group shall assist staff in preparing
a draft coordinated area plan that contains each of the components set forth in
Section
19.10.040. The working group shall, at a minimum, accomplish each of the
following tasks to facilitate preparation of the coordinated area plan:
   (A)   Initial Public Meeting. The working group shall conduct an initial
public meeting to accomplish the following:
   (1)   Establish the general parameters of the plan;
   (2)   Conduct environmental scoping;
   (3)   Identify any known public infra-structure needs and plans;
   (4)   Explain any known private development proposals;
   (5)   Introduce staff and consultants to the public;
   (6)   Identify additional important participants;
   (7)   Identify any other relevant constraints and opportunities.
   (B)   Regular Public Meetings. The working group shall conduct regular
meetings. The working group may also form subcommittees to meet from time to
time to address particular issues or components of the coordinated area plan.
All working group or subcommittee meetings shall be open to the public, with
notice provided to property owners and other persons who have expressed an
interest in the matter to the city. At least one regular meeting during the
first half of the scheduled working group tasks will be conducted as a joint
meeting with the city council. The city council may direct additional or
revised goals and objectives during or following such meeting(s).
   (C)   Community Update Forum. The working group will schedule and notice at
least one community update forum designed to keep the larger community informed
of progress on the plan, and to seek the ideas and advice of the larger
community regarding the content of the coordinated area plan.
   (c)   Schedule. Coordinated area plans, including review and action by the
planning commission and city council, will generally be completed within twelve
to fifteen months of the initial public meeting of the working group.
   (d)   Public Hearings. The coordinated area plan shall be considered at
public hearings before the planning commission and city council prior to
adoption. Notice of the public hearings, initial meeting and community update
forum(s) shall be given in the same manner required by law for amendments to
the Comprehensive Plan and Zoning Ordinance.
   (e)   Planning Commission and Other Board and Commission Advice and
Recommendation. The planning commission shall make a recommendation to the city
council upon each coordinated area plan. The director of planning and
development services may seek advice of any other city board or commission if
such advice is deemed desirable.
   (f)   Adoption. coordinated area plans shall be adopted by ordinance upon a
determination of the city council that the public interest, health, safety and
general welfare will be served by the plan, and that the plan is consistent
with the Comprehensive Plan. The city council shall also consider the manner in
which the proposed coordinated area plan will integrate with and be implemented
by the capital improvement program. The city council may approve, reject or
modify all or part of the coordinated area plan.
   (g)   Amendments. An ordinance adopting a coordinated area plan may
establish procedures for amendments of the plan, including but not limited to
procedures authorizing minor amendments by the director of planning and
development services.
   (h)   Fees. As part of the ordinance adopting a coordinated area plan, the
city council may impose a coordinated area plan fee upon persons seeking
governmental approvals which are required to be consistent with the coordinated
area plan. The fees shall be established so that, in the aggregate, they fully
recover but as estimated do not exceed, the cost of preparation, adoption, and
administration of the coordinated area plan, including costs incurred pursuant
to the California Environmental Quality Act. The fee charged will be reasonably
prorated to take into account the applicant's relative benefit derived from the
plan.
   It is the intent of the city council to charge persons who benefit from
coordinated area plans for the costs of developing those plans which result in
savings to them by reducing the cost of documenting environmental consequences
and advocating changed land uses which may be authorized.
   The city council may require a person who requests adoption, amendment, or
repeal of a coordinated area plan to deposit with the city an amount equal to
the estimated cost of preparing the plan, amendment, or repeal prior to its
preparation.
(Ord. 5494 § 3, 2020: Ord. 4454 § 2 (part), 1997)
19.10.040   Contents of coordinated area plans.
   Each coordinated area plan shall contain at least the following components.
   (a)   The distribution, location, and extent of land uses, including, but
not limited to, industrial, office, commercial, residential, public facilities
and open space, within the area covered by the plan. The land uses established
by the plan may be supplemental to or different from the uses permitted and
specified in the city's zoning districts. For retail commercial and
professional office designations, the coordinated area plan shall also include
the preferred and allowable uses, their respective orientation, articulation,
and floor area ratio. For housing designations, the coordinated area plan shall
also include density, floor area ratio, orientation, setbacks, and graphical
design prototypes.
   (b)   The proposed distribution, location, and extent and intensity of major
components of public and private transportation, sewage, water, drainage, solid
waste disposal, energy, and other public improvements proposed to be located
within the area covered by the plan and needed to support the land uses
described in the plan.
   (c)   A program of implementation measures including development
regulations, public works projects, and financing measures necessary to carry
out the plan. This program shall be specifically coordinated with the city's
capital improvement program ("CIP"), and may include CIP revisions necessary to
implement the plan.
   (d)   Standards and criteria by which development will proceed, if needed.
   (e)   Specific architectural and site design objectives and requirements,
including but not limited to the scale of streets, building orientation,
placement and design of public and private parks or plazas, courtyards,
arcades, porches, walls, fences, trellises, sidewalk treatments, and parking
configuration. Design guidelines that are specific to the conditions of the
area shall be included to address each land use type, streets, parks, and any
public facilities. Specific objectives and requirements may be adopted in
addition to, or in lieu of, existing zoning and design requirements. The
coordinated area plan shall include preliminary elevations and information
regarding facades, roofs and building materials.
   (f)   A determination of the economic and fiscal feasibility of the plan
with specific analysis of market place factors and incentives and disincentives
to the desired development product, as well as a cost-benefit analysis of
public infra-structure investments and projected economic benefits to the city
and community.
   (g)   Environmental review, provided that to the maximum extent feasible the
Comprehensive Plan Environmental Impact Report shall be used as a master or
tiered EIR in order to streamline and focus environmental review of the
coordinated area plan.
(Ord. 4454 § 2 (part), 1997)
19.10.050   Coordinated development permit required.
   A coordinated development permit shall be required before any building or
structure is erected, constructed, enlarged, altered on the exterior, placed or
installed on any site located within an area subject to an approved coordinated
area plan.
(Ord. 4454 § 2 (part), 1997)
19.10.060   Development must be consistent with coordinated area plan.
   No coordinated development permit shall be issued, nor shall any building or
structure be erected, constructed, enlarged, altered on the exterior, placed,
installed or moved within an area subject to an approved coordinated area plan
except upon a finding that the resulting building or structure is consistent
with the coordinated area plan.
(Ord. 4454 § 2 (part), 1997)
Title 20 PRECISE PLANS*
Chapters:
   
20.04   Official Plan Line Regulations
   
20.08   Setback Lines
   *   For provisions relating to encroachments - See
Chapter 12.12.
Chapter 20.04
OFFICIAL PLAN LINE REGULATIONS
Sections:
   
20.04.010   Definitions.
   
20.04.020   Declaration of purpose.
   
20.04.030   Construction or enlargement of improvements prohibited.
   
20.04.040   Conflicting permits or licenses void.
   
20.04.050   Hearing by planning commission.
   
20.04.060   Recommendation to council.
   
20.04.070   Hearing by city council.
   
20.04.080   Amendment or rescission of official plan line.
   
20.04.090   Incorporation of maps into chapter.
   
20.04.100   Map identification and certification.
   
20.04.110   Filing of maps.
   
20.04.120   Variances - Authority - Grounds.
   
20.04.130   Variances - Procedure.
   
20.04.140   Variances - Agreement for removal.
   
20.04.150   Adoption of official plan lines outside city limits.
20.04.010   Definitions.
   For the purpose of this chapter, unless it is plainly evident from the
context that a different meaning is intended certain terms used herein are
defined as follows:
   (a)   "Map" means an illustration, including a drawing, aerial photograph,
or photomap, accurately indicating the precise location of a planned right-of-
way or portion thereof.
   (b)   "Official plan line" means the boundaries and limits of a planned
right-of-way, including the future right-of-way of an existing street as it is
proposed to be widened and including all lands necessary for the building,
widening or maintenance of any road, street, highway, or any other type of
public way, which planned right-of-way is based on the general plan for the
city of Palo Alto.
   (c)   "Right-of-way" means all or any part of the entire width of a road,
street, or highway easement, whether or not such entire area is actually used
for road, street, or highway purposes.
(Ord. 2214 (part), 1964: prior code § 36.401)
20.04.020   Declaration of purpose.
   It is the purpose of the provisions of this chapter to protect and promote
the public health, safety, peace, comfort, or general welfare and specifically
to provide for the systematic execution of the circulation element of the
general plan for the city of Palo Alto, by designating the precise location of
planned rights-of-way and limiting the location of buildings and other
improvements with respect to planned rights-of-way, and to provide an authentic
source of information as to the development of the city of Palo Alto. This
chapter is adopted pursuant to Sections 65600 to 65659, inclusive of the
Government Code of California and shall be cited and referred to as the
official plan line regulations of the city of Palo Alto.
(Ord. 2214 (part), 1964: prior code § 36.402)
20.04.030   Construction or enlargement of improvements prohibited.
   No building, structure, or other improvement, shall hereafter be erected,
constructed, enlarged, or placed within the official plan lines established by
this chapter, or amendments thereto, except that this section shall not apply
to garden and agricultural crop planting or fences and agricultural irrigation
systems in connection therewith, street, curb, gutter and sidewalk
improvements, public utility poles, pipelines or a temporary building or
structure having a value of not more than one thousand dollars. Provided,
however, that prior to the construction of any temporary building or structure
the owner of the property on which it is to be located shall execute an
agreement with the city of Palo Alto in accordance with the provisions of
Section
20.04.140.
(Ord. 2214 (part), 1964: prior code § 36.403)
20.04.040   Conflicting permits or licenses void.
   All departments, officers and employees of the city of Palo Alto vested with
the duty or authority to issue permits, licenses or grant approval of the
subdivision of land, shall conform to the provisions of this chapter and shall
issue no such permit, license, or approval for uses, buildings, structures or
subdivisions where the same would be in conflict with the provisions of this
chapter. Any such permit, license or approval shall be null and void if issued
in conflict with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 2214 (part), 1964: prior code § 36.404)
20.04.050   Hearing by planning commission.
   Before any official plan line is adopted by the city council the planning
commission shall hold a public hearing. Notice of the time and place of such
hearing shall be given by publication of a notice thereof once in a newspaper
of general circulation in the city at least ten days before the hearing and by
mailing a notice thereof to the owners of all property abutting on or included
within the proposed official plan lines using addresses from the last adopted
tax roll of the city assessor.
(Ord. 2214 (part), 1964: prior code § 36.405)
20.04.060   Recommendation to council.
   After the public hearing the planning commission shall submit its
recommendation to the city council.
(Ord. 2214 (part), 1964: prior code § 36.406)
20.04.070   Hearing by city council.
   Upon receipt of the planning commission's recommendation the city council
shall set the matter for a public hearing and shall give notice of such hearing
in the same manner as that provided herein for hearings by the planning
commission. After the hearing the city council may either reject or adopt the
official plan line as submitted. The city council shall not make a change in
any proposed or existing official plan line until the proposed change has been
referred to the planning commission for a report and a copy of the report has
been filed with the city council. Failure of the planning commission to report
within forty days after transmittal shall be deemed to constitute approval of
the change.
(Ord. 2214 (part), 1964: prior code § 36.407)
20.04.080   Amendment or rescission of official plan line.
   Official plan line maps may be amended or rescinded in the same manner as
that provided for their original adoption.
(Ord. 2214 (part), 1964: prior code § 36.408)
20.04.090   Incorporation of maps into chapter.
   Official plan lines shall be clearly delineated on maps which, together with
all data and information indicated thereon, shall, upon adoption by the city
council, be made a part of this chapter and shall be incorporated herein under
sections of this chapter.
(Ord. 2214 (part), 1964: prior code § 36.409)
20.04.100   Map identification and certification.
   Each map adopted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be
designated:
   OFFICIAL PLAN LINES OF (here shall be inserted the name of the street or
highway) BETWEEN (here shall be inserted the names of the streets or other
appropriate places which identify the point of commencement and ending of the
particular official plan line).
   Each map shall have the following certificates which may either be placed
directly on the map or attached to it:
   I hereby certify that this map (or, the map attached hereto), consisting of
____ sheets, constitutes a precise plan based on the Circulation Element of the
General Plan of the City of Palo Alto, adopted by the City Council by
Resolution No. 3616 on March 18, 1963.
_____________________
   City Engineer
   I hereby certify that this map (or, the map attached hereto), consisting of
_____ sheets, constitutes Section __________ of the Palo Alto Municipal Code,
which section was adopted as Ordinance No. _______ by the City Council of the
City of Palo Alto on ____ 19___.
   City Clerk of the City of Palo Alto
(SEAL)
(Ord. 2214 (part), 1964: prior code § 36.410)
20.04.110   Filing of maps.
   The city clerk shall cause all maps adopted pursuant to this chapter and
amendments thereto together with all data and information indicated thereon, to
be filed with the office of the county recorder of the county of Santa Clara.
(Ord. 2214 (part), 1964: prior code § 36.411)
20.04.120   Variances - Authority - Grounds.
   The zoning administrator shall hear and decide applications for variances
from the terms of this chapter when all the following circumstances are found
to apply:
   (a)   There are special conditions or exceptional characteristics in the
nature of the property affected by the application, including size, shape,
topography, location or surroundings, such that a literal enforcement of this
chapter in the particular case would result in practical difficulties or
unnecessary hardships;
   (b)   The variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of
substantial property rights and will not constitute a grant of special
privilege inconsistent with the limitations imposed by this chapter on other
properties in the vicinity of the affected property; and
   (c)   The granting of the variance will not be contrary to the intent of
this chapter or to the purposes and objectives of the general plan of the city
of Palo Alto.
(Ord. 2214 (part), 1964: prior code § 36.412)
20.04.130   Variances - Procedure.
   The procedure to be followed in applying for, giving notice of and granting
such variances shall be that set forth in
Chapter 18.76 (Permits and Approvals) of the Zoning Code. The fee charged shall
be the same as that for zoning variance applications.
(Ord. 4826 § 139, 2004: Ord. 2214 (part), 1964: prior code § 36.413)
20.04.140   Variances - Agreement for removal.
   A variance shall be granted only upon the condition that the owner of the
property shall execute an agreement with the city of Palo Alto, wherein the
owner agrees to remove such building, structure, or other improvements, at his
own expense, upon the acquisition by the city of Palo Alto of an easement in
and across his property for street purposes. The agreement shall include such
other conditions as the zoning administrator deems reasonable to carry out any
of the provisions of this chapter, including, but not limited to, a time
limitation and the requirement that the property owner post a surety bond in
such amount as may be fixed by the city council guaranteeing faithful
performance of the terms and conditions of the agreement, including a covenant
to remove the building, structure, or other improvements at his own expense, or
in the event of his failure so to do, authorizing removal by the city and
making the cost thereof a lien on said property. Such agreement shall be
recorded.
(Ord. 2214 (part), 1964: prior code § 36.414)
20.04.150   Adoption of official plan lines outside city limits.
   (a)   Unincorporated Areas Outside City. The planning commission and the
city council may hold hearings in the manner prescribed herein to adopt
official plan lines for unincorporated areas outside of the city boundaries
which, in the planning commission's or city council's judgment, bears relation
to its planning.
   (b)   Notice of Hearing. Whenever hearings are to be held on official plan
lines covering land outside the city boundaries, a notice of said hearing will
be transmitted to the Santa Clara County planning commission and board of
supervisors of Santa Clara County along with copies of appropriate maps, for
comment from said planning commission or board of supervisors. If no comments
are received within forty days after transmittal, said proposals shall be
deemed to be acceptable with the county planning commission and or board of
supervisors.
   (c)   Effective Date of Official Plan Lines. Official plan lines adopted for
land outside the city boundaries do not become effective until such land is
duly annexed to the city.
   (d)   Official Plan Line Affecting Adjacent City. Whenever an official plan
line is being considered which affects an adjacent city, the city clerk shall
transmit a copy of the proposed map to the appropriate adjacent city planning
commission(s) for their comments. If no comments are received within forty days
after transmittal, said proposal shall be deemed acceptable with said adjacent
city planning commission.
(Ord. 2214 (part), 1964: prior code § 36.415)
Chapter 20.08
SETBACK LINES
Sections:
   
20.08.010   Setback line.
   
20.08.020   Setback map.
   
20.08.030   Buildings between street line and setback line prohibited.
20.08.010   Setback line.
   For the purposes of this chapter, a setback line means a line within a lot
parallel to a corresponding lot line, which is the boundary of any specified
front, side or rear yard, or the boundary of any public right-of-way whether
acquired in fee, easement, or otherwise, or a line otherwise established to
govern the location of buildings, structures or uses. Where no minimum front,
side or rear yards are specified, the setback line shall be coterminous with
the corresponding lot line.
(Ord. 3536 § 31, 1984: Ord. 1896 § l, 1959)
20.08.020   Setback map.*
   Setback lines are established parallel with the streets at a distance in
feet as shown upon the map entitled "Setback Map dated October 12, 1959" made a
part hereof, and according to the legend contained on such map.
   Setback lines on property not having such lines imposed by this chapter and
map shall be as established by Title 18, the Zoning Code.
(Ord. 1896 § 2, 1959)
*   The setback map, adopted by Ordinance 1896, has been amended by Ordinances
1953, 1993, 2028, 2034, 2035, 2036, 2037, 2052, 2060, 2061, 2108, 2109, 2110,
2133, 2136, 2155, 2157, 2171, 2244, 2263, 2687, 3071 and 3531.
20.08.030   Buildings between street line and setback line prohibited.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect or locate
any building or structure within the space between the street line and setback
line.
(Ord. 1896 § 3, 1959)
Title 21 SUBDIVISIONS AND OTHER DIVISIONS OF LAND*
Chapters:
   
21.04   General Provisions
   
21.08   Maps Required
   
21.10   Parcel Maps for Urban Lot Splits in Single-Family Zones
   
21.11   Streamlined Subdivisions Resulting in Ten or Fewer Parcels
   
21.12   Tentative Maps and Preliminary Parcel Maps
   
21.13   Vesting Tentative Maps
   
21.16   Final and Parcel Maps
   
21.20   Design
   
21.24   Dedications
   
21.28   Improvements
   
21.32   Conditional Exceptions
   
21.36   Appeals
   
21.40   Conversions of Rental Housing to Condominiums and Other Community
Housing Projects
   
21.44   Certificates of Compliance
   
21.50   Park Land Dedication or Fees In Lieu Thereof
   *   For state law authorizing local authorities to enact ordinances
regulating the design and improvement of subdivisions - See Business and
Professions Code §§ 11506, 11525-11526 and 11540.1.
   Editor's Note: Title 21 was repealed in its entirety, and replaced by
Ordinance No. 3157. Former chapters of Title 21, and the ordinances or parts of
ordinances from which they were derived, include:
Chapter 21.04, Definitions - Ordinance Nos. 1316, 1912 and 2431;
Chapter 21.08, General Provisions - Ordinance Nos. 1316, 1912, 2040, 2431 and
2528 [Note: At the time of this codification, some sections of Ordinance No.
2528 remain in effect elsewhere in the code - Please see legislative history
tables];
Chapter 21.12, Tentative Map - Ordinance Nos. 1316, 2307, 2350, 2366 and 2431;
Chapter 21.16, Final Map - Ordinance Nos. 1316, 1459, 1912, 2307, 2350 and
2431; Chapter 21.18, Filing and Checking Fees - Ordinance Nos. 1316, 2307,
2431, 2566, 2768, 2863 and 2960 [Note: At the time of this codification, some
sections of Ordinance No. 2566 remain in effect elsewhere in the code - Please
see legislative history tables];
Chapter 21.20, General Regulations and Design - Ordinance Nos. 1316, 1398,
1806, 1912 and 2119;
Chapter 21.24, Improvements and Bonds - Ordinance Nos. 1316, 1926 and 1949;
Chapter 21.28, Exceptions - Ordinance No. 1316;
Chapter 21.32, Miscellaneous Divisions of Land - Ordinance Nos. 1316, 1520,
1912, 2003, 2055, 2307, 2350, 2431, 2516, 2519, 2528, 2611 and 2863; Chapter
21.33, Conversions to Community Housing - Ordinance No. 2821; Chapter 21.34,
Dedication for School Purposes Ordinance Nos. 1316 and 2327;
Chapter 21.36, Appeals - Ordinance Nos. 1316 and 2863.
Chapter 21.04
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sections:
   
21.04.010   Purpose and construction.
   
21.04.020   Applicability of title.
   
21.04.030   Definitions.
   
21.04.040   Merger of contiguous parcels.
   
21.04.050   Reserved.
   
21.04.060   Application forms and fees.
   
21.04.070   Violation.
   
21.04.080   Noncompliance - Permit issuance prohibited.
   
21.04.090   Notice of violation.
21.04.010   Purpose and construction.
   (a)   The purpose of this title is to regulate and control the design and
improvement of subdivisions and to insure their compliance with applicable
policies and regulations of the city. The regulations contained in this title
are intended to implement and supplement the "Subdivision Map Act" of the state
of California as it now exists or as it may be hereafter amended. Except as
otherwise provided in this title, all provisions, requirements, and procedures
set forth in the "Subdivision Map Act" shall be followed and satisfied. Failure
to expressly reference or incorporate those provisions, requirements, and
procedures in this title shall not be deemed a waiver thereof.
   (b)   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this title
shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the protection of the
public health, safety, and welfare.
(Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.04.020   Applicability of title.
   This title shall not apply to, affect, or modify any subdivision, or lot
forming a part of a subdivision, lawfully created and recorded prior to the
effective date of this title, or to any approval or conditions of approval of
any tentative map or preliminary parcel map approved more than forty-five days
prior to the effective date of this title; except as to any further division or
consolidation thereof, any further approvals requested for such subdivision or
lot, or any contiguous parcels merged pursuant to the provision of Section
21.04.040.
(Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.04.030   Definitions.
   (a)   Except where alternate definitions are provided in this title, or the
context clearly requires a different usage, the definitions of words and
phrases contained in the "Subdivision Map Act" are hereby adopted for use in
this title. As used in the "Subdivision Map Act" the term "general plan" means
the Palo Alto comprehensive plan, including all elements, objectives, policies,
and programs thereof.
   All references to any section of the Palo Alto Municipal Code or general
laws of the state of California mean those sections, as may be hereafter
amended, or any successor legislation. References to any officer or employee of
the city include any designee of that officer or employee.
   (b)   Except where the context clearly requires a different usage, the
following definitions are hereby adopted for the purposes of this title:
   (1)   "Alley" means a public or private vehicular way less than twelve and
two-tenths meters (forty feet) in width affording a secondary means of
vehicular access to abutting property.
   (2)   "Arterial" means a street which mainly serves through traffic, takes
traffic to and from expressways, and provides access to adjacent properties.
   (3)   "Board of supervisors" means the board of supervisors of the county of
Santa Clara.
   (4)   "Certificate of compliance" means a document prepared and issued by
the city, and intended for recordation certifying that a parcel or parcels of
property within the city are lots lawfully created and existing in compliance
with this title and the Subdivision Map Act and are capable of use or sale
without further proceedings under this title.
   (5)   "City" means the city of Palo Alto.
   (6)   "City attorney" means the city attorney of the city of Palo Alto.
   (7)   "City controller" means the controller of the city of Palo Alto.
   (8)   "City engineer" means the city engineer of the city of Palo Alto.
   (9)   "City manager" means the city manager of the city of Palo Alto.
   (10)   "Clerk" or "city clerk" means the city clerk of the city of Palo
Alto.
   (11)   "Collector street" means a street which carries traffic within an
area to arterials and provides access to adjacent properties.
   (12)   "Commission" or "planning commission" means the planning commission
of the city of Palo Alto.
   (13)   "Community housing" means condominiums, planned developments,
community apartment projects, or stock cooperatives.
   (14)   "County recorder" means the recorder of the county of Santa Clara.
   (15)   "Director of planning" means the director of planning and community
environment of the city of Palo Alto.
   (16)   "Director of utilities" means the director of utilities of the city
of Palo Alto.
   (16.1)   "Driveway" means a private minor vehicular right-of-way, other than
a street or alley, the primary function of which is to provide access to ten or
fewer lots from a street.
   (17)   "Exception" means an exception to any of the requirements for lot
width, lot depth, lot area, street frontage or access, as set forth in Titles
18 or 21; provided, that a preliminary parcel map that merges four or fewer
substandard R-1 lots into a parcel or parcels in greater compliance with the
requirements of lot width, depth or area set forth in Title 18 than any of the
previous lots shall not be considered an exception.
   (18)   "Final map" means a map, other than a parcel map, prepared in
accordance with this title and the Subdivision Map Act, designed to be placed
on record with the county recorder and thereby finalize a subdivision approved
by a tentative map. A final map shall be prepared pursuant to and in
conformance with the approved tentative map and shall be based upon an accurate
and detailed survey of the property. Final maps typically will be required for
major subdivisions creating five or more lots, or five or more condominium,
community apartment or stock cooperative units.
   (19)   "Freeway/expressway" means a street devoted exclusively to traffic
movement.
   (20)   "Hillside area" means any area with an average cross slope of fifteen
percent or more.
   (21)   "Local street" means a street which is primarily used for access to
adjacent properties.
   (22)   "Lot" means a parcel of land consisting of a single lot of record,
used or intended for use under city zoning regulations as one site for a use or
group of uses.
   (23)   "Lot line" means any boundary of a lot.
   (24)   "Lot of record" means a lot which is part of a subdivision recorded
in the office of the county recorder, or a lot or parcel described by metes and
bounds or comparably specific manner, which has been so recorded and which by
reason of that recordation constitutes a parcel of land lawfully created and
existing in compliance with those provisions of law regulating the division of
land.
   (25)   "Major subdivision" means any subdivision creating five or more
parcels, five or more condominiums, or a community apartment or stock
cooperative project containing five or more units.
   (26)   "Minor subdivision" means any subdivision creating fewer than five
parcels or condominium units, or a community apartment or stock cooperative
project containing fewer than five units.
   (27)   "Owner" means the record owner of property or a vendee under a
contract of sale, or an agent of either of the foregoing with written consent
to act on their behalf. Unless evidence is produced to the contrary, the record
owner of property shall be deemed to be the owner as shown on the last
equalized assessment roll.
   (28)   "Parcel map" means a map, other than a final map, prepared in
accordance with this title and the Subdivision Map Act, designed to be placed
on record with the county recorder and thereby finalize a subdivision for which
a tentative map or preliminary parcel map has been approved and for which a
parcel map is specifically required. A parcel map shall be prepared pursuant to
and in conformance with the approved tentative or preliminary parcel map and
shall be based upon an accurate and detailed survey of the property. Parcel
maps will typically be required for minor subdivisions creating less than five
lots, or less than five condominium, community apartment or stock cooperative
units.
   (29)   "Preliminary parcel map" means a map made for the purpose of showing
the design and improvement of a proposed subdivision and the existing
conditions in and around it. Except as provided in this title, preliminary
parcel maps shall conform with all requirements for tentative maps, except that
preliminary parcel maps shall be reviewed and acted upon by the director of
planning. A preliminary parcel map will typically be required for minor
subdivisions of less than five parcels or units in lieu of a tentative map.
   (30)   “Private street” means any right-of-way, including vehicular access
easements, not dedicated as a public street which is used for vehicular traffic
to or from two or more which do not have frontage on a public street, or to or
from one parcel which does not have frontage on a public street if the right-
of-way or easement used for ingress or egress is more than two hundred feet in
length. For the purpose of this section, "parcel" includes fee ownership,
condominium, townhome or other ownership configurations. Private streets shall
be excluded for the purpose of determining Floor Area Ratio (FAR). Minimum
width of "private streets" shall be as defined in
21.20.240(b)(4). For the purpose of the provisions of
21.20.240(b)(4), the term "lot" includes fee ownership, condominium, townhome
or other ownership configurations.
   (31)   "Public utilities" or "utilities" means water, gas, sewer, electric,
and communication lines and facilities, but not including natural or improved
drainage facilities.
   (32)   "Reversion to acreage" means the dissolution of a previously approved
and recorded subdivision. A reversion to acreage shall result in the merger of
all lots created by the subdivision and reestablishment of the lot lines as
they existed prior to the subdivision. Any modification of lot lines or merger
of parcels comprising less than the whole of the parcel originally subdivided,
or establishing any lot lines other than those existing prior to the
subdivision, shall be deemed a new subdivision, and not a reversion to acreage.
   (33)   "Street" means a public or private right-of-way designed primarily
for vehicular traffic, whether designated as a street, highway, thoroughfare,
parkway, road, avenue, lane, place or however otherwise designated; provided,
however, "street" does not include "alley" or "driveway."
   (34)   "Subdivision" means a subdivision as defined in the Subdivision Map
Act, including a stock cooperative project as defined in Section 11003.2 of the
Business and Professions Code.
   (35)   "Subdivision Map Act" means the Subdivision Map Act of the state of
California as it presently exists or may hereafter be amended.
   (36)   "Tentative map" means a map made for the purpose of showing the
design and improvement of a proposed subdivision and the existing conditions in
and around it. A tentative map need not be based upon an accurate or detailed
final survey of the property. A tentative map will typically be required for
any major subdivision creating five or more lots, or five or more condominiums,
community apartment or stock cooperative units. A tentative map will also be
required for certain minor subdivisions if less than five lots or units where
the total acreage involved exceeds five acres or any individual lot created
exceeds two acres. Tentative maps will be reviewed by the planning commission
and city council.
   (37)   "Vesting tentative map" means a "tentative map" for a residential
subdivision, as defined in Section
21.04.030(b)(35), that shall have printed conspicuously on its face the words
"Vesting Tentative Map" at the time it is filed in accordance with
Chapter 21.13 of the Palo Alto Municipal Code and is thereafter processed in
accordance with the provisions of this title and the Subdivision Map Act.
   (38)   "Use" means the conduct of an activity, or the performance of a
function or operation, on a site or in a building or facility.
   (39)   "Zoning administrator" means the zoning administrator of the city of
Palo Alto.
(Ord. 5073 § 2, 2010: Ord. 5059 § 4, 2009: Ord. 4661 § 1, 2000: Ord. 3901 § 1,
1989: Ord. 3850 §§ 1, 3, 1989: Ord. 3701 §§ 1, 2, 1986: Ord. 3689 §§ 1, 2,
1986: Ord. 3577 §§ 5, 6, 1984: Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.04.040   Merger of contiguous parcels.
   All lots which were merged by the 1977 amendments to the Subdivision Map Act
prior to the adoption of Chapter 234, Statutes of 1977, are hereby deemed
unmerged.
(Ord. 3178 § 1 (part), 1980: Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.04.050   Reserved.*
   *   Editor's Note: Former Section
21.04.050, Notice of Merger, previously codified herein and containing portions
of Ordinance No. 3157 was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 3178.
21.04.060   Application forms and fees.
   Whenever any application or submittal is made pursuant to this title, such
application or submittal shall be made on or accompanied by such application
forms as may be prescribed by the officer with or to whom the application or
submittal is made. Whenever any application or submittal is made under this
title including, but not limited to, applications for tentative, preliminary
parcel, final and parcel map approvals, certificates of compliance, reversions
to acreage and appeals, a fee shall be charged as set forth in the municipal
fee schedule. Whenever any map, agreement, or document is required to be filed
or recorded under the provisions of this title, the applicant shall pay all
filing and recording fees incurred, in addition to the fees set forth in the
municipal fee schedule.
(Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.04.070   Violation.
   Any transaction in violation of the Subdivision Map Act or this title shall
be considered in violation of the Palo Alto Municipal Code and is unlawful and
a public nuisance, subject to the criminal penalties and abatement procedures
of this code and of the general laws of the state of California.
(Ord. 3157 § 1 (part) 1979)
21.04.080   Noncompliance - Permit issuance prohibited.
   The city council finds that the development of property divided in violation
of this title, the Subdivision Map Act, or any predecessor legislation, prior
to review of such property and determination whether it complies with current
standards for lot size and design and whether imposition of any conditions is
required, is contrary to the public health and safety. Therefore, no permit or
approval of any type necessary for the development of such property shall be
issued by the city, whether the applicant was the owner of record at the time
of such violation or whether the applicant is either the current owner of
record or the vendee of the current owner of record pursuant to a contract of
sale of the real property with or without actual or constructive knowledge of
the violation at the time of the acquisition of the applicant's interest in
such real property, until such time as a final or parcel map or certificate of
compliance for the property is approved and recorded. The enforcement of the
provisions of this section shall be in addition to any other remedy or penalty
provided by law for violation of this title or the Subdivision Map Act.
(Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.04.090   Notice of violation.
   Whenever the city has knowledge that real property located within the city
has been divided in violation of the provisions of this title or the
Subdivision Map Act, the zoning administrator shall cause to be filed for
record with the county recorder a notice of intention to record a notice of
violation, describing the real property in detail, naming the owners thereof,
describing the violation, and stating that an opportunity shall be given to the
owner to present evidence. Upon recording such a notice of intention to record
a notice of violation, the zoning administrator shall mail a copy of such
notice to the owner of such real property. The notice shall specify a time,
date, and place at which the owner may present evidence to the zoning
administrator why such notice should not be recorded. Such evidence shall be
limited to material tending to prove or disprove the existence of the alleged
violation. If, after the owner has presented evidence, the zoning administrator
determines that there has been no violation, the zoning administrator shall
record a release of the notice of intention to record a notice of violation
with the county recorder. If the zoning administrator determines that the
property has in fact been illegally divided, or if within sixty days of receipt
of such notice the owner fails to inform the zoning administrator of the
owner's objection to recording the notice of violation, the zoning
administrator shall record the notice of violation with the county recorder.
   Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to require the recordation
of any of the notices referred to as a condition precedent to the
enforceability of Section
21.04.080 or any other provision of this title, the Subdivision Map Act, or any
other provision of law.
(Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
Chapter 21.08
MAPS REQUIRED
Sections:
   
21.08.010   Tentative map and final map required.
   
21.08.020   Tentative map and parcel map required.
   
21.08.030   Preliminary parcel map and parcel map.
   
21.08.040   Procedure and content.
   
21.08.050   Lot line adjustments.
   
21.08.060   Waiver of parcel map requirement.
21.08.010   Tentative map and final map required.
   A tentative map and a final map shall be required for any subdivision for
which a tentative map and a final map are required by the Subdivision Map Act,
including any stock cooperative project creating five or more units.
(Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.08.020   Tentative map and parcel map required.
   A tentative map and a parcel map shall be required for any major subdivision
exempted from the requirement of filing a tentative map and a final map by
Section 66426 of the Government Code. A tentative map and a parcel map shall be
required for any minor subdivision where the land to be divided exceeds five
acres or any lot resulting from the subdivision exceeds two acres. Any such
minor subdivision shall be subject to the same review and conditions as a major
subdivision.
(Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.08.030   Preliminary parcel map and parcel map.
   A preliminary parcel map and a parcel map shall be required for any minor
subdivision other than those referred to in Section
21.08.020 or expressly exempted from such requirements by the Subdivision Map
Act. A parcel map shall not be required for any subdivision for which the
requirement of a parcel map has been waived pursuant to Section
21.08.060.
(Ord. 4661 § 2, 2000: Ord. 4124 § 1, 1992: Ord. 3683 § 19, 1986: Ord. 3157 § 1
(part), 1979)
21.08.040   Procedure and content.
   All maps submitted pursuant to this title shall meet all requirements of the
Subdivision Map Act and of this title.
(Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.08.050   Lot line adjustments.
   (a)   No tentative map, preliminary parcel map, final map or parcel map
shall be required for any lot line adjustment between two or more existing
adjacent parcels where the land taken from one parcel is added to an adjacent
parcel and the same number of, or fewer, parcels result. Any such lot line
adjustment shall conform to the requirements of the Subdivision Map Act, Title
21 (subdivision and other divisions of land), Title 16 (building regulations,
including prior architectural review board approvals) and Title 18 (zoning)
including prior approvals pursuant to those titles. The city engineer shall
issue and cause to be recorded a certificate of compliance or a conditional
certificate of compliance for the involved lots. A conditional certificate of
compliance may require performance of conditions or exactions to conform the
lot line adjustment to Title 16 and Title 18 or to facilitate the relocation of
existing utilities, infrastructure or easements in connection with the lot line
adjustment. The lot line adjustment shall also be reflected in a deed or deeds,
which shall be recorded. No record of survey shall be required for a lot line
adjustment unless required by Section 8762 of the California Business and
Professions Code, as amended.
   (b)   Any application for a lot line adjustment which is not in conformance
with all of the requirements of this section shall be processed as a minor or
major subdivision pursuant to this title. Lot line adjustments resulting in
four or fewer parcels shall be treated as minor subdivisions; lot line
adjustments resulting in five or more parcels shall be treated as major
subdivisions.
(Ord. 4661 § 3, 2000: Ord. 4124 § 2, 1992: Ord. 3683 § 20, 1986: Ord. 3157 § 1
(part), 1979)
21.08.060   Waiver of parcel map requirement.
   Upon written request of the subdivider, the director of planning and
community environment may waive the requirement for a parcel map under this
title if the director finds that the proposed subdivision complies with all
requirements of the Subdivision Map Act, this title and all other provisions of
the Palo Alto Municipal Code, including, but not limited to, area, width,
depth, and frontage requirements, improvements and design, floodwater drainage
control, appropriate improved roads, sanitary disposal facilities, water supply
availability, and environmental protection; that no improvements or dedications
are required in connection with the subdivision; and that the boundaries of the
lot or lots are adequately monumented.
   A request for approval of a waiver of the requirement for a parcel map
constitutes a request for a certificate of compliance. When approval has been
given for waiver of the parcel map requirement, any required tentative map or
preliminary parcel map has been finally approved, and all conditions of such
approval have been met, the city engineer shall issue and cause to be recorded
a certificate of compliance. A conditional certificate of compliance may be
issued and recorded if necessary to insure compliance with the conditions of
approval.
   Any waiver of the requirement of a parcel map shall not constitute a waiver
of the requirement for any tentative map or preliminary parcel map which is
otherwise required, and such tentative map or preliminary parcel map shall be
submitted and processed in accordance with the provisions of the Subdivision
Map Act and this title and shall be subject to such conditions which would
otherwise apply.
(Ord. 4661 § 5, 2000: Ord. 4124 § 5, 1992: Ord. 3771 § 1, 1987: Ord. 3345 § 32,
1982: Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
Chapter 21.10
PARCEL MAPS FOR URBAN LOT SPLITS IN SINGLE-FAMILY ZONES
Sections
   
21.10.010   Purpose.
   
21.10.020   Definitions.
   
21.10.030   Applicability.
   
21.10.040   General requirements.
   
21.10.050   Application and review of an urban lot split.
   
21.10.060   Effective dates.
21.10.010   Purpose.
   This chapter sets forth special regulations applicable to the subdivision of
a single family lot in the R-1 district (and R-1 subdistricts) or R-E district
into two new lots, pursuant to California Government Code Section 66411.7 (SB
9, 2021).
(Ord. 5587 § 17 (part), 2023: Ord. 5542 § 16 (part), 2022: Ord. 5538 § 16
(part), 2021)
21.10.020   Definitions.
   As used in this chapter:
   (a)   “Acting in concert” means pursuing a shared goal to split adjacent
lots pursuant to an agreement or understanding, whether formal or informal.
   (b)   “Specific, adverse impact” means a significant, quantifiable, direct,
and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified written public health or
safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date the
application was deemed complete. Inconsistency with the zoning ordinance or
general plan land use designation shall not constitute a specific, adverse,
impact.
   (c)   “Unit” means any dwelling unit, including, but not limited to, a unit
or units created pursuant to Section
18.42.180, a primary dwelling unit, an accessory dwelling unit, or a junior
accessory dwelling unit.
   (d)   “Urban Lot Split” means the subdivision of an existing legal parcel in
the R-1 district (and R-1 subdistricts) or R-E district to create no more than
two new parcels of approximately equal area, pursuant to this Chapter and
California Government Code Section 66411.7.
(Ord. 5645 § 8, 2025: Ord. 5641 § 8 (part), 2024: Ord. 5587 § 17 (part), 2023:
Ord. 5542 § 16 (part), 2022: Ord. 5538 § 16 (part), 2021)
21.10.030   Applicability.
   The provisions of this chapter shall apply only to lots in the R-1 district
(and R-1 subdistricts) or R-E zone district. Except as modified by this
Chapter, all provisions of Title 21 shall apply to an application for urban lot
split. An Urban Lot Split is not available in any of the following
circumstances:
   (a)   A parcel described California Government Code Section 65913.4,
subdivisions (a)(6)(B) through (a)(6)(K) inclusive, as that section read on
September 16, 2021. Such parcels include, for example, parcels located in
wetlands, in very high fire severity zones (unless the site has adopted certain
fire hazard mitigation measures), and in special flood hazard areas or
regulatory floodways (unless the site meets certain federal requirements for
development).
   (b)   A parcel on which an owner of residential real property has exercised
the owner’s rights under state law to withdraw accommodations from rent or
lease within the past 15 years.
   (c)   A parcel that was created by prior exercise of an Urban Lot Split.
   (d)   A parcel adjacent to a parcel that was created by prior exercise of an
Urban Lot Split by the owner, or a person acting in concert with the owner of
the parcel sought to be split.
   (e)   The Urban Lot Split would require alteration or demolition of any of
the following types of housing.
   (1)   Housing that is subject to a recorded covenant, ordinance, or law that
restricts rents to levels affordable to persons and families of moderate, low,
or very low income.
   (2)   Housing that is subject to any form of rent or price control through a
public entity’s valid exercise of its police power.
   (3)   Housing that has been occupied by a tenant in the last three years.
   (f)   The Urban Lot Split is located within a historic district or property
included on the State Historic Resources Inventory, as defined in California
Public Resources Code Section5020.1, or within a site that is designated or
listed on the City’s historic inventory.
   (g)   The building official finds that the development would have a
specific, adverse impact on public health and safety that cannot be feasibly
mitigated or avoided.
(Ord. 5645 § 8, 2025: Ord. 5641 § 8 (part), 2024: Ord. 5587 § 17 (part), 2023:
Ord. 5546 § 3 (part), 2022: Ord. 5542 § 16 (part), 2022: Ord. 5538 § 16 (part),
2021)
21.10.040   General requirements.
   (a)   The minimum size for a parcel created by an Urban Lot Split is 1,200
square feet.
   (b)   The lots created by an Urban Lot Split must be of approximately equal
area, such that no resulting parcel shall be smaller than 40 percent of the lot
area of the original parcel proposed for subdivision.
   (c)   Where existing dwelling units on the property are to remain, no lot
line may be created under this Chapter in a manner that would bisect any
structure or that would result in more than two dwelling units on any resulting
parcel.
   (d)   Reserved.
   (e)   Each parcel shall comply with any objective lot design standards for
Urban Lot Splits adopted by the City Council and consistent with Chapter
66411.7 of the Government Code.
   (f)   Utility easements shall be shown on the parcel map, and recorded prior
to, or concurrent with final parcel map recordation.
   (g)   A covenant necessary for maintenance of stormwater treatment
facilities shall be recorded prior to, or concurrent with final map
recordation.
   (h)   Existing driveways to be demolished shall follow the procedure(s) in
12.08.090 Elimination of abandoned driveway.
   (i)   A maintenance agreement shall be recorded to ensure shared maintenance
of any shared access easements, stormwater treatment, landscaping and private
utilities, prior to final parcel map recordation.
(Ord. 5646 § 8, 2025: Ord. 5645 § 8, 2025: Ord. 5641 § 8 (part), 2024: Ord.
5587 § 17 (part), 2023: Ord. 5546 § 3 (part), 2022: Ord. 5542 § 16 (part),
2022: Ord. 5538 § 16 (part), 2021)
21.10.050   Application and review of an urban lot split.
   (a)   The director of planning is authorized to promulgate regulations,
forms, and/or checklists setting forth application requirements for a parcel
map for an Urban Lot Split under this Chapter. An application shall include an
affidavit from the property owner, signed under penalty of perjury under the
laws of California, that:
   (1)   The proposed urban lot split would not require or authorize demolition
or alteration of any of the housing described in Section
21.10.030, subdivision (e).
   (2)   The proposed urban lot split is not on a parcel described in Section
21.10.030.
   (3)   The owner intends to occupy one of the housing units located on a lot
created by the parcel map as their principal residence for a minimum of three
years from the date of the recording of the parcel map.
   (4)   The rental of any unit on the property shall be for a term longer than
30 consecutive days.
   (5)   The resulting lots will be for residential uses only.
   (b)   A parcel map for an Urban Lot Split must be prepared by a registered
civil engineer or licensed land surveyor in accordance with Government Code
sections 66444 – 66450 and this Chapter. Unless more specific regulations are
adopted by the director of planning, the parcel map shall be in the form and
include all of the information required of a Preliminary Parcel Map by
Chapter 21.12, as well as any additional information required of a Parcel Map
by
Chapter 21.16. In addition, the face of the Parcel Map shall contain a
declaration that:
   (1)   Each lot created by the parcel map shall be used solely for
residential dwellings.
   (2)   That no more than two dwelling units may be permitted on each lot.
   (3)   That rental of any dwelling unit on a lot created by the parcel map
shall be for a term longer than 30 consecutive days.
   (4)   A lot created by a parcel map under this Chapter shall not be further
subdivided.
   (c)   Upon receipt of a parcel map for an Urban Lot Split, the director of
planning shall transmit copies to the city engineer, chief building official,
director of utilities, chief of police, fire chief, director of transportation,
and such other departments of the city, and any other agencies, as may be
required by law or deemed appropriate.
   (d)   The director of planning shall cause a notice of the pending
application to be posted at the site of the proposed Urban Lot Split and for
notice to be mailed to owners and residents of property within 600 feet of the
property.
   (e)   The director of planning shall ministerially review and approve a
parcel map for Urban Lot Split if they determine that the parcel map
application meets all requirements of this Chapter. The director of planning
shall deny a parcel map application that does not meet any requirement of this
Chapter.
   (f)   The director of planning shall consider and approve or deny an
application for an urban lot split within 60 days from the date the City
receives a completed application. If the director has not approved or denied
the completed application within 60 days, the application shall be deemed
approved.
   (g)   If the director denies an application for an urban lot split, the
director shall, within 60 days of receipt of the completed application, return
in writing a full set of comments to the applicant with a list of items that
are defective or deficient and a description of how the applicant can remedy
the application.
   (h)   The Director of Planning shall determine the appropriate fee required
for an application for parcel map for an Urban Lot Split, which may be the fee
currently established for a Preliminary Parcel Map or Parcel Map.
(Ord. 5645 § 8, 2025: Ord. 5641 § 8 (part), 2024: Ord. 5587 § 17 (part), 2023:
Ord. 5546 § 3 (part), 2022: Ord. 5542 § 16 (part), 2022: Ord. 5538 § 16 (part),
2021)
21.10.060   Effective dates.
   This chapter shall remain in effect until such time as Government Code
Section 66411.7 is repealed or superseded or its requirements for ministerial
approval of an Urban Lot Split on a single family zoned lot are materially
amended, whether by legislation or initiative, at which time this chapter shall
become null and void.
(Ord. 5587 § 17 (part), 2023: Ord. 5542 § 16 (part), 2022: Ord. 5538 § 16
(part), 2021)
Chapter 21.11
STREAMLINED SUBDIVISIONS RESULTING IN TEN OR FEWER PARCELS
Sections
   
21.11.010   Purpose.
   
21.11.020   Applicability.
   
21.11.030   Review.
   
21.11.040   General requirements.
   
21.11.050   Application and review of streamlined subdivisions resulting in ten
or fewer parcels.
21.11.010   Purpose.
   This chapter implements California Government Code Section 66499.41 (Senate
Bill 684, 2023) by establishing regulations for the ministerial subdivision of
a lot resulting in ten or fewer parcels.
(Ord. 5659 § 3, 2025: Ord. 5651 § 4, 2025)
21.11.020   Applicability.
   This chapter applies only to proposed subdivisions that meet all of the
requirements of California Government Code Section 66499.41. Depending on the
number of parcels to be created, a tentative map and final map or preliminary
parcel map and parcel map shall be required for all subdivisions under this
chapter.
(Ord. 5659 § 3, 2025: Ord. 5651 § 4, 2025)
21.11.030   Review.
   Qualifying map applications shall be reviewed and processed ministerially in
accordance with California Government Code Section 66499.41. Final maps and
parcel maps shall be reviewed and processed in accordance with
Chapter 21.16, except that a final map under this section may be approved by
the City Engineer and Director of Planning and Development Services.
(Ord. 5659 § 3, 2025: Ord. 5651 § 4, 2025)
21.11.040   General requirements.
   (a)   The minimum size for a parcel created on a lot zoned for multi-family
use is 600 square feet.
   (b)   The minimum size for a parcel created on a vacant lot zoned for
single-family use is 1,200 square feet.
   (c)   Where existing dwelling units on the property are to remain, no lot
line may be created under this chapter in a manner that would bisect any
structure or that would result in any existing dwelling unit being alienable
separate from the title to any other existing dwelling unit on the lot.
   (e)   Utility easements shall be shown on the parcel map, and recorded prior
to, or concurrent with map recordation.
   (f)   A covenant necessary for maintenance of stormwater treatment
facilities shall be recorded prior to, or concurrent with map recordation.
   (g)   Existing driveways to be demolished shall follow the procedure(s) in
Section
12.08.090.
   (e)   A maintenance agreement shall be recorded to ensure shared maintenance
of any shared access easements, private streets, stormwater treatment,
landscaping and private utilities, prior to map recordation.
   (f)   Where Title 21 requires a private street as indicated in
21.20.240 based on the number of lots to be created, the private street shall
meet the requirements set forth for private streets in this title. The area of
the proposed private street easement shall be deducted from the lot area, as
detailed in
18.04.030(85).
(Ord. 5659 § 3, 2025)
21.11.050   Application and review of streamlined subdivisions resulting in ten
or fewer parcels.
   (a)   The director of planning is authorized to promulgate regulations,
forms, and/or checklists setting forth application requirements for a
streamlined subdivision under this chapter.
   (b)   All maps must be prepared by a registered civil engineer or licensed
land surveyor in accordance with Government Code sections 66444 – 66450 and
this chapter. Unless more specific regulations are adopted by the director of
planning, maps shall be in the form and include all of the information required
of a preliminary parcel map or tentative map by
Chapter 21.12, as well as any additional information required of a parcel or
final map by
Chapter 21.16. In addition, the face of the parcel map or final map shall
contain a declaration that:
      (1)   Each lot created by the map shall be used solely for residential
dwellings.
      (2)   One accessory or junior accessory dwelling unit may be permitted
only on lots greater than or equal to 2,400 square feet in size.
      (3)   A lot created under this chapter shall not be further subdivided.
   (c)   Upon receipt of a application for a streamlined subdivision, the
director of planning shall transmit copies to the city engineer, chief building
official, director of utilities, chief of police, fire chief, director of
transportation, and such other departments of the city, and any other agencies,
as may be required by law or deemed appropriate.
   (d)   The director of planning shall cause a notice of the pending
application to be posted at the site of the proposed streamlined subdivision
and for notice to be mailed to owners and residents of property within 600 feet
of the property.
   (e)   The director of planning shall ministerially review and approve a
preliminary parcel map or tentative map application that meets all requirements
of this chapter. The director of planning shall deny an application that does
not meet any requirement of this chapter.
   (f)   The director of planning shall consider and approve or deny an
application for a streamlined subdivision within 60 days from the date the city
receives a completed application. If the director has not approved or denied
the completed application within 60 days, the application shall be deemed
approved.
   (g)   If the director denies an application for a streamlined subdivision,
the director shall, within 60 days of receipt of the completed application,
return in writing a full set of comments to the applicant with a list of items
that are defective or deficient and a description of how the applicant can
remedy the application.
   (h)   The director of planning shall determine the appropriate fee required
for an application for streamlined subdivision, which may be the fee currently
established for a preliminary parcel map or parcel map.
(Ord. 5659 § 3, 2025)
Chapter 21.12
TENTATIVE MAPS AND PRELIMINARY PARCEL MAPS
Sections:
   
21.12.010   Filing of tentative map.
   
21.12.020   Preliminary title report.
   
21.12.030   Size and scale.
   
21.12.040   Information to be shown on tentative map.
   
21.12.050   Subdivider's statement.
   
21.12.060   Preliminary copy of restrictive covenants.
   
21.12.070   Preliminary soil report.
   
21.12.080   Date of filing.
   
21.12.090   Action on tentative and preliminary parcel maps.
   
21.12.100   Merger and resubdivision.
   
21.12.110   Amendment to approved tentative map or preliminary parcel map.
21.12.010   Filing of tentative map.
   The director of planning shall specify the number of copies of the tentative
map which shall be required. Those copies, together with any additional data
required, shall be filed with the director of planning. Tentative maps shall be
prepared in accordance with the Subdivision Map Act and the provisions of this
title. Except as otherwise required, all requirements for tentative maps set
forth in this chapter shall be applicable to preliminary parcel maps.
(Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.12.020   Preliminary title report.
   The tentative map shall be accompanied by a current preliminary title report
for the property being subdivided.
(Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.12.030   Size and scale.
   Tentative maps shall be eighteen by twenty-six inches in size and to a scale
of one inch equal to not more than one hundred feet, except that the director
of planning may allow the use of a smaller scale where the terrain or size of
the subdivision necessitates such smaller scale.
(Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.12.040   Information to be shown on tentative map.
   A tentative map shall contain the following information:
   (a)   Tract name or number, date, north point, scale and sufficient
description to define the location and boundaries of the proposed tract;
   (b)   Key map showing adjacent property, subdivision, roads or streets in
subdivisions;
   (c)   Name and address of record owner or owners, name and address of the
subdivider, and name and business address of the person who prepared the
tentative map;
   (d)   Acreage of the proposed tract to the nearest tenth of an acre;
   (e)   Average area of each of the lots proposed to be created;
   (f)   Number of lots, average lot size, and size of smallest lot in tract;
   (g)   Sufficient elevations or contours to determine the general slope of
the land, the high and low points thereof, and all drainage features;
   (h)   The locations, names, existing widths, slope and approximate grade of
all existing streets and alleys in the proposed subdivision, abutting or
contiguous to the proposed subdivision;
   (i)   The locations, names, widths, slope and approximate grade of all
streets and alleys proposed to be constructed, widened, improved or dedicated
within, abutting or contiguous to the proposed subdivision;
   (j)   Typical cross-sections of all streets and alleys to be constructed,
widened, improved or dedicated;
   (k)   Plan and profile features of all streets and alleys within the
proposed subdivision;
   (l)   Locations, widths and purposes of all existing and proposed easements;
   (m)   Locations, size and character of all existing pipelines and related
structures, and all other public utilities, showing the ground elevation and
flow line elevations at the connection to existing pipelines, and all building
and use restrictions applicable to any easements;
   (n)   Lot layout and approximate dimensions of each lot to the nearest foot.
Each lot shall be numbered;
   (o)   Dimensions and locations of any existing buildings. The tentative map
shall indicate which, if any, of the existing buildings are to remain on the
property and their proposed location if any are to be moved;
   (p)   Approximate boundaries of areas subject to inundation of stormwater
overflow and the location, width and direction of flow of all watercourses;
   (q)   All water wells;
   (r)   Proposed public areas, if any;
   (s)   Location of wooded areas, tree masses and other significant landscape
features;
   (t)   A list of which parcels have good potential for passive solar design
residences. Substantial solar access protection from shading is afforded these
parcels under Palo Alto's zoning ordinance and the California Solar Shade
Control Act.
(Ord. 3577 § 8, 1984: Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.12.050   Subdivider's statement.
   Subdivider's statement shall appear upon, or accompany, the tentative map
and shall contain the following information:
   (a)   Existing use or uses and zone district or districts of the property;
   (b)   Proposed use or uses of the property;
   (c)   Statement of the improvements and public utilities proposed to be made
or installed, and of the time at which such improvements are proposed to be
completed;
   (d)   Provision for sewerage and sewage disposal;
   (e)   Public areas proposed;
   (f)   Tree planting proposed; including an indication of any existing trees
to be removed or left in place;
   (g)   Proposed street lighting or any outdoor lighting;
   (h)   Existing restrictive covenants, leases, rights-of-way, licenses and
encumbrances affecting the use of the land;
   (i)   A statement regarding the compliance of the subdivision with those
applicable elements of the Palo Alto comprehensive plan, or the manner in which
such compliance will be attained, when relevant and not otherwise ascertainable
from the tentative map or other contents of the subdivider's statements. Such
information shall include, but not be limited to, a statement of how the
housing policies of the Palo Alto comprehensive plan will be met;
   (j)   Justifications and reasons for any requested exceptions to provisions
of this title;
   (k)   Any additional information regarding the subdivision as may be deemed
necessary by the director of planning.
(Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.12.060   Preliminary copy of restrictive covenants.
   A preliminary copy of any restrictive covenants proposed shall be filed with
the tentative map.
(Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.12.070   Preliminary soil report.
   A preliminary soil report based on adequate test borings or excavations and
prepared by a civil engineer who is registered by the state of California shall
be filed with the tentative map, unless the city engineer determines that based
on his knowledge of the soil qualities of the subdivision, no preliminary
analysis is necessary.
   If the preliminary soil report indicates the presence of critically
expansive soils or other soil problems which if not corrected would lead to
structural defects, the city engineer may require that a soil investigation be
prepared by a civil engineer who is registered by the state. The soil
investigation shall include a report which recommends corrective action likely
to prevent structural damage to dwellings, roads, or other public works to be
constructed.
   A subdivision, or portion thereof, may be approved where such soil problems
exist if it is determined that the recommended corrective action is likely to
prevent structural damage to each structure to be constructed. Any building
permit issued for such structures may be conditioned upon incorporation of the
recommended corrective action in the construction of each structure.
   Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to limit the authority of
the building official to require geologic, soils, and engineering data and
mitigation measures pursuant to Section 18.88.150 of this code.
(Ord. 4642 § 44, 2000: Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.12.080   Date of filing.
   The director of planning shall review all tentative map applications to
determine whether all necessary information has been submitted. Within thirty
days of receipt of any tentative map the director of planning shall give
written notice to the applicant indicating pursuant to Government Code Section
65943 whether the application is complete. Any parts which are incomplete shall
be specified and the manner in which they can be made complete shall be
indicated. In the case of any subdivision which requires the preparation of an
environmental impact report pursuant to the California Environmental Quality
Act, no application shall be deemed complete until the initial decision maker
has certified the environmental impact report to be adequate and prepared in
compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act. For the purposes of
the Subdivision Map Act, this title and Chapter 4.5 of Division 1, Title 7 of
the Government Code, the date upon which notice is given to the applicant that
the application is complete shall be deemed the date of filing of the
application; provided, however, that if, at any stage of the processing map, a
decision maker determines that an environmental impact report is required, the
date of filing shall be revised to the date upon which that environmental
impact report or supplemental environmental impact report is certified by a
decision maker.
(Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.12.090   Action on tentative and preliminary parcel maps.
   (a)   Staff Review. Upon receipt of a tentative map or preliminary parcel
map, the director of planning shall transmit copies to the city engineer, chief
building official, director of utilities, chief of police, fire chief, director
of transportation, and such other departments of the city, and any other
agencies, as may be required by law or deemed appropriate. Each involved city
department shall promptly inform the director of planning of any areas of the
application which are incomplete. Not later than ten days after issuance of a
notice of completeness by the director of planning, each such department shall
submit to the director of planning a written report containing each
department's determination of whether the proposed subdivision complies with
all applicable provisions of law and the requirements of that department, and
any departmental recommendation concerning the proposed subdivision.
   (b)   Reports to Planning Commission. In the case of a tentative map, the
director of planning shall make a written report to the planning commission,
incorporating therein the recommendations of all other departments and agencies
concerned. The report shall contain a recommendation of the director of
planning recommending approval, denial, or approval with conditions, of the
tentative map, the findings and grounds for such recommendation, and such other
information as the director of planning may deem relevant. Said recommendation
and any subsequent recommendations or actions by the director of planning, the
planning commission and the city council approving, conditionally approving, or
denying any tentative map or preliminary parcel map shall be based upon a
determination by the acting body whether the proposed subdivision complies and
is consistent with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act, this title, the
Palo Alto comprehensive plan, including all elements thereof, and all other
provisions of the Palo Alto Municipal Code and state law, including but not
limited to Section 66473.5 and 66474 of the Government Code. Any approval of a
tentative map or preliminary parcel map may be made subject to such conditions
as are deemed reasonably necessary to insure compliance with those provisions.
Such conditions may include, but shall not be limited to, required dedications
and improvements, measures required to mitigate the environmental, safety,
traffic, and other detrimental impacts of the subdivision, and such other
conditions as may be required to insure compliance with all policies,
objectives and goals of the Palo Alto comprehensive plan.
   (c)   Action by Planning Commission. Within fifty days of the filing date of
a tentative map, the planning commission shall hold a public hearing at either
a regular or special meeting of the planning commission and thereafter shall
recommend to the city council approval, conditional approval, or denial of the
map, and any conditions upon which such approval should be granted. The
planning commission's recommendation shall include the grounds and findings
upon which its recommendation is based. Such fifty-day period may be extended
by mutual consent of the planning commission and the applicant. The applicant's
consent to such an extension shall be presumed unless the applicant makes
timely objection thereto within the fifty-day period or at the time the matter
is continued beyond such period.
   (d)   Action by City Council. Except where a time extension is mutually
consented to by the city council and the applicant, or the applicant's consent
to an extension is presumed as set out above, within the time limits prescribed
by the Subdivision Map Act, the city council shall approve, conditionally
approve, or disapprove the tentative map at either a regular or special meeting
of the council.
   (e)   Action on Preliminary Parcel Map. Subject to the appeal procedures of
this title, the director of planning shall approve, conditionally approve, or
deny any preliminary parcel map filed. The director of planning shall take such
action or defer the application for decision by the city council pursuant to
Section 18.40.170 of Title 18, within fifty days of the date of filing, unless
extended by the mutual consent of the director of planning and the applicant.
Prior to approving, conditionally approving, or denying a preliminary parcel
map, the director of planning shall hold a public hearing at which any
interested person shall be allowed to present testimony regarding the map. If,
in the opinion of the director of planning, there are issues of major
significance associated with the proposed parcel map, such map may be deferred
by the director of planning to the planning commission and the city council for
processing in accordance with the procedures set forth in subsections (c) and
(d) of this section.
   (f)   Notice of Hearing.
      (1)   Notice of the hearing required by subsections (c), (d), or (e)
above shall be given by publication once in a local newspaper of general
circulation not less than ten days prior to the date of the hearing.
      (2)   Additionally, the city shall mail written notice of such hearing at
least ten days prior to the date of the hearing to each owner of record of real
property within six hundred feet of the exterior boundary of the property for
which classification is sought as such owner of record is shown in the last
equalized assessment roll and to owners or occupants of the property within six
hundred feet as shown on the city utility customer file. Compliance with the
procedures set forth in this section shall constitute a good-faith effort to
provide notice and the failure of any owner or occupant to receive notice shall
not prevent the city from proceeding with the hearing or from taking any action
nor affect the validity of any action.
      (3)   The notice of public hearing shall contain the following:
         (A)   The exact address, if known, of the property involved, or the
location of the property involved if the exact address is not known;
         (B)   The time, place, and purposes of the hearing;
         (C)   A brief description, the content of which shall be in the sole
discretion of the city, of the subdivision applied for;
         (D)   Reference to the application on file for particulars; and
         (E)   A statement that any interested person, or agent thereof, may
appear and be heard.
         Typographical and/or publishing errors shall not invalidate the notice
nor any city action.
      (4)   In addition to any other information required, the applicant shall
submit with its application a list of all owners of record of real property
within six hundred feet of the exterior boundary of the property to be
subdivided as shown in the last equalized assessment roll (as updated by the
semiannual real estate update information).
(Ord. 5651 § 10, 2025: Ord. 5432 § 18, 2018: Ord. 3536 § 41, 1984: Ord. 3465 §
62, 1983: Ord. 3345 § 34, 1982: Ord. 3273 § 7, 1981: Ord. 3157 § 1 (part),
1979)
21.12.100   Merger and resubdivision.
   Subdivided lands may be merged and resubdivided without first reverting the
acreage so long as all requirements of the Subdivision Map Act and this title
are complied with. Such application shall be filed and processed in the same
fashion as a subdivision. Recordation of the final or parcel map shall
constitute legal merging of the separate parcels into one parcel and the
resubdivision of such parcel. Any unused fees, deposits, or security previously
made or posted pertaining to the property shall be credited pro rata toward any
requirements for the same purposes which are applicable at the time of the
resubdivision.
(Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.12.110   Amendment to approved tentative map or preliminary parcel map.
   (a)   Upon application of the subdivider, an amendment to a tentative map or
preliminary parcel map, provided it is not a map for a condominium conversion,
may be made if the amendment is approved by both the director of planning and
community environment and the city engineer and if the amendment meets the
following requirements:
   (1)   It changes only physical aspects of the subdivision;
   (2)   It is substantially inferior in bulk, degree or importance to the
overall dimension and design of the development and does not add any lots,
units or buildings to the subdivision;
   (3)   It does not increase the adverse environmental effects of the
subdivision;
   (4)   It is consistent with the Palo Alto comprehensive plan and the intent
of the original map approval;
   (5)   It does not violate this code.
   (b)   Notice.
   (1)   Within thirty days of receipt of an application for an amendment, the
director of planning and community environment shall state the decision
regarding the amendment, including the reasons for such decision, in writing
and mail a copy to the applicant.
   (2)   Notice of the decision of the director of planning and community
environment shall be given by distributing such notice in the next available
city council packet after the rendering of the decision. Such notice shall also
be published once in a local newspaper of general circulation not later than
five days after the distribution of the notice in the city council packet.
   (3)   The notice referred to in this subsection shall generally state the
address and description of the subject property and project, and the nature of
the determination. Said notice shall also recite the fact that details
regarding the project and determination will be available in the office of the
planning department, and that an appeal may be taken from the determination
within fifteen days after the publication of the notice.
   (4)   Any aggrieved or affected person may appeal such a decision in accord
with
Chapter 21.36 (Appeals).
   (c)   Any such approved amendment shall be indicated on the approved map and
certified by the director of planning and community environment and the city
engineer.
   (d)   If the director of planning and community environment or the city
engineer thinks the requested amendment is a substantial revision or if the
requested amendment does not meet the requirements set forth in subsection (a)
of this section:
   (1)   In the case of a preliminary parcel map without exceptions, a new
preliminary parcel map shall be required to be filed.
   (2)   In the case of a tentative map or a preliminary parcel map with
exceptions, the requested amendment shall be presented to the planning
commission and city council for approval in accordance with Section
21.12.090.
   (3)   Any amendment approved by the city council shall be indicated on the
approved map and certified by the city clerk.
   (e)   Any approved amendment shall not alter the expiration date of the
tentative map or preliminary parcel map.
   (f)   No application for an amendment to a map for a condominium conversion
shall be accepted.
(Ord. 4826 § 140, 2004: Ord. 3381 § 1, 1982)
Chapter 21.13
VESTING TENTATIVE MAPS
Sections:
   
21.13.010   Applicability of chapter.
   
21.13.020   Procedures.
   
21.13.030   Development rights vest on approval of vesting tentative map.
   
21.13.040   Amendment of vesting tentative map.
21.13.010   Applicability of chapter.
   (a)   This chapter shall apply only to residential and nonresidential
developments. Whenever a provision of the Subdivision Map Act (commencing with
Section 66410 of the Government Code), as implemented and supplemented by this
subdivision ordinance (Title 21 of the Palo Alto Municipal Code), requires the
filing of a tentative map or preliminary parcel map for a residential or
nonresidential development, a vesting tentative map may instead be filed, in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (b)   If a subdivider does not seek the rights conferred by a vesting
tentative map, the filing of a vesting tentative map shall not be a
prerequisite to any approval for any proposed subdivision, permit for
construction, or work preparatory to construction.
(Ord. 4109 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 3689 § 3 (part), 1986)
21.13.020   Procedures.
   (a)   Filing and Processing. A vesting tentative map shall be filed in the
same form and have the same contents, accompanying data and reports and shall
be processed in the same manner as set forth for a tentative map in Title 21 of
the Palo Alto Municipal Code, except as provided herein:
   (1)   At the time a vesting tentative map is filed, it shall have printed
conspicuously on its face the words "Vesting Tentative Map."
   (2)   Prior to filing a vesting tentative map, a subdivider shall obtain all
discretionary approvals that will be required under the Palo Alto Municipal
Code in conjunction with the approval or conditional approval of the vesting
tentative map in order to construct the development. Such discretionary
approvals may include, but are not limited to, amendments to the comprehensive
plan land use map, amendments to the zoning map, architectural review pursuant
to
Chapter 18.76 (Permits and Approvals) of the Palo Alto Municipal Code, and site
and design review pursuant to Chapter 18.82 of the Palo Alto Municipal Code. An
application for a vesting tentative map shall be determined to be incomplete
until all other applicable discretionary approvals are processed and acted upon
in accordance with the Palo Alto Municipal Code and applicable state law.
   (b)   Fees. Upon filing a vesting tentative map, the subdivider shall pay
the fees required by the Palo Alto municipal fee schedule for the filing and
processing of a tentative map.
   (c)   Expiration. The approval or conditional approval of a vesting
tentative map shall expire at the end of the same time period, and shall be
subject to the same extensions established by this title for the expiration of
the approval or conditional approval of a tentative map.
(Ord. 4826 § 141, 2004: Ord. 4109 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 3689 § 3 (part), 1986)
21.13.030   Development rights vest on approval of vesting tentative map.
   (a)   The approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall
confer a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance
with the ordinances, policies and standards in effect at the time that an
application is determined to be complete by the city, provided that any fees
required as a condition of approval of a vesting tentative map, unless
otherwise specified, shall be payable at the rates in effect at the time
building permits are issued. This section is further governed by Government
Code Sections 65943 and 66474.2, and any successor legislation. This chapter
shall not be interpreted to create any rights for subdividers beyond those
expressly required by the Vesting Tentative Map Law (Government Code Sections
66498.1 et seq., as may from time to time be amended).
   (b)   Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section, a subsequent permit,
approval, extension, building permit, or entitlement may be made conditional or
denied pursuant to later ordinances, policies and standards if any of the
following are determined:
   (1)   A failure to do so would place the residents of the subdivision or the
immediate community in a condition dangerous to their health or safety;
   (2)   The condition or denial is required, in order to comply with a state
or federal law.
   (c)   The rights referred to in this chapter shall expire if a final map is
not approved prior to the expiration of the vesting tentative map as provided
in Section
21.13.020(c). If the final map is approved, these rights shall last for the
following periods of time:
   (1)   An initial time period of one year beyond the recording of the final
map. Where several maps are recorded on various phases of a project covered by
a single vesting tentative map, this initial time period shall begin for each
phase when the final map for that phase is recorded.
   (2)   The initial time period set forth in subdivision (1) of this
subsection shall be automatically extended by any time used for processing a
complete application for a grading permit or for design or architectural
review, if such processing exceeds thirty days from the date a complete
application is filed.
   (3)   A subdivider may apply for a one-year extension at any time before the
initial time period set forth in subdivision (1) of this subsection expires. If
the extension is denied by the director of planning and community environment,
the subdivider may appeal that denial to the city council within fifteen days.
   (4)   If the subdivider submits a complete application for a building permit
during the periods of time specified in subdivisions (1) through (3) of this
subsection, the rights referred to in this chapter shall continue until the
expiration of that permit or any extension of that permit.
(Ord. 4109 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 3689 § 3 (part), 1986)
21.13.040   Amendment of vesting tentative map.
   Anytime prior to the expiration of the vesting tentative map pursuant to
Section
21.13.020(c), the subdivider, or his assignee, may apply for an amendment to
the vesting tentative map in accordance with the provisions of Section
21.12.110.
(Ord. 4109 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 3689 § 3 (part), 1986)
Chapter 21.16
FINAL AND PARCEL MAPS
Sections:
   
21.16.010   Submission of final map, submission of parcel map.
   
21.16.020   Documents accompanying final or parcel maps.
   
21.16.030   Key map and legend.
   
21.16.040   Survey.
   
21.16.050   Contents of final and parcel maps - Area.
   
21.16.060   Block numbers.
   
21.16.070   Border.
   
21.16.080   Certificates.
   
21.16.090   City boundary lines.
   
21.16.100   Easements.
   
21.16.110   Highwater line.
   
21.16.120   Land subject to inundation.
   
21.16.130   Lot lines and boundary lines.
   
21.16.140   Lot numbers.
   
21.16.150   Monument line.
   
21.16.160   Monuments.
   
21.16.170   Use of lots.
   
21.16.180   Soils report.
   
21.16.190   Streets and other rights-of-way.
   
21.16.200   Additional information.
   
21.16.210   Final and parcel maps - Approval by city engineer and director of
planning.
   
21.16.220   Final and parcel maps - Approval, agreement for improvements,
conditions.
   
21.16.230   Final and parcel maps - Approval - Agreement for improvements -
Security bonds.
   
21.16.240   Final map - Approval by city council, submitted to city clerk.
   
21.16.250   Final and parcel maps - Approval and recording, effect.
   
21.16.260   Coordinated efforts of city and county.
   
21.16.270   Reversion to acreage.
   
21.16.280   Final or parcel map amendments.
21.16.010   Submission of final map, submission of parcel map.
   (a)   Within two years of the approval or conditional approval of a
tentative map, or a preliminary parcel map, the subdivider shall cause the
subdivision or any part thereof to be surveyed, and a final map or a parcel
map, as specified in
Chapter 21.08, to be prepared in conformance with the tentative map or
preliminary parcel map as approved or conditionally approved, and in compliance
with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this title and submitted to
the city engineer.
   Notwithstanding the foregoing time limitations, in the event that a combined
environmental impact report-environmental impact statement is being prepared on
a development project as defined in Section 65928 of the Government Code
pursuant to Section 21083.6 of the Public Resources Code, the city council, if
functioning as a lead agency as defined in Section 65929 of the Government Code
may waive the base time limits. In any event, the city council shall approve or
disapprove such development project within sixty days after the combined
environmental impact report-environmental impact statement has been completed
and adopted.
   (b)   An extension of time may be granted by the director of planning in the
case of a preliminary parcel map and by the city council after recommendation
of the planning commission in the case of a tentative map, upon the written
application of the subdivider within two years of the approval or conditional
approval of the tentative map or preliminary parcel map or prior to the
expiration of any previous extension granted under this subsection. Such
extension shall be subject to the maximum limitations set forth in the
Subdivision Map Act.
   (c)   All conditions of approval of the tentative or preliminary parcel map
shall be fulfilled prior to approval of a final map or parcel map, except those
conditions which are fulfilled by the filing of an agreement to perform those
conditions as specified in this title.
   (d)   Unless a final map or parcel map is filed, and all conditions of
approval are fulfilled within said two-year period, or such extension as may be
granted, the tentative or preliminary parcel map shall expire and all
proceedings shall terminate. Thereafter, no final or parcel map shall be filed
without first processing a tentative or preliminary parcel map.
   (e)   All streets, highways and other public ways, and all other easements,
dedication of access rights or areas required or offered for public use and
dedication shall be shown on the final or parcel map and such dedications or
offers to dedicate shall be made by certificate on the final or parcel map
unless otherwise required by this title or by the conditions of approval of the
tentative or preliminary parcel map. In the case of a parcel map, the director
of planning shall be authorized to accept any offers of dedication on behalf of
the city. The city may require as a condition of approval that a fee interest
in any areas dedicated for street purposes be conveyed to the city by deed.
   (f)   Tracings and an additional number of prints of the final or parcel map
as determined by the director of planning which conform to the requirements of
the law shall be submitted to the director of planning.
(Ord. 4642 § 45, 2000: Ord. 3345 § 35, 1982: Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.16.020   Documents accompanying final or parcel maps.
   (a)   The subdivider shall submit with the final map or the parcel map all
of the following:
   (1)   With each dedication or offer of dedication for the public use, a
preliminary title report issued by a title insurance company, in the name of
the record owner, issued to or for the benefit and protection of the city,
showing all parties whose consent is necessary and their interest therein;
   (2)   The instrument prohibiting the right of ingress or egress across rear
or side lot lines as may be required by Section
21.20.100 of this title;
   (3)   The calculation and traverse sheets used in computing the distance,
angles and courses shown on the final or parcel map and the ties to existing
and proposed monuments;
   (4)   Two copies of any proposed declarations of restrictions;
   (5)   The reports, recommendations, conditions, and findings required under
Section
21.12.070 of this title concerning soils reports and soils investigations;
   (6)   Construction plans and specifications and cost estimates for required
and proposed improvements including all test data, calculations and reports
necessary to support all design conditions or criteria;
   (7)   Any other documents, certifications, or instruments necessary to
fulfill requirements imposed at the time the tentative map was approved or
conditionally approved.
(Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.16.030   Key map and legend.
   When the final map or parcel map consists of two or more sheets, except
sheets showing only certificates and similar text, a key map showing the
relation of the sheets shall be placed on the first sheet. Every sheet shall
bear the scale, north point, legend, sheet number, and number of sheets
comprising the map.
(Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.16.040   Survey.
   Whenever the city engineer has established a system of coordinates, the
survey shall be tied into such system. The map shall show clearly what stakes,
monuments, or other evidences were found on the ground to determine the
boundary of the tract. The corners of all adjoining recorded subdivisions shall
be identified by lot and block numbers, tract name and place of record, or
other proper designation.
(Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.16.050   Contents of final and parcel maps - Area.
   The map shall indicate the acreage of each lot, to the nearest thousandth of
an acre.
(Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.16.060   Block numbers.
   Block numbers shall begin with the number "one" or letter "a" continuing
consecutively without omission or duplication throughout the tract. The numbers
or letters shall be solid and of sufficient size and thickness to stand out,
and shall be so placed as not to obliterate any figure and shall not be
enclosed in any design. Each block in its entirety shall be shown on one sheet.
Where adjoining blocks appear on separate sheets, the street adjoining both
blocks shall be shown on both sheets complete with monument line and property
line data.
(Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.16.070   Border.
   The boundary of the tract shall be designated by a distinctive border. Such
border shall not interfere with the legibility of figures or other data.
(Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.16.080   Certificates.
   A final map or parcel map shall contain those certificates required by the
Subdivision Map Act In addition, a final or parcel map shall contain a
certificate for approval by the director of planning. In the case of a parcel
map where dedications are required, the director of planning is authorized to
accept such dedications and an appropriate certificate shall be included for
signature by the director of planning.
(Ord. 3157 § l (part), 1979)
21.16.090   City boundary lines.
   City boundary lines crossing or abutting the subdivision shall be clearly
designated and referenced.
(Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.16.100   Easements.
   The map shall show the side lines of all easements to which the lots are
subject. Easements shall be labeled clearly and identified. If any easement is
not of record, a statement of such easement must appear on the title sheet.
Easements for storm drains, sewers, and other purposes shall be denoted by fine
dotted lines. The width of the easement and the lengths and bearings of the
lines thereof and sufficient ties thereto to locate the easement definitely
with respect to the subdivision must be shown.
(Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.16.110   Highwater line.
   The map shall show the line of high water if the subdivision or any part
thereof is adjacent to a stream and/or an area or areas subject to periodic
inundation by flood waters.
(Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.16.120   Land subject to inundation.
   If any portion of any land within the boundary shown on any final map,
parcel map, or record of survey map is subject to overflow, inundation, or
flood hazard by stormwaters, such fact and such portion shall be clearly shown
on the final map or parcel map. Such portion shall be enclosed in a separate
border on each sheet of the map upon which such portion appears.
(Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.16.130   Lot lines and boundary lines.
   Sufficient data shall be shown to determine readily the bearing and length
of every lot line, block line, and boundary line. Dimensions of lots shall be
given as the net dimensions to the boundaries of adjoining streets and shall be
shown in feet and hundredths of feet. No ditto marks shall be used. Bearings
and distances of straight lines and radii and arc length of curves shall be
shown.
(Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.16.140   Lot numbers.
   Lot numbers shall begin with the number "one" and shall continue
consecutively through the block, with no omissions or duplications.
(Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.16.150   Monument line.
   Whenever the city engineer has established the monument line of a street or
alley adjacent to or in the proposed subdivision, the map shall show the date
that all such monuments were established, shall indicate all such monuments
found, and shall refer such monuments to a field book or map. The map shall
state if the points were reset by ties.
(Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.16.160   Monuments.
   The map shall show the location and description of all monuments found in
making the survey of the proposed subdivision and shall include the bearings
and distances to such other existing monuments as may be necessary to establish
each portion of the proposed subdivision in relation to such existing
monuments.
(Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.16.170   Use of lots.
   The map shall define, delineate, and designate particularly all lots
intended for private purposes; all parcels offered for dedication for any
purpose, public or private; and any private streets permitted under the
provisions of this title with all dimensions, boundaries, and courses clearly
shown and defined in every instance. Parcels offered for dedication but not
accepted shall be designated by letter; any private streets shall be designated
"not a public street."
(Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.16.180   Soils report.
   When a soils report has been prepared, the date of report and the name of
the engineer making the report shall be recorded on the map.
(Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.16.190   Streets and other rights-of-way.
   The monument and sidelines of all streets, the total widths of all streets,
the widths of all the portions of such streets being dedicated, the widths of
existing dedications, the widths each side of the monument lines, and the
widths of any rights-of-way, including railroad rights-of-way, shall be shown
on the map.
(Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.16.200   Additional information.
   The map shall show also all other data that is or may be required by law. In
addition, the city may require additional information to be filed or recorded
simultaneously with a final or parcel map. The additional information shall be
in the form of a separate document or an additional map sheet which shall
indicate its relationship to the final or parcel map, and shall contain a
statement that the additional in-formation is for informational purposes, de-
scribing conditions as of the date of filing, and is not intended to affect
record title interest. The document or additional map sheet may also contain a
notation that the additional in-formation is derived from public records or
reports, and does not imply the correctness or sufficiency of those records or
reports by the preparer of the document or additional map sheet.
(Ord. 4661 § 6, 2000: Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.16.210   Final and parcel maps - Approval by city engineer and director of
planning.
   (a)   Within twenty days after receipt of a final or parcel map submitted,
along with accompanying data and documents, which map shall have all
certificates other than city approvals fully executed, the city engineer shall
examine the map and accompanying materials to determine whether the final or
parcel map is substantially the same as the approved or conditionally approved
tentative or preliminary parcel map; whether all provisions of the Subdivision
Map Act, this title and any other provisions of law applicable at the time of
the approval of the tentative or preliminary parcel map have been met; whether
all applicable provisions of law governing the approval of final and parcel
maps have been met; whether the final or parcel map is technically correct; and
whether all conditions of approval have been met. The director of planning
shall also review the submitted map and accompanying materials to determine
whether all conditions of approval have been met. In the event either the city
engineer or the director of planning shall determine that any noncompliance
exists, they shall advise the subdivider of that noncompliance and the
subdivider shall be afforded an opportunity to correct the map or fulfill any
remaining conditions. The time for review by the city engineer and director of
planning shall be automatically extended during any period during which the
subdivider is attempting to correct the map or fulfill any such conditions.
Unless the subdivider informs the city engineer that a determination of
approval or disapproval without further modification of the map or fulfillment
of conditions is desired, it shall be presumed that the subdivider is
attempting to correct those defects of which notice was given.
   Upon finally determining whether the map and accompanying materials comply
with the aforementioned standards, the city engineer shall either execute the
city engineer's certificate on the map or shall render written findings as to
any noncompliance or failure to fulfill conditions which prevent the execution
of the certificate.
   (b)   In the case of a parcel map, the city engineer shall forward the map,
either certified by the city engineer or with a statement indicating the
reasons such certification cannot be issued, to the director of planning. Based
upon the report of the city engineer and upon the findings of the review by the
director of planning, within fifteen days after receipt of the map from the
city engineer, the director of planning shall make those determinations set
forth in subsection (a) and shall either approve or disapprove the parcel map.
In the event of approval, the director of planning shall cause the map, along
with any appropriate documents, to be recorded in the office of the county
recorder. In the event of disapproval, written notice of the reasons therefor
shall be given to the subdivider.
   (c)   In the case of a final map, the director of planning shall file the
map, either certified by the city engineer and director of planning, or with a
statement indicating the reasons such certification cannot be issued, along
with a recommendation of approval or disapproval, to the city clerk for
submittal to the city council. For the purpose of this section, said
certification may be either upon the map or by report to the city council, with
actual certification to be performed after approval by the city council. Upon
filing of such map, the city clerk shall place the item upon the agenda of the
city council for action in compliance with the provisions of the Subdivision
Map Act and for acceptance or rejection of any offers of dedication.
(Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.16.220   Final and parcel maps - Approval, agreement for improvements,
conditions.
   (a)   If at the time of approval of the final map or the parcel map, any
required improvements have not been completed and accepted, as a condition
precedent to the approval of the final map or the parcel map, the subdivider
shall execute and file with the city clerk agreement between the subdivider and
the city, pursuant to Section 66462 of the Government Code, specifying the
period within which the subdivider shall complete all improvements and
providing that if the subdivider fails to complete such work within such
period, the city may complete such improvement work and recover the full cost
and expense thereof from the subdivider. Such agreements may provide that such
improvements shall be completed prior to the issuance of any permits for the
development of any of the parcels. Such agreement shall also provide for the
checking of improvement plans, the inspection of all improvements by the city
engineer and the reimbursement of the city for the cost of such checking and
inspections. Such agreement shall also provide that all improvements are
subject to approval by the city engineer. Said agreement may also contain such
other provisions as may be permissible under law and deemed necessary by the
city. The substance and form of any such agreement shall be subject to the
approval of the city manager and city attorney and said agreements shall be
executed by the city manager on behalf of the city. Such agreements may provide
for extensions of time issued by the city manager upon recommendation of the
city engineer.
   The agreement may also provide for the termination of the agreement upon the
completion of proceedings under an assessment district act for the construction
of improvements deemed by the city engineer to be at least the equivalent of
the improvements specified in such agreement and required to be constructed by
the subdivider.
   Such agreements and security shall be submitted to the city, fully executed
by subdivider prior to the approval of any final or parcel map. No final or
parcel map for which such an agreement is required shall be recorded prior to
receipt of said agreement and accompanying security. Said agreement shall be
recorded concurrently with the map.
(Ord. 3157 § l (part), 1979)
21.16.230   Final and parcel maps - Approval - Agreement for improvements -
Security bonds.
   Whenever the subdivider enters into an agreement pursuant to Section
21.16.220 of this title, with such agreement and as a further condition of the
approval of the final or parcel map, the subdivider shall file with the city
adequate security to guarantee full and faithful performance thereof. Such
security may be in any form specified in Chapter 5 of the Subdivision Map Act
and shall be in the following amounts:
   (a)   The amount of one hundred percent of the total estimated cost of the
improvement or of the act to be performed, including cost of engineering,
surveying and inspection, as determined by the city engineer, including an
inflationary factor based upon the time for completion, conditioned upon the
faithful performance of the act or agreement. In the event the subdivider
elects to furnish security in the form of a cash deposit or other pledge of
cash, payable to the city upon demand without any conditions precedent, the
city manager may approve a reduction in this amount of security guaranteeing
performance by not more than fifty percent; provided that the total of such
cash deposit guaranteeing both faithful performance and payment of contractors,
subcontractors and materialmen shall not be less than one hundred percent of
the cost of improvement, and the whole of said deposit shall be available for
use for either purpose;
   (b)   An additional amount equal to fifty percent of the total estimated
cost of the improvement, as determined by the city engineer, including an
inflationary factor based upon the time for completion, securing payment to the
contractor, subcontractors and to persons furnishing labor, materials or
equipment to them for the improvement or the performance of the required act;
   (c)   An amount to be determined by the city engineer to guarantee and
warranty the work for a period of one year following the completion and
acceptance of the work against any defective work or labor done, or defective
materials furnished;
   (d)   As a part of the obligation guaranteed by the security and in addition
to the face amount of the security, there shall be included costs and
reasonable expenses and fees, including reasonable attorneys' fees, incurred by
the city in successfully enforcing the obligations secured.
(Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.16.240   Final map - Approval by city council, submitted to city clerk.
   At the council's first regular meeting following its receipt of the final
map or within ten days of the filing of the final map, whichever is later, the
city council shall consider such map and any offers of dedication. The city
council may reject any or all offers of dedication. If the city council
determines that the map meets the requirements of the Subdivision Map Act and
this title, it shall approve the map and certify such approval on the map. It
shall transmit the map to the city clerk. The city council shall not disapprove
a final map when the failure of the map is the result of a technical and
inadvertent error which, in the opinion of the city council does not materially
affect the validity of the map; provided that, to the extent possible, the map
shall be corrected prior to recordation.
(Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.16.250   Final and parcel maps - Approval and recording, effect.
   No final or parcel map shall have any effect until approved under this
title. No title to any property described in any offer of dedication shall be
conveyed until the map has been recorded in the office of the county recorder.
(Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.16.260   Coordinated efforts of city and county.
   If a subdivision is partly in the city and partly in the county, the county
surveyor and the city engineer shall enter into an agreement by and with the
consent of their respective governing bodies providing that either shall
perform the duties prescribed for the city engineer in this chapter, or
providing for an apportionment between them of such duties. When by such
agreement all such duties devolve upon either the city engineer or the county
surveyor, such officer shall perform said duties. After performance thereof,
such officer shall certify to the performance of said duties on the map. When
by such agreement the duties are apportioned between the county surveyor and
the city engineer, each officer shall, after the performance thereof, make
certification on said map, covering the duties performed by each.
(Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979).
21.16.270   Reversion to acreage.
   A reversion to acreage shall be accomplished in conformance with Chapter 6
of the Subdivision Map Act. A parcel map may be filed for the purpose of
reverting to acreage land previously subdivided and consisting of four or less
contiguous parcels under one ownership. In the event a reversion to acreage is
accomplished by means of a parcel map, the director of planning shall be the
advisory agency and shall be empowered to perform all functions of the
legislative body under said Chapter 6. All maps filed for the purpose of
reverting land to acreage shall be conspicuously so designated under the title
"The Purpose of this Map is a Reversion to Acreage."
(Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.16.280   Final or parcel map amendments.
   In addition to the amendments authorized by Government Code Section 66469,
after a final map or parcel map is filed in the office of the county recorder,
the recorded map may be modified by a certificate of correction or an amending
map if (i) there are changes in circumstances which make any or all of the
conditions of such a map no longer appropriate or necessary, (ii) that the
modifications do not impose any additional burden on the present fee owner of
the property, (iii) the modifications do not alter any right, title, or
interest in the real property reflected on the recorded map, and (iv) the map
as modified conforms to the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and
Chapter 21.16 of this title. The decision to approve or deny a modification
shall be made by the city council for final maps and by the director of
planning and community development in the case of parcel maps. Prior to
approval of any modification, notice shall be given as provided in Section
21.12.090. The hearing shall be confined to consideration of and action on the
proposed modification. The decision of the director on a modification of a
parcel map is subject to the appeal procedures of this title.
(Ord. 4661 § 7, 2000)
Chapter 21.20
DESIGN
Sections:
   
21.20.010   Generally.
   
21.20.020   Conformance to master plan and local law.
   
21.20.030   Alleys.
   
21.20.040   Boundaries of subdivision.
   
21.20.050   Divided lots.
   
21.20.060   Drainage.
   
21.20.070   Easements.
   
21.20.080   Interior lots with double frontage.
   
21.20.090   Land reserved for public use.
   
21.20.100   Lots.
   
21.20.110   Nonaccess and planting strips.
   
21.20.120   Service roads and off-street parking.
   
21.20.130   Side lot lines.
   
21.20.140   Street names.
   
21.20.150   Street name and traffic-control signs.
   
21.20.160   Streets and highways - Conformance to master plan.
   
21.20.170   Conformance to council proceedings.
   
21.20.180   Access strips.
   
21.20.190   Alignment.
   
21.20.200   Centerlines.
   
21.20.210   Grades.
   
21.20.220   Intersection corner rounding.
   
21.20.230   Turnarounds.
   
21.20.240   Widths.
   
21.20.250   Walkways.
   
21.20.260   Watercourses.
   
21.20.270   Local transit facilities.
   
21.20.280   Bicycle paths.
   
21.20.290   Required dedications.
   
21.20.300   Preliminary parcel map - Additional requirements.
   
21.20.301   Flag lots.
   
21.20.310   Solar requirements.
   
21.20.320   Flood hazard regulations.
21.20.010   Generally.
   The provisions of this chapter shall govern the design of all subdivisions.
The provisions of this chapter shall be incorporated in any subdivision
approval unless the city council, or director of planning in the case of a
preliminary parcel map, finds that due to the particular circumstances these
design criteria are not necessary or that alternative designs are preferable;
provided, that any modifications to the lot size, dimensions, location or
configuration standards shall only be made upon request for and approval of
exceptions to said standards, except when each nonconforming lot to be created
contains a residence with recorded preservation covenants, where no request for
nor approval of exceptions to said standards shall be required. Design of all
subdivisions shall include such facilities for the handicapped as may be
required by federal, state or local law.
(Ord. 5051 § 7, 2009: Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.20.020   Conformance to master plan and local law.
   In all respects, subdivisions shall be consistent with the Palo Alto
comprehensive plan. Subdivisions shall also conform with any specific plan.
Subdivisions shall also conform with all other provisions of law, including but
not limited to, zoning, safety and health codes. The design of the subdivision
or of improvements shall conform in all respects to accepted standards of
engineering and shall be subject to the approval of the city engineer. Any
subdivision may be approved subject to such additional design criteria or
conditions as may be necessary to insure the public health, safety, welfare and
convenience.
(Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.20.030   Alleys.
   When any lots are proposed for commercial or industrial usage, alleys at
least twenty feet in width may be required at the rear thereof with adequate
ingress and egress for truck traffic.
(Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.20.040   Boundaries of subdivision.
   Where possible, the exterior boundaries of all subdivisions shall be to the
centerline of all streets and highways adjacent to said subdivision unless such
street or highway is not within the city limits; in such a case, the exterior
boundary of the subdivision will coincide with the city limits. The subdivider
shall be required to dedicate to the city all property within the city which is
not owned by another public agency between the centerline and the proposed
right-of-way line of such street or highway as may be established by official
plan lines of the city or established by the comprehensive plan or established
by any master plan of streets and highways or any specific plan. Any property
between the centerline and the proposed right-of-way line with another public
jurisdiction shall be dedicated to that jurisdiction. Such property shall be
improved or the full cost of making permanent improvements to the property
shall be deposited with the city as prescribed in this chapter.
(Ord. 3157 § l (part), 1979)
21.20.050   Divided lots.
   No lot shall be divided by a city boundary line.
(Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.20.060   Drainage.
   All lots shall be graded to drain to a public street; but the city engineer
may require or allow alternative drainage patterns as may be reasonably
necessary to avoid excessive grading or grading which results in a significant
height differential at any property line.
(Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.20.070   Easements.
   Public utility, sanitary sewer, and drainage easements shall be provided in
such locations and to such widths as may be required by the director of
utilities and city engineer.
(Ord. 3157 § l (part), 1979)
21.20.080   Interior lots with double frontage.
   Interior lots having double frontage will not be approved.
(Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.20.090   Land reserved for public use.
   The city council may, as a condition of approval of any tentative map,
require the subdivider to reserve areas of real property for parks,
recreational facilities, fire stations, libraries, or other public uses if such
reservation would implement the Palo Alto comprehensive plan or any adopted
specific plan. Such reservations shall be pursuant to Section 66479 et seq. of
the Government Code.
(Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.20.100   Lots.
   The size and shape of lots shall conform with any zoning regulations
effective in the area of the proposed subdivisions and as shown on the zoning
map. In addition, residential lots on curved or cul-de-sac streets shall have a
minimum width at the building setback line of sixty feet, a minimum average
depth of one hundred feet, and a minimum area of six thousand square feet;
provided, that this requirement shall not be deemed to reduce any more
restrictive requirement contained in the zoning regulations.
(Ord. 3157 § l (part), 1979)
21.20.110   Nonaccess and planting strips.
   When a rear or side lot line of a lot borders on any street, the right of
ingress or egress may be prohibited to such lot across such rear or side lot
line. Dedication of such access rights shall be made either on the map or by
separate instrument satisfactory to the city attorney. When the rear or side
lot line of any lot borders any freeway, state highway, expressway, or major
thoroughfare, a planting strip approved by the city engineer may be required
adjacent to such freeway, highway, expressway, or major thoroughfare.
(Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.20.120   Service roads and off-street parking.
   When lots proposed for commercial usage front on any expressway, arterial or
collector street, a service road to provide adequate ingress and egress or in
lieu thereof adjacent areas for public off-street parking purposes may be
required. When any lot proposed for residential use fronts on any freeway,
state highway, expressway, or arterial, an improved service road may be
required at the front of such lot. In addition, adequate off-street parking
areas for all lots proposed for commercial use shall be required.
(Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.20.130   Side lot lines.
   The side lot lines of all lots, as far as practicable, shall be at right
angles to straight streets or radial to curved streets.
(Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.20.140   Street names.
   Street names, whether for public or private streets, require approval by the
city council. No street name shall be duplicated. No street name signs or other
identification shall be erected showing any name other than that approved by
the city council.
(Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.20.150   Street name and traffic-control signs.
   All street names shall be clearly shown upon signs approved by the city
engineer. The city engineer shall require traffic-control signal systems,
signs, and markings adequate to secure the objectives of public safety and the
comprehensive plan. The design and installation of such systems, signs and
markings shall be subject to the approval of the city engineer.
(Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.20.160   Streets and highways - Conformance to master plan.
   The street design shall conform both in width and alignment to any master
plan of streets approved by the city council.
(Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.20.170   Conformance to council proceedings.
   The street design shall conform to any proceedings affecting the subdivision
which may have been initiated by the city council on its own motion or approved
by the city council upon initiation by any other legally constituted bodies of
the city, county, or state. If a parcel of land to be subdivided includes a
portion of the right-of-way to be acquired for a freeway or expressway and the
city council determines the boundaries of the right-of-way to be acquired, such
right-of-way shall be shown on the tentative and final or parcel maps.
(Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.20.180   Access strips.
   Reserve strips controlling the access to public ways or which will not be
taxable for special improvements, shall be approved only if such strips are
necessary for the protection of the public welfare or of substantial property
rights, or both. The control and disposal of the land comprising such strips
shall be placed within the jurisdiction of the city under conditions deemed
sufficient by the city attorney and approved by the city council or director of
planning in the case of a preliminary parcel map.
(Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.20.190   Alignment.
   As far as practicable, the streets shall be in alignment with existing
adjacent streets by continuations of the centerlines thereof and by adjustments
by curves.
(Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.20.200   Centerlines.
   Street centerlines shall intersect one another at an angle as near to a
right angle as practicable by tangents not less than seventy-five feet in
length.
(Ord. 3157 § l (part), 1979)
21.20.210   Grades.
   No freeway, expressway, arterial or collector street shall have a grade of
more than seven percent. No other street shall have a grade of more than
fifteen percent.
(Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.20.220   Intersection corner rounding.
   Whenever any street intersects any other street, the property lines at each
block corner thus formed shall be rounded with a curve having a radius of net
less than ten feet. The city engineer may require a greater curve radius if
streets intersect at other than right angles. This section shall not apply at
any intersection where there are no building setback requirements.
(Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.20.230   Turnarounds.
   All dead-end streets shall have a turnaround with a minimum radius of forty
feet, except that where necessary to give access to or to permit a satisfactory
future subdivision of adjoining land, streets may extend to the boundary of the
property and the resulting dead-end streets may be approved without a
turnaround.
(Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.20.240   Widths.
   (a)   Streets shown in any master street plan or affected by proceedings
initiated or approved by the city council shall have widths as required by such
plan or proceedings.
   (b)   All other streets shall have rights-of-way of the following widths,
except where the city council determines that the topography or the small
number of lots served and the probable future traffic development are such as
to justify a narrowed width. Increased widths may be required where streets are
to serve nonresidential property, or where probable traffic conditions warrant
such increased widths:
   (1)   Major arterials: eighty-six feet to one hundred feet;
   (2)   Collector streets, local streets, or cul-de-sac streets longer than
three hundred fifty feet: sixty feet;
   (3)   Cul-de-sac streets three hundred fifty feet or less in length: fifty
feet;
   (4)   Private streets: Such right-of-way as would be required for a
comparable public street, except as specified below. Streets serving five or
more lots shall be no less than thirty-two feet wide. Streets serving four or
fewer lots shall be no less than twenty-two feet wide providing that the
Director of Planning and Community Environment and the City Council
specifically approves the twenty-two foot street width.
      (a)   If a building adjacent to a private street has a setback of at
least twenty feet between the street and building allowing on-site parking,
then the width of the private street may be no less than twenty-six feet at the
discretion of the Director of Planning and Community Environment and the City
Council.
      (b)   If a private street has a public parking strip of at least six feet
in width between the street and the building location, then the width of the
private street may be no less than twenty-six feet at the discretion of the
Director of Planning and Community Environment and the City Council.
Effective Date: This private street width requirement applies to any project or
development that has not obtained a final map, building permit, and performed
significant construction as of July 31, 2009. If the effective date of July 31,
2009, is held by a court of competent jurisdiction in a final judicial action
to be void, voidable, or unenforceable, then the effective date of this
ordinance as it applies to private street width shall be November 4, 2009.
(Ord. 5059 § 5, 2009: Ord. 3345 § 36, 1982: Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.20.250   Walkways.
   Walkways through long blocks where necessary to provide adequate public
access to schools, parks, or other areas may be required. The design and
locations of such walkways shall be approved by the city council, or the
director of planning in the case of a preliminary parcel map.
(Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.20.260   Watercourses.
   A right-of-way for storm drainage purposes shall be required and shall
conform substantially with the lines of any natural watercourse or channel,
stream, or creek that traverses the subdivision. If a parcel of land to be
subdivided includes a portion of the right-of-way to be acquired for flood
control or drainage purposes and the city council determines the boundaries of
the right-of-way to be acquired, such right-of-way shall be shown on the
tentative and final and parcel maps and shall either be dedicated or withheld
from the subdivision.
(Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.20.270   Local transit facilities.
   If the subdivision as shown on the tentative map has a potential for two
hundred dwelling units or more if developed to the maximum density, or contains
one hundred acres or more, and transit services are or within a reasonable time
will be made available to such subdivision, local transit facilities, such as
bus turn-outs, benches, shelters, landing pads, or similar items which directly
benefit the residents of such subdivision may be required.
(Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.20.280   Bicycle paths.
   If the subdivision as shown on the tentative map thereof contains two
hundred or more parcels, and the subdivider is required to dedicate or offer to
dedicate real property for roadways, the subdivision shall also contain bicycle
paths for the use and safety of the residents of the subdivision.
(Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.20.290   Required dedications.
   In connection with the design of any subdivision, the subdivider shall make
such dedications and improvements as are specified in this chapter or in
Chapters
21.24 and
21.28.
(Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.20.300   Preliminary parcel map - Additional requirements.
   In addition to the other requirements of this chapter, the standards
contained in this section shall be applicable to any subdivision for which a
preliminary parcel map is required and is approved by the director of planning.
All lots created by such division shall have frontage, equal to the minimum
required by this title, upon a street dedicated as a public street.
(Ord. 3850 § 4, 1989: Ord. 3340 § 18, 1982: Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.20.301   Flag lots.
   (a)   The director of planning may approve, pursuant to a preliminary parcel
map, not more than one flag lot, as defined in Title 18 of this code, under the
following conditions:
      (1)   The flag lot shall be used only for single-family residential use;
      (2)   The flag lot shall meet all of the requirements of the zone
district within which it is
located and, in addition, shall have an area which exceeds the lot area
requirement of the zone district by not less than twenty percent exclusive of
any portion of the lot used for access to a public street.
   (3)   Access from the flag lot to a public street shall not be over an
easement but over land under the same ownership as the flag lot. Such access
shall have a minimum width of fifteen feet and shall have a paved way not less
than ten feet in width.
   (4)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the flag lot or adjacent lot to be
created contains a residence with recorded preservation covenants, the flag lot
area is not required to exceed the low requirement of the zone district and the
flag lot access may be over an easement or land under the same ownership, the
access shall have a minimum width of twelve feet for a maximum length no more
than 100 feet, and shall have a paved way not less than ten feet in width, and
no request for nor approval of exceptions to said standards shall be required.
   (b)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, the creation of flag lots, as defined
in Title 18 of this code, shall be prohibited in the R-1 single- family
residence district, and no exceptions shall be granted therefore; provided,
however, that:
   (1)   Flag lots may be created in the R-1 zone district as long as a
preservation covenant is recorded for a historic resource located on the flag
lot or on an adjacent lot to be created; and
   (2)   Flag lots in the R-1 zone district shall comply with the requirements
stated in subsection (a), except that smaller lot areas may be approved
pursuant to Section
18.12.140 of Title 18.
   (3)   Flag lots validly existing in the R-1 district as of the effective
date of said prohibition shall, nonetheless, be recognized as legal lots for
purposes of this Title 21 only. Development of such existing flag lots shall be
subject to all applicable provisions of Title 18 of this code as of the date of
any such proposed development.
(Ord. 5476 § 1, 2019: Ord. 5051 § 8, 2009: Ord. 3850 § 2, 1989)
21.20.310   Solar requirements.
   All major subdivisions shall provide, to the extent feasible, for future
passive or natural heating or cooling opportunities in the subdivision.
(Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.20.320   Flood hazard regulations.
   For the purpose of carrying out the intent of
Chapter 16.52 of this code, all subdivisions shall:
   (a)   Be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
   (b)   Have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical,
and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage;
   (c)   Have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage;
and
   (d)   Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals
and other proposed developments which contain at least fifty lots or five acres
(whichever is less).
(Ord. 3158 § 2, 1979)
Chapter 21.24
DEDICATIONS
Sections:
   
21.24.010   Required dedications.
   
21.24.020   Dedication of improvements.
21.24.010   Required dedications.
   The subdivider shall dedicate or offer to dedicate to the city or other
appropriate public agency upon the final or parcel map any and all rights-of-
way and easements necessary for the layout, maintenance and operation of all
public improvements required or permitted under this title or by specific
requirement of the subdivision approval. Dedications shall also be made
permitting or restricting use of certain property or rights as required by this
title. All easements and rights-of-way shall be the width specified in this
title or the specific approval and shall be of sufficient size to meet the
requirements of the purpose for which they are dedicated. Required dedications
shall include, but not he limited to:
   (a)   Easements for public utility, sanitary sewer and drainage purposes,
and for the overhead pole lines and anchors required under this title, or as
may be required by the director of utilities;
   (b)   The improved planting strips required under this title;
   (c)   The improved service roads and/or the improved parking areas required
by Section
21.20.120;
   (d)   The installed street name signs and traffic-control signals system,
signs, and markings required under this title;
   (e)   The rights-of-way for public streets and alleys approved under this
title. Fee title to all public street rights-of-way shall be conveyed to the
city by separate deed to be recorded with the final or parcel map;
   (f)   The rights-of-way for freeways, or expressways required to be shown on
the tentative map under Section
21.20.160, unless the subdivider withholds from the subdivision all the areas
included in such right-of-way;
   (g)   The rights-of-way for storm drainage required under this title, unless
the subdivider withholds from the subdivision all the area included in such
right-of-way;
   (h)   Bicycle paths required or shown on the tentative or preliminary parcel
map;
   (i)   Transit facilities required or shown on the tentative or preliminary
parcel map;
   (j)   Dedication of access rights as required under this title.
(Ord. 4642 § 46, 2000: Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.24.020   Dedication of improvements.
   Whenever any dedication for public improvements is required under this
chapter, such dedication shall include not only such right-of-way and easement
as is required for said improvements, but also any such improvements
constructed, installed or erected by the subdivider.
(Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
Chapter 21.28
IMPROVEMENTS
Sections:
   
21.28.010   Improvements required of all subdivisions.
   
21.28.020   Standards for improvements.
   
21.28.030   Submission and approval of plans prior to improvement work.
   
21.28.040   Inspection and approval of improvements, cost of inspection.
   
21.28.050   Underground facilities, construction prior to street finishing.
   
21.28.060   Specific improvements required - Benchmarks.
   
21.28.070   Curbs and gutters.
   
21.28.080   Monuments.
   
21.28.090   Railroad crossings.
   
21.28.100   Sewers.
   
21.28.110   Sidewalks.
   
21.28.120   Street lighting.
   
21.28.130   Street trees.
   
21.28.140   Streets.
   
21.28.150   Water mains, fire hydrants, and gas mains.
   
21.28.160   Street name and traffic-control signs.
   
21.28.170   Alleys.
   
21.28.180   Planting strips.
   
21.28.190   Service roads and off-street parking.
   
21.28.200   Undergrounding of public utilities.
   
21.28.210   Storm drainage.
   
21.28.220   Walkways.
   
21.28.230   Bicycle paths.
   
21.28.240   Local transit facilities.
   
21.28.250   Other improvements.
21.28.010   Improvements required of all subdivisions.
   The improvements set forth in this chapter shall be required of all
subdivisions unless the city council or director of planning, in the case of a
preliminary parcel map, finds that due to the particular circumstances of the
subdivision said improvements are not necessary, are not desirable, or that
alternatives are desired for the public health, safety and welfare. The
subdivider shall pay the expense of all required improvements.
(Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.28.020   Standards for improvements.
   All improvements shall be subject to the approval of the city engineer and
shall not be less than those set forth in the "Standard Specifications of the
City of Palo Alto," copies of which are on file in the office of the city
engineer; except that the city engineer may approve alternate standards if
conditions such as location, size, and terrain make the application of such
specifications unfeasible or undesirable for the particular improvement. All
improvements shall also be subject to the standards of the director of
utilities and fire chief. The location of all improvements shall be subject to
the approval of the city engineer. All improvements shall provide facilities
for the handicapped as required by federal, state or local law.
(Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.28.030   Submission and approval of plans prior to improvement work.
   Plans and profiles for all improvement work shall be prepared in accordance
with the requirements of the city engineer. No improvement work shall be
commenced until such plans and the profiles have been submitted to and approved
by the city engineer. The subdivider shall be required to pay for the cost of
checking such plans.
(Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.28.040   Inspection and approval of improvements, cost of inspection.
   All improvements shall be constructed under the inspection of and subject to
the approval of the city engineer. The subdivider shall pay the cost of such
inspection.
(Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.28.050   Underground facilities, construction prior to street finishing.
   All underground facilities and storm drains installed in streets or alleys
shall be constructed prior to the surfacing of such streets or alleys.
Connections for all underground utilities shall be laid to such lengths as the
city engineer determines necessary to avoid disturbing the street or alley
improvements when service connections are made.
(Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.28.060   Specific improvements required - Benchmarks.
   Permanent and accurate benchmarks shall be established on the monument or
other approved location at each street intersection. Complete field notes
showing locations and elevations of all benchmarks and monuments shall be filed
with the city engineer.
(Ord. 3157 § l (part), 1979)
21.28.070   Curbs and gutters.
   Curbs and gutters shall be installed to locations and grades approved by the
city engineer. Ramps shall be provided for the handicapped in accordance with
state and local requirements.
(Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.28.080   Monuments.
   Permanent pipe monuments and boxes shall conform to the standards of the
city. Permanent pipe monuments shall be set at each boundary corner of the
subdivision along the exterior boundary lines at intervals of approximately
five hundred feet at the beginning of curves and ending of curves of property
line curves. Monuments shall be set at intersections of all street monument
line tangents and at both the beginning of curves and ending of curves of all
monument line curves. Complete field notes showing permanent references or ties
shall be filed with the city engineer. All monuments that are required to be
set shall be marked to conform with the provisions of Chapter 775 of the
Statutes of 1935, and all subsequent amendments thereto and with the provisions
of this title.
(Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.28.090   Railroad crossings.
   Provision shall be made for all railroad crossings necessary to provide
access or circulation within the proposed subdivision, including the
preparation of all documents necessary for application to the California State
Public Utilities Commission for the establishment and improvement of such
crossings.
(Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.28.100   Sewers.
   Sanitary sewer facilities connecting with the existing city sewer system
shall be installed to serve each lot and to grades and sizes approved by the
city engineer. The location, grade and size of all sewers must be approved by
the city engineer.
(Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.28.110   Sidewalks.
   Sidewalks shall be installed to locations, grades, and widths approved by
the city engineer.
(Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.28.120   Street lighting.
   Street lights shall be installed.
(Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.28.130   Street trees.
   Approved street trees shall be provided and planted by the subdivider.
(Ord. 3157 § l (part), 1979)
21.28.140   Streets.
   All streets shall be graded and surfaced to widths and grades approved by
the city engineer. All extensions of subdivision streets to the intersecting
paving line of any county road, city street or state highway shall be improved.
(Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.28.150   Water mains, fire hydrants, and gas mains.
   Water mains, fire hydrants, and gas mains connecting to the city system
shall be installed as required by the city engineer, fire chief, and director
of utilities.
(Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.28.160   Street name and traffic-control signs.
   Street name and traffic-control signal systems, signs, and markings shall be
installed by the subdivider when required.
(Ord. 3157 § 1 1979)
21.28.170   Alleys.
   All alleys shall be paved.
(Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.28.180   Planting strips.
   All planting strips shall be landscaped.
(Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.28.190   Service roads and off-street parking.
   All service roads and off-street parking areas shall be improved.
(Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.28.200   Undergrounding of public utilities.
   All public utilities shall be installed underground.
(Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.28.210   Storm drainage.
   Adequate storm drainage improvements shall be required, including, but not
limited to, storm drain sewers, structures for drainage, and access to such
improvements for service and/or public safety.
(Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.28.220   Walkways.
   Walkways shall be improved.
(Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.28.230   Bicycle paths.
   Bicycle paths shall be paved.
(Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.28.240   Local transit facilities.
   Local transit facilities shall be improved.
(Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.28.250   Other improvements.
   Other improvements necessary or convenient to insure conformity to or
implementation of the comprehensive plan or other local ordinances and to
insure the public health, safety and welfare, shall be required. In addition,
improvements outside of the subdivision may be required where such improvements
are required for the general health, safety and welfare, and where conditions
necessitating such improvements are caused or aggravated by the subdivision.
(Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
Chapter 21.32
CONDITIONAL EXCEPTIONS
Sections:
   
21.32.010   Application for exceptions.
   
21.32.020   Justifications and findings, conditions.
   
21.32.030   Minor subdivision.
21.32.010   Application for exceptions.
   A subdivider may apply for conditional exceptions to the requirements and
regulations set forth in this title and Title 18, as defined in Section
21.04.030(b)(17). Such exceptions may be granted only by the city council after
recommendation by the planning commission. Application for such exception shall
be made by petition of the subdivider, stating fully the grounds of the
application and the facts relied upon by the petitioner. Such petition shall be
submitted with the tentative or preliminary parcel map for which the exception
is requested and shall be reviewed and processed concurrent with said map.
(Ord. 5432 § 19, 2018: Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.32.020   Justifications and findings, conditions.
   (a)   Exceptions shall be granted only upon a finding that the approval will
secure substantially the objectives of the regulations or requirements to which
the exceptions are requested, shall protect the public health, safety,
convenience, and the general welfare and shall be consistent with and implement
the policies and objectives of the comprehensive plan. Any approval of
exceptions may be made upon such conditions as are deemed necessary to secure
such compliance.
   (b)   Exceptions shall be granted only upon making the following findings:
   (1)   There are special circumstances or conditions affecting the property.
   (2)   The exception is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a
substantial property right of the petitioner.
   (3)   The granting of the exception will not be detrimental to the public
welfare or injurious to other property in the territory in which the property
is situated.
   (4)   The granting of the exception will not violate the requirements,
goals, policies, or spirit of the law.
   (c)   In the event an exception is granted, any conditions necessary to
achieve the objectives of this title, the comprehensive plan, or any provision
of law shall be imposed.
(Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.32.030   Minor subdivision.
   The director of planning shall not be authorized to grant any exceptions. In
the event a petition for exceptions is filed in conjunction with a tentative
parcel map, the director of planning shall not approve or disapprove the map,
but shall process said map and forward it to the planning commission and city
council for action as in the case of a tentative map.
(Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
Chapter 21.36
APPEALS
Sections:
   
21.36.010   Notice.
   
21.36.020   Hearing before planning commission.
   
21.36.030   Action by city council.
   
21.36.040   Extension of time.
21.36.010   Notice.
   Any aggrieved person may appeal from the decision of the director of
planning in approving, conditionally approving or denying a preliminary parcel
map or from any portion or condition thereof. Such appeal shall be taken to the
city council; provided, that prior to consideration of the appeal by the city
council, the planning commission, acting as an advisory appeal board, shall
review the appeal and make its recommendations to the city council. An appeal
shall be commenced by filing a notice of appeal with the director of planning.
Such notice shall be filed within fifteen days of the decision of the director
of planning which is the subject of the appeal. An appeal notice filed after
such fifteen-day period shall not be processed. Any decision not appealed
within said time shall become final. The notice of appeal shall set forth in
detail the decision, or portion thereof, appealed and the grounds for the
appeal. The notice of appeal shall be accompanied by eighteen copies of the
tentative parcel map.
(Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.36.020   Hearing before planning commission.
   Within thirty days after the filing of the notice of appeal, the planning
commission shall hold a hearing and consider the appeal. The director of
planning shall submit a written report to the planning commission. Within ten
days after the conclusion of the hearing, the planning commission shall make
its recommendation. The planning commission may recommend that the city council
sustain, modify, or overrule the decision of the director of planning. Said
recommendation shall be forwarded to the city clerk for presentation to the
city council.
(Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.36.030   Action by city council.
   The appeal shall be set for a hearing before the city council within thirty
days after receipt of the planning commission's recommendation by the city
clerk. Within seven days after the conclusion of the hearing, the city council
shall render its decision and findings based upon the testimony and documents
produced before it or before the planning commission. The city council may
sustain, modify, or overrule the decision of the director of planning based
upon the provisions of this title and the Subdivision Map Act.
(Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.36.040   Extension of time.
   Any of the time limits contained in this section, except the fifteen-day
period for filing a notice of appeal, may be extended by the mutual consent of
the appellant, the subdivider, and the agency before which the appeal is
pending.
(Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
Chapter 21.40
CONVERSIONS OF RENTAL HOUSING TO CONDOMINIUMS AND OTHER COMMUNITY HOUSING
PROJECTS
Sections:
   
21.40.010   Purposes.
   
21.40.020   Definitions.
   
21.40.030   Scope.
   
21.40.040   Determination of vacancy rate and surplus.
   
21.40.050   When an application for conversion may be filed.
   
21.40.060   Approval of a map for conversion.
   
21.40.070   Contents of an application.
   
21.40.080   Time limits.
   
21.40.090   Severability.
21.40.010   Purposes.
   (a)   The purposes of this chapter are:
   (1)   To seek a reasonable balance of rental and ownership housing in the
city in a variety of individual choices of tenure, type, price, and location of
housing;
   (2)   To protect the supply of multi-family rental housing;
   (3)   To protect the supply of rental housing for low and moderate income
persons and families;
   (4)   To reduce and avoid displacement of tenants, particularly senior
citizens and families with school-age children, who may be required to move
from the community due to a shortage of replacement rental housing;
   (5)   In the event of a conversion, to assure that purchasers have adequate
information on the physical conditions of the structure and that the structure
meets adequate health and safety standards;
   (6)   In the event of a conversion, to give priority for purchase of units
to existing tenants;
   (7)   To meet the goals of the comprehensive plan, including the below-
market-rate programs.
(Ord. 3295 § 1 (part), 1981: Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.40.020   Definitions.
   (a)   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions are
adopted:
   (1)   "Community housing" and "community housing project" mean and include
the following:
   (A)   "Community apartment," which means a project in which an undivided
interest in the land is coupled with the right of exclusive occupancy of any
apartment thereon;
   (B)   "Condominium," which means an estate in real property consisting of an
undivided interest in common in a portion of a parcel of real property together
with a separate interest in space in a residential building on such real
property;
   (C)   "Planned development," which means a real estate development having
either or both of the following features:
   (i)   Any contiguous or noncontiguous lots, parcels or areas owned in common
by the owners of the separately owned lots, parcels or areas consisting of
areas or facilities the beneficial use and enjoyment of which is reserved to
some or all of the owners of separately owned lots, parcels or areas.
   (ii)   Any power exists to enforce any obligation in connection with
membership in the owners association, or any obligation pertaining to the
beneficial use and enjoyment of any portion of, or any interest in, either the
separately or commonly owned lots, parcels or areas by means of a levy or
assessment which may become a lien upon the separately owned lots, parcels or
areas of defaulting owners or members, which said lien may be foreclosed in any
manner provided by law for the foreclosure of mortgages or deeds of trust, with
or without a power of sale;
   (D)   "Stock cooperative," which means a corporation which is formed or
availed of primarily for the purpose of holding title, either in fee simple or
for a term of years, to improved real property, if all or substantially all of
the shareholders of such corporation receive a right of exclusive occupancy in
a portion of the real property, title to which is held by the corporation,
which right of occupancy is transferable only concurrently with the transfer of
the share or shares of stock or membership certificate in the corporation held
by the person having such right of occupancy. The term "stock cooperative" does
not include a limited-equity housing cooperative as defined in California
Business and Professions Code Section 11003.4;
   (E)   Such other forms of ownership in which a parcel or parcels of real
property, including all structures thereon, are wholly or partially rented or
leased for residential purposes and are proposed to be divided, as land or air
space, into three or more parcels, units or rights of exclusive occupancy.
   (2)   "Conversion" means a change, including a proposed change, in the type
of ownership of a parcel or parcels of land, together with the existing
structures, from a rental housing complex to a community housing project,
regardless of whether substantial improvements have been made to such
structures.
   (3)   "DRE report" means the final subdivision public report issued by the
California Department of Real Estate pursuant to Section 11018.2 of the
California Business and Professions Code.
   (4)   "Rental housing complex" means a structure or structures containing at
least three rental units on the same parcel or adjoining parcels of property.
   (5)   "Rental unit" means an element of a rental housing complex designed to
be rented to one family independently.
   (6)   "Tenant" means a person who enters into a written or oral lease or
rental agreement with the owner, or owner's agent, of a rental housing complex.
"Tenant" does not include a subtenant or sublessee.
   (7)   "Unit" means the element of a community housing project which is to be
exclusively owned or occupied individually, and not in common with the owners
of other elements of the project.
   (8)   "Vacancy deficiency" means the number of vacant rental units needed to
raise the vacancy rate to three percent.
   (9)   "Vacancy rate" means the number of rental units being offered for rent
or lease in the city of Palo Alto, shown as a percentage of the total number of
rental units both being offered and actually under a rental or lease agreement
   (10)   "Vacancy surplus" means the number of rental units being offered for
rent or lease in excess of the three-percent vacancy rate.
(Ord. 3295 § 1 (part), 1981: Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.40.030   Scope.
   All conversions involving a change in the type of ownership of three or more
rental units are subject to the provisions of this chapter. Nothing in this
chapter shall be interpreted to exempt any conversion from the operation of any
other chapter under this title or from the requirements of any other statute,
ordinance, or regulation.
(Ord. 3295 § l (part), 1981: Ord. 3157 § l (part), 1979)
21.40.040   Determination of vacancy rate and surplus.
   In April and November of each year, the director of planning and community
environment shall determine from the city utility meter records the vacancy
rate and the vacancy surplus, if any, within the city limits. New market-priced
rental units available to the general public, for which a certificate of use
and occupancy has been issued since the last vacancy survey, shall be added on
a unit-for-unit basis either to reduce the vacancy deficiency or to increase
the vacancy surplus.
(Ord. 3295 § 1 (part), 1981: Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.40.050   When an application for conversion may be filed.
   (a)   No application for consideration of a tentative or preliminary parcel
map for a subdivision to be created from a conversion may be filed with the
city unless there is a vacancy surplus as of the most recent determination
pursuant to this chapter.
   (1)   When there is a vacancy surplus as of the most recent determination
pursuant to this chapter, an application for consideration of a tentative or
preliminary parcel map for a subdivision to be created from a conversion may be
filed with the director of planning and community environment if the number of
lots, units or rights of exclusive occupancy in such proposed conversion does
not exceed the vacancy surplus by more than forty percent.
   (b)   An application for consideration of a tentative or preliminary parcel
map for a conversion may be filed, regardless of whether a vacancy surplus
exists, if both of the following conditions are met:
   (1)   One below-market-rate rental unit must be provided for every two non-
below-market-rate units to be converted.
   (A)   The below-market-rate unit(s) must be of comparable size and condition
(prior to any rehabilitation done for purposes of conversion) to the non-below-
market-rate units to be converted;
   (B)   For the purposes of this section, a below-market-rate rental unit is a
unit provided within the city for permanent low and moderate income rental
housing in accordance with either the city's below-market-rate program, the
city's rental housing acquisition program, or such similar program expressly
approved by the city council as being in accord with the city's comprehensive
plan's goals and objectives for low and moderate rental income, and which the
city, or its designee, is willing and able to accept. The provision of low and
moderate income housing in accordance with this subsection shall satisfy the
city's below-market-rate requirement for subdivisions set forth in Housing
Program 17 of the comprehensive plan, and as thereafter may be amended. And:
   (2)   The tenants of at least two-thirds of the rental units in the rental
housing complex consent to convert the rental housing complex to a community
housing project in accordance with the following provisions:
   (A)   Each rental unit (including any units subject to the tentative or
preliminary parcel map which are to be provided to the city as below-market-
rate units pursuant to Section
21.40.050(b)(1) above) is entitled to one consent and such consent must be
signed under penalty of perjury by all tenants of the rental unit;
   (B)   The following units shall not be eligible to sign consent forms:
   (i)   A rental unit in which the tenants do not all agree to consent to the
conversion or do not all sign the consent form;
   (ii)   A rental unit in which one or more of the tenants has not resided in
the rental housing complex for at least one year before signing the consent
form;
   (iii)   A rental unit occupied by a tenant employed by or related to the
owner or manager of the rental housing complex or to the applicant for the
conversion;
   (iv)   A rental unit which is vacant on the date the consent forms are sent
to tenants or which is vacated between that date and the last date for
returning signed consent forms to the applicant for conversion.
   (C)   The following consent form shall be used by the applicant for
conversion in calculating the number of consenting units:
   CONSENT FORM FOR PROPOSED CONVERSION TO COMMUNITY HOUSING
   [Specify Type]:
   THIS CONSENT IS IRREVOCABLE
   ADDRESS:
   The units in the rental housing complex at the above address may be
converted to [specify type of community housing] if the tenants of at least
two-thirds of the units in the rental housing complex consent to the
conversion. The applicant for conversion is [name] [address].
   DECLARATIONS
   I and each of the signatories below represent all of the tenants in
possession of unit ____. I am not employed by or related to the owner or
manager of the rental housing complex or to the applicant for conversion. I
irrevocably consent to the conversion. I declare under penalty of perjury that
the representations made herein are true and correct.
   (print name) ______________________________
   signature __________________________________
   length of continuous tenancy in rental housing complex___________________
   date________________
   (print name) ______________________________
   signature __________________________________
   length of continuous tenancy in rental housing complex___________________
   date________________
   (print name) ______________________________
   signature __________________________________
   length of continuous tenancy in rental housing complex___________________
   date________________
   (D)   The city must be notified on the date consent forms are first given to
tenants, and the consent forms must be signed no later than ninety days from
the date the consent forms are first given to the tenants;
   (E)   Notice to Prospective Tenants. No rental unit in a rental housing
complex shall be leased or rented to any person after the consent forms are
first given to tenants unless said person has been notified of the proposed
conversion immediately prior to the acceptance of any rent or deposit from the
prospective tenant in the following written form:
   NOTICE TO PROSPECTIVE TENANT
   This rental housing complex is in the process of obtaining the consent of
its tenants to convert the complex to a community housing project. If you
become a tenant, if two-thirds of the rental units consent to conversion and if
the conversion application is approved by the city council, the unit you are
considering leasing or renting will be offered to you for purchase; if you do
not desire to purchase the unit, you will be offered an extended lease. As a
new tenant, you will be ineligible to sign a consent form.
(Ord. 3295 § 1 (part), 1981: Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979).
21.40.060   Approval of a map for conversion.
   (a)   A tentative map, preliminary parcel map, final map or parcel map for a
subdivision to be created from a conversion shall not be approved or
recommended for approval unless such map is consistent with the purposes and
requirements of state law, the Palo Alto comprehensive plan, this title, this
chapter, and unless all of the following conditions are or will be met:
   (1)   Tenant Protections.
   (A)   Application Timely. If the applicant for conversion procures tenant
consents pursuant to Section
21.40.050(b)(2) above, the tentative or preliminary parcel map for conversion
must be received by the city within sixty days of the last date on which the
signed consent forms may be returned to the applicant for conversion.
   (B)   Notice to Tenants in Accordance with Government Code Sections 66452.9
and 66427.1. The applicant for conversion shall give notice in the following
form to each tenant of the rental housing complex at least sixty days prior to
the filing of the tentative or preliminary parcel map:
   To the occupants of
   _____________________
   [address]
   The owner(s) of this building, at ____________ plans to file an application
with the City of Palo Alto to convert this building to a [specify community
housing project]. You shall be given notice of each hearing for which notice is
required pursuant to Sections 66451.3 and 66452.5 of the Government Code, and
you have the right to appear and the right to be heard at any such hearing.
   (date) ______________________________
   (signature of owner) ________________________________
   Attached to this notice must be an explanation of all tenant protections
required by this Section
21.40.060(a)(1).
   (C)   Right of First Refusal. Each of the tenants of the proposed community
housing project has been or will be given notice of an exclusive right to
contract for the purchase of their respective rental units upon the same terms
and conditions that such units will be initially offered to the general public
or terms more favorable to the tenant. Each of the tenants who was a tenant on
the date of the completed conversion application shall be given such a right to
purchase upon the terms and conditions, if any, quoted to the tenants and set
forth in the subdivision application. Such rights to purchase shall run for a
period of not less than ninety days from the date of issuance of the DRE
report, unless the tenant gives prior written notice of his or her intention
not to exercise the right.
   (D)   Extension of Leases. Tenants in the proposed community housing project
on the date of recordation of the final map for said project have been provided
assurances that they will have the opportunity to remain in their respective
rental units after conversion as tenants under extended leases. Such extended
leases shall be subject to the following provisions:
   (i)   Any tenant who has reached or will reach the age of sixty years at the
end of the calendar year in which that tenant's unit is offered for sale shall
be offered a lifetime lease to his or her rental unit.
   (ii)   Any tenant who does not qualify for a lifetime lease pursuant to
subsection (a)(1)(D)(i) above shall be offered a ten-year lease to his or her
rental unit.
   (iii)   Any lease(s) offered pursuant to subsections (a)(1)(D)(i) or (ii)
above must:
   a.   Be circulated to all tenants at least sixty days before the consent
forms are required to be returned to the applicant for conversion, if the
applicant for conversion procures tenant consents pursuant to Section
21.40.050(b)(2) above;
   b.   Restrict the rent on each unit to the monthly rent charged two years
prior to the date the conversion application is received by the city, with
increases in the monthly rent for each ensuing year after such date not to
exceed seventy-five percent of the preceding years increase in the Consumer
Price Index for the San Francisco Bay Area for All Urban Consumers (all items),
as published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics, United States Department of
Labor, or any other standard recognized cost-of-living index which is published
by the United States Government in lieu of the index;
   c.   Be subject to any "just cause" eviction ordinance adopted by the city;
   d.   Not be subordinated to the CC & R's adopted by the community housing
project with regard to tenants' rights and tenants' financial obligations or
other liabilities;
   e.   Be recorded by the applicant for conversion in the Santa Clara County
recorder's office.
   (iv)   The applicant for conversion, upon the request of the tenants of at
least one-third of all the rental units, must pay the standard hourly fees for
an attorney selected by those tenants to represent them in negotiating the
terms of the lease(s) offered pursuant to subsections (a)(1)(D)(i) and/or (ii)
above, provided that such expenses may not exceed the fees for more than forty
hours.
   (v)   The city's rental housing mediation task force shall be available to
mediate any disputes arising from any lease(s) offered pursuant to subsections
(a)(1)(D)(i) or (ii) above.
   (vi)   In the event that a tenant or tenants in a unit held by the city or
its designee as below-market-rate rental housing pursuant to Section
21.40.050(b) is eligible to receive any available rental-housing assistance
payments, such tenant or tenants may choose to enter into a lease providing for
such rental-housing assistance payments in lieu of the extended lease required
by this section.
   (E)   Termination of Tenancy by Developer. Each of the tenants of the
proposed community housing project who does not choose to purchase his or her
respective rental unit or does not choose to enter into an extended lease
pursuant to Section
21.40.060(a)(1)(D) above must have been given one hundred eighty days' written
notice of intention to convert prior to termination of tenancy due to the
conversion or proposed conversion. The provisions of this subsection shall not
deter or abridge the rights or obligations of the parties in performance of
their covenants, including but not limited to the provision of services,
payment of rent, or the obligations imposed by Sections 1941, 1941.1 and 1941.2
of the Civil Code.
   (F)   Termination of Tenancy by Tenant. The applicant for conversion shall
permit a tenant to terminate any lease or rental agreement without any penalty
whatsoever after notice has been given of the intention to convert the tenant's
rental unit to a community housing project in accordance with Section
21.40.060(a)(1)(B) above, if such tenant notifies the applicant for conversion
in writing thirty days in advance of such termination. Such right to terminate
shall expire if the application for conversion is denied.
   (G)   Notice to Prospective Tenants in Accordance with Government Code
Section 66452.8.
   (i)   Commencing on a date not less than sixty days prior to the filing of a
tentative or preliminary parcel map, the applicant for conversion or his or her
agent shall give notice of such filing to each person applying after such date
for rental of a unit of the subject property immediately prior to the
acceptance of any rent or deposit from the prospective tenant.
   (ii)   The notice shall be as follows:
   To the prospective occupant(s) of
   ______________________
   [address]
   The owner(s) of this building, at (address), has filed or plans to file an
application with the City of Palo Alto to convert this building to a [specify
community housing project]. No units may be sold in this building unless the
conversion is approved by the City of Palo Alto and until after a public report
is issued by the Department of Real Estate. If you become a tenant of this
building, you shall be given notice of each hearing for which notice is
required pursuant to Sections 66451.3 and 66452.5 of the Government Code, and
you have the right to appear and the right to be heard at any such hearing. In
addition, if you become a tenant, if two-thirds of the rental units have
consented to conversion and if the conversion application is approved by the
City Council, the unit you rent will be offered to you for purchase; if you do
not desire to purchase the unit, you will be offered an extended lease in
accordance with
Chapter 21.40 of the Palo Alto Municipal Code.
   (signature of owner or owner's agent) ______________________________
   (dated) ______________________________
   I have received this notice on: (date) ______________________________
   (prospective tenant's signature) ______________________________
   (H)   Remodeling. Repairs and/or remodeling proposed to be made in
connection with the conversion shall not be performed without the tenant's
consent during the ninety-day period from the date of issuance of the DRE
report. If repairs and/or remodeling of the unit require the tenant's temporary
relocation, the applicant for conversion must assume all moving costs and rent
for comparable replacement housing for the tenant who is displaced on a
temporary basis.
   (I)   Engineer's Report. In order to assist the tenants in their decisions
whether to purchase their units upon conversion, the applicant for conversion
must send a copy of the property report and structural pest report required
pursuant to Section
21.40.060(a)(2)(B)(i) and (ii) to all tenants on or before the date of issuance
of the DRE report.
   (J)   Notice of Compliance with State Law. The applicant for conversion must
provide written evidence of compliance with Government Code Section 66427.1.
   (2)   Buyer Protections.
   (A)   Age Discrimination. No community housing project shall prohibit sales
of units to persons with children unless it is determined by the director of
planning and community environment upon review of a preliminary parcel map or
the city council upon review of a tentative map that from the time of its
development, the project was designed and built for the exclusive occupancy of
persons sixty years of age or older.
   (B)   Certificate of Use and Occupancy. Prior to the sale or occupancy of
any units which have been converted to community housing, a certificate of use
and occupancy for community housing shall be obtained from the chief building
official pursuant to
Chapter 16.38 and subject to the following additional requirements:
   (i)   The applicant for conversion shall submit a property report describing
the condition and useful life of the roof, foundations, mechanical, electrical,
plumbing and structural elements of all existing buildings and structures. Such
report shall be prepared by a registered civil or structural engineer, or a
licensed general building contractor or general engineering contractor.
   (ii)   The applicant for conversion shall submit a structural pest report.
Such report shall be prepared by a licensed structural pest-control operator
pursuant to Section 8516 of the Business and Professions Code, relating to
written reports on the absence or presence of wood-destroying pests or
organisms.
   (iii)   The consumption of gas and electricity within each dwelling unit
shall be separately metered so that the unit owner can be separately billed for
each utility. A water shut-off valve shall be provided for each unit. The
requirements of this subsection may be waived where the chief building official
finds that such would not be practical.
   (iv)   All permanent mechanical equipment, including domestic appliances,
which are determined by the chief building official to be a source or potential
source of vibration or noise, shall be shock-mounted, isolated from the floor
and ceiling, or otherwise installed in a manner approved by the chief building
official to lessen the transmission of vibration and noise.
   (v)   The wall and floor/ceiling assemblies between dwelling units shall
conform to the sound-performance criteria of Title 25 of the California
Administrative Code.
   (vi)   Accessible attics shall be insulated to meet the energy conservation
requirements of Title 24 of the California Administrative Code.
   (vii)   Electrical control panels shall be provided in accessible locations
controlling the entire service to each unit.
   (viii)   The wall and floor/ceiling assemblies between dwelling units shall
meet one-hour fire-resistive construction as specified in the latest edition of
the Uniform Building Code.
   (ix)   Smoke detectors approved by the fire prevention division shall be
provided in each unit.
   (x)   Any multiple-unit building three stories or more in height or
containing more than fifteen dwelling units shall have an approved fire alarm
system as specified in the Fire Prevention Code.
   (3)   Below-Market-Rate Requirement. In conversions of ten or more rental
units, not less than ten percent of the units in the community housing project
shall be provided for sale to the city for permanent low and moderate income
housing in accordance with either the city's below-market-rate program, the
city's rental housing acquisition program, or such similar program expressly
approved by the city council as being in accord with the city's comprehensive
plan's goals and objectives for low and moderate income housing. The provision
of such low and moderate income housing in accordance with this subsection
shall be in compliance with the city's below-market-rate requirement for
subdivisions set forth in Housing Program 17 of the comprehensive plan, and as
thereafter may be amended. This section shall be considered fulfilled if the
applicant for a conversion meets the condition set forth in Section
21.40.050(b).
(Ord. 3295 § 1 (part), 1981: Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.40.070   Contents of an application.
   (a)   In addition to the other requirements of this title, an application
for approval of a tentative or preliminary parcel map for a conversion shall be
accompanied by the following information:
   (1)   Age and length of occupancy of every tenant including children, in the
rental housing complex on the date of the conversion application;
   (2)   Current rents for each unit and the date and amount of all rental
increases within the two years prior to the date the conversion application is
received;
   (3)   The approximate proposed sales price of each unit and the pro forma
budget proposed for submission to the real estate commissioner or a similar
estimate of projected annual operating and maintenance fees or assessments; and
   (4)   A statement of any repairs or improvements proposed to be completed
prior to the sale of units, along with a time schedule therefor;
   (5)   A statement of proposed tree and landscaping removal and/or planting,
if any;
   (6)   A parking plan, including the total number of spaces actually
provided, the total number of covered and uncovered spaces, and the location
and number of guest parking spaces;
   (7)   A report describing the building's utilities, storage space and
laundry facilities;
   (8)   Any other information which, in the opinion of the director of
planning and community environment, will assist the city in determining whether
the proposed conversion is consistent with the purposes of this chapter and the
comprehensive plan.
(Ord. 3295 § 1 (part), 1981)
21.40.080   Time limits.
   (a)   Withdrawal. If a tentative or preliminary parcel map for a subdivision
to be created from a conversion is withdrawn before city council review, a map
for said subdivision cannot be submitted again for one year after the date of
withdrawal.
   (b)   Expiration. If a tentative or preliminary parcel map for a subdivision
to be created from a conversion which has been approved or conditionally
approved by the city council expires, pursuant to Government Code Section
66452.6, a map for said subdivision cannot be submitted again for one year
after the date of expiration.
   (c)   Denial. If a tentative or preliminary parcel map for a subdivision to
be created from a conversion is denied by the city council, a map for said
subdivision cannot be submitted for one year after the date of denial.
   (d)   Sale. All rental units approved for conversion shall be offered for
sale within two years of the issuance of the DRE report.
(Ord. 3295 § 1 (part), 1981)
21.40.090   Severability.
   If any provision or clause of this chapter or the application thereof to any
person or circumstance is held to be unconstitutional or to be otherwise
invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not
affect other chapter provisions, and clauses of this chapter are declared to be
severable.
(Ord. 3295 § 1 (part), 1981)
Chapter 21.44
CERTIFICATES OF COMPLIANCE
Sections:
   
21.44.010   Certificate of compliance defined.
   
21.44.020   Certificate of compliance in lieu of final or parcel map.
   
21.44.030   Certificate of compliance to confirm lawful status of property.
   
21.44.040   Certificate of compliance to render lot conforming.
   
21.44.050   Property description.
   
21.44.060   Conditions.
   
21.44.070   Fee.
21.44.010   Certificate of compliance defined.
   A "certificate of compliance" is a document issued by the city engineer for
recordation stating, with or without conditions, that a certain lot or lots
described therein complies with the provisions of this title and the
Subdivision Map Act and is a lawfully existing lot or lots. A certificate of
compliance may be issued for the following purposes:
   (a)   A certificate of compliance shall be issued in lieu of any preliminary
parcel map, tentative map, parcel map or final map in the case of a lot line
adjustment pursuant to Section
21.08.050.
   (b)   A certificate of compliance may be issued in lieu of a parcel map in
the case of a written request of the subdivider pursuant to Section
21.08.060.
   (c)   A certificate of compliance shall be issued upon request of a property
owner for property which has been divided in compliance with any existing
provisions of law regulating such divisions or at a time when no such
regulations were applicable, and which presently constitutes a lawfully
existing lot or lots, for the purpose of establishing recorded evidence that
the lot or lots are lawfully existing; except that no certificate of compliance
shall be issued for any lots merged pursuant to Section
21.04.040.
   (d)   A certificate of compliance may be issued subject to the provisions
set forth in this chapter for a lot not created in compliance with any existing
provisions of law regulating such divisions, in order to establish such a lot
as lawfully existing.
(Ord. 4661 § 8, 2000: (Ord. 4124 § 6, 1992: Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.44.020   Certificate of compliance in lieu of final or parcel map.
   In the case of a minor subdivision for which the requirement of a parcel map
has been waived, the property owner may apply for the issuance of a certificate
of compliance. Such application shall be made within the time limits specified
for the filing of the otherwise required final or parcel map. Prior to issuance
of a certificate of compliance, the owner shall fulfill all conditions of
tentative or preliminary parcel map approval as would be required in the
approval of a final or parcel map. The issuance of such a certificate of
compliance shall be made upon such terms and conditions as would be applicable
were a final or parcel map to be filed.
   Such terms and conditions shall be stated in the certificate of compliance.
(Ord. 4661 § 9, 2000: Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.44.030   Certificate of compliance to confirm lawful status of property.
   Any property owner may request in writing that the city engineer determine
whether such property complies and was created in conformance with this title
and the Subdivision Map Act, or was lawfully created prior to the applicability
of such provisions. Upon making such a determination, the city engineer shall
issue and cause a certificate of compliance to be recorded with the county
recorder. No such certificate shall be issued for any lots merged pursuant to
Section
21.04.040. Any property owner making application under this section shall have
the obligation of furnishing to the city engineer such evidence and documents
as may be required to enable the city engineer to make the determinations
required under this chapter.
(Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.44.040   Certificate of compliance to render lot conforming.
   The owner of a lot created in violation of this title, the Subdivision Map
Act or any predecessor legislation governing the division of land other than
the person who created such violation and any person who took title to the
property with actual or constructive notice of such violation, may apply for a
certificate of compliance in order to render that lot legal and in compliance
with this title and the Subdivision Map Act. Such application may be processed
only if the lot conforms with all present standards contained in this title and
Title 18 with regard to lot size and design. No application under this section
shall be processed unless the applicant submits to the city a declaration under
penalty of perjury that the applicant has attempted and been unable to obtain
the consent of the other owners of property constituting the remainder of the
original parcel unlawfully divided, of which the applicant's property is a
portion, for the filing of a subdivision application for the entire property.
In no event shall such a certificate of compliance be issued if the applicant
is the owner of the whole of said original parcel.
   As a prerequisite to the filing of an application under this section, the
applicant shall submit and apply for approval of a tentative parcel map as
provided in this title, showing the lot for which a certificate of compliance
is requested.
   In approving such tentative parcel map or certificate of compliance, the
director of planning and city engineer may impose such conditions as would have
been applicable to the division of the property at the time the applicant
acquired said applicant's interest. Said conditions shall be reflected on the
face of the certificate of compliance.
(Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.44.050   Property description.
   In addition to any other requirements contained in this chapter, any person
applying for a certificate of compliance shall furnish to the city engineer
property descriptions, satisfactory to the city engineer, and an area map, for
any lots which are the subject of the application.
(Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
21.44.060   Conditions.
   The city engineer may impose upon the issuance of any certificate of
compliance such conditions as are required to insure compliance with this title
and the Subdivision Map Act.
(Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979).
21.44.070   Fee.
   In every instance where an application for a certificate of compliance is
filed, a fee shall be charged as set forth in the municipal fee schedule.
(Ord. 3157 § 1 (part), 1979)
Chapter 21.50
PARK LAND DEDICATION OR FEES IN LIEU THEREOF
Sections:
   
21.50.010   Findings and purpose.
   
21.50.020   Definitions.
   
21.50.030   Requirements for residential subdivisions.
   
21.50.040   Land requirement.
   
21.50.050   Density formula.
   
21.50.060   Procedure.
   
21.50.070   Calculation of fair market value.
   
21.50.080   Calculation of requirement.
   
21.50.090   Commencement of development.
   
21.50.100   Exclusions.
21.50.010   Findings and purpose.
   The city council hereby finds that development of residential subdivisions
has a significant effect on the use and availability of park and recreation
space and facilities, and that the limited open space and recreation amenities
provided by these residential developments are insufficient to meet the needs
of the residents for open space and recreational facilities. The intent of this
chapter is to require that such developments contribute their fair share toward
the purchase, development, and/or improvement of park and recreational
facilities. The provisions of this chapter are enacted pursuant to the Palo
Alto City Charter and the Palo Alto Comprehensive Plan as well as Sections
66477 and 66479 of the Government Code of the State of California, as may be
applicable.
(Ord. 4907 § 2 (part), 2006)
21.50.020   Definitions.
   As used in this chapter:
   "District Park" shall include, but is not limited to, a park that serves
large areas of the City and contains a broad variety of facilities.
   "Neighborhood Park" shall include, but is not limited to, a park of roughly
two to 10 acres in size, intended to meet the recreation needs of people living
or working within a one-half mile radius.
   "Subdivision" shall mean the same as defined in Section 66424 of the
California Government Code.
   "Subdivider" shall mean a person, firm, corporation, partnership or
association who proposes to divide, divides or causes to be divided real
property into a subdivision.
   "Subdivision map" shall mean any map filed pursuant to any proceedings for
subdivision as defined in Title 21 of Palo Alto Municipal Code.
(Ord. 4907 § 2 (part), 2006)
21.50.030   Requirements for residential subdivisions.
   As a condition of approval of any final subdivision map, the subdivider
shall dedicate land, pay a fee in lieu thereof, or both, at the option of the
city, for park or recreational purposes according to the following standards:
   (a)   Dedication of Sites. The subdivider shall be required to dedicate land
for park and recreational facilities sufficient in size to serve the residents
of the subdivision area. The park land to be so dedicated shall conform to
locations and standards set forth in the Comprehensive Plan or a Coordinated
Area Plan, if applicable. The slope, topography and geology of the site, as
well as its surroundings, must be suitable for the intended park or recreation
purpose. The amount of land to be provided shall be determined pursuant to the
standards set forth in Sections
21.50.040 through
21.50.050 of this chapter establishing the formula for land dedication or for
payment of fees in lieu thereof.
   (b)   Fees In Lieu of Land Dedication. A fee in lieu of land dedication
hereunder shall be required when:
   (1)   When dedication is impossible, impractical, or undesirable as
determined by the director of planning and community environment or the city
council as appropriate; or
   (2)   When the proposed subdivision contains fifty parcels of land or less.
   (c)   Dedication and Fees Required. In certain subdivisions in excess of
fifty parcels of land, a combination of land dedication and fee payment may be
required. These shall be subdivisions in which a major part of the park or
recreation site falling within the subdivision has already been acquired, and
only a small portion of land is needed from the subdivider to complete the park
or recreation site, in which case the land needed shall be required for
dedication, and a fee shall then be required in lieu of the additional land
that would have been required to be dedicated under this chapter.
   (d)   Use of and Basis for In-Lieu Fees. The fees collected pursuant to this
chapter are to be used only for the purpose of providing park or recreational
facilities to serve the subdivision from which fees are collected in accordance
with the service area requirements as shown in Table 1. Fees so collected shall
be used to purchase land, buy equipment, construct improvements or rehabilitate
a proposed or existing neighborhood park, district park, publicly owned
conservation land, recreational open space, recreational facility, community
gardening facility or combination thereof serving said subdivision. The fee so
required shall be based on the fair market value of the land that otherwise
would have been required for dedication.
Table 1
PARK SERVICE AREA AND SIZE
 
PARK TYPE                                 SERVICE AREA  DESIRABLE SIZE
Mini Park                                 0 to 1/2 Mile 1/2 to 2 Acres
Neighborhood Park                         1/2 Mile      2 to 10 Acres
District Park                             Entire City   15 to 50 Acres
Publicly Owned                            Entire City   N/A
Conservation Land/Recreational Open Space
 
(Ord. 4907 § 2 (part), 2006)
21.50.040   Land requirement.
   In accordance with the Palo Alto Comprehensive Plan, it is hereby found and
determined that the city of Palo Alto currently provides neighborhood, district
park, recreational facilities, and open space to its residents at a ratio of
five acres per thousand residents. The public interest, convenience, health,
welfare and safety require that five acres of property for each one thousand
persons residing within the city of Palo Alto be devoted to public park and
recreational facilities.
(Ord. 5005 § 1, 2008: Ord. 4907 § 2 (part), 2006)
21.50.050   Density formula.
   In calculating dedication and in-lieu fee requirements under this chapter,
the following table, derived from the density assumptions of the Comprehensive
Plan, shall apply:
Table 2
DENSITY FORMULA
 
                 Density of Persons Per Dwelling Acreage Requirement Per
Dwelling Density Unit                            Dwelling Unit within
                                                 Subdivision
Single Family    2.44                            .0122
Multi Family     1.68                            .0084
 
(Ord. 5005 § 2, 2008: Ord. 4907 § 2 (part), 2006)
21.50.060   Procedure.
   (a)   Payment of fees: Any fee due under this chapter shall be paid as set
forth in
Chapter 16.64 of this code.
   (b)   Land dedications. At the time of the filing of the final or parcel
map, the subdivider shall dedicate the land to the city by a grant deed or
other form acceptable to the city attorney.
(Ord. 5400 § 18 (part), 2016: Ord. 4907 § 2 (part), 2006)
21.50.070   Calculation of fair market value.
   (a)   At the time of submission a final subdivision map for approval, the
city shall, in those cases where a fee in lieu of dedication is required either
in whole or in part, determine the fair market value of the land in the
proposed residential development, and this determination shall be used in
calculating the fee to be paid. If the developer objects to the fair market
value, the city, at developer's expense, shall obtain an appraisal of the
property by a qualified independent real estate appraiser, agreed to by the
city and the developer, and the value established by said appraiser using
standard recognized appraisal techniques to establish fair market value will be
accepted as the fair market value of the land in the proposed development.
Alternatively, the city and the developer may agree as to the fair market
value.
   (b)   The fair market value per acre of land for the purposes of the
calculation in §
21.50.080 is $5.7 million per acre.
   (c)   The rate of the fee shall be subject to annual adjustment for
inflation pursuant to Section
16.64.110.
(Ord. 5521 § 2, 2021: Ord. 5400 § 18 (part), 2016: Ord. 5005 § 3, 2008: Ord.
4907 § 2 (part), 2006)
21.50.080   Calculation of requirement.
   For the purpose of the formula established by this section, the following
definition shall apply:
   A = the park land dedication acreage required per dwelling unit within the
proposed residential development for park and recreational facilities as set
forth herein and in Section
21.50.050 of this chapter.
   B = the number of new dwelling units in the proposed residential
development.
   C = the fair market value per acre of land in the proposed residential
development.
   F = the in-lieu fee required.
   L = the land required for dedication.
   The following formula shall be used in calculating the land required for the
dedication under this chapter:
      A x B = L
   The following formula shall be used in calculating the in-lieu fees required
to be paid under this chapter:
      A x B x C = F
(Ord. 4907 § 2 (part), 2006)
21.50.090   Commencement of development.
   Any fees collected for these purposes shall be committed within five years
after payment of such fees or issuance of building permits on one-half of the
units of the residential development, whichever occurs later.
(Ord. 4907 § 2 (part), 2006)
21.50.100   Exclusions.
   This chapter shall not apply to the following subdivisions:
   (a)   Commercial or industrial subdivisions.
   (b)   Nonresidential condominium units.
   (c)   Projects or stock cooperatives which consist of the subdivision of air
space in an existing apartment building which is more then five years old when
no new dwelling units are added.
   (d)   Parcel maps for a subdivision containing less than five parcels and
not used for residential purposes.
   (e)   A project with a maximum of two dwelling units that exist on a
property if, at the time the subdivision is approved, the existing units are to
remain on the property.
   (f)   100% affordable housing projects.
(Ord. 4907 § 2 (part), 2006)
Title 22 PARKS*
Chapters:
   
22.04   Parks and Recreations Building Use and Regulations
   
22.08   Park Dedications
   *   Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes Ordinance Nos. 2237,
2252, 2269, 2284, 2300, 2351, 2467, 2484, 2488, 2530, 2555, 2583, 2594, 2603,
2604, 2610, 2627, 2643, 2827, 2851, 2861, 2913, 2972, 2986, 3067, 3096, 3127,
3201, 3228, 3233, 3265, 3305, 3346, 3359, 3370, 3383, 3543, 3644, 3749, 3789,
3828, 3985, 4040, 4057, 4068, 4076, 4104, 4120, 4148, 4301 and 5640.
Chapter 22.04
PARKS AND RECREATION BUILDING USE AND REGULATIONS
Sections:
   
22.04.010   Purpose.
   
22.04.020   Definitions.
   
22.04.030   Compliance required.
   
22.04.035   Enforcement.
   
22.04.040   Permits for use of parks and open space lands.
   
22.04.050   Permit application.
   
22.04.060   Reserved.
   
22.04.070   Action on permit application.
   
22.04.080   Reserved.
   
22.04.090   Reserved.
   
22.04.100   Reserved.
   
22.04.110   Reserved.
   
22.04.120   Right of permit appeal.
   
22.04.130   Permit fees and deposits.
   
22.04.140   Liability of permit holders.
   
22.04.150   Foothills Nature Preserve.
   
22.04.155   Dogs in city parks and open space lands.
   
22.04.160   Commercial activities and solicitation.
   
22.04.170   Violation of permit.
   
22.04.180   Amplified sound.
   
22.04.190   Golf and other games.
   
22.04.200   Models, kites.
   
22.04.210   Vehicle operation and parking.
   
22.04.215   Launch and takeout from ramp or dock.
   
22.04.220   Bicycles and animals.
   
22.04.230   Litter.
   
22.04.240   Interference with permitted activities.
   
22.04.250   Standards and guidelines.
   
22.04.260   Weapons.
   
22.04.270   Flora, fauna, feeding of wildlife.
   
22.04.280   Removal of turf or soil.
   
22.04.290   Entering, marking, injuring, damaging or disturbing park or open
space lands.
   
22.04.300   Fires in city parks and open space lands.
   
22.04.310   Enid Pearson Arastradero Preserve, Esther Clark Park closed from
sunset until 8:00 a.m.
   
22.04.315   Byxbee Park and city-owned Baylands closed from sunset to 8:00 a.m.
   
22.04.320   Parks closed, 10:30 p.m. to sunrise.
   
22.04.321   John Lucas Greer Park - Use of or trespass at skateboard facility
prohibited when closed.
   
22.04.322   Rinconada Park - Use of or trespass at pool facility prohibited
when closed.
   
22.04.330   Cogswell Plaza - Consumption of alcoholic beverages prohibited.
   
22.04.331   Lytton Plaza - Consumption of alcoholic beverages prohibited.
   
22.04.332   Edith Eugenie Johnson Park - Consumption of alcoholic beverages
prohibited.
   
22.04.333   Boulware Park - Consumption of alcoholic beverages prohibited.
   
22.04.334   Scott Street Minipark - Consumption of alcoholic beverages
prohibited.
   
22.04.335   John Lucas Greer Park - Consumption of alcoholic beverages
prohibited in skateboard facility.
   
22.04.336   Rinconada Park - Consumption of alcoholic beverages prohibited
without a permit.
   
22.04.337   Mitchell Park - Consumption of alcoholic beverages prohibited
without a permit.
   
22.04.338   Don Secondino Robles Park - Consumption of alcoholic beverages
prohibited.
   
22.04.339   Timothy Hopkins Creekside Park - Consumption of alcoholic beverages
prohibited.
   
22.04.340   Motorized vehicles and generators in parks and open space land.
   
22.04.341   El Palo Alto Park - Consumption of alcoholic beverages prohibited.
   
22.04.342   Heritage Park - Consumption of alcoholic beverages prohibited.
   
22.04.343   Eleanor Pardee Park - Consumption of alcoholic beverages
prohibited.
   
22.04.350   Consumption of alcoholic beverages prohibited in motor vehicles.
   
22.04.360   Storage of opened container.
   
22.04.370   Reckless driving prohibited.
   
22.04.380   Unlawful riding and towing.
   
22.04.390   Duck pond.
22.04.010   Purpose.
   The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the use of the parks, open space
lands, and recreation buildings owned or controlled by the city in order that
all persons may enjoy and make use of such parks, open space lands, and
buildings and to protect the rights of those in the surrounding areas.
(Ord. 4368 § 2 (part), 1996)
22.04.020   Definitions.
   The following words and phrases, whenever used in this chapter, shall be
construed as defined in this section:
   (a)   "Amplified sound" means speech, sounds, or music projected or
transmitted by electronic equipment including amplifiers, loudspeakers,
microphones, bull horns or similar devices or combinations of devices which are
intended to increase the volume, range, distance or intensity of speech,
sounds, or music and are powered by electricity, battery or combustible fuel;
   (b)   "Buildings" means and includes those buildings, or any portion
thereof, within any city park or open space lands made available to exclusive
use permit holders;
   (c)   "Director" means the managing director of the department of community
services or that director's designee(s);
   (d)   "Open space land" means any parcel or area of land owned or controlled
by the city, which is essentially unimproved or in its natural state and
devoted to an open space use as defined in Section 18.71.020 of the Palo Alto
Municipal Code.
   (e)   "Park" means any park, playground, recreation and conservation lands
and uses dedicated under Article VIII of the Charter of the city, or any part,
portion or area thereof;
   (f)   "Permit" means a written authorization issued pursuant to this chapter
for exclusive use of parks or park buildings or for other purposes as provided
for and defined in this chapter;
   (g)   "Permit holder" means a recipient of a permit issued pursuant to this
chapter.
   (h)   "Person" means and includes an individual, association, partnership,
firm or corporation.
(Ord. 4368 § 2 (part), 1996)
22.04.030   Compliance required.
   No person shall enter, be or remain in any city park or open space lands
except in compliance with this code and the regulations promulgated by the city
manager.
   Any regulation promulgated by the city manager shall be filed with the city
clerk and with the director and shall become effective on the fifteenth day
following notice sent to the council, provided, however, that any regulation
may be terminated or modified at any time by council resolution or ordinance.
   It is unlawful for any person to disobey or fail to observe any park or open
space lands regulation of which such person has actual notice, however given,
or constructive notice through appropriate signs or notice in the park or open
space lands.
(Ord. 4368 § 2 (part), 1996)
22.04.035   Enforcement.
   (a)   Criminal Penalties. As provided in Chapter
1.08 of Title 1 of this code, violations of the provisions of this chapter
shall be subject to criminal penalties. The following designated employee
positions may enforce the provisions of this chapter by the issuance of
citations: open space, parks and golf division manager; and recreation
supervisor. Persons employed in such positions are authorized to exercise the
authority provided in Penal Code Section 836.5 and are authorized to issue
citations for violations of this chapter. The designated employee positions
are: open space and sciences superintendent, park ranger, senior ranger,
seasonal ranger, open space, parks and golf division manager, and community
services operations manager.
   (b)   Other Remedies. The method of enforcement of this chapter set forth in
subsection (a) of this section is not exclusive and shall be in addition to any
other method of enforcement or remedy available to the city under this code or
state or federal law.
(Ord. 5095 § 2, 2010: Ord. 5015 § 2, 2008: Ord. 4745 § 13, 2002: Ord. 4548 § 1,
1999)
22.04.040   Permits for use of parks and open space lands.
   Buildings, facilities, and areas of city parks and open space lands shall be
made available for the exclusive use of persons and groups consistent with city
code and regulation requirements subject to the issuance of a permit by the
director and subject to the payment of fees therefor as provided in the Palo
Alto municipal fee schedule. A park or open space land may not be used for pre-
advertised assemblies consisting of twenty-five or more persons on either an
exclusive use or non-exclusive use basis without a permit. Applications for a
permit must be signed or co-signed by an adult, who shall agree to be
responsible for the activity. No permit will be granted, if, prior to the time
the application was filed, the city has scheduled a city-sponsored event at the
same time and place as the activity proposed in the application.
   No permit shall be granted for use of a park or open space lands by any
assembly or assembly activity involving more than one hundred fifty
participants from one hour before sunset until one hour after sunrise, unless
the park has the appropriate program lighting as specified in park regulations.
(Ord. 4368 § 2 (part), 1996)
22.04.050   Permit application.
   Applicants for a park permit shall file an application with the director not
less than two days nor more than one year prior to the proposed park use.
(Ord. 4368 § 2 (part), 1996)
22.04.060   Reserved.*
*   Editor's Note: Former Section
22.04.060, Contents of park application, previously codified herein and
containing portions of Ordinance No. 2484, was designated as "reserved" by
Ordinance No. 4368.
22.04.070   Action on permit application.
   (a)   The director shall grant or deny a permit no later than four days
after receipt of the application, unless applicant has waived the time for
acting on the application in writing. The decision to grant or deny the permit
shall be mailed or delivered to the applicant promptly.
   (b)   The director shall grant the permit when it complies with the
requirements of this code and park regulations and may impose reasonable
requirements and conditions concerning the use of the park by applicant based
upon those requirements. The director, upon the written advice of the chief of
police that the size and activity of the expected crowd would require police
personnel for crowd control in numbers that will leave other areas of the city
unprotected, may impose a requirement for the applicant to provide crowd
control monitors. The director may require a training program for the crowd
control monitors at a reasonable time and place set by the director prior to
the proposed activity. The applicant shall, at the election of the chief of
police, provide and pay for police personnel instead of crowd control monitors
in the numbers approved by the director and chief of police in which case no
training session will be required.
   (c)   The director may accept a substitute application and issue a permit
for a park other than that applied for if a permit has already been issued for
the park originally requested or if that park does not meet the applicant's
needs or is otherwise unsuitable for the proposed activity. Applications for
use of the same park on the same day shall be acted upon in the order received.
   (d)   The director shall deny the application if any of the following
conditions exist:
   (1)   The activity applied for does not comply with the requirements of this
code and park regulations;
   (2)   The size or nature of the proposed activity requires the diversion of
so many city police officers to properly police the event as to hinder police
protection in other parts of the city;
   (3)   The applicant has failed to agree to provide a reasonable means of
informing all of the activity's participants of the terms and conditions of the
permit;
   (4)   The applicant refuses to agree in writing to comply with the
conditions of the permit;
   (5)   The applicant fails to file a timely application, unless waived by the
director and unless applicant waives all rights of appeal.
   Grounds for denial of an application shall be specified in writing.
(Ord. 4368 § 2 (part), 1996)
22.04.080   Reserved.*
*   Editor's Note: Former Section
22.04.080, Exclusive use of buildings, previously codified herein and
containing portions of Ordinance Nos. 2484 and 2610, was designated as
"reserved" by Ordinance No. 4368.
22.04.090   Reserved.*
*   Editor's Note: Former Section
22.04.090, Building application, previously codified herein and containing
portions of Ordinance No. 2484, was designated as "reserved" by Ordinance No.
4368.
22.04.100   Reserved.*
*   Editor's Note: Former Section
22.04.100, Contents of building application, previously codified herein and
containing portions of Ordinance Nos. 2484 and 2594, was designated as
"reserved" by Ordinance No. 4368.
22.04.110   Reserved.*
*   Editor's Note: Former Section
22.04.110, Action on building application, previously codified herein and
containing portions of Ordinance No. 2484, was designated as "reserved" by
Ordinance No. 4368.
22.04.120   Right of permit appeal.
   An applicant may appeal the director's decision regarding a permit to the
city manager within five days of the date the decision was mailed or delivered
to applicant. The city manager or designee shall hold a hearing within three
days of the filing of an appeal, at which time applicant may present any and
all evidence, testimony, and information relevant to the director's decision.
The city manager or designee, within twenty-four hours following the appeal
hearing, shall issue a decision affirming the denial of the application or
directing the director to issue a permit. The decision of the city manager or
designee shall be mailed or delivered to the applicant when issued and shall be
final and binding.
(Ord. 4368 § 2 (part), 1996)
22.04.130   Permit fees and deposits.
   Fees and charges required for all permits issued in connection with the use
of city parks and open space lands shall be as stated in the Palo Alto
municipal fee schedule. A deposit may be required by the director to be paid
within ten (10) days after issuance of a permit, and if the deposit is not made
within that time limit then the permit shall be null and void. Full payment of
all fees for any city special equipment or personnel anticipated to be required
when the permit was issued shall be made prior to the time permitted for the
activity, and the permit shall be null and void if that payment is not made
prior to the time permitted for the activity. The director may require
immediate and full payment for specified facilities and activities as listed in
park regulations. Payment of entry fees to facilities, where posted, is
required. A permit holder will be charged after the activity for any city
special equipment or personnel the use of which was not anticipated at the time
the permit was issued, and those additional charges shall be collectible as a
debt owed to the city.
(Ord. 4368 § 2 (part), 1996)
22.04.140   Liability of permit holders.
   Permit holders shall agree in writing as a condition of the permit to
indemnify and hold harmless the city, its agents and employees, from and
against claims, damages, losses and expenses, including but not limited to
attorney's fees, arising out of or resulting from the activity for which the
permit was granted. Permit holders shall be liable to the city for any and all
damage to parks, facilities or buildings owned by the city, caused by any
participant or resulting from the activity for which the permit was granted.
(Ord. 4368 § 2 (part), 1996)
22.04.150   Foothills Nature Preserve.
   Foothills Nature Preserve shall be open to all persons, regardless of
residency.
   (a)   Foothills Nature Preserve shall not be made available for the
exclusive use by any persons except for Towle Camp and the Oak Grove Group Area
and the Foothills Nature Preserve Interpretive Center classroom. Facility
reservations shall be made available to residents of the city before being
offered to the general public, according to regulations promulgated by the city
manager.
   (b)   No person shall enter or exit Foothills Nature Preserve except at:
      (1)   The main gate on Page Mill Road;
      (2)   Designated entry and exit locations on the park boundaries shared
with the Enid Pearson Arastradero Preserve (Gate D) and the Los Trancos Open
Space Preserve (Page Mill Trail). These entry and exit locations shall not be
used by bicycles or horses; or
      (3)   As authorized by the director.
   Violations of this subsection shall be a misdemeanor.
   (c)   Foothills Nature Preserve shall be closed from sunset (the actual
closure time to be prescribed in park regulations and posted accordingly) until
8:00 a.m. the following morning. No person shall remain in Foothills Nature
Preserve during the hours of park closure except for duly authorized city
employees, holders of permits which authorize afterhours use, and participants
in city-sponsored activities. Violations of this subsection shall be a
misdemeanor.
   (d)   No person shall exceed the maximum speed limit for all vehicles in
Foothills Nature Preserve of twenty miles per hour. Violations of this
subsection shall be an infraction.
   (e)   No person shall leave an unauthorized vehicle in Foothills Nature
Preserve after the closing time designated and posted for closing of the park.
Violations of this subsection shall be a misdemeanor.
   (f)   No person shall operate a bicycle or a motorcycle except on the paved
roads of Foothills Nature Preserve. No person shall operate a skateboard or
roller skates or blades or other coasting device in Foothills Nature Preserve.
This subsection shall not apply to a bicycle or motorcycle operated by a police
officer or park ranger acting in the course and scope of his or her duties.
Violations of this subsection shall be an infraction.
   (g)   No person shall smoke on any trail in Foothills Nature Preserve.
Violations of this subsection shall be a misdemeanor.
   (h)   No person shall make a wood fire in Foothills Nature Preserve without
a permit. Permits for wood fires within Foothills Nature Preserve may be issued
only for the Towle campfire ring. No person shall start or maintain any
charcoal cooking fire within Foothills Nature Preserve except in city-provided
braziers and barbecues in areas so designated and posted. Violations of this
subsection shall be a misdemeanor.
   (i)   No person shall shortcut across trail switchbacks. Violations of this
subsection shall be an infraction.
   (j)   The city manager shall promulgate regulations for the use of Boronda
Lake to protect the users, plants, animals, and structures of the lake.
   (k)   No more than 600 people shall be permitted in Foothills Nature
Preserve at any one time.
      (1)   The city manager or designee may establish a capacity limit in the
range of 400 to 600 people at Foothills Nature Preserve in order to protect the
health, safety, and welfare of preserve users; to protect the natural resources
in the preserve; and/or due to limits in parking, facilities, or staff
availability. The city shall not distinguish between residents and non-
residents in setting any limits under this subsection.
      (2)   The following persons shall not count toward the limit in this
subsection: visitors with reservations in the Towle Campground, Oak Grove
Picnic Area, and Interpretive Center Meeting Room; city-sanctioned recreation
and education groups (including city-run programs for summer camps, field
trips, and community partner youth groups); group permit holders; city-
sanctioned park volunteers; and visitors arriving in a vehicle with a valid
disabled person parking placard or license plate.
   (l)   No person owning or harboring any dog shall allow or permit such dog
to enter or be in Foothills Nature Preserve on any holiday, as defined in
Section 2.08.100(a) of this code, or any Saturday or Sunday. At all other
times, no person owning or harboring any dog shall allow or permit such dog,
whether licensed or not, to enter or be in Foothills Nature Preserve except
when held under leash by an able-bodied person. Violations of this section
shall be an infraction.
(Ord. 5550 § 2, 2022: Ord. 5522 § 2, 2021: Ord. 5518 § 3, 2021: Ord. 5516 § 3,
2021: Ord. 5515 § 3, 2021: Ord. 5514 § 3, 2021: Ord. 5511 § 3, 2020: Ord. 4865
§ 1, 2005: Ord. 4435 § 70, 1997: Ord. 4368 § 2 (part), 1996)
22.04.155   Dogs in city parks and open space lands.
   (a)   No dogs shall be allowed in a park or open space lands, or portion
thereof, where prohibited by park regulations and where signs prohibiting dogs
are posted.
   (b)   It is unlawful to permit or allow a dog to pursue any undomesticated
mammal or bird in any city park or open space lands. Palo Alto police officers,
animal control officers and park rangers may capture or destroy a dog
inflicting injury or threatening to inflict injury upon any undomesticated
mammal or bird within city parks or open space lands. Owners of dogs with
identification that have been captured or destroyed pursuant to this section
shall be notified within seventy-two hours after capture or destruction. No
criminal or civil liability shall accrue to any city employee as a result of
enforcement of this section.
(Ord. 4368 § 2 (part), 1996)
22.04.160   Commercial activities and solicitation.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided, no person shall engage in commercial
activities, including advertising or solicitation for commercial purposes in
parks and open space lands.
   (b)   Commercial activities associated with and supportive of city programs
or city-sponsored activities for which a permit has been issued by the director
shall be permitted in parks and open space lands.
   (c)   Commercial activities, commercial solicitation, and solicitation for
donations shall comply with all applicable laws, including those requirements
for permits issued under Title 4 of the Palo Alto Municipal Code.
(Ord. 4435 § 70, 1997: Ord. 4368 § 2 (part), 1996)
22.04.170   Violation of permit.
   Violation of any of the terms or conditions of a permit issued pursuant to
this chapter by a permit holder, or any agent, servant or employee of the
permit holder, is a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 4368 § 2 (part), 1996)
22.04.180   Amplified sound.
   (a)   No person shall operate any device or sound amplification equipment in
city parks or open space lands, emitting sound in excess of the limits allowed
under Section
9.10.050 of this code.
   (b)   The director may restrict the use of sound amplification devices in
connection with any activity for which a permit is required, and such
restrictions may include constraints on capacity, volume, emission spectrum,
location and arrangement, when such restrictions are designed to reduce the
noise impact on adjacent land uses.
   (c)   No person shall operate any device or sound amplification in Lytton
Plaza, except as provided by the director by permit and in accordance with park
and open space regulations and Section
9.10.050 of this code.
(Ord. 5175, § 1, 2012: Ord. 4368 § 2 (part), 1996)
22.04.190   Golf and other games.
   No person shall play or practice golf or use golf clubs or lawn darts, horse
shoes, or baseball games in any area of a park or open space lands not
designated in park regulations for such use.
(Ord. 4368 § 2 (part), 1996)
22.04.200   Models, kites.
   (a)   No person shall operate any motor-driven or radio controlled model
airplane, helicopter, boat, car, truck, or similar object in a park and open
space lands, except in areas designated by the director in park regulations.
   (b)   Kite flying is prohibited in city-owned Baylands and Byxbee Park.
(Ord. 4368 § 2 (part), 1996)
22.04.210   Vehicle operation and parking.
   No person shall operate or park any vehicle, including any motor vehicle,
motorcycle, moped, bicycle, and any other vehicle as defined in the California
Vehicle Code, within the time periods prohibited by and designated in park
regulations and posted accordingly within a city park or open space land,
except in areas designated and posted for such use without the written
permission of the director. Any city employee performing park maintenance work
or other work related to park and open space land purposes is excluded from the
foregoing restriction. No person shall operate any vehicle in excess of twenty
miles per hour in any city park or open space land. No person shall access or
use city utilities (electrical and water), within a city park or open space
lands, to power any vehicle or equipment without the written permission of the
director, except as authorized by park regulations and posted accordingly.
(Ord. 4610 § 1, 2000: Ord. 4368 § 2 (part), 1996)
22.04.215   Launch and takeout from ramp or dock.
   No person shall launch or take out any boat, motorboat, or personal
watercraft as defined in the California Harbors and Navigation Code, or any
other motor-powered boat or watercraft from a boat ramp or a dock in a city
park or open space land without the written permission of the director, except
as authorized by park regulations and posted accordingly.
(Ord. 4610 § 3, 2000)
22.04.220   Bicycles and animals.
   (a)   No person shall operate, drive or ride a bicycle, electric bicycle (e-
bike), unicycle, skateboard, roller skates, scooter, jogging stroller or other
coasting device (including electric coasting devices), horse or any other
animal in a park or open space lands except as expressly permitted to do so
pursuant to park regulations.
   (b)   Persons riding horses shall properly dispose of horse manure dropped
from the animal they are riding by removing it to the side of the levee, trail
or road.
(Ord. 5576 § 2: Ord. 4868 § 1, 2005: Ord. 4368 § 2 (part), 1996)
22.04.230   Litter.
   No person within any city park or open space lands shall leave any garbage,
trash, cans, bottles, papers or other refuse elsewhere than in the receptacles
provided therefor.
(Ord. 4368 § 2 (part), 1996)
22.04.240   Interference with permitted activities.
   No person shall use, or attempt to use, or interfere with the use of any
table, space, building or facility within a park or open space lands which at
the time is reserved for a permit holder. The permit shall become void and the
director may cancel the permit holder's rights thereunder if the table, space,
building or facility referred to in the permit is not used within one hour
after the time provided in the permit for the activity to begin.
(Ord. 4368 § 2 (part), 1996)
22.04.250   Standards and guidelines.
   No person shall engage in any activity in any park or open space lands
contrary to the regulations promulgated by the city manager or contrary to a
plan for such park approved by ordinance pursuant to Article VIII of the
Charter.
(Ord. 4368 § 2 (part), 1996)
22.04.260   Weapons.
   (a)   No person shall discharge, fire or shoot any device listed in Section
9.08.010 in any park or open space lands.
(Ord. 4368 § 2 (part), 1996)
22.04.270   Flora, fauna, feeding of wildlife.
   (a)   No person other than a duly authorized city employee or any person
participating in city-sponsored activities shall dig, remove, destroy, injure,
mutilate or cut any tree, plant, shrub, bloom or flower, or any portion
thereof, growing in any park or open space lands, without written consent of
the director.
   (b)   No person shall take, seize, molest, injure, or hunt a bird, reptile,
or animal in any city park or opens space lands, except as authorized by park
regulations or with the written consent of the director.
   (c)   No person shall feed, cause to be fed, scatter or leave food, seed or
other matter edible to any wildlife animal, including any bird or feral animal,
including any feral cat, in any park or open space lands or building located
within a park or open space lands, without the written consent of the director.
(Ord. 5259 § 1, 2014; Ord. 4368 § 2 (part), 1996)
22.04.280   Removal of turf or soil.
   No person other than a duly authorized city employee shall remove any wood,
turf, grass, soil, rock, sand or gravel from any park or opens space lands,
except as authorized by park regulations or by written consent of the director.
(Ord. 4368 § 2 (part), 1996)
22.04.290   Entering, marking, injuring, damaging or disturbing park or open
space lands.
   No person other than a duly authorized city employee shall:
   (a)   Cut, break, injure, damage, deface, or disturb any rock, building,
cage, pen, monument, boat ramp, dock, rail, bollard, sign, fence, bench,
structure, apparatus, equipment or other property in a park or open space
lands;
   (b)   Mark or place any mark, writing or printing on a rock, building, cage,
pen, monument, boat ramp, dock, rail, bollard, sign, fence, bench, structure,
apparatus, equipment or other property in a park or open space lands;
   (c)   Attach any sign, card, display or other similar device to a rock,
building, cage, pen, monument, boat ramp, dock, rail, bollard, sign, fence,
bench, structure, apparatus, equipment or other property in a park or open
space lands, except as authorized by permit;
   (d)   Enter or remain in a building or structure which has been closed, or
after the operating hours designated in park regulations and posted in the
building or structure; or
   (e)   Bring into or use in any park or open space lands portable tables or
other fixtures designed to increase the capacity of picnic facilities without a
permit authorizing those additional tables or fixtures.
(Ord. 4610 § 2, 2000: 4368 § 2 (part), 1996)
22.04.300   Fires in city parks and open space lands.
   (a)   Lighting or maintaining a fire within any park or open space lands is
prohibited, except that a charcoal fire may be lighted or maintained in those
barbecues, fire rings, or similar fixtures placed in the parks by the city
specifically for such purpose. Portable barbecues, gas stoves or lanterns,
other fixtures for lighting or maintaining fires may not be brought into or
used in any park or open space lands without a permit.
(Ord. 4368 § 2 (part), 1996)
22.04.310   Enid Pearson Arastradero Preserve, Esther Clark Park closed from
sunset until 8:00 a.m.
   Enid Pearson Arastradero Preserve, and Esther Clark Park shall be closed
from sunset (the actual time of closure to be designated by the city manager in
park regulations and posted accordingly) until 8:00 a.m. the following morning.
No person shall remain in these park and open space lands, other than duly
authorized city employees and permit holders or participants in city-sponsored
activities, during the hours of closure.
(Ord. 4864 § 1, 2005: Ord. 4368 § 2 (part), 1996)
22.04.315   Byxbee Park and city-owned Baylands closed from sunset to 8:00 a.m.
   Byxbee Park and the city-owned Baylands shall be closed from sunset (the
actual time of closure to be designated by the city manager in park regulations
and posted accordingly) to 8:00 a.m. No person shall remain in these park and
open space lands, other than duly authorized city employees and permit holders
or participants in city-sponsored activities, during the hours of closure.
(Ord. 4368 § 2 (part), 1996)
22.04.320   Parks closed, 10:30 p.m. to sunrise.
   Except as provided under this code, no person shall use, remain in or enter
any park or building between ten-thirty p.m. and sunrise, other than a duly
authorized city employee or persons participating in city-sponsored activities
or other activities for which the city has provided written permission to
utilize a park beyond the closing time, provided however that the closure of
specific facilities during portions of the day or the year may be specified by
park regulation.
(Ord. 4368 § 2 (part), 1996)
22.04.321   John Lucas Greer Park - Use of or trespass at skateboard facility
prohibited when closed.
   (a)   No person shall use, remain in or enter the skateboard facility,
located within John Lucas Greer Park, during all closed hours specified in park
regulations.
   A notice indicating time or period when the skateboard facility is closed
shall be posted at the skateboard facility.
   (b)   No person shall ride a skateboard in the skateboard facility except
while wearing a helmet, elbow pads, and knee pads.
   (c)   No person shall use the skateboard facility for any purpose other than
skateboarding; use of the skateboard facility by bicycles, rollerblades,
rollerskates, or similar devices is specifically prohibited.
   (d)   No person shall perform stunt, trick, or luge skateboarding in the
skateboard facility.
   (e)   For purposes of this section, the term "skateboard facility" shall
mean the fence and the entire fenced area surrounding and including the
skateboard bowl and the land adjacent to the skateboard bowl, located in John
Lucas Greer Park. The boundaries of Greer Park are set forth under Section
22.08.010 of this code.
   (f)   This section does not apply to any duly authorized city employee.
   (g)   Any person who violates this section is guilty of an infraction and
upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in Section
1.08.010 of this code. Each violation constitutes a separate offense and may be
separately punished.
(Ord. 4521 § 2, 1998: 4368 § 2 (part), 1996)
22.04.322   Rinconada Park - Use of or trespass at pool facility prohibited
when closed.
   (a)   No person shall use, remain in or enter the pool facility located
within Rinconada Park during all closed hours specified in park regulations.
   A notice indicating any times or period when the pool facility is closed
shall be posted at the pool facility.
   (b)   For purposes of this section, the term "pool facility" shall mean the
entire pool complex known as "Rinconada Pool," within Rinconada Park.
   (c)   This section does not apply to any duly authorized city employee or to
any person participating in city-sponsored activities or other activities for
which the city has provided written permission to utilize the pool facility
beyond the closing time.
   (d)   Any person who violates this section is guilty of an infraction and
upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in Section
1.08.010 of this code. Each violation constitutes a separate offense and may be
separately punished.
(Ord. 4368 § 2 (part), 1996)
22.04.330   Cogswell Plaza - Consumption of alcoholic beverages prohibited.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage
(1) in Cogswell Plaza, bounded by Bryant and Ramona Streets and Lytton Avenue;
or (2) in the public parking lot located along Ramona Street adjacent to
Cogswell Plaza.
   (b)   Any person who violates this section is guilty of an infraction and
upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in Section
1.08.010 of this code. Each violation constitutes a separate offense and may be
separately punished.
(Ord. 4368 § 2 (part), 1996)
22.04.331   Lytton Plaza - Consumption of alcoholic beverages prohibited.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage
in Lytton Plaza, bounded by University Avenue, Emerson Street and Parking Lot
P.
   (b)   Any person who violates this section is guilty of an infraction and
upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in Section
1.08.010 of this code. Each violation constitutes a separate offense and may be
separately punished.
(Ord. 4368 § 2 (part), 1996)
22.04.332   Edith Eugenie Johnson Park - Consumption of alcoholic beverages
prohibited.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage
in Edith Eugenie Johnson Park.
   (b)   Any person who violates this section is guilty of an infraction and
upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in Section
1.08.010 of this code. Each violation constitutes a separate offense and may be
separately punished.
(Ord. 4368 § 2 (part), 1996)
22.04.333   Boulware Park - Consumption of alcoholic beverages prohibited.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage
in that park known as Boulware Park.
   (b)   Any person who violates this section is guilty of an infraction and
upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in Section
1.08.010 of this code. Each violation constitutes a separate offense and may be
separately punished.
(Ord. 4368 § 2 (part), 1996)
22.04.334   Scott Street Minipark - Consumption of alcoholic beverages
prohibited.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage
in that park known as Scott Street Minipark.
   (b)   Any person who violates this section is guilty of an infraction and
upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in Section
1.08.010 of this code. Each violation constitutes a separate offense and may be
separately punished.
(Ord. 4417 § 1, 1997)
22.04.335   John Lucas Greer Park - Consumption of alcoholic beverages
prohibited in skateboard facility.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage
in or upon the skateboard facility, located within John Lucas Greer Park.
   (b)   For purposes of this section, the term "skateboard facility" shall
mean the fence and the entire fenced area surrounding and including the
skateboard bowl and the land adjacent to the skateboard bowl, located in John
Lucas Greer Park.
   (c)   Any person who violates this section is guilty of an infraction and
upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in Section
1.08.010 of this code. Each violation constitutes a separate offense and may be
separately punished.
(Ord. 4368 § 2 (part), 1996)
22.04.336   Rinconada Park - Consumption of alcoholic beverages prohibited
without a permit.
   (a)   Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, it shall be
unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage in that park known as
Rinconada Park.
   (b)   Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section, alcoholic beverages
may be consumed in Rinconada Park only in accordance with, and subject to the
conditions set forth in, a permit granted by the director that allows such
consumption in all or part of the park. No such permit shall be granted if the
director determines that issuance of the permit would interfere with normal
operations or usage of the park or would otherwise threaten the public health,
safety, convenience, or welfare. The director shall require an applicant for
such a permit to furnish any information necessary to review and consider the
application. The director shall further require the applicant to provide
insurance naming the city of Palo Alto as an additional insured party to the
policy, with minimum coverage as required by the city risk manager, as a
condition to issuance of the permit.
   (c)   Any person who violates this section is guilty of an infraction and
upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in Section
1.08.010 of this code. Each violation constitutes a separate offense and may be
separately punished.
(Ord. 4368 § 2 (part), 1996)
22.04.337   Mitchell Park - Consumption of alcoholic beverages prohibited
without a permit.
   (a)   Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, it shall be
unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage in that park known as
Mitchell Park.
   (b)   Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section, alcoholic beverages
may be consumed in Mitchell Park only in accordance with, and subject to the
conditions set forth in, a permit granted by the director that allows such
consumption in all or part of the park. No such permit shall be granted if the
director determines that issuance of the permit would interfere with normal
operations or usage of the park or would otherwise threaten the public health,
safety, convenience, or welfare. The director shall require an applicant for
such a permit to furnish any information necessary to review and consider the
application. The director shall further require the applicant to provide
insurance naming the city of Palo Alto as an additional insured party to the
policy, with minimum coverage as required by the city risk manager, as a
condition to issuance of the permit.
   (c)   Any person who violates this section is guilty of an infraction and
upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in Section
1.08.010 of this code. Each violation constitutes a separate offense and may be
separately punished.
(Ord. 4368 § 2 (part), 1996)
22.04.338   Don Secondino Robles Park - Consumption of alcoholic beverages
prohibited.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage
in that park known as Don Secondino Robles Park.
   (b)   Any person who violates this section is guilty of an infraction and
upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in Section
1.08.010 of this code. Each violation constitutes a separate offense and may be
separately punished.
(Ord. 4417 § 2, 1997)
22.04.339   Timothy Hopkins Creekside Park - Consumption of alcoholic beverages
prohibited.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage
in that park known as Timothy Hopkins Creekside Park.
   (b)   Any person who violates this section is guilty of an infraction and
upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in Section
1.08.010 of this code. Each violation constitutes a separate offense and may be
separately punished.
(Ord. 4417 § 3, 1997)
22.04.340   Motorized vehicles and generators in parks and open space land.
   Motorized vehicles and generators in parks and open space land. No person,
except city staff, their agents or where authorized by permit, shall drive a
motorized vehicle or moped upon park or open space lands owned and/or
controlled by the city unless he or she holds a valid driver's license issued
under the provisions of the California Vehicle Code. No person shall operate a
motorized vehicle as defined in California Vehicle Code Section 415, moped or
motor scooter within any open space park or preserve except on paved roads or
designated parking lots. Use of vehicles on trails or off-road shall be an
infraction under this section. No person shall perform any maintenance or
repairs to any motorized vehicles (other than in emergencies) upon park or open
space lands owned and/or controlled by the city. No person, except city staff,
their agents or where authorized by permit, shall operate any electric power
generators (other than those integral to motorized vehicles) upon park or open
space lands owned and/or controlled by the city.
(Ord. 4746 § 1, 2002: Ord. 4368 § 2 (part), 1996)
22.04.341   El Palo Alto Park - Consumption of alcoholic beverages prohibited.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage
in that park known as El Palo Alto Park.
   (b)   Any person who violates this section is guilty of an infraction and
upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in Section
1.08.010 of this code. Each violation constitutes a separate offense and may be
separately punished.
(Ord. 4421 § 1, 1997)
22.04.342   Heritage Park - Consumption of alcoholic beverages prohibited.
   (a)   Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, it shall be
unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage in that park known as
Heritage Park.
   (b)   Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section, alcoholic beverages
may be consumed in Heritage Park only in accordance with, and subject to the
conditions set forth in, a permit granted by the director that allows such
consumption in all or part of the park. No such permit shall be granted if the
director determines that issuance of the permit would interfere with normal
operations or usage of the park or would otherwise threaten the public health,
safety, convenience, or welfare. The director shall require an applicant for
such a permit to furnish any information necessary to review and consider the
application. The director shall further require the applicant to provide
insurance naming the city as an additional insured party to the policy, with
minimum coverage as required by the city risk manager, as a condition to
issuance of the permit.
   (c)   Any person who violates this section is guilty of an infraction and
upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in Section
1.08.010 of this code. Each violation constitutes a separate offense and may be
separately punished.
(Ord. 5016 § 1, 2008)
22.04.343   Eleanor Pardee Park - Consumption of alcoholic beverages
prohibited.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage
in Eleanor Pardee Park.
   (b)   Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section, alcoholic beverages
may be consumed in Eleanor Pardee Park only in accordance with, and subject to
the conditions set forth in, a permit granted by the director that allows such
consumption in all or part of the park. No such permit shall be granted if the
director determines that issuance of the permit would interfere with normal
operations or usage of the park or would otherwise threaten the public health,
safety, convenience, or welfare. The director shall require an applicant for
such a permit to furnish any information necessary to review and consider the
application. The director shall further require the applicant to provide
insurance naming the city as an additional insured party to the policy, with
minimum coverage as required by the city risk manager, as a condition to
issuance of the permit.
   (c)   Any person who violates this section is guilty of an infraction and
upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in Section
1.08.010 of this code. Each violation constitutes a separate offense and may be
separately punished.
(Ord. 5016 § 2, 2008)
22.04.350   Consumption of alcoholic beverages prohibited in motor vehicles.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to consume an alcoholic beverage
while in a motorized vehicle or upon a moped, in any park or open space lands.
   (b)   Any person who violates this section is guilty of an infraction and
upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in Section
1.08.010 of this code. Each violation constitutes a separate offense and may be
separately punished.
(Ord. 4368 § 2 (part), 1996)
22.04.360   Storage of opened container.
   It is unlawful for the registered owner of any motor vehicle or moped, or
the driver if the registered owner is not present in the vehicle, to keep any
bottle, can, or other receptacle containing any alcoholic beverage which has
been opened, or the seal broken, or the contents of which have been partially
removed, inside a motor vehicle or moped within a park or open space lands,
unless such the container is kept in the trunk of the vehicle or in some other
area of the vehicle not normally occupied by the driver or passengers if the
vehicle is not equipped with a trunk. A utility compartment or glove
compartment shall be deemed to be within the area occupied by the driver and
passengers. This section shall not apply to the living quarters of a motor home
or camper.
(Ord. 4368 § 2 (part), 1996)
22.04.370   Reckless driving prohibited.
   No person shall drive any vehicle, bicycle or moped upon park or open space
lands owned or controlled by the city in willful or wanton disregard for the
safety of persons or property. Such conduct shall constitute reckless driving.
(Ord. 4368 § 2 (part), 1996)
22.04.380   Unlawful riding and towing.
   No person shall:
   (a)   While driving a motor vehicle, knowingly permit any person to ride on
such vehicle or upon any portion thereof not designed or intended for the use
of passengers; or
   (b)   At any time, ride on any moving vehicle or upon any portion thereof,
not designed or intended for the use of passengers.
(Ord. 4368 § 2 (part), 1996)
22.04.390   Duck pond.
   Entry to the fenced nesting area north of the duck pond located in the Yacht
Harbor is prohibited, except for city employees or contractors in connection
with city business.
(Ord. 4368 § 2 (part), 1996)
Chapter 22.08
PARK DEDICATIONS
Sections:
   
22.08.001   Purpose.
   
22.08.002   Definition.
   
22.08.003   Lease, abandonment, disposition of parks - State law to govern.
   
22.08.004   Ordinance required.
   
22.08.005   Ordinance required for substantial building, construction, etc.
   
22.08.006   Ordinance subject to referendum.
   
22.08.007   Provisions for land use.
   
22.08.010   John Lucas Greer Park.
   
22.08.020   Byxbee Park and the city-owned Baylands.
   
22.08.030   Cameron Park.
   
22.08.035   Bol Park.
   
22.08.040   Bowden Park.
   
22.08.050   Palo Alto Lawn Bowling Green.
   
22.08.060   Cogswell Plaza.
   
22.08.065   Cogswell Plaza Extension.
   
22.08.068   Edith Eugenie Johnson Park.
   
22.08.070   Eleanor Park.
   
22.08.080   William C. Werry Park.
   
22.08.090   Foothills Nature Preserve (formerly Foothills Park).
   
22.08.100   Lee Property - Addition to Foothills Nature Preserve.
   
22.08.110   Lee Property - Addition to Foothills Nature Preserve.
   
22.08.120   Lee Property - Addition to Foothills Nature Preserve.
   
22.08.130   Frederick Weisshaar Park.
   
22.08.140   Mayfield Park.
   
22.08.150   Herbert Hoover Park.
   
22.08.155   Herbert Hoover Park Addition.
   
22.08.160   Don Secondino Robles Park.
   
22.08.170   Don Jesus Ramos Park (formerly Meadow Park) Addition.
   
22.08.175   Don Jesus Ramos Park (formerly Meadow Park) Addition.
   
22.08.180   Mitchell Park.
   
22.08.185   Monroe Mini-Park.
   
22.08.190   Nolte Property - Addition to Mitchell Park.
   
22.08.200   Peers Park.
   
22.08.210   Rinconada Park.
   
22.08.211   Rinconada Park Addition.
   
22.08.212   Rinconada Park Addition.
   
22.08.220   Henry W. Seale Park (formerly Stockton Park).
   
22.08.225   Henry W. Seale Park (formerly Stockton Park) Addition.
   
22.08.230   El Camino Park.
   
22.08.240   Municipal Golf Course.
   
22.08.250   Palo Alto Yacht Harbor.
   
22.08.260   Esther Clark Park.
   
22.08.270   Juana Briones Park.
   
22.08.280   John Boulware Park.
   
22.08.290   Timothy Hopkins Creekside Park.
   
22.08.300   El Palo Alto Park.
   
22.08.310   Scott Street Minipark.
   
22.08.320   Sarah Wallis Park.
   
22.08.330   Enid Pearson Arastradero Preserve.
   
22.08.340   John Fletcher Byxbee Recreation Area Addition.
   
22.08.350   Hewlett-Mullen Property.
   
22.08.360   Lytton Plaza.
   
22.08.370   Terman Park.
   
22.08.380   Dr. Thomas M. and Dora Moody Williams Park.
   
22.08.390   Heritage Park.
   
22.08.400   Stanford/Palo Alto Community Playing Fields.
   
22.08.410   Lee Property - Addition to Foothills Nature Preserve.
   
22.08.420   ITT Antenna Field - Addition to Baylands Nature Preserve.
   
22.08.430   Addition to John Boulware Park.
   
22.08.440   Fred Eyerly Tower Well Park.
22.08.001   Purpose.
   The purpose of this chapter is to implement Article VIII of the Charter
providing for the preservation of city lands which are used or intended to be
used for park, playground, recreation or conservation purposes, and providing
the electorate an opportunity to pass upon proposals to discontinue or change
such actual or intended uses or to improve such lands. This chapter shall be
liberally construed to effectuate its purposes.
(Ord. 4368 § 3 (part), 1996)
22.08.002   Definition.
   The word "park" as used in this chapter and in the general laws hereinafter
referred to, in every case means and includes park, playground, recreation and
conservation lands and uses.
(Ord. 4368 § 3 (part), 1996)
22.08.003   Lease, abandonment, disposition of parks - State law to govern.
   Lands owned or controlled by the city which are used or intended to be used
for park purposes shall be sold, leased or otherwise disposed of, or their use
abandoned or discontinued only in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter. Except as otherwise provided in the Charter, the general laws of the
state of California as they existed January 1, 1965, authorizing municipal
corporations to abandon or discontinue the use of lands dedicated or placed in
use for park purposes, authorizing the sale or other disposition of such lands,
and providing procedures therefor and for matters relating thereto (designated
as Government Code Article 2, Chapter 9, Part 2, Division 3, Title 4,
commencing at Section 38440) shall be applicable to the city of Palo Alto and
to all lands owned, used or held by it for park purposes, and said laws shall
govern and control exclusively in respect thereto.
(Ord. 4368 § 3 (part), 1996)
22.08.004   Ordinance required.
   The council shall by ordinance prepare a list setting forth in separately
numbered sections the common name or other designation and the legal
description of each site, parcel or area of land owned or controlled by the
city which is used or intended to be used for park purposes. Each section shall
be accompanied by a map or plat of the land described, and said ordinance shall
contain a statement that the lands listed thereon are reserved for park,
playground, recreation or conservation purposes pursuant to this chapter. As
additional lands are acquired or held by the city for park purposes, they shall
likewise, by ordinance and without delay, be added to said list and subject to
the provisions of this chapter. Any such ordinance may be proposed pursuant to
the initiative provisions of Article VI, Section 2, of the Charter.
(Ord. 4368 § 3 (part), 1996)
22.08.005   Ordinance required for substantial building, construction, etc.
   Before any substantial building, construction, reconstruction or development
is commenced or approved, upon or with respect to any land held by the city for
park purposes, either by the city or by a lessee, licensee or permittee
thereof, the council shall first cause to be prepared and by ordinance approve
and adopt a plan therefor. All leases, licenses and permits with respect to
land held for park purposes shall contain provisions requiring compliance with
this section. The plan shall be prepared in such a manner and with sufficient
detail and particularity to show, as applicable, the nature, function, size,
extent and general appearance of the proposed project. Any change in the plan
shall be prepared in the same manner and adopted by ordinance.
(Ord. 4368 § 3 (part), 1996)
22.08.006   Ordinance subject to referendum.
   Whenever in this chapter action is required to be taken by ordinance, such
action shall be subject to the referendum provisions of Article VI, Section 3,
of the Charter, irrespective of whether such action would be characterized as
legislative, administrative or otherwise. One or more sections of any ordinance
adopted pursuant to Section
22.08.004 of this chapter may be made subject to a referendum without including
the whole of such ordinance.
(Ord. 4368 § 3 (part), 1996)
22.08.007   Provisions for land use.
   All of the lands listed in this chapter shall be held for use for park
purposes subject to the provisions of Article VIII of the Charter.
(Ord. 4368 § 3 (part), 1996)
22.08.010   John Lucas Greer Park.
   That certain parcel of land formerly known as Amarillo Park as delineated
and described in Exhibit A-1 attached hereto is named John Lucas Greer Park and
is hereby reserved for park, playground, recreation or conservation purposes
along with those certain additional parcels of land delineated and described in
Exhibit A-1.1 attached hereto.
(Ord. 4368 § 3 (part), 1996)
22.08.020   Byxbee Park and the city-owned Baylands.
   That certain parcel of land known as Byxbee Park and city-owned Baylands as
delineated and described in Exhibit A-2 attached hereto is hereby reserved for
park, playground, recreation or conservation purposes. That portion of Byxbee
Park and the city-owned Baylands commonly known and referred to as the
"Baylands Interpretive Center" is hereby named "The Lucy Evans Baylands Nature
Interpretive Center."
(Ord. 4368 § 3 (part), 1996)
22.08.030   Cameron Park.
   That certain parcel of land formerly known as Berkeley Park and now known as
Cameron Park as delineated and described in Exhibit A-3 attached hereto is
hereby reserved for park, playground, recreation or conservation purposes.
(Ord. 4368 § 3 (part), 1996)
22.08.035   Bol Park.
   That certain parcel of land known as Bol Park dedicated and described in
Exhibit A-3.1 attached hereto hereby is reserved for park, playground,
recreation or conservation purposes.
(Ord. 4368 § 3 (part), 1996)
22.08.040   Bowden Park.
   That certain parcel of land known as Bowden Park as delineated and described
in Exhibit A-4 attached hereto is hereby reserved for park, playground,
recreation or conservation purposes.
(Ord. 4368 § 3 (part), 1996)
22.08.050   Palo Alto Lawn Bowling Green.
   That certain parcel of land known as the Palo Alto Lawn Bowling Green as
delineated and described in Exhibit A-5 attached hereto is hereby reserved for
park, playground, recreation or conservation purposes.
(Ord. 4368 § 3 (part), 1996)
22.08.060   Cogswell Plaza.
   That certain parcel of land known as Cogswell Plaza as delineated and
described in Exhibit A-6 attached hereto is hereby reserved for park,
playground, recreation or conservation purposes.
(Ord. 4368 § 3 (part), 1996)
22.08.065   Cogswell Plaza Extension.
   That certain parcel of land known as Cogswell Plaza Extension as delineated
and described in Exhibit A-6.1 attached hereto is hereby reserved for park,
playground, recreation or conservation purposes.
(Ord. 4368 § 3 (part), 1996)
22.08.068   Edith Eugenie Johnson Park.
   That certain parcel of land formerly known as Downtown Park North and now
known as Edith Eugenie Johnson Park as delineated and described in Exhibit A-
6.5 attached to this chapter is reserved for park, playground, recreation or
conservation purposes.
(Ord. 4368 § 3 (part), 1996)
22.08.070   Eleanor Park.
   That certain parcel of land known as Eleanor Park as delineated and
described in Exhibit A-7 attached hereto is hereby reserved for park,
playground, recreation or conservation purposes.
(Ord. 4368 § 3 (part), 1996)
22.08.080   William C. Werry Park.
   That certain parcel of land formerly known as Eton Park and now known as
William C. Werry Park as delineated and described in Exhibit A-8 and now known
as Cameron Park attached hereto is hereby reserved for park, playground,
recreation or conservation purposes.
(Ord. 4368 § 3 (part), 1996)
22.08.090   Foothills Nature Preserve (formerly Foothills Park).
   That certain parcel of land formerly known as Foothills Park as delineated
and described in Exhibit A-9 attached hereto and now known as Foothills Nature
Preserve is hereby reserved for park, playground, recreation or conservation
purposes.
(Ord. 5518 § 4 (part), 2021: Ord. 4368 § 3 (part), 1996)
22.08.100   Lee Property – Addition to Foothills Nature Preserve.
   That certain parcel of land known as the Lee Property (addition to Foothills
Nature Preserve) as delineated and described in Exhibit A-9.1 attached hereto
is hereby reserved for park, playground, recreation or conservation purposes.
(Ord. 5518 § 4 (part), 2021: Ord. 4368 § 3 (part), 1996)
22.08.110   Lee Property – Addition to Foothills Nature Preserve.
   That certain parcel of land known as the Lee Property (addition to Foothills
Nature Preserve) as delineated and described in Exhibit A-9.2 attached hereto
is hereby reserved for park, playground, recreation or conservation purposes.
(Ord. 5518 § 4 (part), 2021: Ord. 4368 § 3 (part), 1996)
22.08.120   Lee Property – Addition to Foothills Nature Preserve.
   That certain parcel of land known as the Lee Property (addition to Foothills
Nature Preserve) as delineated and described in Exhibit A-9.3 attached hereto
is hereby reserved for park, playground, recreation or conservation purposes.
(Ord. 5518 § 4 (part), 2021: Ord. 4368 § 3 (part), 1996)
22.08.130   Frederick Weisshaar Park.
   That certain parcel of land formerly known as Hampton Park and now known as
Frederick Weisshaar Park as delineated and described in Exhibit A-10 attached
hereto is hereby reserved for park, playground, recreation or conservation
purposes.
(Ord. 4368 § 3 (part), 1996)
22.08.140   Mayfield Park.
   That certain parcel of land formerly known as Hollywood Park and now known
as Mayfield Park as delineated and described in Exhibit A-11 attached hereto is
hereby reserved for park, playground, recreation or conservation purposes.
(Ord. 4368 § 3 (part), 1996)
22.08.150   Herbert Hoover Park.
   That certain parcel of land known as Herbert Hoover Park, as delineated and
described in Exhibits A-12 and A-12.1 attached hereto, is hereby reserved for
park, playground, recreation or conservation purposes.
(Ord. 4368 § 3 (part), 1996)
22.08.155   Herbert Hoover Park Addition.
   That certain parcel of land known as the former Hoover School site, as
delineated and described in Exhibit A-12.2 attached hereto, is hereby reserved
for park, playground, recreation or conservation purposes.
(Ord. 4368 § 3 (part), 1996)
22.08.160   Don Secondino Robles Park.
   That certain parcel of land formerly known as Mayfield Park and now known as
Don Secondino Robles Park as delineated and described in Exhibit A-13 attached
hereto is hereby reserved for park, playground, recreation or conservation
purposes.
(Ord. 4368 § 3 (part), 1996)
22.08.170   Don Jesus Ramos Park (formerly Meadow Park) Addition.
   That certain parcel of land known as Don Jesus Ramos Park, as delineated and
described in Exhibit A-14 attached hereto, is hereby reserved for park,
playground, recreation or conservation purposes.
(Ord. 4368 § 3 (part), 1996)
22.08.175   Don Jesus Ramos Park (formerly Meadow Park) Addition.
   A portion of that certain parcel of land known as the former Ortega School
site, as delineated and described in Exhibit A-14.1 attached hereto, is hereby
reserved for park, playground, recreation or conservation purposes.
(Ord. 4368 § 3 (part), 1996)
22.08.180   Mitchell Park.
   That certain parcel of land known as Mitchell Park as delineated and
described in Exhibit A-15 attached hereto is hereby reserved for park,
playground, recreation or conservation purposes.
(Ord. 4368 § 3 (part), 1996)
22.08.185   Monroe Mini-Park.
   That certain parcel of land known as Monroe Mini-Park delineated and
described in Exhibit A-21.6 attached hereto is reserved for park, playground,
recreation or conservation purposes.
(Ord. 4368 § 3 (part), 1996)
22.08.190   Nolte Property - Addition to Mitchell Park.
   That certain parcel of land known as the Nolte Property (addition to
Mitchell Park) as delineated and described in Exhibit A-15.1 attached hereto is
hereby reserved for park, playground, recreation or conservation purposes.
(Ord. 4368 § 3 (part), 1996)
22.08.200   Peers Park.
   That certain parcel of land known as Peers Park as delineated and described
in Exhibit A-16 attached hereto is hereby reserved for park, playground,
recreation or conservation purposes.
(Ord. 4368 § 3 (part), 1996)
22.08.210   Rinconada Park.
   That certain parcel of land known as Rinconada Park as delineated and
described in Exhibit A-17 attached hereto is hereby reserved for park,
playground, recreation or conservation purposes.
(Ord. 4839 § 1, 2004: Ord.4368 § 3 (part), 1996)
22.08.211   Rinconada Park Addition.
   The parcel of land delineated and described in Exhibit A-17.1 attached
hereto is hereby reserved for park, playground, recreation or conservation use,
and is hereby made a part of Rinconada Park.
(Ord. 4368 § 3 (part), 1996)
22.08.212   Rinconada Park Addition.
   The parcel of land delineated and described in Exhibit A-17.2 attached
hereto is hereby reserved for park, playground, recreation or conservation use,
and is hereby made a part of Rinconada Park.
(Ord. 4368 § 3 (part), 1996)
22.08.220   Henry W. Seale Park (formerly Stockton Park).
   That certain parcel of land known as Henry W. Seale Park, as delineated and
described in Exhibit A-18 attached hereto, is hereby reserved for park,
playground, recreation or conservation purposes.
(Ord. 4368 § 3 (part), 1996)
22.08.225   Henry W. Seale Park (formerly Stockton Park) Addition.
   A portion of that certain parcel of land known as the former DeAnza School
site, as delineated and described in Exhibit A-18.1 attached hereto, is hereby
reserved for park, playground, recreation or conservation purposes.
(Ord. 4368 § 3 (part), 1996)
22.08.230   El Camino Park.
   That parcel of land known as El Camino Park as delineated and described in
Exhibit A-19 attached hereto is hereby reserved for park, playground,
recreation or conservation purposes.
(Ord. 4368 § 3 (part), 1996)
22.08.240   Municipal Golf Course.
   That certain parcel of land known as the Municipal Golf Course as delineated
and described in Exhibit A-20 attached hereto is hereby reserved for park,
playground, recreation or conservation purposes.
(Ord. 4368 § 3 (part), 1996)
22.08.250   Palo Alto Yacht Harbor.
   That certain parcel of land known as the Palo Alto Yacht Harbor as
delineated and described in Exhibit A-21 attached hereto is hereby reserved for
park, playground, recreation or conservation purposes.
(Ord. 4368 § 3 (part), 1996)
22.08.260   Esther Clark Park.
   That certain parcel of land known as Esther Clark Park as delineated and
described in Exhibit A-21.1 attached hereto is hereby reserved for park,
playground, recreation or conservation purposes.
(Ord. 4368 § 3 (part), 1996)
22.08.270   Juana Briones Park.
   That certain parcel of land formerly known as the Arastradero Road Park and
now known as Juana Briones Park as delineated and described in Exhibit A-21.2
attached hereto is hereby reserved for park, playground, recreation or
conservation purposes.
(Ord. 4368 § 3 (part), 1996)
22.08.280   John Boulware Park.
   That certain parcel of land formerly known as South Palo Alto Neighborhood
Park and now known as John Boulware Park as delineated and described in Exhibit
A-21.3 attached hereto is hereby reserved for park, playground, recreation or
conservation purposes.
(Ord. 4368 § 3 (part), 1996)
22.08.290   Timothy Hopkins Creekside Park.
   That certain parcel of land known as Timothy Hopkins Creekside Park
delineated and described in Exhibit A-21.4 attached hereto is hereby reserved
for park, playground, recreation or conservation purposes.
(Ord. 4368 § 3 (part), 1996)
22.08.300   El Palo Alto Park.
   That certain parcel of land known as El Palo Alto Park delineated and
described in Exhibit A-21.5 attached hereto is hereby reserved for park,
playground, recreation or conservation purposes.
(Ord. 4368 § 3 (part), 1996)
22.08.310   Scott Street Minipark.
   That certain parcel of land known as Scott Street Minipark delineated and
described in Exhibit A-21.7 attached hereto hereby is reserved for park,
playground, recreation or conservation purposes.
(Ord. 4368 § 3 (part), 1996)
22.08.320   Sarah Wallis Park.
   That certain parcel of land known as Sarah Wallis Park, delineated and
described in Exhibit A-21.8 attached to this chapter is reserved for park,
playground, recreation or conservation purposes.
(Ord. 4368 § 3 (part), 1996)
22.08.330   Enid Pearson Arastradero Preserve.
   Those certain parcels of land known as the Enid Pearson Arastradero Preserve
as delineated and described in Exhibit A-21.9 attached hereto are reserved for
park, playground, recreation and/or conservation purposes.
   The parcels shall serve as a regional trailhead facility for three regional
trails, the Matadero Creek/Page Mill Trail (S1 Trail), the San Francisquito/Los
Trancos Creek Trail (C1 Trail), and the Juan Bautista de Anza National Historic
Trail (R1-A Trail), designated in the County of Santa Clara Countywide Trails
Master Plan, and access to these trails shall be gained on foot and by horse or
bicycle.
(Ord. 4886 § 1, 2006: Ord. 4864 § 2, 2005: Ord. 4835 § 1, 2004: Ord. 4713 § 2,
2001: Ord. 4368 § 3 (part), 1996)
22.08.340   John Fletcher Byxbee Recreation Area Addition.
   That certain parcel of land known as John Fletcher Byxbee Recreation Area
Addition delineated and described in Exhibit A-21.10 attached to this chapter
is reserved for park, playground, recreation or conservation purposes.
(Ord. 4368 § 3 (part), 1996)
22.08.350   Hewlett-Mullen Property.
   That certain parcel of land known as Hewlett-Mullen Property delineated and
described in Exhibit A-22 attached hereto and incorporated herein by reference
is hereby reserved for park, playground, recreation or conservation purposes.
(Ord. 4368 § 3 (part), 1996)
22.08.360   Lytton Plaza.
   That certain parcel of land known as Lytton Plaza delineated and described
in Exhibit A-23 attached hereto and incorporated herein by reference is hereby
reserved for park, playground, recreation or conservation purposes.
(Ord. 4368 § 3 (part), 1996)
22.08.370   Terman Park.
   A portion of that certain parcel of land known as the former Terman Middle
School site, as delineated and described in Exhibit A-24 attached hereto, is
hereby reserved for park, playground, recreation or conservation purposes.
(Ord. 4368 § 3 (part), 1996)
22.08.380   Dr. Thomas M. and Dora Moody Williams Park.
   That certain parcel of land known as the Dr. Thomas M. and Dora Moody
Williams Park delineated and described in Exhibit A-25, attached hereto and
incorporated herein by reference, is hereby reserved for park, playground,
recreation or conservation purposes.
(Ord. 4423 § 2, 1997)
22.08.390   Heritage Park.
   That certain 2.01 acre parcel of land, a portion of the land formerly known
as the Palo Alto Medical Foundation site and the South of Forest Coordinated
Area Plan Phase I Park, as delineated and described in Exhibit A-26 attached to
this chapter and incorporated herein by this reference, is reserved for park,
playground, recreation and/or conservation purposes; provided however, that
underground reservoir, well and pump station facilities necessary for emergency
water supply may be located at this site subject to the following requirements:
   1.   The reservoir, well and pump station structures shall be located
underground. Any above-ground appurtenances, such as ventilation devices, shall
be incorporated into the park design and shall support a park use.
   2.   The design, location and operation of the reservoir, well and pump
station structures shall not significantly interfere with or limit park design
alternatives.
   3.   The design, location and operation of the reservoir, well and pump
station structures shall not result in a net loss of trees or park acreage.
   4.   The underground reservoir, well and pump station structures shall be
located at a sufficient depth so as to not preclude turf, landscape or tree
plantings.
   5.   A park improvement ordinance shall be adopted in conformance with
Municipal Code Section
22.08.005 prior to construction of the reservoir, well and pump station.
(Ord. 4838 § 1, 2004: Ord. 4815 § 2, 2004)
22.08.400   Stanford/Palo Alto Community Playing Fields.
   That certain parcel of land on the northwest corner of El Camino and Page
Mill Road formerly known as the Mayfield Site, of approximately 6 acres, as
delineated and described in Exhibit A-27 attached to this chapter and
incorporated herein by this reference, is reserved for park, playground,
recreation and/or conservation purposes until the expiration or prior
termination of that certain Ground Lease between the City of Palo Alto and the
Board of Trustees of Leland Stanford Junior University dated July 18, 2005.
(Ord. 4920 § 2, 2006)
22.08.410   Lee Property - Addition to Foothills Nature Preserve.
   That certain parcel of land known as the Lee Property (addition to Foothills
Nature Preserve), as delineated and described in Exhibit A-28 and attached
hereto, is hereby reserved for park, playground, recreation or conservation
purposes.
(Ord. 5518 § 4 (part), 2021: Ord. 5268 § 1, 2014)
22.08.420   ITT Antenna Field – Addition to Baylands Nature Preserve.
   That certain parcel of land known as the ITT Antenna Field (addition to
Baylands Nature Preserve), as delineated and described in Exhibit A-29 and
attached hereto, is hereby reserved for park, playground, recreation or
conservation purposes.
(Ord. 5413 § 1, 2017)
22.08.430   Addition to John Boulware Park.
   That certain parcel of land as delineated and described in Exhibit A-30 and
attached hereto, formerly known as 3350 Birch Street, is hereby reserved for
park, playground, recreation or conservation purposes.
(Ord. 5545 § 1, 2022)
22.08.440   Fred Eyerly Tower Well Park.
   That certain parcel of land known as the Fred Eyerly Tower Well Park, as
delineated and described in Exhibit A-31, is hereby reserved for park,
playground, recreation or conservation purposes.
(Ord. 5631 § 2, 2024: Ord. 5617 § 3, 2024)
EXHIBITS FOR TITLE 22, PARKS
   
A-1   John Lucas Greer Park
   
A-1.1   Addition to John Lucas Greer Park
   
A-2   Baylands (City Owned)
   
A-3   Cameron Park
   
A-3.1   Bol Park
   
A-4   Bowden Park
   
A-5   Palo Alto Lawn Bowling Green
   
A-6   Cogswell Plaza
   
A-6.1   Cogswell Plaza Extension
   
A-6.5   Edith Eugenie Johnson Park
   
A-7   Eleanor Park
   
A-8   William C. Werry Park
   
A-9   Foothills Nature Preserve (formerly Foothills Park)
   
A-9.1   Lee Property - Addition to Foothills Nature Preserve
   
A-9.2   Lee Property - Addition to Foothills Nature Preserve
   
A-9.3   Lee Property - Addition to Foothills Nature Preserve
   
A-10   Frederick W. Weisshaar Park
   
A-11   Mayfield Park
   
A-12   Herbert Hoover Park
   A-12.1    Herbert Hoover Park Addition
   
A-12.2    Herbert Hoover Park Addition
   
A-13   Don Secondino Robles Park
   
A-14   Don Jesus Ramos Park
   
A-14.1   Don Jesus Ramos Park Addition
   
A-15   Mitchell Park
   
A-15.1   Nolte Property-Addition to Mitchell Park
   
A-16   Peers Park
   
A-17   Rinconada Park
   
A-17.1   Rinconada Park Addition
   
A-17.2   Rinconada Park Addition
   
A-18   Henry W. Seale Park
   
A-18.1   Henry W. Seale Park Addition
   
A-19   El Camino Park
   
A-20   Municipal Golf Course
   
A-21   Palo Alto Yacht Harbor
   
A-21.1   Esther Clark Park
   
A-21.2   Juana Briones Park
   
A-21.3   John Boulware Park
   
A-21.4   Timothy Hopkins Creekside Park
   
A-21.5   El Palo Alto Park
   
A-21.6   Monroe Minipark
   
A-21.7   Scott Street Minipark
   
A-21.8   Sarah Wallis Park
   
A-21.9   Enid Pearson Arastradero Preserve
   
A-21.10   John Fletcher Byxbee Recreation Area Addition
   
A-22   Hewlett-Mullen Property
   
A-23   Lytton Plaza
   
A-24   Terman Park
   
A-25   Dr. Thomas M. and Dora Moody Williams Park
   
A-26   Heritage Park
   
A-27   Stanford/Palo Alto Community Playing Fields
   
A-28   Lee Property - Addition to Foothills Nature Preserve
   
A-29   ITT Antenna Field - Addition to Baylands Nature Preserve
   
A-30   Addition to John Boulware Park
Exhibit A-1 JOHN LUCAS GREER PARK
   That certain 4.978 acre parcel of land conveyed by Bayshore Amusement
Company, Inc. to city of Palo Alto by deed dated July 8, 1963, and recorded
August 26, 1963 in Book 6164 of Official Records at page 745 records of Santa
Clara County, California.
Exhibit A-1.1 JOHN LUCAS GREER PARK
   All lands owned by the city of Palo Alto, delineated in the following
recorded documents:
   Parcel 1.   6.228 acres. Deed from Carrier Properties of Nevada, Inc. to
City, recorded March 27, 1975, Book 335 of Official Records, page 172, Records
of Santa Clara County, California, reserving therefrom a sanitary sewer
easement for the benefit of the lands of grantor, as therein described.
   Parcel 2.   1.320 acres. Deed from Carrier Properties of Nevada, Inc. to
City, recorded March 27, 1975, Book 335 of Official Records, page 172, Records
of Santa Clara County, California.
   Parcel 3.   7.769 acres. Deed from United Artists Theater Circuit, Inc. to
City, recorded February 21, 1975, Book 287 of Official Records, page 676,
Records of Santa Clara County, California.
   Parcel 4.   0.741 acres. Deed from Arthur D. Nearon and Gladus H. Nearon to
City, recorded February 28, 1975, Book 299 of Official Records, page 501,
Records of Santa Clara County, California.
Exhibit A-2 DEDICATION FOR PARK AND RECREATION PURPOSES BYXBEE PARK AND CITY
OWNED BAYLANDS
   All lands owned by the city of Palo Alto lying northeasterly of Bayshore
Freeway excepting public streets, creek channels, the Municipal Golf Course
(Exhibit A-20), Palo Alto Yacht Harbor (Exhibit A-21), and Exclusions 1-
5 delineated and described in the following recorded documents:
   1.   Gustav Laumeister et ux. to City, recorded 1/14/21, Book 532 of Deeds,
page 59, Records of Santa Clara County.
   2.   Alfred Seale et al. to City, recorded 1/14/21, Book 531 of Deeds, page
144, Records of Santa Clara County.
   3.   Gustav Laumeister et ux. to City, recorded 1/14/21, Book 297 of Deeds,
page 477, Records of San Mateo County.
   4.   Peter Faber et ux. to City, recorded 8/12/26, Book 246 of Official
Records, page 168, Records of San Mateo County.
   5.   Alfred Seale et ux. to City, recorded 3/15/29, Book 449 of Official
Records, page 537, Records of Santa Clara County.
   6.   The Morgan Oyster Co. to City, recorded 8/15/29, Book 473 of Official
Records, Page 474, Records of Santa Clara County.
   7.   Alviso Salt Co. to City, recorded 8/15/29, Book 474 of Official
Records, page 410, Records of Santa Clara County.
   8.   Gustav Laumeister et ux. to City, recorded 9/15/30, Book 500 of
Official Records, page 89, Records of San Mateo County.
   9.   Spring Valley Co. Ltd. to City, recorded 11/20/30, Book 545 of Official
Records, page 123, Records of Santa Clara County.
   10.   Alfred Seale and Grace R. Seale to City, recorded 10/14/32, Book 623
of Official Records, page 572, Records of Santa Clara County.
   11.   Alfred Seale and Grace R. Seale to City, recorded 10/14/32, Book 575
of Official Records, page 308, Records of San Mateo County.
   12.   Peter and Laura E. Faber to City, recorded 4/18/33, Book 588 of
Official Records, page 375, Records of San Mateo County.
   13.   The Morgan Oyster Co. to City, recorded 10/18/34, Book 704 of Official
Records, page 445, Records of Santa Clara County.
   14.   Gustav and Mabel S. Laumeister to City, recorded 7/13/35, Book 736 of
Official Records, page 216, Records of Santa Clara County.
   15.   Margaret Nicolay and Gertrude Nicolay to City, recorded 8/17/39, Book
858 of Official Records, page 203, Records of San Mateo County.
   16.   Peter Faber to City, recorded 12/13/41, Book 1000 of Official Records,
page 119, Records of San Mateo County.
   17.   Peter Faber to City, recorded 10/16/44, Book 1146 of Official Records,
page 218, Records of San Mateo County.
   18.   Peter Faber to City, recorded 10/16/44, Book 1149 of Official Records,
page 10, Records of San Mateo County.
   19.   Estate of Peter Faber to City, recorded 4/15/46, Book 1269 of Official
Records, page 315, Records of San Mateo County.
   20.   Leslie Salt Co. to City, recorded 3/27/50, Book 1951 of Official
Records, page 216, Records of Santa Clara County.
   21.   Final Order of Condemnation, City vs. Jacob J. Geng, et al. recorded
3/31/50, Book 1954 of Official Records, page 356, Records of Santa Clara
County.
   22.   Alto Yacht Club to City, recorded 1/2/63, Book 4384 of Official
Records, page 134, Records of San Mateo County.
   23.   City of Los Altos to City, recorded 10/7/58, Book 4194 of Official
Records, page 744, Records of Santa Clara County.
   SAVE AND EXCEPT THE FOLLOWING DESCRIBED PORTION THEREOF DISCONTINUED FOR
PARK PURPOSES PURSUANT TO A VOTE OF THE PEOPLE, AS CONFIRMED BY ORDINANCE NO.
2351:
   Beginning at the southwesterly corner of that certain 26.66 acre tract
conveyed to the City of Palo Alto by Peter Faber and Laura E. Faber by deed
recorded July 19, 1926 in Volume 246 at page 168, records of San Mateo County,
California; thence S. 65 degrees 00 minutes E. along the southwesterly line of
said tract and its southeasterly prolongation 240.24 feet; thence S.63 degrees
15 minutes E. 152.40 feet; thence N.51 degrees 37 minutes 00 seconds E. 603.71
feet; thence N.38 degrees 23 minutes 00 seconds W. 479.18 feet; thence N.8
degrees 23 minutes 26 seconds E. 600.00 feet; thence N.36 degrees 39 minutes 50
seconds E. 620.99 feet to the True Point of Beginning, said True Point of
Beginning being designated as "Point N" on the map entitled "Palo Alto Airport
Lease Lands Exhibit-A" attached to the lease agreement between the City of Palo
Alto and the County of Santa Clara dated March 16, 1964, and filed in the
office of the City Clerk of the City of Palo Alto (Agreement No. 2276; thence
along the northerly line of Parcel A as shown on said map N. 50 degrees 33
minutes 45 seconds W.1471.40 feet; N.0 degrees 41 minutes 30 seconds E. 95.01
feet and N. 40 degrees 51 minutes 30 seconds W. 1308.00 feet; thence leaving
said northerly line N. 50 degrees 57 minutes 00 seconds E. 316.20 feet; thence
S. 38 degrees 25 minutes 00 seconds E. 2872.72 feet; thence N. 50 degrees 33
minutes 45 seconds W. 51.37 feet, to the True Point of Beginning, containing
14.629 acres more or less.
   SAVE AND EXCEPT THE FOLLOWING DESCRIBED PORTION OF BYXBEE PARK AND CITY-
OWNED BAYLANDS DISCONTINUED FOR PARK USE PURSUANT TO A VOTE OF THE PEOPLE, AS
CONFIRMED BY ORDINANCE NO. 2481.
   Beginning at the southwesterly corner of that certain 26.66 acre tract of
land conveyed to the City of Palo Alto by Peter Faber et ux by Deed recorded
July 19, 1926 in Volume 246 of Official records at page 168, Records of San
Mateo County, California; thence S. 65° 00' E, 240.24 feet, thence S. 63° 15'
E, 152.40 feet; thence N. 51° 37' E, 25.32 feet; thence East 730.88 feet to the
true point of beginning; thence S. 38° 23' E. 1076 feet. more or less, to a
point which bears N. 38° 23' W, 151.94 feet from the most easterly corner of
the Sewage Treatment Plant exclusion as said exclusion is shown on Exhibit A-
2 of Section
22.08.020 of the Palo Alto Municipal Code; thence S. 51° 37' W, at right
angles, 43 feet, more or less, to a point on the northerly boundary line of
said Sewage Treatment Plant exclusion; thence in a northwesterly direction,
along the northerly boundary line of said Sewage Treatment Plant exclusion,
1270 feet, more or less, to the point of intersection of said northerly
boundary line with a line running due south from a point 250.00 feet distant
along a line running due west from said true point of beginning; thence North
40 feet, more or less, to said named line; thence East 250.00 feet to the true
point of beginning. being a portion of Rancho Rinconada del Arroyo de San
Francisquito, and containing 4.5 Acres, more or less.
EXHIBIT A-3 CAMERON PARK
   Beginning at the most westerly corner of Lot 15, Block 35, College Terrace;
thence northwesterly, along the northwesterly prolongation of the southwesterly
line of said Lot 169.00 feet; thence northeasterly, at right angles, 310.00
feet; thence southeasterly, at right angles 169.00 feet; thence southwesterly
at right angles 310.00 feet to the point of beginning.
EXHIBIT A-3.1 BOL PARK
   All that real property in the County of Santa Clara, State of California
described as follows: Commencing at the point of intersection of the
northwesterly line of Arastradero Road, 40 feet wide, with the southwesterly
line of said 6.074 acre tract of land said point of commencement also being the
point of intersection of said northwesterly line of Arastradero Road with the
northeasterly line of the parcel of land designated Parcel N. on the Map of
Record of Survey of Foothill Expressway on file in Book 163 of maps Pages 48,
49, 50 and 51, Santa Clara County Records; thence leaving Arastradero Road and
running along the northeasterly line of said Parcel N. north 30° 28' 48" west
60.43 feet; thence northwesterly along the arc of a curve to the right having a
radius of 5769.65 feet through an angle of 1° 25' 42" an arc distance of 143.83
feet to the point of intersection of the southwesterly line of said 6.074 acre
tract of land with the northeasterly line of said Parcel N. and to the true
point of beginning of the parcel to be described; thence from said true point
of beginning continuing along the southwesterly line of said 6.074 acre tract
of land continuing along the arc of a curve to the right having a radius of
5769.6 feet, a distance of 774.13 feet; thence radially south 68° 51' west
10.00 feet; thence leaving said radial line and curving to the right with a
radius of 5779.6 feet an arc distance of 251.38 feet; thence north 18° 40' west
50.8 feet; thence at right angles north 71° 20' east 10.00 feet; thence north
18° 40' west 3854.54 feet, more or less, to a point on the easterly line of
Matadero Avenue; thence in a northeasterly direction and along said easterly
line 100.00 feet, more or less, to the point of intersection of last named
easterly line with the northeasterly line of Laguna Avenue; thence in
southeasterly direction and along said northeasterly line 470.00 feet, more or
less; thence S. 56° 55' E. continuing along said northeasterly line 349.5 feet
to the point of intersection of said last named line with the centerline of
Matadero Creek; thence along said centerline the following bearings and
distances: S. 9° 13' W. 105.88 feet; S. 16° 49' E. 68.7 feet; S. 51° 34' E.
65.7 feet; S. 34° 39' E. 142.90 feet; S. 16° 01; W. 144.20 feet; S. 20° 27' E.
144.20 feet; S. 44° 34' E. 105.70 feet; S. 27° 42' W. 133.40 feet; S. 18° 52'
W. 94.5 feet; and S. 67° 42' W. 48.95 feet; thence leaving said centerline S.
18° 40' E. 2356.68 feet more or less; thence at right angles north 71 20' east
10.00 feet; thence at right angles south 18° 40' east 50.8 feet; thence along
the arc of a tangent curve to the left with a radius of 5679.6 feet an arc
distance of 247.03 feet; thence radially south 68° 51' west 10.00 feet; thence
leaving said radial line along the arc of a curve to the left with a radius of
5689.6 feet an arc distance of 759.43 feet more or less to a point which bears
north 63° 52' 42" east 80.00 feet from the true point of beginning; thence
south 63° 52' 42" west 80.00 feet to the true point of beginning. Excepting
therefrom that portion of the hereinabove described parcel lying within that
certain 80.00-foot strip of land owned by the city and county of San Francisco
known as the Hetch Hetchy right-of-way.
   Reserving, however, an easement of ten feet in width for access, maintenance
and repair to a waterline which runs from the intersection of Laguna Road and
Matadero Creek in a southwestwardly direction to parcel 8 of page 17, Book 137
in the assessor's office of Santa Clara County. Also reserving an easement for
creek maintenance over that certain strip of land lying adjacent to and
westerly of the westerly bank of Matadero Creek described in the deed to city
of Palo Alto, recorded November 15, 1976, in Book 489 of Official Records at
pages 500 and 501, Records of said county.
EXHIBIT A-4 BOWDEN PARK
   All of Block 61, Lots 9 through 13 of Block 66, Seale Subdivision No. 1 and
that portion of Nevada Avenue lying between High Street and Alma Street,
excepting therefrom that portion thereof taken for Oregon Avenue underpass.
EXHIBIT A-5 PALO ALTO LAWN BOWLING GREEN
   Parcel A   Block 27 and that closed portion of Kellogg Avenue lying between
Waverly Street and Embarcadero Road, as shown upon "Map No. 1 of the Seale
Addition to the Town of Palo Alto."
   Parcel B   Lots 1 through 9 of Block 26 as shown upon "Map No. 1 of the
Seale Addition to the Town of Palo Alto."
EXHIBIT A-6 COGSWELL PLAZA
   Beginning at the point of intersection of the northeasterly line of Ramona
Street with the southeasterly line of Lytton Avenue; thence southeasterly along
said northeasterly line 101.00 feet; thence northeasterly parallel to said
southeasterly line 131.00 feet; thence easterly 16 feet, more or less, to a
point on a line which is parallel to and distant 113.50 feet southeasterly, at
right angles, from the southeasterly line of Lytton Avenue; thence
northeasterly, along said parallel line, 66.00 feet, to a point on the
southwesterly line of Bryant Street; thence northwesterly along said
southwesterly line of Bryant Street 113.50 feet to a point on said
southwesterly line of Lytton Avenue; thence southwesterly along said
southeasterly line 215.00 feet to the point of beginning.
EXHIBIT A-6.1 COGSWELL PLAZA EXTENSION
   Situate in the city of Palo Alto, county of Santa Clara, state of
California, and further described as follows:
   Beginning at a point on the southeasterly line of Lot 43 as shown on that
certain map entitled "Mill's Subdivision of Block 13 in the Town of University
Park," which map was recorded on February 28, 1889 in Book D of Maps, at Page
71, records of Santa Clara County, state of California; distant thereon 7.00
feet southwesterly from the most easterly corner thereof; thence northwesterly
along a line parallel to the northeasterly line of said lot 179.50 feet to the
true point of beginning, said true point of beginning being on the
southwesterly line of Bryant Street (74 feet wide); thence southeasterly along
the last mentioned southwesterly line 32.50 feet; thence southwesterly along a
line at right angles to the last mentioned line 68.00 feet; thence at right
angles southeasterly 4.00 feet; thence at right angles southwesterly 50.00
feet; thence at right angles northwesterly 49.00 feet to a point on the
southeasterly line of that certain parcel of land known as Cogswell Plaza, said
parcel reserved for park purposes by city of Palo Alto Ordinance Number 2252,
Section G, enacted on September 13, 1965; thence northeasterly along the last
mentioned southeasterly line to the true point of beginning, being a portion of
Lots 48 through 50 and 59 through 61 inclusive of said Block 13, and containing
0.103 acre more or less.
EXHIBIT A-6.5 EDITH EUGENIE JOHNSON PARK
   All those certain real properties situated in the city of Palo Alto, county
of Santa Clara, state of California, described as follows:
   Portions of Block 32, as shown on the Map of University Park, now city of
Palo Alto, recorded February 27, 1889 in Book D, page 69 of Maps, Records of
Santa Clara County, California and being more particularly described as
follows: Commencing at the point of intersection of the southeasterly line of
Hawthorne Avenue with the southwesterly line of Kipling Street; running thence
southwesterly along the southeasterly line of Hawthorne Avenue 225 feet to the
point of intersection of the southeasterly line of Hawthorne Avenue with the
northeasterly line of Waverly Street; thence at right angles southeasterly
along the northeasterly line of Waverly Street 400 feet to the point of
intersection of the northeasterly line of Waverly Street with the northwesterly
line of Everett Avenue; thence at right angles northeasterly along the
northwesterly line of Everett Avenue 225 feet to the point of intersection of
the northwesterly line of Everett Avenue and the southwesterly line of Kipling
Street; thence at right angles northwesterly along the southwesterly line of
Kipling Street 400 feet to the point of beginning.
EXHIBIT A-7 ELEANOR PARK
   Beginning at the point of intersection of the northerly line of Channing
Avenue with the easterly line of Center Drive; thence easterly along said
northerly line 496.40 feet; thence northerly parallel to said easterly line
749.58 feet; thence northwesterly 531.19 feet, more or less to a point on said
easterly line; thence southerly along said easterly line 933.50 feet, to the
point of beginning.
   Dedicated by deeds dated August 1, 1915, October 14, 1915 and July 17, 1922
and City Council resolution passed July 17, 1922.
EXHIBIT A-8 WILLIAM C. WERRY PARK
   Beginning at the most westerly corner of Lot 15, Block 11, College Terrace;
thence northwesterly along the northwesterly prolongation of the southwesterly
line of said Lot 157.00 feet; thence northeasterly, at right angles 125.00
feet; thence northwesterly, at right angles 12.00 feet; thence northeasterly,
at right angles 185.00 feet; thence southeasterly, at right angles 169.00 feet;
thence southwesterly at right angles 310.00 feet to the point of beginning.
EXHIBIT A-9 FOOTHILLS NATURE PRESERVE (FORMERLY FOOTHILLS PARK)
   All of that certain 1194.05 acre tract of land described in Exhibits B
through H in that certain Lease Agreement between Russell V. Lee et ux. to the
City of Palo Alto recorded December 10, 1958; in Book 4254 of Official Records
at pages 695 et seq., records of Santa Clara County, California.
EXHIBIT A-9.1 LEE PROPERTY - ADDITION TO FOOTHILLS NATURE PRESERVE
   Situate in the city of Palo Alto, County of Santa Clara, State of
California, described as follows:
   Beginning at a point in the northwesterly line of that certain 200-acre,
more or less, parcel excepted in the Deed from Russell V. Lee, et ux., to the
City of Palo Alto, dated December 9, 1958 and recorded in Book 4254 of Official
Records at page 720, Records of Santa Clara County, California, distant along
said line S. 69 degrees 10 minutes W. 920 feet from an iron pipe which pipe
bears N. 75 degrees 15 minutes 30 seconds W. 307.05 feet from an iron pipe set
in the center line of Page Mill Road; thence S. 20 degrees 50 minutes E. 2800
feet, more or less, to a point on the southeasterly line of the Rancho El Corte
de Madera; thence S. 15 degrees 12 minutes W. along said Rancho line 1350 feet,
more or less, to the center line of Los Trancos Creek; thence northwesterly
along the center line of Los Trancos Creek to a point which bears S. 69 degrees
10 minutes W. 10 feet, more or less, from an iron pipe set in the bank of said
Creek; thence N. 69 degrees 10 minutes E. along the northwesterly line of said
parcel excepted in said Deed from Lee to City 2090 feet, more or less, to the
point of beginning, containing 140 acres, more or less, and being a portion of
the Rancho El Corte de Madera.
EXHIBIT A-9.2 LEE PROPERTY - ADDITION TO FOOTHILLS NATURE PRESERVE
   Situate in the City of Palo Alto, County of Santa Clara, State of
California, described as follows:
   Beginning at a point on the southeasterly line of Rancho El Corte de Madera,
said point being in the center line of Page Mill Road, said point also being
the most easterly corner of that certain 200-acre, more or less, tract of land
excepted in the Deed from Russell V. Lee, et ux., to the City of Palo Alto,
dated December 9, 1958, and recorded in Book 4254 of Official Records at Page
720, Records of Santa Clara County, California; thence westerly along the
center line of Page Mill Road and the northerly line of said excepted tract 700
feet, more or less, to an iron pipe; thence continuing along the boundary line
of said excepted tract N. 75 degrees 05 minutes 30 seconds W. 307.05 feet to an
iron pipe; thence, continuing along the northwesterly boundary line of said
excepted tract, S. 69 degrees 10 minutes W. 920 feet: thence leaving said
boundary line, S. 20 degrees 50 minutes E. 2800 feet, more or less, to a point
on said Rancho line; thence N. 15 degrees 12 minutes E. along said Rancho line
2850 feet, more or less, to the point of beginning, containing 60 acres, more
or less, and being a portion of said Rancho El Corte de Madera.
EXHIBIT A-9.3 LEE PROPERTY - ADDITION TO FOOTHILLS NATURE PRESERVE
   Situate in the City of Palo Alto, County of Santa Clara, State of
California, described as follows:
   Beginning at an iron pipe set in the boundary line of that certain 234.172
acre parcel of land delineated upon a map entitled "Record of Survey of a
portion of the Lands of Dorothy W. and Russell V. Lee" and recorded September
10, 1957 in Book 86 of Maps at page 17, Records of Santa Clara County,
California, which iron pipe bears S. 74 degrees 42 minutes 11 seconds W.
2392.51 feet from the most easterly comer of said 234.172 acre parcel of land;
thence N. 81 degrees 01 minutes 32 seconds W. 54.00 feet to an iron pipe which
marks the true point of beginning; thence N. 82 degrees 01 minutes 26 seconds
W. 433.00 feet to an iron pipe; thence S. 11 degrees 19 minutes 26 seconds W.
178.17 feet; thence S. 39 degrees 11 minutes 58 seconds W. 123.70 feet to an
iron pipe; thence S. 69 degrees 28 minutes 33 seconds W. 267.84 feet to an iron
pipe; hence S. 69 degrees 59 minutes 52 seconds W. 333.78 feet to an iron pipe;
thence S. 61 degrees 31 minutes 34 seconds W. 468.48 feet to an iron pipe;
thence N. 81 degrees 03 minutes 10 seconds W. 122.62 feet to an iron pipe;
thence in a straight line southwesterly 60 feet, more or less, to a fence post
marking a comer in the northwesterly boundary line of the lands of the City of
Palo Alto known as "Foothills Park," as said lands are described in "Exhibit A"
of the agreement between said City and Russell V. Lee and Dorothy Womack Lee,
dated December 8, 1958 and recorded December 10, 1958 in Book 4254 at page 695,
et seq., Official Records of said County; thence following said boundary line
of Foothills Park the following courses and distances: S. 62 degrees 29 minutes
02 seconds E. 165 feet, more or less, to an iron pipe; N. 67 degrees 24 minutes
58 seconds E. 805 feet, more or less, to an iron pipe; N. 80 degrees 07 minutes
58 seconds E. 204 feet, more or less, to an iron pipe; and N. 54 degrees 51
minutes 58 seconds E. 675 feet, more or less, to the true point of beginning,
containing 5.60 acres, more or less, and being a portion of the Rancho El Corte
de Madera.
EXHIBIT A-10 FREDERICK W. WEISSHAAR PARK
   Beginning at the most westerly corner of Lot 14, Block 13, College Terrace;
thence northwesterly along the northwesterly prolongation of the southwesterly
line of said Lot, 160.00 feet; thence northeasterly at right angles, 310.00
feet; thence southeasterly, at right angles 160.00 feet; thence southwesterly
at right angles 310.00 feet to the point of beginning.
EXHIBIT A-11 MAYFIELD PARK
   Beginning at the most westerly corner of Lot 14, Block 37, College Terrace;
thence northwesterly, along the northwesterly prolongation of the southwesterly
line of said Lot 160.00 feet; thence northeasterly, at right angles 310.00
feet; thence southeasterly, at right angles 160.00 feet; thence southwesterly,
at right angles 310.00 feet, to the point of beginning, excepting therefrom
that portion thereof being used for public library purposes.
EXHIBIT A-12 HERBERT HOOVER PARK
   Parcel A   Beginning at a point on the northeasterly line of Lot 58, C. M.
Wooster Company's Subdivision of Clarke Ranch, distant thereon N. 52 degrees 00
minutes W. 47.04 feet from the most easterly corner of said Lot; thence N. 38
degrees 00 minutes E. 277.59 feet; thence S. 52 degrees 00 minutes E. 186.71
feet, to a point on the northwesterly line of Matadero Canal (60 feet wide)
thence along said northwesterly line S. 38 degrees 12 minutes W. 277.76 feet
and S. 37 degrees 10 minutes W. 252.41 feet to a point on the northeasterly
line of Cowper Street; thence N. 52 degrees 00 minutes W. along said last named
line 294.20 feet; thence N. 38 degrees 00 minutes E. 252.23 feet; thence S. 52
degrees 00 minutes E. 104.65 feet to the point of beginning, being portions of
Lots 58 and 59 of said Subdivision.
   Parcel B   All of that certain parcel of land described in the deed from
Terrence J. McGovern et ux. to City of Palo Alto, recorded March 17, 1958 in
Book 4031 of Official Records at page 273, Records of Santa Clara County,
California.
   Parcel C   Situate in the city of Palo Alto, county of Santa Clara, state of
California, and further described as follows:
   Beginning at the point of intersection of the northeasterly line of Cowper
Street (60 feet wide) with the northwesterly line of Lot 59, as said lot is
shown upon that certain map entitled "Map of C. M. Wooster Company's
Subdivision of the Clarke Ranch" which map was filed for record in the office
of the recorder of the county of Santa Clara, state of California, on November
11, 1912 in Book "O" of Maps at page 16; thence from said point of beginning S.
52 degrees 00 minutes 00 seconds E. along said northeasterly line of Cowper
Street 25.00 feet to the true point of beginning; thence N. 38 degrees 00
minutes 00 seconds E. 252.23 feet to a point on the northeasterly line of said
Lot 59; thence S. 52 degrees 00 minutes 00 seconds E. along said northeasterly
line of Lot 59, 92.35 feet; thence S. 38 degrees 00 minutes 00 seconds W.
137.23 feet; thence S. 52 degrees 00 minutes 00 seconds E. 90.00 feet; thence
N. 38 degrees 00 minutes 00 seconds E. 137.23 feet to a point on the
northeasterly line of Lot 58 as shown upon the map mentioned above; thence S.
52 degrees 00 minutes 00 seconds E. along said northeasterly line of Lot 58,
30.00 feet; thence S. 38 degrees 00 minutes 00 seconds W. 252.23 feet to a
point on said northeasterly line of Cowper Street; thence N. 52 degrees 00
minutes 00 seconds W. along said northeasterly line of Cowper Street 212.35
feet to the true point of beginning, containing 0.95 acre of land, more or
less.
EXHIBIT A-12.2 HERBERT HOOVER PARK ADDITION
   Beginning at a point on the centerline of Cowper Street, 60 feet wide, as
shown on that certain map entitled Map of C.M. Wooster Company's Subdivision of
the Clark Ranch and recorded in Book "O" of Maps at Page 16 of the Official
Records of Santa Clara County, California. Said point also being the most
southerly corner of Lot 60 as shown on said Map. Thence along the common line
between Lots 59 and 60, N. 38° 00' E, 282.23 feet to the true point of
beginning; thence continuing N. 38° 00' E. along the northwesterly line of Lot
56 as shown on said Map for a distance of 345.00 feet; thence leaving said
northwesterly line, S. 52° 00' E, 342.00 feet; thence S. 38° 11' W, 345.00
feet; thence N. 52° 00' W, 342.00 feet to the true point of beginning, being a
portion of said Lot 56 and containing 2.709 acres more or less.
EXHIBIT A-13 DON SECONDINO ROBLES PARK
   That certain parcel of land conveyed by Kenkichi Osugi et ux to City of Palo
Alto by deed dated August 12, 1956 and recorded September 13, 1956 in Book 3604
of Official Records at page 602, Records of Santa Clara County, California;
excepting therefrom that portion thereof lying within the bounds of Park
Boulevard.
EXHIBIT A-14 DON JESUS RAMOS
   Beginning at a point in the northeasterly line of that certain parcel of
land described in the Deed from Kenneth W. Croy, et al., to Ed Lee Champion, et
al., dated October 11, 1949, and recorded October 17, 1949, in Book 1861,
Official Records, page 579, Santa Clara County, California, distant thereon S.
10° 07' 20" E. 38.12 feet from the most northerly corner of said parcel, said
point of beginning being on the southeasterly line of East Meadow Drive (60
feet wide); thence S. 10° 07' 20" E. along the Easterly line of said parcel of
land 548.09 feet to the true point of beginning;
   Thence continuing S. 10° 07' 20" E. and along said Easterly line 89.22 feet
to the point of intersection thereof with the Northerly line of Tract No. 1563
Meadow Park Unit No. 2, a map of which was filed for record in the Office of
the Recorder of the County of Santa Clara, California, on August 5, 1958, in
Book 62 of Maps at page 2;
   Thence S. 87° 30' 49" E. along said Northerly line of Tract No. 1563, 125.09
feet;
   Thence N. 56° 27' 26" W. - 168.76 feet to the true point of beginning, and
being a portion of the Rancho Rincon de San Francisquito.
EXHIBIT A-14.1 DON JESUS RAMOS PARK ADDITION
   Beginning at an iron pipe monument in the centerline of East Meadow Drive,
70 feet wide, as shown on that certain subdivision map of Tract No. 1597,
Meadowpark Unit 3, as recorded in Book 63 of Maps at Page 15 in the Official
Records of Santa Clara County, California, said monument marks an angle point
in the general westerly boundary of said Tract; thence S. 10° 07' 20" E. along
said boundary line, 38.12 feet to a point on the southeasterly line of said
East Meadow Drive; thence S. 56° 32' 06" W. along said southeasterly line,
312.07 feet to the true point of beginning; thence leaving said southeasterly
line, S. 33° 27' 54" E, 503.24 feet to a point hereinafter referred to as
"Point A" ; thence N. 56° 27' 26" W, 243.37 feet; thence N. 33° 27' 54" W,
279.20 feet to a point on said southeasterly line; thence along said
southeasterly line, N. 56° 32' 06" E. 95.06 feet to the true point of
beginning, containing 0.854 acres more or less and being a portion of Rancho
Rincon de San Francisquito.
EXHIBIT A-15 MITCHELL PARK
   All of that certain 17.99 acre tract of land shown on the Record Survey map
of a portion of the Rancho Rincon de San Francisquito, which map was recorded
June 30, 1952, in Book 37 of Maps at page 30, Records of Santa Clara County,
California.
EXHIBIT A-15.1 NOLTE PROPERTY - ADDITIONS TO MITCHELL PARK
   Situate in the City of Palo Alto, County of Santa Clara, State of
California, described as follows:
   Beginning at the most southerly corner of that certain parcel of land
conveyed to City of Palo Alto by Little League Baseball of Palo Alto, Inc., by
Deed dated August 16, 1956, recorded September 14, 1956, in Book 3605 of
Official Records, page 553, Records of Santa Clara County, California; thence
N. 54º 30' E. along the southeasterly line of said parcel 433.63 feet, to a
point on the southwesterly curved line of Middlefield Road (86 feet wide);
thence southeasterly along said southwesterly curved line on a non-tangent
curve to the right, having a radius of 457 feet through a central angle of 7°
41' 51", for an arc length of 61.40 feet to a tangent point; thence continuing
alone said line of Middlefield Road S. 35° 30' 50" E. 132.00 feet, to the point
of intersection of said line of Middlefield Road with the northwesterly line of
that certain 1.93 acre parcel of land conveyed by George S. Nolte, et ux., to
Middlefield Properties, Inc. by deed dated September 9, 1963 and recorded
September 13, 1963 in Book 6189 of Official Records, page 625, records of said
County; thence S. 54° 39' 50" W. along said northwesterly line 437.57 feet, to
the most westerly corner of said 1.93 acre parcel of land; thence N. 35° 34'
50" W. along the northwesterly prolongation of the southwesterly line of said
1.93 acre parcel 192.73 feet, more or less, to the point of beginning, being a
portion of the Rancho Rincon de San Francisquito.
EXHIBIT A-16 PEERS PARK
   Blocks 5 and 18, Evergreen Park, and the northwesterly 30 feet of Stanford
Avenue lying northeasterly of Park Boulevard. Excepting therefrom, the
following.
   1.   That portion thereof lying within the bounds of Castilleja Avenue.
   2.   A well site approximately 56 feet by 35 feet located at the most
easterly corner thereof.
EXHIBIT A-17 RINCONADA PARK
   Beginning at a point on the northwesterly line of Embarcadero Road said
point being, North 70° 13' 00" East 462.49 feet from the intersection of the
Northwesterly line of Embarcadero Road with the Northeasterly line of
Middlefield Road as shown on that Record of Survey filed August 19, 1998 in
Book 707 at pages 14 and 15 in the Santa Clara County Recorders Office; Thence
North 19° 47' 00" West, 370.70 feet; Thence North 89° 57' 00" West, 561.15
(561.14) feet; Thence South 38° 18' 00" West, 65.00 feet; Thence North 51° 42'
00" West, 68.00 feet; Thence North 38° 18' 00" East, 29.58 feet; Thence North
00° 12' 42" East, 180.36 feet; Thence South 89° 47' 18 East, 31.71 feet; Thence
North 00° 12' 42" East, 53.08 feet; Thence North 89° 47' 18" West, 31.97 feet;
Thence North 00° 12' 42" East, 47.41 feet to the southerly line of Hopkins
Street; Thence along said southerly line, South 89° 47' 18" East, 1143.38 feet;
Thence parallel with Newell Road, South 00° 03' 30" West, 116.00 feet; Thence
parallel with Hopkins Street, South 89° 47' 18" East, 75.00 feet; Thence
parallel with Newell Road, South 00° 03' 30" West, 89.00 feet; Thence parallel
with Hopkins Street, South 89° 47' 18" East, 65.00 feet to the westerly line of
Newell Road; Thence along said westerly line, South 00° 03' 30" West, 100.73
feet; Thence parallel with Hopkins Street, North 89° 47' 18" West, 110.95 feet;
Thence parallel with Newell Road, South 00° 03' 30" West, 186.70 feet to the
northwesterly line of Embarcadero Road; Thence along said northwesterly line,
South 70° 13' 00" West, 436.53 feet to the Point of Beginning.
[Amd. by Ord. 4839 § 1, 2004]
EXHIBIT A-17.1 RINCONADA PARK ADDITION
   That Parcel of land Situate in the City of Palo Alto, County of Santa Clara,
State of California described as follows:
   Beginning at a point, North 70° 13' 00" East 462,49 feet from the
intersection of the Northwesterly line of Embarcadero Road with the
Northeasterly line of Middlefield Road as shown on that Record of Survey which
was filed for record in Book 707 pages 14 and 15 on August 19, 1998 in the
Santa Clara County Recorders Office;
   1)   Thence North 23° 47' 07" West 26.46 feet to a tangent curve concave
southwesterly and having a radius of 55.00 feet;
   C-2)   Thence along said curve 39.04 feet northwesterly, through a central
angle of 40º 39' 56", to a point of reverse curvature, a radial line through
said point bears South 25° 32' 57" West, said point being the beginning of a
curve concave northeasterly and having a radius of 30.00 feet;
   C-3)   Thence along said curve 32.44 feet northerly, through a central angle
of 61° 56' 47" to a line tangent;
   4)   Thence North 02° 30' 16" West 23.48 feet to a tangent curve concave
southwesterly and having a radius of 60.00 feet;
   C-5)   Thence along said curve 48.06 feet northerly and northwesterly,
through a central angle of 45° 53' 54" to a line tangent;
   6)   Thence North 41º 24' 10" West 30.18 feet to a tangent curve concave
easterly and having a radius of 80.10 feet;
   C-7)   Thence along said curve 126.00 feet northerly, through a central
angle of 90° 07' 43" .to a non-tangent line;
   8)   Thence North 19° 47' 00" West 27.28 feet;
   9)   Thence North 48° 35' 59" West 82.17 feet;
   10)   Thence North 80° 35' 12" West 147.74 feet;
   11)   Thence South 86º 13' 31" West 91.27 feet;
   12)   Thence South 79º 01' 58" West 30.30 feet;
   13)   Thence South 86º 55' 00" West 143.62 feet;
   14)   Thence South 00º 45' 35" West 11.82 feet;
   15)   Thence North 89° 57' 00" West 100.98 feet;
   16)   Thence South 38º 18' 00" West 65.00 feet;
   17)   Thence North 51° 42' 00" West 68.00 feet;
   18)   Thence North 38º 18' 00" East 29.58 feet;
   19)   Thence North 00º 12' 42" East 180.36 feet;
   20)   Thence South 89° 47' 18" East 31.71 feet;
   21)   Thence North 00° 12' 42" East 53.05 feet;
   22)   Thence North 89° 47' 18" West 31.97 feet;
   23)   Thence North 00° 12' 42" East 47.41 feet to the southerly line of
Hopkins Avenue;
   24)   Thence along said southerly line, South 89° 47' 18" East 1143.38 feet;
   25)   Thence parallel with Newell Road, South 00º 03' 30" West 116.00 feet;
   26)   Thence parallel with Hopkins Avenue, South 89° 47' 18" East 75.00
feet;
   27)   Thence parallel with Newell Road, South 00° 03' 30" West 89.00 feet;
   28)   Thence parallel with Hopkins Avenue, South 89° 47' 18" East 65.00 feet
to the westerly line of Newell Road;
   29)   Thence along said westerly line, South 00° 03' 30" West 100.73 feet;
   30)   Thence parallel with Hopkins Avenue, North 89° 47' 18" West 110.95
feet;
   31)   Thence parallel with Newell Road, South 00° 03' 30" West 186.70 feet
to the Northwesterly line of Embarcadero Road;
   32)   Thence along said northwesterly line, South 70° 13' 00" West 436.53
feet to the Point of Beginning
   The land described herein contains 491,742 square feet (11.2888 acres).
   The land described herein is shown on attached plat Exhibit A-17 and made a
part herein.
   ( )   Record of Survey Book 707 pages 14 and 15.
   End of Description
EXHIBIT A-17.2 RINCONADA PARK ADDITION
   Beginning at the northwest corner of Lot 2, Block 6 of the Alba Park
Addition recorded December 18, 1905 in Volume L of Maps at page 8, Records of
Santa Clara County, California; thence easterly along the northerly line of
said Lot 2 a distance of 40.00 feet to the true point of beginning; thence
easterly along said northerly line of Lot 2 and its easterly prolongation, a
distance of 200.00 feet to the point of intersection thereof with the westerly
line of Newell Road (60 feet wide); thence southerly along said westerly line
of Newell Road a distance of 190.00 feet to the point of intersection thereof
with the northerly line of Hopkins Avenue (60 feet wide); thence westerly along
said northerly line of Hopkins Avenue a distance of 200.00 feet; thence
northerly along a line parallel to said westerly line of Newell Road a distance
of 190.00 feet to the said true point of beginning.
EXHIBIT A-18 HENRY W. SEALE PARK
   Beginning at the point of intersection of the southeasterly line of Matadero
Canal with the northeasterly line of Lot 126, C. M. Wooster Company's
Subdivision of the Clarke Ranch; thence southwesterly along said southeasterly
line 282.31 feet; thence southeasterly, parallel to the northeasterly line of
Louis Road 44.47 feet; thence southwesterly, at right angles, 39.57 feet;
thence southeasterly at right angles, 203.10 feet; thence southwesterly at the
right angles, 212 feet, more or less, to a point on the northeasterly line of
Louis Road; thence southeasterly along said last named line 28.00 feet; thence
northeasterly, at right angles, 100.00 feet; thence southeasterly, at right
angles 165.60 feet; thence northeasterly, at right angles 223.82 feet; thence
northwesterly at right angles 46.60 feet; thence northeasterly at right angles
176 feet, more or less, to a point on the southwesterly line of Stockton Place;
thence northwesterly along said last named line 270.73 feet, to a point on said
northeasterly line of Lot 126; thence northwesterly along said northeasterly
line 101.98 feet; to the point of beginning.
EXHIBIT A-18.1 HENRY W. SEALE PARK ADDITION
   Beginning at the intersection of the centerlines of Stockton Place, 60 feet
wide, and Clifton Court, 50 feet wide, as shown on that certain subdivision map
of Tract No. 954, Sterling Gardens No. 2, recorded on June 10, 1952, in Book 38
of Maps at Pages 14 and 15 in the Official Records of Santa Clara County,
California; thence N. 52° 00' W, along the said centerline of Stockton Place,
245.27 feet; thence S. 38° 00' W, 429.82 feet, to the common corner of Lots 8,
28 and 29 of said subdivision; thence N. 52° 00' W, 268.40 feet along the
northeasterly line of Lots 29, 30, 31, 32 and 33 to the true point of
beginning; thence continuing N. 52° 00' W, along the northeasterly line of Lots
33, 34, 35, 36 and 37 of said Tract 954 a distance of 237.00 feet; thence
leaving said northeasterly line, N. 38° 00' E, 200.00 feet; thence S. 52° 00'
E, 237.00 feet; thence S. 38° 00' W, 200.00 feet to the true point of beginning
and containing 1.088 acres more or less and being a portion of the C.M. Wooster
Company Subdivision of the Clark Ranch.
EXHIBIT A-19 LEGAL DESCRIPTION EL CAMINO PARK
   Beginning at the most northerly corner of that certain 1.194 acre parcel of
land described in that certain sublease between the City of Palo Alto and
Southern Pacific Railroad Company, dated October 2, 1939; thence S. 17° 13' 57"
E. along the westerly line of said parcel 143.13 feet; thence S. 51° 41' 59" E.
421.31 feet; thence northeasterly along a tangent curve to the left, having a
radius of 13.64 feet, through a central angle of 90 00' for an arc length of
21.42 feet to a point of reverse curve; thence southeasterly along a curve to
the right, having a radius of 13.64 feet, through a central angle of 90° 00',
for an arc length of 21.42 feet; thence S. 51° 41' 59" E. 122.41 feet; thence
southerly along a tangent curve to the right, having a radius of 75 feet,
through a central angle of 87° 29' 32", for an arc length of 114.53 feet, to a
point of reverse curve; thence southerly along a tangent curve to the left,
having a radius of 300 feet, to a point of reverse curve; thence southerly
along a tangent curve to the left, having a radius of 300 feet, to a point of
compound curve; thence continuing southerly along a tangent curve to the left,
having a radius of 68 feet, through a central angle of 20° 03' 52" for an arc
length of 23.81 feet, to a point of reverse curve; thence southwesterly, along
a reverse curve to the right having a radius of 33.40 feet, through a central
angle of 77° 52' 04", for an arc length of 45.39 feet, to a non-tangent point
on the northeasterly line of El Camino Real; thence northwesterly, along said
northeasterly line, the following courses and distances: N. 51° 13' 12" W.
566.52 feet; N. 42° 20' 20" W. 80.45 feet; along a curve to the left, having a
radius of 1333 feet through a central angle of 8° 24' 00", for an arc length of
195.43 feet; N. 51° 08' W. 68.39 feet; along a tangent curve to the right,
having a radius of 900 feet, through a central angle of 11° 08' 21", for an arc
length of 174.97 feet; N. 39° 59' 39" W. 317.82 feet; along a tangent curve to
the left, having a radius of 72 feet, through a central angle of 73° 09' 21",
for an arc length of 91.93 feet; N. 45° 58' 59" W. 436.48 feet; N. 41° 16' 13"
W. 151.00 feet; along a curve to the right, having a radius of 102 feet,
through a central angle of 16° 19' 30", for an arc length of 29.06 feet, to a
point of compound curve, along a curve to the right, having a radius of 12
feet, through a central angle of 90° 08' 53", for an arc length of 18.88 feet;
N. 31° 10' 38" W. 85.53 feet; N. 51° 31' 10" W. 123.49 feet; N. 49° 31' 31" W.
69.11 feet to a point in the centerline of San Francisquito Creek; thence
leaving said northeasterly line of El Camino Real, and running along the
centerline of said creek S. 85° 56' 59" E. 164.52 feet and N. 62° 31' 01" E.
77.22 feet, to a point on the southwesterly line of the Southern Pacific right-
of-way; thence southeasterly along the southwesterly line S. 51° 35' 10" E.
7.93 feet; S. 51° 41' 59" E. 797.87 feet and S. 46° 56' 10" E. 602.08 feet;
thence S. 38° 18' 01" W. 60.00 feet to the point of beginning. Excepting
therefrom the following described portion of Palo Alto Avenue: Beginning at the
northerly terminus of the above described as "having a radius of 12 feet,
through a central angle of 90° 08' 53", for an arc length of 18.88 feet";
thence easterly along a compound curve to the right, having a radius of 182
feet, through a central angle of 19° 27' 55", an arc length of 61.83 feet;
thence N. 81° 46' 56" E. 59.63 feet; thence N. 84° 40' 59" W. along said right-
of-way line 86.96 feet; thence S. 84° 40' 05" W. 192.23 feet; thence westerly
along a curve to the right, having a radius of 382 feet, through a central
angle of 7° 50' 24", an arc distance of 52.27 feet; thence S. 31° 10' 38" E.
85.53 feet to the point of beginning. Also excepting therefrom that portion
thereof described in Resolution No. 5802 of the City of Palo Alto recorded July
16, 1980 in Book F442 of Official Records at Page 707, records of Santa Clara
County, California. Also excepting therefrom that certain 0.551 acre parcel
described as follows: Commencing at the intersection of the southwesterly line
of the Southern Pacific Railroad Company's right-of-way, 230 feet in width, (as
described in that certain easement of Leland Stanford to the Southern Pacific
Railroad Company, dated November 23, 1892, and recorded October 28, 1915, in
Volume 435 of Deeds at page 244, Santa Clara County Records, in which the
bearing of said line is called North 51 28' West, which is also the
southwesterly line of that certain easement (Palo Alto Agreement No. 224)
granted by the Southern Pacific Railroad Company to the City of Palo Alto by
Agreement dated October 2, 1939, and recorded November 27, 1939, in Book 954 of
Official Records, page 567, Santa Clara County Records), with the center line
of University Avenue produced southwesterly, as said University Avenue exists
75 feet in width (said intersection being the most easterly point of Parcel 1
as described in that certain lease of the Board of Trustees of Leland Stanford
Junior University of the City of Palo Alto (Palo Alto Lease No. 3) dated June
10, 1915, and recorded by Stanford University on September 23, 1915, in Vol. P
of Leases at page 333 et seq., Santa Clara County Records, in which the bearing
of said line is called North 51 45" West); thence North 51 45' West along said
southwesterly line a distance of 467.50 feet to the intersection of said line
of right-of-way with the center line of Lytton Avenue (prolonged); a distance
of 81.00 feet to a point on the southwesterly most line of Parcel No. 2, City
of Palo Alto Agreement No. 46, dated October 2, 1939, and recorded October 30,
1939, in Book 951 of Official Records, page 580, Santa Clara County Records,
which point is the true point of commencement; thence South 51 45' East, along
said southwesterlymost line, a distance of 25.00 feet; thence South 38 15' West
a distance of 120.00 feet; thence North 51 45' West a distance of 200.00 feet;
thence North 38 15' East a distance of 120.00 feet to a point on the above
mentioned southwesterlymost line of Parcel No. 2; thence South 51 45' East a
distance of 175.00 feet along said line to the true point of commencement.
SAVE AND EXCEPT THE FOLLOWING DESCRIBED PORTION THEREOF DISCONTINUED FOR PARK
PURPOSES PURSUANT TO A VOTE OF THE PEOPLE, AS CONFIRMED BY ORDINANCE No. 5640:
   Real property in the City of Palo Alto, County of Santa Clara, State of
California, described as follows:
   Being a portion of Park Parcel 1, as said Parcel 1 is described in that
certain document, recorded on September 6, 2012, as Document 21840095, Official
Records of Santa Clara County, more particularly described as follows:
   COMMENCING at the most westerly corner of Palo Alto Station Grounds, as said
Station Grounds are described in that certain easement from Leland Stanford to
the Southern Pacific Railroad Company, dated November 23, 1892 and recorded
October 28, 1915 in Volume 435 of Deeds at Page 244, Official Records of Santa
Clara County, said point being marked by a found 3/4" iron pipe with wood plug
and tack;
   Thence along the northeasterly line of said Park Parcel, South 16° 12' 28"
East, 56.48 feet to the POINT OF BEGINNING;
   Thence leaving said point and continuing along said northeasterly line,
South 16° 12' 28" East, 86.65 feet to an angle point in said northeasterly
line;
   Thence along said northeasterly line, South 50° 40' 30" East, 4.34 feet;
   Thence leaving said northeasterly line, South 34° 32' 43" West, 24.21 feet
to the beginning of a tangent curve to the right, having a radius of 273.00
feet;
   Thence southwesterly along said curve, through a central angle of 09° 40'
14", for an arc length of 46.08 feet;
   Thence South 44° 12' 57" West, 49.45 feet, to the beginning of a tangent
curve to the left, having a radius of 49.50 feet;
   Thence southerly along said curve, through a central angle of 62° 46' 25",
for an arc length of 54.23 feet to the northeasterly line of El Camino Real
(State Highway 82);
   Thence northwesterly along said northeasterly line, North 41° 18' 51" West,
2.64 feet; to the beginning of a non-tangent curve, concave to the southwest,
having a radius of 1,333.00 feet, with a radial line that bears North 48° 17'
29" East;
   Thence continuing along said northeasterly line and northwesterly along said
curve, through a central angle of 04° 28' 38", for an arc length of 104.17
feet;
   Thence leaving said northeasterly line, North 44° 14' 48" East, 87.93 feet;
to the beginning of a tangent curve to the right, having a radius of 260.50
feet;
   Thence northeasterly along said curve, through a central angle of 04° 48'
43", for an arc length of 21.88 feet;
   Thence North 49° 03' 31" East, 59.71 feet, to the beginning of a tangent
curve to the left, having a radius of 19.50 feet;
   Thence northerly along said curve, through a central angle of 66° 09' 32",
for an arc length of 22.52 feet;
   Thence North 29° 22' 27" East, 14.50 feet to the POINT OF BEGINNING.
EXHIBIT A-20 PALO ALTO MUNICIPAL GOLF COURSE
   Beginning at the point of intersection of the northwesterly line of
Embarcadero Road with the southwesterly line of the lands leased to the Palo
Alto Airport shown on Exhibit "A" in that certain Agreement between the county
of San Mateo, the county of Santa Clara, the city of Palo Alto and Nystrom
Aviation Corporation, dated June 1, 1964: (Palo Alto File No. "Agreement 2370"
) thence S. 51° 36' W. along said line of Embarcadero Road 1668 feet, more or
less, to a point on the northeasterly line of the Palo Alto Gas Metering
Station; thence N. 38º 24' W. along said northeasterly line 82.00 feet; thence
S. 51º 36' W. 54.00 feet to a point on the northeasterly line of Geng Road;
thence N. 16º 30' W. along said northeasterly line of Geng Road and its
northwesterly prolongation 677.45 feet; thence N. 28° 13' W. 100.00 feet;
thence N. 34° 16' W. 100.00 feet; thence N. 38° 25' W. 100.00 feet; thence N.
35° 50' W. 100.00 feet; thence N. 42° 42' W. 100.00 feet; thence N. 40° 22' W.
100.00 feet; thence N. 41° 43' W. 98.70 feet; thence N. 28° 27' W. 85.00 feet;
thence S. 61° 33" W. 19.50 feet, more or less, to a point on the easterly line
of San Francisquito Creek as shown on Exhibit "A" in the easement from city of
Palo Alto to Santa Clara County dated May 1, 1959 (Palo Alto File No.
"Easements, No. 359" ); thence northerly along said easterly line to the point
of intersection of said easterly line with said southwesterly line of the lands
leased to the Palo Alto Airport as shown on Exhibit "A" hereinabove referred
to; thence in a general southeasterly direction along said last named
southwesterly line to the point of beginning.
   SAVE AND EXCEPT THE FOLLOWING DESCRIBED PORTION THEREOF DISCONTINUED FOR
PARK PURPOSES PURSUANT TO A VOTE OF THE PEOPLE, AS CONFIRMED BY ORDINANCE NO.
2351:
   Beginning at the southwesterly corner of that certain 26.66 acre tract
conveyed to the City of Palo Alto by Peter Faber et ux. by deed recorded July
19, 1926 in Volume 246 of Official Records at page 168, records of San Mateo
County, California; thence S. 47 30' 00" W. 152.46 feet to a point on the
general southwesterly line of that certain tract of land shown as PARCEL "A" on
the map entitled "Palo Alto Airport Lease Lands Exhibit-A" attached to the
Lease Agreement between the City of Palo Alto and County of Santa Clara dated
March 16, 1964 and filed in the office of the City Clerk of the City of Palo
Alto (Agreement No. 2276); thence along the general southwesterly line of said
lease, the following courses and distances: West 134.50 feet; N. 17º 08' 00" W.
314.60 feet; North 720.70 feet; East 232.00 feet; North 80.00 feet; West 42.00
feet and North 150.00 feet to the True Point of Beginning; thence, continuing
along said general southwesterly line of said lease, East 150.00 feet, North
642.02 feet and N. 38º 25' W. 337.96 feet; thence leaving said general
southwesterly line South 906.82 feet; thence East 60.00 feet to the True Point
of Beginning, containing 3.733 acres more or less.
EXHIBIT A-21 PALO ALTO YACHT HARBOR
   That area described in that certain lease agreement No. 2275 dated March 25,
1963, as shown on that Map recorded in Book 7243, Page 721, Records of Santa
Clara County.
   SAVE AND EXCEPT THE FOLLOWING DESCRIBED PORTION THEREOF DISCONTINUED FOR
PARK PURPOSES PURSUANT TO A VOTE OF THE PEOPLE, AS CONFIRMED BY ORDINANCE NO.
2351:
   Beginning at the southwesterly corner of that certain 26.66 acre tract of
land conveyed to the City of Palo Alto by Peter Faber et ux. by deed recorded
July 19, 1926 in Volume 246 of Official Records at page 168, records of San
Mateo County, California; thence South 65 00' 00" E. 240.24 feet; thence S. 63
15' E. 152.40 feet; thence N. 51º 37' 00" E. 25.32 feet to the True Point of
Beginning; thence East 1043.38 feet; thence North 350.00 feet; thence N. 15º
05' 00" E. 345.00 feet; thence N. 64º 55' 00" W. 530.00 feet; thence N. 38º 25'
00" W. 530 feet more or less, to a point on the Westerly shoreline of a lagoon,
said shoreline also being the most westerly line of that certain tract of land
shown on Exhibit "E" attached to the Palo Alto Yacht Harbor lease agreement
between the City of Palo Alto and the County of Santa Clara dated March 25,
1963, and filed April 12, 1963 in the office of the City Clerk of the City of
Palo Alto (Agreement No. 2275); thence in a general southerly direction along
the westerly line of said leased lands and said shoreline 1275 feet, more or
less, to a point designated as "Point W." on the map entitled "Palo Alto
Airport Lease Lands Exhibit-A" attached to the lease agreement between the City
of Palo Alto and the County of Santa Clara dated March 16, 1964 and filed in
the office of the City Clerk of the City of Palo Alto (Agreement No. 2276);
thence S. 63 17' 56" W. along the southeasterly line of said Airport Lease
Lands 407.07 feet; thence S. 51 37' W. 578.39 feet, to the True Point of
Beginning, containing 16 acres, more or less.
EXHIBIT A-21.1 ESTHER CLARK PARK
   Beginning at a point on the Southerly line of that certain 13.23 tract of
land conveyed by Alvina Mesa, an unmarried man, to R. A. Isenberg, by Deed
dated July 1, 1927 and recorded July 25, 1927 in Book of Official Records, at
page 382, Records of Santa Clara County, California, distant thereon S. 89º 20'
E. 814.85 feet from the original corner "A" marked by a 34 inch iron pipe at
the most Southeasterly corner of the Briones Partition of 16.99 acre tract as
said Tract is shown and delineated upon that certain Map entitled "Map of a
partition of 16.99 acres in the Rancho La Purissima Concepcion, belonging to
the Estate of Juana Briones de Miranda deceased," which map was recorded
December 19, 1903 in Book F-3 of Maps, at page 47, Records of said county, said
point of beginning being also the Southeasterly corner of that certain 10 acre
tract of land conveyed by R. A. Isenberg, et ux., to John M. Fowler, et ux. by
Deed dated April 19,1943 and recorded April 21, 1943 in Book 1137 of Official
Records, at page 338 Records of said county; thence from said point of
beginning running S. 89° 20' E. 389.55 feet; thence S. 0º 40' W. 504.24 feet to
the Southwesterly corner of that certain 18.04 acre tract of land conveyed by
Willis J. Sheldon to Edith C. Eaton, by Deed recorded January 10, 1925 in Book
125 of Official Records, at page 583, Records of said County, said corner being
also a point in the dividing line between lots 4 and 7 of the Briones
Partition, a map of which was recorded November 3, 1900 in Book "I" of Maps at
page 149, Records of said county; thence running along said dividing line S.
86º 50' E. 159.12 feet; thence S.0º 18' E. 175.01 feet to the Northwesterly
corner of that certain 3.293 acre tract of land conveyed by R. A. Isenberg, et
ux., to Jack Snell by Deed dated April 11, 1939 and recorded April 18, 1939 in
Book 929 of Official Records at page 141, Records of said county; thence S. 87º
10' E. 373.99 feet; thence S. 43º 02' 30" E. 262.55 feet to a 2" x3" stake
marked B-13 standing on Westerly line of Lot 13 of the Mesa Tract, a map of
which was recorded November 8, 1899 in Book "I" of Maps, at page 123, Records
of said county; thence S. 86º 50' E. 365.58 feet; thence N. 0º 15' E. 357.92
feet to a point in the Northerly line of said Lot 13; thence along said
Northerly line N. 86º 50' W. 365.58 feet to a 3" x4" stake marked 10-13
standing at the Westerly common corner of Lots 10 and 13 of said Mesa Tract;
thence along the Westerly line of said Lot 10 N. 0º 15' E. 502.00 feet to the
Southeasterly corner of that certain parcel of land conveyed by Edith C. Eaton,
et al. to Grace Phyllis Sheets by Deed dated August 21, 1936 and recorded
August 31, 1936 in Book 781 of Official Records at page 406, Records of said
county; thence N. 86º 50' W. and along the Southerly line of said parcel of
land so conveyed to Sheets 275.00 feet thence N. 29º 17' W. 561.50 feet; thence
S. 84º 55' W. 351.25 feet; thence S. 7º 34' E. 8.12 feet; thence N. 75º 08' W.
369.57 feet to the Northeasterly corner of the aforementioned 10 acre tract of
land so conveyed to John M. Fowler, et ux: thence S. 15º 37' 10" E. and along
the easterly line of said 10 acre tract of land 532.44 feet to the point of
beginning, containing 22.15 acres, more or less, being a portion of Lots 4, 5
and 7 of the Briones Partition and a portion of Lot 13 of the Mesa Tract.
EXHIBIT A-21.2 JUANA BRIONES PARK
   Situate in the City of Palo Alto, County of Santa Clara, State of
California, described as follows:
   Beginning at the most northerly corner of that certain parcel of land
described in the Final Judgment of Condemnation, had in the Superior Court of
the State of California in and for the County of Santa Clara, on April 13,
1962, Action No. P2497, a certified copy of which was recorded April 25, 1962
in Book 5552 of Official Records at page 78, records of Santa Clara County,
California; thence S. 28 48' W. along the northwesterly line of said parcel of
land 200.00 feet to the most westerly corner of said parcel; thence S. 61 12'
E. along the southwesterly line of said parcel 175.00 feet to a point on the
northwesterly line of Arastradero Road (75 feet wide); thence S. 28º 48' W.
along said last named northwesterly line 153.60 feet; thence N. 61º 12' W. 553
feet, more or less, to a point on a line which is parallel to and distant
southeasterly 30.00 feet, measured at right angles, from the centerline of
Maybell Avenue (40 feet wide); thence N. 48º 48' E. along said parallel line
343.60; thence along a tangent curve to the right, having a radius of 10 feet,
through a central angle of 90° 00', for an arc length of 15.71 feet; thence S.
61º 12' E. 368.00 feet, to the point of beginning, being a portion of Lots 16
and 23 of the Maybell Tract, a map of which was recorded June 19, 1905 in Book
"K" of Maps at pages 88 and 89, records of said County.
EXHIBIT A-21.3 JOHN BOULWARE PARK
   Situate in the City of Palo Alto, County of Santa Clara, State of
California, described as follows:
   Beginning at the Northerly common corner of Lots 14 and 15, Block 12, in the
centerline of Matadero Creek, as said Lots, Block and Creek are shown upon the
map of the Sunnyside Addition, hereinafter referred to; said point of beginning
also being on the southwesterly line of Ash Street (40 feet wide, shown as
First Street on said map) thence S. 56 degrees 27 minutes 58 seconds E. along
said southwesterly line 73.00 feet to the northeasterly corner of that certain
0.337 acre parcel of land conveyed to the Santa Clara County Flood Control and
Water Conservation District, State of California, by deed dated October 8, 1957
and recorded October 28, 1957 in Book 3923 of Official Records, at page 112
records of Santa Clara County, said northeasterly corner being the True Point
of Beginning; thence leaving said southwesterly line of Ash Street and running
along the easterly line of said 0.337 acre parcel of land the following courses
and distances; S. 33 degree 32 minutes 02 seconds W. 27.96 feet, S. 15 degrees
04 minutes 46 seconds E. 105.27 feet, thence along a tangent curve to the right
with a radius of 590.09 feet through a central angle of 11 degrees 22 feet 11
inches, an arc distance of 117.10 feet to a point of compound curvature; thence
along a curve to the right with a radius of 556.98 feet and along said easterly
line of said 0.337 acre parcel to the point of intersection thereof with the
dividing line between Lots 16 and 17 in said Block 12; thence northerly along
said dividing line 5 feet, more or less, to the most northerly corner of that
certain parcel of land conveyed to Emil Jost by deed dated November 2, 1933 and
recorded November 22, 1933 in Book 664 of Official Records at page 435, Records
of said County; thence southeasterly, along the northeasterly line of said
parcel so conveyed to Jost, 49.95 feet to the most easterly corner thereof;
thence northeasterly along the southeasterly line of said Lot 17, a distance of
200.00 feet to the most westerly corner of Lot 2, Block 6, of the Bartley Tract
Subdivision No. 2, hereinafter referred to; thence along the southwesterly line
of said Lot 2 S. 56 degrees 27 minutes 58 seconds E. 45.00 feet; thence leaving
said line N. 33 degrees 32 minutes 02 seconds E. 4.00 feet; thence S. 56
degrees 27 minutes 58 seconds E. 60.00 feet to a point on the northwesterly
line of Fernando Avenue (50 feet wide); thence N. 33 degrees 32 minutes 02
seconds E. along said last named line 136.00 feet to the most easterly corner
of Lot 11, Block 4, of said Bartley Tract Subdivision No. 2; thence N. 56
degrees 27 minutes 58 seconds W. 105.00 feet; thence N. 33 degrees 32 minutes
02 seconds E. 5.42 feet; thence N. 56 degrees 27 minutes 58 seconds W. 116.50
feet, to a point on the southeasterly line of Chestnut Avenue (50 feet wide);
thence S. 33 degrees 32 minutes 02 seconds W. along said last named line and
its southwesterly prolongation 95.42 feet to a point on said southwesterly line
of Ash Street; thence N. 56 degrees 27 minutes 58 seconds W. along said last
named line 138.00 feet to the True Point of Beginning, being a portion of said
Lots 15, 16 and 17 in Block 12 and a portion of First Street (presently called
Ash Street) as shown upon that certain map entitled "Map of Sunnyside Addition
to the Town of Mayfield" which map was recorded February 28, 1905 in Book "K"
of maps, at page 47, records of said county, all of Lot 13, Block 13, Sunnyside
Addition No. 2, a map of which was recorded December 13, 1905 in Book "L" of
Maps at page 12, records of said County, and all of Lot 11 of Block 4, Lot 1
and a portion of Lot 2 of Block 6 and a portion of First Street as said Lots,
Blocks and Street are shown on that certain map of the Bartley Tract
Subdivision No. 2, recorded August 8, 1911 in Book "N" of Maps at page 55,
records of said county. Excepting therefrom a well site located on the
following described parcel of land:
   Beginning at a point on the southwesterly line of Lot 2, Block 6, of Bartley
Tract Subdivision No. 2, hereinabove referred to, distant thereon S. 56 degrees
27 minutes 58 seconds E. 20.00 feet from the most westerly corner of said Lot
2; thence continuing along said southwesterly line S. 56 degrees 27 minutes 28
seconds W. 25.00 feet; thence S. 33 degrees 32 minutes 02 seconds W. 27.00 feet
to the point of beginning.
EXHIBIT A-21.4 TIMOTHY HOPKINS CREEKSIDE PARK
   That portion of a certain parcel of land conveyed to the Board of Trustees
of the Town of Palo Alto, by deed from Timothy Hopkins and Mary Kellogg
Hopkins, his wife, dated June 7, 1907, recorded June 18, 1907 in Book 319 of
Deeds, page 474, Santa Clara County Records. Said portion of the deeded parcel
is shown on the map attached hereto and is described as that certain strip of
land in the City of Palo Alto, County of Santa Clara, State of California,
adjoining and adjacent to and on northwesterly side of that certain street or
avenue known as Palo Alto Avenue and lying between said Avenue and the center
line of San Francisquito Creek (said center line being also the division line
between the Counties of Santa Clara and San Mateo), said strip of land
extending from a line corresponding to a prolongation of the center line of
Emerson Street in a general northwesterly direction to the limits of the City
of Palo Alto, in a general northeasterly direction to the northwesterly line of
the town limits of the Town of Palo Alto as of June 7, 1907, which line is now
slightly west of Marlowe Avenue; Said deed excepting and reserving, however,
unto the grantors and to their respective heirs and assigns all the gravel now
or at any times thereafter in that part of said Creek between the railroad
bridge of the Southern Pacific Company and that certain road known as and
called the Middlefield Road and the right to enter upon said demised premises
and Creek at any and all times to remove the same; and also excepting and
reserving to the said grantors and to their respective heirs and assigns
forever the perpetual right to use and occupy as much of the land demised as
may be necessary for abutments, roadways and approaches for bridges across said
Creek from any and all portions of said street or avenue known as Palo Alto
Avenue to the property owned by the grantors, or either of them, in San Mateo
County, and the right to construct as many of such bridges, approaches and
abutments as either of them may desire. By said deed, the right for such
abutments, roadways and approaches is and shall be a covenant running with and
appurtenant to said lands in San Mateo County so owned by the said grantors or
either of them.
EXHIBIT A-21.5 EL PALO ALTO PARK
   That portion of a certain parcel of land conveyed to the Board of Trustees
of the Town of Palo Alto, by deed from Timothy Hopkins and Mary Kellogg
Hopkins, his wife, dated June 7, 1907, recorded June 18, 1907, in Book 319 of
Deeds, page 474, Santa Clara County Records. Said portion of the deeded parcel
is shown on the map attached hereto and is described as that certain strip of
land in the City of Palo Alto, County of Santa Clara, State of California,
adjoining and adjacent to and on northwesterly side of that certain street or
avenue known as Palo Alto Avenue and lying between said Avenue and the center
line of San Francisquito Creek (said center line being also the division line
between the Counties of Santa Clara and San Mateo), said strip of land
extending from the intersection of the right of way of the Southern Pacific
Company in a general northeasterly direction to a line corresponding to a
prolongation of the center line of Emerson Street in a general northwesterly
direction to the limits of the City of Palo Alto; said deed excepting and
reserving, however, unto the said grantors and to their respective heirs and
assigns all the gravel now or at any and all times hereafter in that part of
said Creek between the railroad bridge of the Southern Pacific Company and that
certain road known as and called the Middlefield Road and the right to enter
upon said demised premises and Creek at any and all times to remove the same;
and also excepting and reserving to the said grantors and to their respective
heirs and assigns forever the perpetual right to use and occupy as much of the
land demised as may be necessary for abutments, roadways and approaches for
bridges across said Creek from any and all portions of said street or avenue
known as Palo Alto Avenue to the property owned by the grantors, or either of
them, in San Mateo County, and the right to construct as many of such bridges,
approaches and abutments as either of them may desire.
   By said deed the right for such abutments, roadways and approaches is and
shall be a covenant running with and appurtenant to said lands in San Mateo
County so owned by the said grantors or either of them.
EXHIBIT A-21.6 MONROE MINI-PARK
   Beginning at the southeast corner of that certain parcel of land conveyed by
Marie Tavores to Lawrence J. and Helen S. Davick by deed recorded October 23,
1947, in Book 1519 at page 463, records of Santa Clara County, California;
(said parcel known at Lot 95 of L. G. Monroe Subdivision unrecorded); thence S.
2 degrees 30 minutes 00 seconds W. 119.04 feet; thence S. 38 degrees 30 minutes
00 seconds W. 50.00 feet; thence S. 51 degrees 30 minutes 00 seconds E. 115.00
feet to a point on the northwesterly line of Monroe Drive (widened to 60 feet);
(easterly portion); thence S. 38 degrees 30 minutes 00 seconds W. 20.00 feet;
thence along the arc of a curve to the right having a radius of 20.00 feet
through a central angle of 90 degrees 00 minutes 00 seconds for an arc distance
of 31.42 feet to a point on the northeasterly line of Miller Avenue (60 feet
wide); thence N. 51 degrees 30 minutes 00 seconds W. 194.49 feet; thence along
an arc of a curve to the right having a radius of 20.00 feet through a central
angle of 77 degrees 49 minutes 33 seconds an arc distance of 27.17 feet to a
point of reverse curvature, said point of reverse curvature being on the
southeasterly line of Monroe Drive (widened to 60 feet); (westerly portion);
thence along the arc of a curve to the left having radius of 180.00 feet
through a central angle 29 degrees 05 minutes 46 seconds for an arc distance of
91.40 feet; thence N. 83 degrees 30 minutes 00 seconds E. 127.00 feet to the
point of beginning, containing 0.549 acres more or less and being a portion of
the Rancho Rincon de San Francisquito.
EXHIBIT A-21.7 SCOTT STREET MINIPARK
   Beginning at the intersection of the southwesterly line of Scott Street with
the southeasterly line of Channing Avenue as shown on that certain map entitled
"Plan of the Subdivision of Block 25 University Park Santa Clara Co.
California" recorded May 2, 1891 in Book E of Maps at Page 101 of Santa Clara
County official records.
   Thence northeasterly 50 feet along the prolongation of the southerly line of
Channing Avenue to the intersection of the northeasterly line of Scott Street
with the southeasterly line of Channing Avenue;
   Thence in coincident with the northeasterly line of Scott Street
southeasterly 50 feet to a point; thence parallel with Channing Avenue
northeasterly 112.50 feet to a point; thence parallel with Scott Street
southeasterly 100 feet to a point.
   Thence parallel with Channing Avenue southwesterly 162.50 feet to a point on
the southwesterly line of Scott Street;
   Thence in coincident with the southwesterly line of Scott Street
northwesterly 150 feet to the point of beginning.
   Containing 0.430 acres more or less and being the southeasterly half of Lots
57 through 60, the southeasterly quarter of Lot 56, all of Lots 61 and 62 and
the northwesterly 150 feet of Scott Street as shown on said map.
EXHIBIT A-21.8 SARAH WALLIS PARK
   Beginning at the most southerly corner of Lot 76 as shown on that certain
map entitled "Plat of the Town of Mayfield Paul Survey" which map was recorded
on July 9, 1867 in Book "C" at page 641, records of Santa Clara County,
California, said point also being the point of intersection of the
northwesterly line of Grant Avenue (60 feet wide) with the northeasterly line
of Ash Street (40 feet wide) also shown on said map; thence N. 56° 25' 11" W.
along said northeasterly line of Ash Street 136.00 feet; thence N. 33° 30' 17"
E. 10.00 feet to the true point of beginning; thence S. 56° 25' 11" E. 126.00
feet; thence along an arc of a tangent curve to the left with a radius of 10.00
feet through a central angle of 89° 55' 28", an arc length of 15.69 feet to a
tangent point on the northwesterly line of said Grant Avenue; thence N. 33° 30'
17" E. along said northwesterly line 71.52 feet; thence N. 56° 25' 11" W.
136.00 feet; thence S. 33° 30' 17" W. 81.52 feet to the true point of beginning
containing 0.253 acres, more or less, and being all of Lots 76 and 77 and
portions of Lots 75 and 78 of said map.
EXHIBIT A-21.9 ENID PEARSON ARASTRADERO PRESERVE
   Parcel 1.   A portion of that certain real property shown on that certain
Record of Survey, recorded in Book 262 of Maps at pages 2, 3, 4, and 5, Santa
Clara County Records, lying within the City of Palo Alto, County of Santa
Clara, State of California, and being more particularly described as follows:
   Beginning at a found 8" x 8" granite monument F-52 located on the City
Limits Line of Said City of Palo Alto, at the most northerly corner of Sheet 2
of said Record of Survey; thence along the common line of said Record of Survey
and said City Limits Line S. 12° 05' 22" W, 1668.31 feet to a found 3" x 4"
post as shown on said Record of Survey; thence leaving said common line along
said City Limits Line, S. 11° 59' 52" W, 51.89 feet to a point on the southerly
line of Arastradero Road (50 feet wide) said point being the true point of
beginning; thence continuing S. 11° 59' 52" W. along said City Limits Line
2188.35 feet to a general southerly line of said Record of Survey; thence
leaving said City Limits Line along said southerly line, N. 71° 41' 29" W,
148.43 feet; thence continuing along the boundary line of said Record of
Survey, N. 28° 58' 17" W, 649.04 feet; thence N. 67° 22' 14" W, 318.96 feet;
thence S. 49° 27' 16" W, 382.41 feet; thence S. 27° 41' 10" W, 653.36 feet;
thence S. 38° 48' 58" W, 1486.60 feet; thence N. 53° 44' 34" W, 128.38 feet;
thence S. 34° 28' 08" W, 99.25 feet; thence S. 21° 10' 22" W, 199.71 feet;
thence S. 38° 11' 17" W, 315.03 feet; thence S. 8° 45' 56" E, 62.04 feet;
thence S. 52° 14' 04" W, 94.38 feet; thence S. 51° 14' 04" W, 31.68 feet;
thence S. 43° 44' 04" W, 64.68 feet; thence S. 55° 44' 04" W, 158.40 feet;
thence S. 58° 44' 04" W, 100.32 feet; thence S. 28° 44' 04" W, 64.02 feet;
thence S. 52° 14' 04" W, 58.08 feet; thence S. 60° 44' 04" W, 91.08 feet;
thence S. 51° 59' 04" W, 92.40 feet; thence S. 80° 14' 04" W, 114.84 feet;
thence S. 54° 14' 04" W, 93.72 feet; thence S. 41° 14' 04" W, 121.44 feet;
thence S. 55° 44' 04" W, 50.82 feet; thence S. 24° 14' 04" W, 43.56 feet;
thence S. 25° 15' 56" E, 62.70 feet; thence S. 12° 44' 04" W, 145.20 feet;
thence S. 39° 14' 04" W, 76.60 feet; thence S. 39° 43' 27" W, 62.88 feet;
thence S. 40° 44' 11" W, 44.92 feet; thence S. 39° 54' 09" W, 21.93 feet;
thence S. 67° 28' 20" W, 254.56 feet; thence S. 72° 23' 48" W, 438.62 feet;
thence S. 87° 32' 46" W, 190.74 feet; thence N. 84° 11' 05" W, 183.00 feet;
thence N. 78° 10' 07" W, 194.51 feet; thence N. 75° 37' 13" W, 363.80 feet;
thence N. 87° 19' 39" W, 102.83 feet to point "A" (for later reference); thence
N. 88° 06' 14" W, 272.34 feet; thence N. 84° 05' 50" W, 80.63 feet; thence N.
67°
   Parcel 2.   Beginning at said found 8" x 8" granite monument F-52 described
in Parcel 1; thence along the common line of said Record of Survey and said
city limit line, S. 12° 05' 22" W, 1668.31 feet to a found 3" x 4" post as
shown on said Record of Survey, said point being a point on the northerly line
of Arastradero Road; thence leaving said common line N. 62° 29' 54" W, along
said northerly line 171.19 feet; thence continuing along said northerly line
and along the arc of a tangent curve to the left having a radius of 1025.00
feet, through a central angle of 6° 09' 54", a length of 110.29 feet; thence N.
68° 39' 48" W, 751.69 feet; thence along the arc of a tangent curve to the left
having a radius of 525.00 feet, through a central angle of 12° 49' 05", a
length of 117.45 feet; thence N. 81° 28' 53" W, along said northerly line
587.45 feet; thence along the arc of a tangent curve to the left having a
radius of 525.00 feet, through a central angle of 17° 42' 17", a length of
162.23 feet; thence S. 80° 48' 50" W, along said northerly line of Arastradero
Road 71.70 feet; thence along the arc of a tangent curve to the left having a
radius of 4025.00 feet, through a central angle of 02° 04' 16", a length of
145.50 feet; thence S. 78° 44' 34" W, 303.45 feet; thence along the arc of a
tangent curve to the left having a radius of 250.00 feet, through a central
angle of 18° 23' 40", a length of 80.26 feet; thence leaving said northerly
line of Arastradero Road N. 34° 15' 32" W, 981.51 feet; thence N. 77° 55' 13"
E, 2495.07 feet; thence S. 70° 42' 45" E, 434.11 feet; thence N. 83° 27' 13" E,
449.97 feet to the point of beginning, containing 77.219 acres more or less.
   Parcel 3.    Beginning at a point which lies North 66° 30' 46" West, a
distance of 642.43 feet from 3 x 4 post marked "M-H-03", said point being the
Southwesterly corner of "Tract 3306, Page Mill Estates", recorded in Book 153
of Maps, at page 40-42, Records of said County; thence along the following
courses and distances; South 23° 44' 16" West, 290 feet North 68° 32"00" West
241.00 feet, South 66° 43' 42" West 165.00 feet; North 87° 36' 45" West 554.84
feet, North 49° 17' 51" West 146.04 feet, North 75° 13" 35" West 395.00 feet
and North 57° 16' 53" West 198.00 feet to a point on a curve; thence along said
curve to the right of radius 550 feet, Northeasterly and Easterly, through a
central angle of 32° 46' 04", a distance of 314.55 feet to a point of compound
curvature, said point being the Westerly point of curvature of a curve, of
radius of 4025 feet, as shown in the Map entitled, "Record of Survey of a
Portion of Rancho El Corte De Madera", recorded in Book 118 of Maps, at page
12, Records of said County; thence along the Southerly line of the 77.219 acre
parcel described in said Records of Survey, and along a curve to the right of
radius 4025 feet, through a central angle of a 2° 04' 16" a distance of 145.50
feet, thence North 80° 48' 50" East, a distance of 71.70 feet; thence along a
tangential curve to the right of a radius of 525 feet, through a central angle
of 17° 42' 17" a distance of 162.23 feet, thence South 81° 28' 53" East, a
distance of 587.45 feet thence along a tangential curve to the right of radius
of 525 feet, through a central angle of 12° 49' 05" a distance of 117.45 feet;
thence South 68° 39' 48" East a distance of 390.00 feet to the point of
beginning.
EXHIBIT A-21.10 JOHN FLETCHER BYXBEE RECREATION AREA ADDITION
   All that certain real property situate in the County of Santa Clara, State
of California, described as follows:
   Beginning at the most southerly corner of the 151.61 Acre Parcel of Land
shown on that certain Record of Survey Map which was filed on August 15, 1969,
in Book 258 of Maps at Pages 4 and 5, Records of Santa Clara County,
California; thence from said point of beginning along the general westerly line
of said 151.61 Acre Parcel N.40° 34' 12" W. 1003.28 feet, thence N.39° 59' 40"
W. 709.32 feet: thence along a curve to the right a radius of 900.05 feet
through a central angle of 22° 35' 50", for an arc distance of 354.98 feet;
thence N.16° 23' 50" W. 266.03 feet; thence N.5° ' 00' 10" E. 98.90 feet;
thence N.84° 59' 50" W. 38.65 feet; thence N.16° 20' 32 W. 122.01 feet; thence
S.84° 59' 50" E. 83.06 feet; thence N.5° 00' 10" E. 15.00 feet; thence S.84°
59' 50" E. 195.69 feet; thence N.16° 20' 32" W. 384.11 feet, S.73° 39' 28" W.
60.00 feet, N.05° 00' 10" E. 195.67 feet, N.85° 31' 57" E. 127.37 feet, and
N.10° 35' 30" W. 540.33 feet; thence continuing along the general northerly
line of said 151.61 Acre Parcel as shown on said Map N.33° 31' 50" E. 179.72
feet, N.63° 59' 20" E. 17.73 feet, S.37° 17' 50" E. 277.53 feet, N.52° 42' 10"
E. 375.72 feet, S.88° 07' 10" E., S. 244.11 feet, N.66° 47' 40" E. 179.79 feet,
N.41° 59' 20" E. 112.05 feet, N. 13° 58' 00" E. 203.07 feet, and S.88° 58' 50"
E. 1113.34 feet to the northerly corner of said 151.61 Acre Parcel; thence
along the general easterly of said Parcel, S.0° 50' 58" W. 2690.96 feet, S.06°
31' 50" E. 354.00 feet, S. 79 03' 20" E. 93.06 feet, S.22 53' 30" E. 145.20
feet; S.76 27' 30" E. 132.00 feet to the most easterly corner of said 151.61
Acre Parcel; thence along the southeasterly line of said Parcel as shown on
said Map S.70° 24' 00" W. 1317.52 feet to the point of beginning and containing
151.61 acres of land, more or less. Excepting therefrom a parcel of land more
particularly described as follows: Commencing at the most southerly corner of
the 151.61 Acre Parcel 1 of Land shown on that certain Record of Survey Map,
Recorded August 15, 1969, in Book 258 of Maps at Pages 4 and 5, Records of
Santa Clara County, California; thence along the southwesterly line of said
Parcel as shown on said Map N.40° 34' 12" W. 1003.28 feet, and N.38° 59' 40" W.
27.39 feet; thence leaving said southwesterly line S.89° 39' 37" E. 401.49 feet
to the true point of beginning of the lands to be described herein; thence from
said true point of beginning and continuing S.89° 39' 37" E. 843.01 feet;
thence N.11° 41' 22" E. 592.28 feet; thence N.11° 29' 20" W. 502.06 feet;
thence N.18° 14' 16" W. 734.92 feet; thence S.82° 14' 05" W. 222.04 feet;
thence N.72° 38' 46" W. 335.26 feet; thence S.24° 07' 42" W. 525.95 feet;
thence S.05° 08' 41" E. 1360.48 feet to the true point of beginning and
containing 36.55 acres of land, more or less. Also excepting therefrom an
easement for water pipeline and system injection, extraction and monitoring
wells and ingress and egress in incidental purposes, and electrical, telephone
and other utility service lines, pipes and facilities and other public
utilities and ingress and egress over that portion of lands shown on that
certain Record of Survey filed for Record in Book 258 of Maps, at Pages 4 and
5; and a portion of the lands described in the deed recorded in Book 355 of
Official Records, at Page 2, said deed and record of survey are filed in the
Office of the Recorder, County of Santa Clara, State of California, to wit:
   Area (I)   Beginning at the intersection of the northeasterly line of Faber
Place, as said intersection is shown on that certain Record of Survey filed for
record in Book 229 of Maps, at Page 24, Santa Clara County Records, with the
general northerly line of the lands now or formerly of ITT World
Communications, Inc. as described in said deed, said point bears N.88° 07' 10"
W. 141.69 feet, from the easterly terminus of the course S.88° 07' 10" E.
224.11 feet, as shown on said Record of Survey filed for record in Book 258 of
Maps, at Pages 4 and 5, Santa Clara County Records; thence S.55° 18' 31" E.
144.37 feet; thence N.50° 49' 39" E. 5.00 feet; thence N.56° 32' 17" E. 50.25
feet; thence S.39° 10' 21" E. 10.00 feet; thence S.43° 42' 09" W. 40.31 feet;
thence S.39° 10' 21" E.30.00 feet; thence S.50 49' 39" W.15.00 feet; thence
S.39 10' 21" E. 150.35 feet; thence S.84 10' 21" E. 28.28 feet; thence N.50°
49' 39" E. 913.63 feet; to a point on the general northerly line of said lands;
thence along said line S.88° 58' 50" E. 24.80 feet; thence leaving said line
S.50° 49' 39" W. 932.58 feet; thence S.05° 49' 39" W. 28.28 feet; thence S.39°
10' 21" E. 649.85 feet; thence N.50° 49' 39" E. 5.00 feet; thence N.56° 32' 17"
E. 50.25 feet; thence S.39° 10' 21" E. 10.00 feet; thence S.43° 42' 09" W.
40.31 feet; thence S.39° 10' 21" E. 30.00 feet; thence S.50° 49' 39" W. 15.00
feet; thence S.39° 10' 21" E. 0.05 feet; thence N.72° 38' 46" W. 29.01 feet;
thence N.39° 10' 21" W. 831.06 feet; thence along a tangent curve to the left,
with a radius of 20.00 feet, through a central angle of 90° 00' 00" for an arc
distance of 31.42 feet; thence S.50° 49' 39" W. 949.96 feet; thence S.39° 10'
21" E. 10.00 feet; thence S.50° 49' 39" W. 50.23 feet; thence S.16° 20' 32" E.
462.57 feet; thence N.87° 58' 26" W. 12.64 feet; thence N.16° 20' 32" W. 436.12
feet; thence N.39° 10' 21" W. 48.04 feet; thence N.50° 49' 39" E. 70.00 feet;
thence S.39° 10' 21" E. 10.00 feet; thence N.50° 49' 39" E. 949.96 feet; thence
along a tangent curve to the left with a radius of 20.00 feet, through a
central angle of 90° 00' 00" for an arc distance of 31.42 feet; thence N.39°
10' 21" W. 46.73 feet; thence N.55° 18' 31" W. 97.73 feet; thence N.59° 57' 10"
W. 79.42 feet; thence S.88° 07' 10" E. 41.40 feet to the point of beginning.
   Area (II)   Beginning at the most southeasterly corner of the lands of ITT
World Communications, Inc., as shown on said Record of Survey, recorded in Book
258 of Maps, at Pages 4 and 5, Santa Clara County Records; thence along the
general easterly line of said lands, as shown on said map, the following five
courses; N.75° 27' 30" W. 132.00 feet; N.22° 53' 30" W. 145.20 feet, N.79° 03'
20" W. 93.06 feet, N.06° 31' 50" W. 354.00 feet, and N.0° 50' 58" E. 546.23
feet to the true point of beginning; thence leaving said line N.39° 10' 21" W.
278.53 feet; thence along a tangent curve to the left, with a radius of 20.00
feet through a central angle of 90° 00' 00" for an arc distance of 31.42 feet;
thence S.50° 49' 39" W. 124.24 feet; thence N.11° 29' 20" W. 13.55 feet; thence
N.50° 49' 39" E. 117.94 feet; thence along a tangent curve to the left with a
radius of 20.00 feet through a central angle of 90° 00' 00" for an arc distance
of 31.42 feet; thence N.39° 10' 21" W. 282.77 feet; thence N.18° 14' 16" W.
44.79 feet; thence S.39° 10' 21" E. 636.08 feet; thence N.18° 14' 16" W. 44.79
feet; thence S.39° 10' 21" E.; thence 636.08 feet to said general easterly
line: thence along said line S.0° 50' 58" W. 24.88 feet to the true point of
beginning.
   Area (III)   Beginning at the most southerly corner of the lands of ITT
World Communications, Inc., as shown on said Record of Survey, recorded in Book
258 of Maps, at Pages 4 and 5, Santa Clara County Records; thence along the
general westerly line of said lands as shown on said Map N.40° 34' 12" W.
1003.28 feet; thence N. 38° 59' 40" W. 27.39 feet; thence leaving said line S.
89° 39' 37" E. 348.46 feet to the true point of beginning; thence S.89° 39' 37"
E. 16.85 feet; thence S.44° 23' 51" E.351.20 feet; thence S.77° 04' 21" E.
548.24 feet; thence N.12° 55' 39" E. 10.00 feet, thence S.77° 04' 21" E. 50.00
feet; thence S.12° 55' 39" W. 20.00 feet; thence S.57° 55' 39" W. 42.43 feet;
thence N.77° 04' 21" W. 20.00 feet; thence N.22° 33' 35" W. 34.43 feet; thence
N.77° 04' 21" W. 531.75 feet; thence N.44° 23' 51" W. 366.57 feet to the true
point of beginning.
   Area (IV)   Beginning at the most southerly corner of the lands of ITT World
Communications, Inc., as shown on said Record of Survey, recorded in Book 258
of Maps, at Pages 4 and 5, Santa Clara County Records; thence along the general
westerly line of said lands as shown on said Map N.40° 34' 12" W. 212.95 feet
to the true point of beginning; thence continuing along said westerly line
N.40° 34' 12" W. 34.05 feet; thence leaving said line N.77° 40' 00" E. 80.00
feet; thence S.77° 40' 00" W. 63.89 feet to the true point of beginning.
   And also excepting therefrom an easement for flood control and/or storm
water drainage, ingress and egress and incidental purposes over that portion of
the lands as shown on that certain Record of Survey, filed in Book 258 of Maps,
at Pages 4 and 5, in the Office of the Recorder, County of Santa Clara, State
of California, to wit:
   Beginning at the most southerly corner of said lands; thence along the
northeasterly line of the East Bayshore Road, as shown on said Record of Survey
N.40° 34' 12" W. 247.00 feet; thence leaving said northeasterly line N.77° 40'
00" E. 1021.00 feet; thence N.16° 04' 24" E. 396.08 feet to a point on the
general easterly line of said lands; thence along said general easterly line
the following four courses: S.06° 31' 50" E. 163.06 feet, S.79° 03' 20" E.
93.06 feet; S.22° 53' 30" E.145.20 feet, and S.76° 27' 30" E. 132.00 feet to
the southeasterly corner of said lands; thence along the southerly line of said
lands S.70° 24' 00" W. 1317.52 feet to the point of beginning.
EXHIBIT A-22 HEWLETT-MULLEN PROPERTY LEGAL DESCRIPTION
   Beginning at the northeasterly corner of Parcel "A," as said parcel is shown
on the certain map entitled "Parcel Map Being a Portion of the Rancho Rincon El
Corte de Madera" which map was filed for record in the Office of the Recorder
of the County of Santa Clara, State of California, on August 28, 1979, in Book
448 of Maps at pages 46 & 47, said corner also being an angle point of Parcel
"B," also shown on the map above referred to;
   Thence along the boundary line of said Parcel "B" for the following courses
and distances;
   Thence N. 0° 05' 05" E. 209.19 feet;
   Thence N. 52° 48' 14" W. 685.19 feet;
   Thence S. 38° 03' 18" W. 678.34 feet to a post marked "H.5";
   Thence N. 54° 31' 17" W. 128.51 feet;
   Thence S. 34° 55' 25" W. 99.00 feet;
   Thence S. 21° 25' 25" W. 199.98 feet;
   Thence S. 38° 40' 25" W. 316.80 feet;
   Thence S. 10° 04' 35" E. 62.04 feet;
   Thence S. 50° 55' 25" W. 94.38 feet;
   Thence S. 49° 55' 25" W. 31.68 feet;
   Thence S. 42° 55' 25" W. 64.68 feet;
   Thence S. 54° 25' 25" W. 158.40 feet;
   Thence S. 57° 25' 25" W. 100.32 feet;
   Thence S. 27° 25' 25" W. 64.02 feet;
   Thence S. 50° 55' 25" W. 58.08 feet;
   Thence S. 59° 25' 25" W. 91.08 feet;
   Thence S. 50° 40' 25" W. 92.40 feet;
   Thence S. 78° 55' 25" W. 114.84 feet;
   Thence S. 52° 55' 25" W. 93.72 feet;
   Thence S. 39° 55' 25" W. 121.44 feet;
   Thence S. 54° 25' 25" W. 50.82 feet;
   Thence S. 22° 55' 25" W. 43.56 feet;
   Thence S. 26° 34' 35" E. 62.70 feet;
   Thence S. 11° 25' 25" W. 145.20 feet;
   Thence S. 37° 55' 25" W. 72.60 feet; and S.39° 25' 25" W. 63.15 feet;
   Thence S. 39° 43' 33" W. 14.92 feet;
   Thence S. 41° 50' 19" W. 21.88 feet;
   Thence S. 66° 22' 28" W. 94.10 feet to the northeasterly corner of Tract No.
7025 as said Tract was filed for record in the Office of the Recorder of Santa
Clara County, California, on August 12, 1982, in Book 488 of Maps at pages 48 &
49;
   Thence S. 66° 41' 58" W. and along the northerly line of said Tract 54.92
feet;
   Thence leaving said last named line and along the westerly line of a 10.977
acre parcel of land dedicated to the City on said Tract Map the following
courses and distances; S.1° 08' 38" W. 326.62 feet;
   Thence S. 35° 51' 22" E. 369.06 feet;
   Thence S. 41° 11' 22" E. 94.48 feet;
   Thence S. 23° 21' 22" E. 94.42 feet;
   Thence S. 57° 29' 22" E. 166.26 feet;
   Thence S. 71° 17' 22" E. 65.12 feet;
   Thence S. 42° 17' 22" E. 118.09 feet;
   Thence S. 73° 37' 22" E. 158.53 feet;
   Thence S. 52° 07' 22" E. 194.14 feet;
   Thence S. 33° 07' 22" E. 120.73 feet;
   Thence S. 64° 37' 22" E. 108.18 feet;
   Thence S. 51° 07' 22" E. 99.76 feet;
   Thence S. 19° 09' 52" E. 56.24 feet;
   Thence S. 70° 16' 16" W. 115.18 feet;
   Thence S. 40° 30' 16" W. 129.97 feet;
   Thence S. 15° 59' 03" W. 169.82 feet;
   Thence S. 49° 21' 51" W. 110.26 feet;
   Thence S. 75° 09' 56" W. 306.09 feet;
   Thence S. 34° 09' 04" W. 146.56 feet;
   Thence S. 26° 37' 18" W. 210.45 feet to a point on the southwesterly line of
said Tract No. 7025;
   Thence S. 61° 39' 14" East and along said southwesterly line 60.03 feet ; to
a corner point in said Tract;
   Thence along the southeasterly line of said Tract No. 7025 which line is
also the southeasterly line of said 10.977 acre parcel of land, the following
courses and distances;
   Thence N. 26° 37' 18" E. 208.31 feet;
   Thence N. 34° 09' 04" E. 120.17 feet;
   Thence N. 75° 09' 56" E. 297.39 feet;
   Thence N. 49° 21' 51" E. 141.99 feet;
   Thence N. 15° 59' 03" E. 174.77 feet;
   Thence S. 40° 30' 16" W. 100.99 feet;
   Thence N. 70° 16' 16" E. 145.84 feet;
   Thence S. 89° 29' 55" E. 136.96 feet;
   Thence S. 66° 02' 08" E. 143.12 feet;
   Thence N. 85° 00' 57" E.181.80 feet;
   Thence S. 73° 33' 38" E. 255.95 feet ;
   Thence N. 28° 09' 17" E. 372.06 feet to the most easterly corner of said
Tract No. 7025, said point also being the southerly corner of Parcel "C" as
said Parcel is also shown on the Parcel Map above referred to;
   Thence N. 87° 55' 48" E. and along the southerly line of said Parcel "C"
383.40 feet to the point of intersection of said last named line with the
southwesterly line of Parcel "D," also shown on above referred to map;
   Thence along the common line between said Parcels "C" and "D" the following
courses and distances;
   Thence N. 54° 50' 26" W. 418.00 feet;
   Thence N. 11° 19' 33" E. 240.19 feet;
   Thence S. 88° 21' 30" E. 570.00 feet to a point on the westerly line of
Alexis Drive:
   Thence N. 13° 30' 00" W. and along said last named line 31.74 feet;
   Thence along a curve to the right with a radius of 425.00 feet through a
central angle of 1° 45' 02" for an arc length of 12.98 feet to the point of
intersection of said last named westerly line with the northerly boundary line
of said Parcel "C" ;
   Thence along said last named boundary line the following courses and
distances;
   Thence N. 54° 50' 26" W. 334.02 feet;
   Thence N. 10° 20' 34" E. 82.77 feet;
   Thence N. 79° 39' 26" W. 179.00 feet;
   Thence N. 86° 33' 21" W. 152.57 feet to a common angle point between said
Parcels "B" and "C" ;
   Thence along the boundary line of said Parcel "B" the following courses and
distances;
   Thence N. 0° 45' 07" E. 97.21 feet;
   Thence N. 54° 50' 26" W. 350.75 feet;
   Thence N. 30° 08' 33" E. 220.27 feet to the westerly line of Laurel Glen
Drive;
   Thence along said westerly line, and along a curve to the right with a
radius of 225.00 feet through a central angle of 14° 00' 00" for an arc length
of 54.98 feet;
   Thence along said westerly line, and along to the westerly line of Laurel
Glen Drive a curve to the left with a radius of 175.00 feet through a central
angle of 14° 40' 00" for an arc length of 44.80 feet;
   Thence along a curve to the right with a radius of 325.00 feet through a
central angle of 40° 20' 00" for an arc length of 228.78 feet;
   Thence leaving said last named westerly line and continuing along the
boundary
line of said Parcel "B" N. 40° 38' 00" W. 330.00 feet;
   Thence N. 32° 00' 00" W. 117.00 feet;
   Thence N. 72° 00' 00" W. 58.57 feet;
   Thence E. 165.37 feet to a common angle point between said Parcels "A" and
"B" ;
   Thence along the common boundary lines of said last named Parcels the
following courses and distances;
   Thence N. 52° 48' 14" W. 371.17 feet;
   Thence N. 38° 03' 18" E. 933.00 feet;
   Thence N. 88° 16' 50" E. 226.25 feet;
   Thence S. 52° 48' 14" E. 610.00 feet to the point of beginning being a
portion of the Rancho El Corte de Madera and containing 99.002 acres more less.
EXHIBIT A-23 LYTTON PLAZA
   All of Lots 13, 14, and 15 as shown on the Map of Millers Subdivision of
Block 12 of University Park as recorded in Book G of Maps at Page 57 on March
3. 1893, and containing 0.195 acres more or less.
EXHIBIT A-24 TERMAN PARK ADDITION
   All of Parcel "C," 7.66 acres+, as shown on that certain Parcel Map filed
for record in the Office of the Recorder of the County of Santa Clara, State of
California, on December 5, 1983 in Book 521 of Maps, Pages 52-53.
EXHIBIT A-25 DR.THOMAS M. & DORA MOODY WILLIAMS PARK
   A portion of real properly situated in the City of Palo Alto, County of
Santa Clara, State of California more particularly described as follows;
   Beginning at a point on the northwesterly line of Homer Avenue, said point
being a distant thereon 100 feet southwesterly from the intersection of the
southwesterly line of Waverley Street with the northwesterly line of Homer
Avenue
   Thence, southwesterly 150 feet, along the northwesterly line of Homer
Avenue;
   Thence, at right angles northwesterly 2 10 feet and parallel with the
southwesterly line of Waverley Street;
   Thence, at right angles northeasterly 100 feet and parallel with the
northwesterly line of Homer Avenue;
   Thence, at right angles southeasterly 30 feet and parallel with the
southwesterly line of Waverley Street;
   Thence, at right angles northeasterly 50 feet and parallel with the
northwesterly line of Homer Avenue;
   Thence, at right angles southeasterly 180 feet and parallel with the
southwesterly line of Waverley Street, to the Point of Beginning.
   Being a portion of Lot 3 and 4 of Block 23, as shown on the map of
University Park, recorded in the office of the County Recorder on February 27,
1889 in Book D of Maps at Pages 69 of Santa Clara County Official Records;
   Said Parcel 1 contains 30,000 square feet 0.6887 acres more or less.
EXHIBIT A-26 HERITAGE PARK
   [Pending Inclusion -- Please refer to the office of the city clerk.]
EXHIBIT A-27 STANFORD/PALO ALTO COMMUNITY PLAYING FIELDS
   All of Parcel 1 as shown on the attached Exhibit B and fully described in
Exhibit A to the Certificate of Compliance recorded on December 5, 2005 as
Document No. 18704553, Official Records of the Santa Clara County Clerk-
Recorder.
EXHIBIT A-28 LEE PROPERTY - ADDITION TO FOOTHILLS NATURE PRESERVE
   Beginning at a 3/4-inch iron pipe at the northeasterly corner of that
certain tract of land described in the deed from Russell V. Lee, et ux, to
Richard Stanford Lee, et ux, dated December 30, 1956, and recorded December 3,
1956 in Book 3696 of Official Records at page 382, Records of Santa Clara
County, California;
   Thence S. 15° 24' 19" E. along the easterly line of said tract 1083.65 feet;
   Thence S. 72° 08' 48" W. 595.53 feet;
   Thence S. 38° 48' 32" W. 179.00 feet;
   Thence 48" W. 593.53 feet;
   Thence S. 12° 01' 23" E. 488.00 feet;
   Thence 32° 25' 26" W. 229.44 feet to an iron pipe marking the southwest
corner of a quarry, said last-named corner being the True Point Of Beginning;
   Thence S. 68° 17' 19" E. 1048.00 feet to an iron pipe;
   Thence 57° 28' W. 60 feet, more or less, to a fence post marking a corner in
the northwesterly boundary line of the lands of the City of Palo Alto known as
“Foothills Park”, as said lands are described in "Exhibit A" of the agreement
between said City and Russell V. Lee and Dorothy Womack Lee, dated December 8,
1958 and recorded December 10, 1958 in Book 4254 of Official Records at page
695, et seq., Records of said County;
   Thence following said boundary line of Foothills Park S. 57° 28' W. (called
55° 54' W. in said "Exhibit A") 435.35 feet;
   Thence leaving said park boundary, N. 32° 32' W. 5.00 feet;
   Thence N. 64° 09' W. 263.50 feet;
   Thence N. 71° 21' W. 117.50 feet;
   Thence N. 29° 16' E. 246.32 feet to the True Point Of Beginning, containing
7.70 acres, more or less, and being a portion of the Rancho El Corte De Madera.
EXHIBIT A-29 ITT ANTENNA FIELD – ADDITION TO BAYLANDS NATURE PRESERVE
   All of that certain real property situate in the City of Palo Alto, County
of Santa Clara, State of California, and being more particularly described as
follows:
Parcel One:
Beginning at the most southerly corner of the 151.61 acre parcel of land shown
on that certain Record of Survey Map which was filed on August 15, 1969, in
Book 258 of Maps, at Pages 4 and 5, records of Santa Clara County, California;
thence from said point of beginning along the general westerly line of said
151.61 acre parcel north 40° 34' 12" west 1003.28 feet, and north 38° 59' 40"
west 27.39 feet to a point thereon; thence leaving said general westerly line
south 89° 39' 37" east 1244.50 feet; thence north 11° 41' 22" east 592.28 feet;
thence north 11° 29' 20" west 502.06 feet; thence north 18° 14' 16" west 734.92
feet; thence south 82° 14' 05" west 222.04 feet; thence north 72° 38' 46" west
335.26 feet; thence north 79° 14' 55" west 665.06 feet; thence south 14° 50'
40" west 676.45 feet; thence north 87° 58' 26" west 121.20 feet to a point on
said general westerly line above described; thence along said general westerly
line as shown on said Map north 16° 20' 32" west 384.11 feet, south 79° 39' 28"
west 60.00 feet, north 05° 00' 10" east 195.67 feet, north 85° 31' 57" east
127.37 feet and north 10° 35' 30" west 540.33 feet; thence continuing along the
general northerly line of said 151.61 acre parcel as shown on said Map, north
33° 31' 50" east 179.72 feet, north 63° 59' 20" east 17.73 feet, south 37° 17'
50" east 277.53 feet, north 52° 42' 10" east 375.72 feet, south 88° 07' 10"
east 224.11 feet, north 66° 47' 40" east 179.79 feet, north 41° 59' 20" east
112.05 feet, north 13° 58' 00" east 203.07 feet, and south 88° 58' 50" east
1113.34 feet to the northeasterly corner of said 151.61 acre parcel; thence
along the general easterly line of said parcel, south 00° 50' 58" west 2690.96
feet, south 06° 31' 50" east 354.00 feet south 79° 03' 20" east 93.06 feet,
south 22° 53' 30" east 145.20 feet, south 76° 27' 30" east 132.00 feet to the
most easterly corner of said 151.61 acre parcel; thence along the southeasterly
line of said parcel as shown on said Map, south 70° 24' 00" west 1317.52 feet
to the point of beginning.
Parcel Two:
Commencing at the most southerly corner of the 151.61 acre parcel of land shown
on that certain Record of Survey Map, recorded August 15, 1969, in Book 258 of
Maps, at Pages 4 and 5, records of Santa Clara County, California; thence along
the southwesterly line of said parcel as shown on said Map, north 40° 34' 12"
west 1003.28 feet, and north 38° 59' 40" west 27.39 feet, thence leaving said
southwesterly line south 89° 39' 37" east 401.49 feet to the true point of
beginning of lands to be described herein; thence from said true point of
beginning and continuing south 89° 39' 37" east 843.01 feet; thence north 11°
41' 22" east 592.28 feet; thence north 11° 29' 20" west 502.06 feet; thence
north 18° 14' 16" west 734.92 feet; thence south 82° 14' 05" west 222.04 feet;
thence north 72° 38' 46" west 335.26 feet; thence south 24° 07' 42" west 525.95
feet; thence south 05° 08' 41" east 1360.48 feet to the true point of
beginning.
Parcel Three:
Beginning at a point on the general westerly line of the 151.61 acre parcel of
land shown on that certain Record of Survey Map, filed on August 15, 1969, in
Book 258 of Maps, at Pages 4 and 5, records of Santa Clara County, California,
said point of beginning being the southerly terminus of the course designated
as "North 05° 00' 10" East 98.90 feet", shown on the northerly portion of said
general westerly line as same is delineated upon Sheet 1 of said Map, and said
point of beginning being marked on the ground by 3/4 inch iron pipe monument
and tag "RCE 5597"; thence from said point of beginning and continuing along
said general westerly line of said 151.61 acre parcel north 05° 00' 10" east
98.90 feet, north 84° 59' 50" west 38.65 feet, north 16° 20' 32" west 122.01
feet, south 84° 59' 50" east 83.06 feet, north 05° 00' 10" east 15.00 feet, and
south 84° 59' 50" east 195.69 feet; thence leaving said general westerly line
of said 151.61 acre parcel, south 87° 58' 26" east 739.73 feet; thence south
05° 08' 41" east 396.83 feet; thence south 84° 04' 53" west 287.98 feet; thence
north 72° 39' 01" west 729.32 feet returning to said general westerly line of
said 151.61 acre parcel; thence along said general westerly line north 16° 23'
50" west 25.00 feet to the point of beginning.
Parcel Four:
Parcel A: Commencing at a point on the general westerly line of the 151.61 acre
parcel of land shown on that certain Record of Survey Map filed on August 15,
1969, in Book 258 of Maps, at Pages 4 and 5, records of Santa Clara County,
California, said point of beginning being the southerly terminus of the course
designated as "North 05° 00' 10" East 98.90 feet" as shown on the northerly
portion of said general westerly line as same is delineated upon Sheet 1 of
said Map, and said point of beginning being marked on the ground by a 3/4 inch
iron pipe monument and Tag "RCE 5597"; thence from a point of beginning and
continuing along said general westerly line of said 151.61 acre parcel north
05° 00' 10" east 98.90 feet, north 84° 59' 50" west 38.65 feet, north 16° 20'
32" west 122.01 feet, south 84° 59' 50" east 83.06 feet, north 05° 00' 10" east
15.00 feet, and south 84° 59' 50" east 195.69 feet; thence leaving said general
westerly line of said parcel, south 87° 58' 26" east 121.20 feet to the true
point of beginning of the parcel of land to be described herein; thence from
said true point of beginning north 14° 50' 40" east 676.45 feet; thence south
79° 14' 55" east 665.06 feet; thence south 24° 07' 42" west 525.95 feet; thence
south 05° 08' 41" east 71.97 feet; thence north 87° 58' 26" west 618.53 feet to
the true point of beginning.
Parcel B: Beginning at a point on the general westerly line of the 151.61 acre
parcel as shown on the above described Record of Survey Map, which point of
beginning is located along said general westerly line North 40° 34' 12" west
1003.28 feet, and north 38° 59' 40" west 27.39 feet from the most southerly
corner of said parcel as shown on said Map; thence from said point of beginning
and continuing along said general westerly line north 38° 59' 40" west 681.93
feet, thence tangent to the preceding course on the arc of a curve to the right
having a radius of 900.05 feet and a central angle of 22° 35' 50", an arc
distance of 354.98 feet, thence north 16° 23' 50" west 241.03 feet; thence
leaving said general westerly line south 72° 39' 01" east 729.32 feet; thence
north 84° 04' 53" east 287.98 feet; thence south 05° 08' 41" east 891.68 feet;
thence north 89° 39' 37" west 401.49 feet to the point of beginning.
(Ord. 5518 § 5 (part [Exh. A-9, A-9.1, A-9.2, A-9.3, A-28]), 2021: Ord. 5413 §
1 (part [Exh. A-29]): Ord. 5268 § 1 (part [Exh. A-28]), 2014: Ord. 4920 § 2,
2006: Ord. 4859 § 1, 2004: Ord. 4839 § 1, 2004: Ord. 4815 § 2 (part [Exh. A-
26]), 2004: Ord. 4423 § 2 (part [Exh. A-25]), 1997; Ord. 4368 § 3 (part), 1996)
EXHIBIT A-30 Addition to John Boulware Park
   The Land referred to herein below is situated in the City of Palo Alto,
County of Santa Clara, State of California, and is described as follows:
Parcel One:
Lot 1 and 2, Block 13, as shown on that certain map entitled, "Map No. 2
Sunnyside Addition to the Town of Mayfield, Santa Clara Co., California" being
a resubdivision of Block 9, 10, 11, 13 and 14 of Sunnyside Addition", as
recorded in Book "K" of maps, page 47, and also a subdivision of Lot 12 of
Lambert Tract as recorded in Book "C" of miscellaneous records, page 350,
Records of Santa Clara Co., California, here shown as Block 15, which map was
filed for record in the Office of the Recorder of the County of Santa Clara,
State of California on December 19, 1905 in Book "L" of maps, page 12.
Parcel Two:
All that certain real property situate in the City of Palo Alto, County of
Santa Clara, State of California, being a portion of Lot 3 of Block 13 as shown
on "Map No. 2, Sunnyside Addition" filed in Book "L" of maps at page 12, Santa
Clara County Records, and a portion of parcel one as described in that certain
certificate of lot merger, recorded September 12, 2018, as Series Number
24022183 Santa Clara County, being more particularly described as follows:
   Beginning at a point on the northeasterly line of said Lot 3, said point
being distant north 56°27'00" west 4.26 feet from the most easterly corner of
said Lot 3;
   Thence from said point of beginning, perpendicular to said northeasterly
line, north 33°33'00" east, a distance of 2.90 feet to a point within said
parcel one;
   Thence along a tangent curve to the left having a radius of 20.00 feet,
through a central angle of 90°00'00" and an arc distance of 31.42 feet to a
point within said parcel one;
   Thence north 56°27'00" west, a distance of 92.23 feet to a point on the
northwesterly line of said parcel one;
   Thence south 33°33'00" west, a distance of 78.31 feet along the
northwesterly lines of said parcel one and said Lot 3 to the most westerly
corner of said Lot 3;
   Thence south 56°27'00" east, a distance of 116.49 feet along the
southwesterly line of said Lot 3 to the most southerly corner of said Lot 3,
being on the northwesterly line of said parcel one;
   Thence north 33°33'00" east, a distance of 22.44 feet along said
northwesterly line of parcel one to a point;
   Thence north 56°27'00" west, a distance of 4.26 feet;
   Thence north 33°33'00" east 32.97 feet to the point of beginning.
   The above parcel is as described as Lot 3 in that certain certificate of
compliance (lot line adjustment) recorded September 12, 2018, as Instrument
Number 24022189 Santa Clara County Official Records.
Parcel Three:
All that certain real property situate in the City of Palo Alto, County of
Santa Clara, State of California, being a portion of Lot 12 of Block 13 as
shown on "Map No. 2, Sunnyside Addition" filed in Book "L" of maps at Page 12,
Santa Clara County Records, and a portion of parcel one as described in that
certain certificate of lot merger, recorded September 12, 2018, as Series
Number 24022183, Santa Clara County, being more particularly described as
follows:
   Beginning at the most southerly corner of said Lot 12,
   Thence from said point of beginning, north 33°33'00" east, a distance of
50.23 feet along the southeasterly line of said Lot 12 to a point;
   Thence leaving said southeasterly line, north 56°27'00" west, a distance of
38.35 feet;
   Thence perpendicular to the southwesterly line of said parcel one, north
33°33'00" east, a distance of 49.72 feet to a point within said parcel one;
   Thence at right angles, north 56°27'00" west, a distance of 15.09 feet to a
point within said parcel one;
   Thence at right angles, north 33°33'00" east, a distance of 13.32 feet to a
point within said parcel one;
   Thence along a tangent curve to the left having a radius of 20.00 feet,
through a central, angle of 90°00'00" and an arc distance of 31.42 feet to a
point within said parcel one;
   Thence north 56°27'00" west, a distance of 43.05 feet to a point on the
southeasterly line of Lot 3, Block 13 of said "Map No. 2, Sunnyside Addition",
said point being distant north 33°33'00" east 22.44 feet from the most
southerly corner of said Lot 3;
   Thence south 33°33'00" west, a distance of 133.27 feet along said
southeasterly line of Lot 3 and the northwesterly lines of said parcel one and
said Lot 12, to the most westerly corner of said Lot 12;
   Thence south 56°27'00" east, a distance of 116.49 feet along the
southwesterly line of said Lot 12 to the point of beginning.
   The above parcel is as described as Lot 12 in that certain certificate of
compliance (lot line adjustment) recorded September 12, 2018, as Instrument
Number 24022189 Santa Clara County Official Records.
For conveyancing purposes only: APN 132-33-061, -062 & -063
(Ord. 5545 §1 (part [Exh. A-30]): Ord. 5518 §5 (part [Exh. A-9, A-9.1, A-9.2,
A-9.3, A-28]), 2021: Ord. 5413 § 1 (part [Exh. A-29]): Ord. 5268 §1 (part [Exh.
A-28]), 2014: Ord. 4920 § 2, 2006: Ord. 4859 § 1, 2004: Ord. 4839 § 1, 2004:
Ord. 4815 § 2 (part [Exh. A-26]), 2004: Ord. 4423 § 2 (part [Exh. A-25]), 1997;
Ord. 4368 § 3 (part), 1996)
 
Editor's Note: To view Exhibit Images in PDF, click_here.
ORDINANCE LIST AND DISPOSITION TABLE
Ord. Description and Disposition
Ord.    Description and Disposition
61      Adopts "Codified Ordinance No. 1" (Superseded by 277)
62      To 273, included in Codified Ord. 2 (Superseded by 385)
234     Zoning code (Repealed by 2297)
274     Repeals Section 8 of Ord. 156 (Repealer)
275     Amends Ord. 234 (Superseded by 1324)
276     Amends Art. VI, Part V, fire limits (Superseded by 770)
277     Adopts "Codified Ordinance No. 2" (Superseded by 385)
278     Parking on Waverley Street (Repealed by 2297)
279     Setback line for garages (Superseded by 1324)
280     Zoning annexed territory (Superseded by 1324)
281     Setback lines for South Palo Alto (Superseded by 1330)
282     Sale of gasoline and oil (Superseded by 385)
283     Property assessment (Repealed by 2297)
284     Parking (Repealed by 2297)
285     Public garages (Repealed by 2297)
286     Park bond election (Special)
287     Parking (Repealed by 2297)
288     Amends Ord. 234 (Superseded by 1324)
289     Oath of office (Superseded by 1277)
290     Amends Ord. 234 (Superseded by 1324)
291     Sidewalk elevators and trap doors (Superseded by 385)
292     Amends Ord. 234 (Superseded by 1324)
293     Bond election (Special)
294     Vicious dogs (Superseded by 385)
295     Provides for bonded debt (Special)
296     Animals running at large (Superseded by 385)
297     Gambling (Superseded by 385)
298     Tax rate for 1924-25 (Special)
299     Fire department (Superseded by 1277)
300     Motor buses (Superseded by 385)
301     Amends Ord. 234 (Superseded by 1324)
302     Amends Ord. 234, setback line in Block 91 (Superseded by 1324)
303     Fire limits (Superseded by 770)
304     Amends Ord. 234, setback line in Block 42 (Superseded by 1324)
305     Amends Ord. 234, setback line in Block 38 (Superseded by 1324)
306     Secondhand dealers (Superseded by 385)
307     Taxes (Repealed by 2297)
308     Peddling (Superseded by 385)
309     Revokes Ords. 84, 85 (Repealer)
310     Setback lines (Superseded by 1330)
311     Rules of board of safety (Repealed by 2297)
312     Changes name of Little Kingsley (Special)
313     Trees and hedges (Superseded by 385)
314     Permit for public dancing (Superseded by 385)
315     Secondhand dealers (Superseded by 385)
316     Kindling fires (Superseded by 385)
317     Election for councilmen (Special)
318     Election, consolidation of Mayfield (Special)
319     Sale of sewer and water bonds (Special)
320     Sale of power and water bonds (Special)
321     Assessment of Mayfield (Special)
322     Declares Ord. 94 invalid (Special)
323     Width of sidewalks on University Avenue (Special)
324     Mayfield zoning ordinance (Superseded by 1324)
325     Fixing tax rate (Special)
326     Taxicab license (Superseded by 385)
327     Alteration of exterior walls (Superseded by 1149)
328     Renames streets in Mayfield (Special)
329     Peddling (Superseded by 385)
330     Parking at oil stations (Superseded by 385)
331     Appointment of advisory board (Repealed by 2297)
332     Canned heat (Superseded by 385)
333     Registration at hotels, etc. (Superseded by 385)
334     Mayfield zone and setback map (Superseded by 1324)
335     Changes names of streets (Special)
336     Fire limits for Mayfield (Superseded by 770)
337     Residential district in South Palo Alto (Superseded by 1324)
338     Extending health service (Repealed by 2297)
339     Destruction of insects in trees (Superseded by 385)
340     Changes names of highways (Special)
341     Calling bond election (Special)
342     Amends building code (Repealed by 1149)
343     Capping milk bottles (Superseded by 385)
344     Licenses (Superseded by 385)
345     Water bond issue (Special)
346     Public utilities (Repealed by 2297)
347     Numbering houses (Repealed by 2297)
348     Vehicles and traffic (Superseded by 385)
349     Amends Ord. 345 (Special)
350     Approves form of water bond (Special)
351     Setback lines (Superseded by 1330)
352     Changes agricultural district (Superseded by 1324)
353     Fixing tax rate (Special)
354     Rezone (Superseded by 1324)
355     Petroleum quantities (Superseded by 385)
356     Diagonal parking (Repealed by 2297)
357     Hauling heavy loads (Repealed by 1495)
358     Amends plumbing code (Repealed by 631)
359     Arterial stops (Repealed by 2297)
360     Changes setback lines (Superseded by 1330)
361     Changes names of certain streets (Special)
362     House moving (Superseded by 1149)
363     Changes setback lines (Superseded by 1330)
364     Changes setback lines (Superseded by 1330)
365     Temporary permit to construct building (Superseded by 1149)
366     Electric signs and billboards (Superseded by 1149)
367     Defining laundries (Superseded by 385)
368     Ground floor hose pipe casing (Superseded by 385)
369     Bond election (Special)
370     Changes setback lines (Superseded by 1330)
371     Repeals setback lines for University Avenue (Repealer)
372     Changes setback lines, Amherst Street (Superseded by 1330)
373     Parking restrictions (Repealed by 2297)
374     Providing for bonded debt (Special)
375     Fire escapes (Superseded by 385)
376     Changes name of Olive Street (Special)
377     Official bonds (Superseded by 385)
378     Rezone (Superseded by 1324)
379     Signs and billboards (Superseded by 1149)
380     Election for councilmen (Special)
381     Changes setback lines and zones (Superseded by 1324)
382     Establishing bus stops (Repealed by 2297)
383     Changes setback lines (Superseded by 1330)
384     Declares result of election (Special)
385     Adopts "Codified Ordinance No. 3"; supersedes Ord. 62 and Ord. 385
        (Codified Ord. 2) (Superseded by 816)
386     Changes name of California Avenue (Special)
387     Changes setback lines (Superseded by 1330)
388     Widens Hamilton Avenue (Special)
389     Changes setback lines (Superseded by 1330)
390     Workmen's compensation fund (Superseded by 1277)
391     Opens and widens Cambridge Avenue (Special)
392     Employment of children (Superseded by 816)
393     Changes setback lines (Superseded by 1330)
394     Reorganization of planning commission (Superseded by 1277)
395     Widening Cambridge Avenue (Special)
396     Changes setback lines (Superseded by 1330)
397     Changes setback lines (Superseded by 1330)
398     Rezone (Superseded by 1324)
399     Traffic regulations (Repealed by 2297)
400     Laundry and towel supply business (Superseded by 816)
401     Amends Ord. 191 (Superseded by 1330; repealed formally by 2297)
402     Changes setback lines (Superseded by 1330)
403     Setback lines on Page Mill Road (Superseded by 1330)
404     Hydrant obstructions (Repealed by 2297)
405     Traffic regulations (Repealed by 2297)
406     Peddling (Superseded by 816)
407     Repeals 368C (Superseded by Codified Ord. 4)
408     Amends plumbing law (Repealed by 631)
409     Diagonal parking on Waverley Street (Repealed by 2297)
410     Changes zones, setback lines (Superseded by 1324)
411     Repeals parts of Ord. 390 (Repealer)
412     Zoning Ordinance (Superseded by 1324)
413     Changes setback lines (Superseded by 1330)
414     Changes setback lines (Superseded by 1330)
415     Loading zones for churches (Repealed by 2297)
416     Changes setback lines (Superseded by 1330)
417     Auto camps (Superseded by 816)
418     Changes setback lines (Superseded by 1330)
419     Changes setback lines (Superseded by 1330)
420     Regulates awnings (Superseded by 816)
421     Traffic at fires (Repealed by 2297)
422     Parking at post office (Repealed by 2297)
423     Milk and cream requirements (Superseded by 816)
424     Sidewalks (Repealed by 2297)
425     Changes setback lines (Superseded by 1330)
426     Removes traffic restrictions in Block 12 (Repealed by 2297)
427     Fire limits (Superseded by 770)
428     Changes setback lines (Superseded by 1330)
429     Changes setback lines (Superseded by 1330)
430     Gasoline tanks (Superseded by 816)
431     Budget and tax rate 1928-29 (Temporary - Expired)
432     Rezone, Block 16 (Superseded by 1324)
433     Changes setback lines, Block L (Superseded by 1330)
434     Amends zoning ordinance (Superseded by 1324)
435     Side yard area (Superseded by 1324)
436     Changes name of Santa Ynez to Washington Avenue (Special)
437     Post office parking (Repealed by 2297)
438     Dog regulation (Superseded by 816)
439     Zoning (Superseded by 1324)
440     Rezone, Blocks 14, 19 (Superseded by 1324)
441     Repeals Churchill Avenue Arterial (Repealer)
442     Annexation, South Oregon Avenue Tract (Special)
443     Changes setback lines (Superseded by 1330)
444     Annexation, South Oregon Avenue Tract (Special)
445     Building areas (Superseded by 1324)
446     Wrecking of automobiles (Superseded by 816)
447     Rezone (Superseded by 1324)
448     Calling election on subway bonds (Special)
449     Annexation, Embarcadero Oaks Tract (Special)
4491/2  Rezone, Block E (Superseded by 1324)
450     Election for councilmen (Special)
451     Transfer of subway funds (Special)
452     Result of election for councilmen (Special)
453     Result of election on annexation of Embarcadero Oaks (Special)
454     Result of election (Special)
455     Meetings of boards and committees (Superseded by 1277)
456     Calls election on hospital bonds (Special)
457     Dogs in food supply places (Superseded by 816)
458     Office manager (Superseded by 1277)
459     Bureau of information and complaints (Superseded by 1277)
460     Duties of city clerk (Superseded by 1277)
461     Election of deputies (Superseded by 1277)
462     Setback line for South Oregon Tract (Superseded by 1330)
463     Zoning, South Oregon Tract (Superseded by 1324)
464     Setback lines for South Court Addition (Superseded by 1330)
465     Changes setback lines (Superseded by 1330)
466     Removal of setback lines, Home Avenue (Superseded by 1330)
467     Changes setback line (Superseded by 1330)
468     Naming alleys (Special)
469     Parking in front of fire house (Repealed by 2297)
470     Map of South Oregon Tract (Special)
471     Changes setback lines (Superseded by 1330)
472     Amends 1011A (Superseded by Codified Ord. 4)
473     Local labor on public contracts (Superseded by 816)
474     Regulation of dogs (Superseded by 816)
475     Community center commission (Repealed by 2297)
476     Workmen's compensation (Superseded by 1277)
477     Minor alterations (Superseded by 816)
478     Amends zoning ordinance (Superseded by 1324)
479     Rezone, Blocks 24, 26 (Superseded by 1324)
480     Organization of planning commission (Superseded by 1277)
481     Changes setback lines (Superseded by 1330)
482     U-turns (Repealed by 2297)
483     Duties of city auditor (Superseded by 1277)
484     Rezone, Block 56 (Superseded by 1324)
485     Side yard widths (Superseded by 1324)
486     Changes setback lines (Superseded by 1330)
487     Refreshment stands (Superseded by 816)
488     Changes setback lines (Superseded by 1330)
489     Changes setback lines (Superseded by 1330)
490     Nonconforming building permits (Repealed by 2297)
491     Changes Dana Street to Dana Avenue (Special)
492     Calls election for acquisition of P. G. & E. systems (Special)
492     Election on transfer of subway funds (Special)
494     Issuance of hospital bonds (Special)
495     Changes Ashby Avenue to Lincoln Avenue (Special)
496     Changes setback lines (Superseded by 1330)
497     Result of election on transfer of subway fund (Special)
498     Issuance of bonds (Special)
499     Barriers (Repealed by 2297)
500     Temporary permits for taxicabs (Repealed by 2297)
501     Changes setback lines (Superseded by 1330)
502     Rezone, Evergreen Park (Superseded by 1324)
503     Rules of land subdivision (Repealed by 1316)
504     Nonconforming permits (Repealed by 2297)
505     Changes setback lines (Superseded by 1330)
506     Nonconforming permit (Repealed by 2297)
507     Budget for 1930-31 (Temporary - Expired)
5o8     Amends Ord. 498 (Special)
509     Tax rate for 1930-31 (Temporary - Expired)
510     Rules for land subdivision (Repealed by 1316)
511     Disposition of unclaimed property (Superseded by 816)
512     Control of dogs (Superseded by 816)
513     Traffic in Lane 11 (Repealed by 2297)
514     Changes Park Way to Island Drive (Special)
515     Widens Channing Avenue (Special)
516     Prohibiting vending machines (Superseded by 816)
517     Changes setback lines (Superseded by 1330)
518     Nonconforming permit (Repealed by 2297)
519     Providing for bonded debt for hospital (Special)
520     Nonconforming permit (Repealed by 2297)
521     Solicitors' and peddlers' permits (Superseded by 816)
522     Employment of local labor (Superseded by 977)
523     Regulating radio loudspeakers (Superseded by 816)
524     Changes setback lines (Superseded by 1330)
525     Use of hydrants (Superseded by 816)
526     Changes setback lines (Superseded by 1330)
527     Handling nitrocellulose material (Superseded by 816)
528     Changes setback line (Superseded by 1330)
529     Providing for election for councilmen (Superseded)
530     Milk supply and service (Superseded by 816)
531     Changes setback lines (Superseded by 1330)
532     Changes setback line (Superseded by 1330)
533     Adopts Uniform Building Code (Repealed by 1149)
534     Changes setback line (Superseded by 1330)
535     Changes setback line (Superseded by 1330)
536     Results of council election (Special)
537     Changes setback line (Superseded by 1330)
538     Results of second election (Special)
539     Appoints acting city treasurer (Special)
540     Changes setback line (Superseded by 1330)
541     Parking space for fire apparatus of forestry service (Repealed by 2297)
542     Changes setback line (Superseded by 1330)
543     Changes setback line (Superseded by 1330)
544     Changes setback line (Superseded by 1330)
545     Calls election, annexation of Embarcadero Annex (Special)
546     Changes setback line (Superseded by 1330)
547     Repeals 355h, arterial stops (Superseded by 816)
548     Dog regulations (Superseded by 816)
549     Repeals certain sections and ordinances on dogs (Repealer)
550     Traffic regulations (Repealed by 2297)
551     Approves annexation of Embarcadero Annex (Repealed by 562)
552     Amends Ord. 487, refreshment stands (Superseded by 816)
553     Meat sale (Superseded by 816)
554     Changes setback line (Superseded by 1330)
555     Changes setback lines (Superseded by 1330)
556     Amends 1011A, zoning ordinance (Superseded by 1324)
557     Changes setback lines (Superseded by 1330)
558     Amends Ord. 527, nitrocellulose film (Superseded by 816)
559     Amends code sections on milk and cream (Superseded by 816)
560     Changes setback line (Superseded by 1330)
561     Parking at night (Repealed by 2297)
562     Repeals Ord. 551 (Repealer)
563     Diagonal parking on California Avenue (Repealed by 2297)
564     Setback lines (Superseded by 1330)
565     Tax ordinance (Repealed by 2297)
566     Calls election on annexation of Embarcadero Annex (Special)
567     Amends Ord. 357, hauling heavy loads (Repealed by 1495)
568     Makes Ord. 565 effective (Repealed by 2297)
569     Operation of stages and buses (Repealed by 2297)
570     Calls election on Embarcadero Annex (Special)
571     Calls election on charter amendments (Special
572     Fixes tax rate (Temporary - Expired)
573     Rezone (Superseded by 1324)
574     Rezone (Superseded by 1324)
575     Rezone (Superseded by 1324)
576     Amends building code (Repealed by 1149)
577     Changes setback lines (Superseded by 1330)
578     Changes name of Pope Street to Chaucer Street (Special)
579     Rezone (Superseded by 1324)
580     Rezone (Superseded by 1324)
581     Changes setback lines (Superseded by 1330)
582     Rezone (Superseded by 1324)
583     Rezone (Superseded by 1324)
584     Defines "schools," zoning (Superseded by 1324)
585     Calls sewer bond election (Special)
586     Tax moratorium for sixty days (Temporary - Expired)
587     Calls election for councilmen (Special)
588     Amends building code (Repealed by 1149)
589     Amends zoning (Superseded by 1324)
590     Result of council elections (Special)
591     Regulation of laundries (Superseded by 816)
592     Issuance of sewer bonds (Special)
593     Amends 649, protection of food products (Superseded by 816)
594     Amends Ord. 548, dogs (Superseded by 816)
595     Calls special election on charter amendment (Special)
596     Calls special election on ordinances (beer petition) (Special)
597     Fees for milk inspection (Superseded by 816)
598     Repealing office of office manager (Repealer)
599     Abolishing bureau of information and complaints (Repealer)
600     Relating to community center commission (Repealed by 2297)
601     Duties of committee No. 3 (Superseded by 1277)
602     Permits and fees for food supply businesses (Superseded by 810)
603     Board of compensation referees (Superseded by 1777)
604     Purchasing agent (Superseded by 1277)
605     Amends 1011A, zoning (Superseded by 1324)
606     Repeals 355b (University Avenue Arterial) (Repealer)
607     Fixing tax rates for 1933-34 (Expired)
608     Rezone (Superseded by 1324)
609     Collection of utility revenues (Repealed by 2297)
610     Changes setback line (Superseded by 1330)
611     Amends 1004, zoning ordinance (Superseded by 1324)
612     Amends Ord. 522, employment of labor (Superseded by 977)
613     Amends 192, solicitors (Superseded by 816)
614     Inspection fees (Superseded by 816)
615     Amends building code, walls and fences (Repealed by 1149)
616     Amends 1000, zoning ordinance (Superseded by 1324)
617     Restricted traffic streets, trucks (Repealed by 1495)
618     Changes setback lines (Superseded by 1330)
619     Electrical ordinance (Repealed by 1685)
620     Advisory board, prohibition children's admission (Repealed by 2297)
621     Amends Ord. 617 (Repealed by 1495)
622     Amends 567, interest on deposits (Superseded by 816)
623     Amends 563, (Superseded by 816)
624     Amends 469, peddling (Superseded by 816)
625     Amends 649, protection of food (Superseded by 816)
626     Amends Ord. 565, tax ordinance (Repealed by 2290)
627     Amends 558, utility bills (Superseded by 816)
628     Police radio messages (Superseded by 816)
629     Changes setback lines (Superseded by 1330)
630     Amends 1602 of building code (Repealed by 1149)
631     Official plumbing code (Repealed by 1659)
632     Gas appliance and heating (Repealed by 1675)
633     Official minutes and records (Superseded by 1277)
634     Hour of regular meetings of council (Superseded by 1277)
635     Changes setback line (Superseded by 1330)
636     Exception of 1602 of building code (Repealed by 652)
637     Fixing tax rate (Temporary - Expired)
638     Licenses itinerant vendors (Repealed by 761)
639     Repeals 250-i on canned heat (Repealer)
640     Amends 1015-17 of zoning ordinance (Superseded by 1324)
641     Changes setback line (Superseded by 1330)
642     Amends 567, interest on deposit (Superseded by 816)
643     Amends plumbing code (Repealed by 1659)
644     Amends Ch. 46, building code, house moving (Superseded by 1149)
645     Redemption of property sold for taxes (Superseded by 1277)
646     Veterans building commission (Repealed by 650)
647     Election for councilmen (Special)
648     Changes setback line (Superseded by 1330)
649     Changes setback line (Superseded by 1330)
650     Repeals Ord. 646 (Repealer)
651     Veterans building commission (Repealed by 2297)
652     Repeals Ord. 636 (Repealer)
653     Declares result of election (Special)
654     Amends Ord. 645, tax redemption (Superseded by 1277)
655     Result of second election (Special)
656     Changes setback line (Superseded by 1330)
657     Redemption of taxes (Superseded by 1277)
658     Changes setback line (Superseded by 1330)
659     Amends 225, 226 (Superseded by 816)
660     Fixes tax rate for 1935-36 (Expired)
661     Changes setback line (Superseded by 1330)
662     Oil burning equipment installation regulations (Superseded by 816)
663     Special gas tax street improvement fund (Superseded by 816)
664     Changes setback line (Superseded by 1330)
665     Rezone, power plant site (Superseded by 1324)
666     Calls election on Embarcadero Annex (Special)
667     Amends 252, gambling (Superseded by 816)
668     Reorganization of advisory board (Superseded by 2297)
669     Approves annexation of Embarcadero Annex (Special)
670     Penalties for ordinance violations (Superseded by 816)
671     Amends Ord. 638, itinerant vendor licenses (Superseded by 816)
672     Registration of bicycles (Superseded by 816)
673     Amends 24, claims for damages (Superseded by 816)
674     Establishing zones, Embarcadero Annex (Superseded by 1324)
675     Four-way stop signals, Middlefield and Melville (Repealed by 2297)
676     Changes setback lines (Superseded by 1330)
677     Setback lines in Emery subdivision (Superseded by 1330)
678     Setback lines in Embarcadero Annex (Superseded by 1330)
679     Amends 1011-D, zoning ordinance (Superseded by 1324)
680     Changes setback lines (Superseded by 1330)
681     Amends 95, reorganization of community center commission (Superseded by
        816)
682     Changes setback line (Superseded by 1330)
683     Redemption of taxes (Superseded by 1277)
684     Amends zoning ordinance (Superseded by 1324)
685     Establishes stop signs (Repealed by 2297)
686     Changes setback lines (Superseded by 1330)
687     Amends 1511, building code (Repealed by 1149)
688     Fixing tax rate (Temporary - Expired)
689     Personnel officer, office and duties (Superseded by 1277)
690     Amends 35A of Codified Ord. 3, appointment of officials and deputies
        (Superseded by 816)
691     Maintenance of dog kennels (Superseded by 816)
692     Establishes setback line (Superseded by 1330)
693     Changes setback line (Superseded by 1330)
694     Establishes setback lines (Superseded by 1330)
695     Amends 370A, bus stops (Superseded by 816)
696     Changes setback lines (Superseded by 1330)
697     Changes setback lines (Superseded by 1330)
698     Amends 651, veterans building commission (Repealed by 2297)
699     Changes setback lines (Superseded by 1330)
700     Changes setback line (Superseded by 1330)
701     Amends Ord. 672, registration of bicycles (Superseded by 816)
702     Nonconforming permit (Repealed by 2297)
703     Traffic on community center driveway (Repealed by 2297)
704     Calls election on peddling ordinance (Special)
705     Amends 101l-E, zoning ordinance (Superseded by 1324)
706     Changes setback lines (Superseded by 1330)
707     Establishes setback lines (Superseded by 1330)
708     Calls election for councilmen (Special)
709     Rezone (Superseded by 1324)
710     Result of election and calling second election (Special)
711     Redemption of taxes (Superseded by 1277)
712     Declaring result of second election (Special)
713     Calls election on retirement system (Special)
714     Rezone (Superseded by 1324)
715     Changes setback line (Superseded by 1330)
716     Fixes tax rate (Temporary - Expired)
717     Nonconforming permit (Repealed by 2297)
718     Stop signs established (Repealed by 2297)
719     Amends 1307, plumbing code (Repealed by 1659)
720     Rezone (Superseded by 1324)
721     Rezone (Superseded by 1324)
722     Improvement procedure code (Repealed by 844)
723     Establishes setback lines (Superseded by 1330)
724     Amends 207 - 212, adds 212a - 212n of Codified Ord. 3, auctions
        (Superseded by 816)
725     Loading zone (Repealed by 2297)
726     No parking area (Repealed by 2297)
727     No parking area and loading zone (Repealed by 2297)
728     Amends 615-d of Codified Ord. 3 (Superseded by 816)
729     Changes setback line (Superseded by 1330)
730     Amends zoning ordinance (Superseded by 1324)
731     Adds 1009, zoning ordinance (Superseded by 1324)
732     Amends 1000, zoning ordinance (Superseded by 1324)
733     Enforcement of provisions of zoning ordinance (Superseded by 1324)
734     Changes setback lines (Superseded by 1330)
735     Calls special election, enlargement of hospital (Special)
736     Changing setback lines (Superseded by 1330)
737     Establishes crosswalk (Repealed by 2297)
738     No parking areas and loading zones (Repealed by 2297)
739     No parking area (Repealed by 2297)
740     Amends parts of section "N", Ord. 619, electrical ordinance (Repealed
        by 1685)
741     Licensing used car dealers (Repealed by 756)
742     Redemption of taxes (Superseded by 1277)
743     Trailer ordinance (Superseded by 816)
744     Changes zone (Superseded by 1324)
745     Veterans building commission created (Repealed by 2297)
746     Building restrictions in fire limits (Repealed by 1149)
747     Labor on public works (Superseded by 977)
748     Names Everett Court (Special)
749     Amends zoning ordinance (Superseded by 1324)
750     Changes setback lines (Superseded by 1330)
751     Rezone (Superseded by 1324)
752     Fixes tax rate (Temporary - Expired)
753     Signs on store windows (Superseded by 816)
754     Changes setback lines (Superseded by 1330)
755     Amends Ord. 753, signs on store windows (Superseded by 816)
756     Repeals Ord. 741, used car dealers (Repealer)
757     Amends 4510, building code, driveways for service stations and parking
        lots (Repealed by 1149)
758     Parking in front of oil stations (Repealed by 2297)
759     Dog control (Repealed by 790)
760     Licensing itinerant vendors (Superseded by 816)
761     Repeals Ord. 638, licensing itinerant vendors (Repealer)
762     Gambling (Superseded by 816)
763     Changes setback lines (Superseded by 1330)
764     Changes setback lines (Superseded by 1330)
765     Amends 1011-E, zoning ordinance (Superseded by 1324)
766     Rezone (Superseded by 1324)
767     Special election, annexation Embarcadero Oaks (Special)
768     Amends 1011-A, part 6, zoning ordinance (Superseded by 1324)
769     Amends 101 l-A, part 2, zoning ordinance (Superseded by 1324)
770     Fire zones one and two (Superseded by 843)
771     Annexation of Embarcadero Oaks No. 2, approval (Special)
772     Special election on annexation of Green Gables (Special)
773     Repeals 267 of Codified Ord. 3 (Repealer)
774     Amends 253 of Codified Ord. 3 (Superseded by 816)
775     Amends zoning ordinance (Superseded by 1324)
776     Redemption of taxes (Superseded by 1277)
777     Changes setback lines (Superseded by 1330)
778     Uniform Building Code, 1937 edition (Repealed by 1149)
779     Amends zoning ordinance (Superseded by 1334)
780     Changes setback lines (Superseded by 1330)
781     Annexation of Green Gables, approval (Special)
782     Changes name of California Avenue (spell)
783     Rezone (Superseded by 1324)
784     Election for councilmen (Special)
785     Rezone (Superseded by 1324)
786     Nonconforming permit (Repealed by 2297)
787     Changes setback line (Superseded by 1330)
788     Setback lines, Embarcadero Oaks No. 2 (Superseded by 1330)
789     Result of council election (Special)
790     Repeals Ord. 759 (Repealer)
791     Arterial stop signs (Repealed by 2297)
792     Results of second election for councilmen (Special)
793     Changes setback lines (Superseded by 1330)
794     Establishes zones (Superseded by 1324)
795     Changes setback lines (Superseded by 1330)
796     Changes setback line (Superseded by 1330)
797     Changes setback line (Superseded by 1330)
798     Nonconforming permit (Repealed by 2297)
799     Fixes tax rate (Temporary - Expired)
800     Amends and rearranges sections of building code relating to signs and
        billboards (Repealed by 1149)
801     Establishes setback lines (Superseded by 1330)
802     Removes setback lines (Superseded by 1330)
803     Changes setback lines (Superseded by 1330)
804     Changes setback lines (Superseded by 1330)
805     Issuance of hospital bonds of 1939 (Special)
806     Regulates subway traffic (Repealed by 2297)
807     Arterial stop (Repealed by 2297)
808     Parking on Hamilton Avenue (Repealed by 2297)
809     Changes setback lines (Superseded by 1330)
810     Diagonal parking, Hamilton Avenue, post office (Repealed by 2297)
811     Parking zones, High and Alma Streets (Repealed by 2297)
812     Passenger loading zones, Alma Street and the Circle (Repealed by 2297)
813     Loading zone on Alma Street (Repealed by 2297)
814     Amends 1000, 1002, 1011-E, zoning ordinance (Superseded by 1324)
815     Setback lines on Colorado Avenue (Superseded by 1330)
816     Enacts, revises, codifies ordinances ("Codified Ordinance No. 4")
        (Superseded by 1278)
817     Rezones Block 16 (Superseded by 1324)
818     Abolishes crosswalk, Walter Hays School (Repealed by 2297)
819     Abolishes no-parking area, Walter Hays School (Repealed by 2297)
820     Changes zone, Block 17, Evergreen Park (Superseded by 1324)
821     Arterial stop signs, intersection on Embarcadero Road beyond
        Middlefield Road (Repealed by 2297)
822     Changes setback lines (Superseded by 1330)
823     Rezone (Superseded by 1324)
824     Amends 1228 of Codified Ord. 4, redemption of property sold for taxes
        (Superseded by 1278)
825     Bowling alley regulations (Superseded by 1278)
826     Public parking areas and parking limits (Repealed by 2297)
827     Amends 2336 of Codified Ord. 4, restricted traffic streets (Repealed by
        862)
828     Nonconforming permit (Repealed by 2297)
829     Budget for 1940-41 (Temporary - Expired)
830     Fixes tax rate (Temporary - Expired)
831     Changes name of community center commission and director of community
        center (Repealed by 2297)
832     Traffic signals, Embarcadero Road and El Camino Real (Repealed by 2297)
833     Removal of dead animals (Superseded by 1278)
834     Nonconforming permit (Repealed by 2297)
835     Establishes business district B-1 (Superseded by 1324)
836     Jurisdiction of Middlefield Road during improvements (Special)
837     Setback lines on Cambridge Avenue (Superseded by 1330)
838     Rezone, Greer Homestead Tract, Block L (Superseded by 1324)
839     Election of chairman, planning commission (Superseded by 1277)
840     Alley in NE half of Block 12 (Repealed by 2297)
841     Changes zone, lots in Block 31 (Superseded by 1324)
842     Amends building code fire zones (Superseded by 843)
843     Establishes fire zones one, two, three (Repealed by 1329)
844     Improvement procedure code (Repealed by 1928)
845     Loading zone (Repealed by 2297)
846     Double riding of bicycles (Superseded by 1278)
847     Rezone Blocks 37, 38, 42, 43, Zone D-1 (Superseded by 1324)
848     Parking in alleys (Repealed by 2297)
849     Parking markers (Repealed by 2297)
850     Calls special election, extension of B-1 District (Special)
851     Parking regulations, Addison Avenue School (Repealed by 2297)
852     Changes setback lines, Greer Tract, Block L (Superseded by 1324)
853     Calls election for councilmen (Special)
854     Changes setback lines (Superseded by 1330)
855     Changes setback lines (Superseded by 1330)
856     Result of general municipal election (Special)
857     False report of crimes, misdemeanor (Superseded by 1278)
858     Changes name of Poppy Avenue to El Dorado Avenue (Special)
859     Establishes setback lines (Superseded by 1330)
860     Parking on University Avenue and Waverley Street (Repealed by 2297)
861     Keeping bees (Superseded by 1278)
862     Repeals Ord. 827 (Repealer)
863     Changes setback line (Superseded by 1330)
864     Budget for 1941-42 (Temporary - Expired)
865     Fixes tax rate (Temporary - Expired)
866     Traffic and parking in University Avenue underpass area (Repealed by
        2297)
867     Taxi stands established (Repealed by 872)
868     Parking near intersections on University Avenue (Repealed by 2297)
869     Loading zone (Repealed by 2297)
870     Setback line (Superseded by 1330)
871     Amends Ord. 860, parking University Avenue and Waverley Street
        (Repealed by 2297)
872     Repeals Ord. 867 (Repealer)
873     Amends Ord. 866, traffic and parking (Repealed by 2297)
874     Taxi stand in south Palo Alto districts (Repealed by 2297)
875     Amends Ord. 866, traffic and parking (Repealed by 2297)
876     Nonconforming permit (Repealed by 2297)
877     Passenger loading zone (Repealed by 2297)
878     Changes fire zone (Repealed by 1329)
879     Amends 1101 of Codified Ord. 4 (Superseded by 1278)
880     Blackouts (Repealed by 2297)
881     Air raid precautions (Repealed by 2297)
882     Nonconforming permit (Repealed by 2297)
883     State employees' retirement system contract (Repealed by 2297)
884     Nonconforming permit (Repealed by 2297)
885     Amends 1316, plumbing code (Repealed by 1659)
886     Amends building code (Repealed by 1149)
887     Amends zoning ordinance (Superseded by 1324)
888     Zoning, Green Gables subdivision (Superseded by 1324)
889     Construction of residences and appurtenant buildings on Block 59
        (Repealed by 2297)
890     Budget for 1942-43 (Temporary - Expired)
891     Fixes tax rate (Temporary - Expired)
892     Calls special election, Leland Manor annexation (Special)
893     Amends 2105 of Codified Ord. 4 (Superseded by 1278)
894     Loading zone (Repealed by 2297)
895     Approves annexation of Leland Manor (Special
896     Setback lines in block 59 (Superseded by 1330)
897     Restricted lighting (Repealed by 2297)
898     Nonconforming permit (Repealed by 2297)
899     Changes setback line (Superseded by 1330)
900     Amends Ord. 881, air raids (Repealed by 2297)
901     Passenger loading zone (Repealed by 2297)
902     Amends Ord. 881, air raids (Repealed by 2297)
903     Submits dog ordinance to voters (Special)
904     Rezone (Superseded by 1324)
905     Provides for municipal election (Special
906     Result of municipal election (Special)
907     Amends second residential zone uses (Superseded by 1324)
908     Repeals 4211 of Codified Ord. 4 (Superseded by 1278)
909     Loading zone (Repealed by 2297)
910     Budget for 1943-44 (Temporary - Expired)
911     Fixes tax rate (Temporary - Expired)
912     Amends zoning ordinance, lodging and boarding house (Superseded by
        1324)
913     Changes setback line (Superseded by 1330)
914     Temporary establishment of loading zone (Repealed by 2297)
915     Penalties for tax delinquencies (Repealed by 2297)
916     Pedestrians' limited right to roadway (Repealed by 2297)
917     Workmen's compensation for volunteer civil defense workers (Repealed by
        2297)
918     Amends building code, signs billboards and marquees (Repealed by 1149)
919     Riding bicycles on sidewalks (Repealed by 2297)
920     Inspection fees (Repealed by 2297)
921     Loading zone (Repealed by 924)
922     Amends Art. 44 of Codified Ord. 4, stables and keeping animals
        (Superseded by 1278)
923     Powers of advisory board on commercial amusements (Repealed by 2297)
924     Repeals Ord. 921 (Repealer)
925     Parking zone (Repealed by 2297)
926     Billiard and pool halls (Superseded by 1278)
927     Curfew hours for minors (Superseded by 1278)
928     Firearms (Superseded by 1278)
929     Amends Art. 18 of Codified Ord. 4, billiard and pool rooms (Superseded
        by 1278)
930     Names Community Lane (Special)
931     Limited parking time in parking lot (Repealed by 2297)
932     Parking in public street (Repealed by 2297)
933     Budget for 1944-45 (Temporary - Expired)
934     Fixes tax rate (Temporary - Expired)
935     Reserved space on Bryant Street (Repealed by 2297)
936     Reserved space (Repealed by 2297)
937     Dogs, rabies suspected (Superseded by 1278)
938     Gasoline storage (Superseded by 1278)
939     No parking zone (Repealed by 1381)
940     Toilet facilities in eating places (Superseded by 1278)
941     Reserved parking space (Repealed by 2297)
942     Traffic at intersection of Guinda Street and Embarcadero Road (Repealed
        by 2297)
943     Fire fighting equipment maintenance (Repealed by 2297)
944     Parking vehicles on sidewalks (Repealed by 2297)
945     Election regulation amendments (Superseded by 1277)
946     Sale or disposal of electrical materials, devices and appliances
        (Superseded by 1278)
947     Participation in state law enforcement mutual aid plan (Repealed by
        2297)
948     Nonconforming permit (Repealed by 2297)
949     Motor courts (Superseded by 1278)
950     Housing department (Repealed by 2297)
951     Submitting repeal of 3501 of Codified Ord. 4 to voters, Sunday
        restrictions (Special)
952     Municipal election (Special)
953     Result of municipal election (Special)
954     Repeals and adds new Ch. 46 to building code, signs and billboards
        (Repealed by 1149)
955     Repeals and enacts provisions regarding stopping and parking (Repealed
        by 2297)
956     Parking near intersections (Repealed by 2297)
957     No parking and bus loading zone (Repealed by 2297)
958     Rezone (Superseded by 1324)
959     Changes fire zone (Repealed by 1329
960     Rezone (Superseded by 1324)
961     Establishes reserved space (Repealed by 2297)
962     Disposal of dead animals (Superseded by 1278)
963     Changes name of street (Special)
964     Superintendent of community center and recreation (Repealed by 2297)
965     Housing department (Repealed by 2297)
966     Budget for 1945-46 (Temporary - Expired)
967     Fixes tax rate (Temporary - Expired)
968     Nonconforming permit (Repealed by 2297)
969     Rezone (Superseded by 1324)
970     Dim-out, blackout and air raid precautions (Repealed by 2297)
971     Bicycle zone (Repealed by 2297)
972     Bicycle zone (Repealed by 2297)
973     Bicycle zone (Repealed by 2297)
974     Movable awnings (Superseded by 1278)
975     Ten minute parking zone (Repealed by 2297)
976     Changes setback line (Superseded by 1330)
977     Local labor on public works (Repealed by 2297)
978     Lot area requirements (Superseded by 1324)
979     Side yards (Superseded by 1324)
980     Rear yards (Superseded by 1324)
981     Changes fire zone (Repealed by 1329)
982     No parking zone, Bryant St. (Repealed by 2297)
983     Traffic regulations (Repealed by 2297)
984     Food regulations (Superseded by 1278)
985     Registration of minors at hotels (Superseded by 1278)
986     Schools and churches in first residential zone (Superseded by 1324)
987     Installation of awnings, permit fee (Superseded by 1149)
988     Wood joisted floors (Repealed by 1149)
989     Foundries (Repealed by 2297)
990     Ambulance service companies (Superseded by 1278)
991     Nonconforming permit (Repealed by 2297)
992     Setback lines in Garland Tract (Superseded by 1330)
993     Rezone (Superseded by 1324)
994     Changes fire zone (Repealed by 1329)
995     Removes setback lines (Superseded by 1330)
996     Amends plumbing code (Repealed by 1659)
997     Glass in sidewalks for lighting basements prohibited (Superseded by
        1278)
998     Assessment, levy and collection of municipal taxes (Repealed by 2297)
999     Amends 1004, zoning ordinance, professional office buildings
        (Superseded by 1324)
1000    Garages in commercial district (Repealed by 2297)
1001    Utility easements (Repealed by 2297)
1002    Changes setback lines (Superseded by 1330)
1003    Signs on marquees and awnings (Superseded by 1149)
1004    Changes name of Rinconada Street to Lucas Lane (Special)
1005    Amends Ord. 631, plumbing code (Repealed by 1659)
1006    Amends Ord. 860, parking on University Avenue and Waverley Street
        (Repealed by 2297)
1007    Changes setback line (Superseded by 1330)
1008    Changes setback line (Superseded by 1330)
1009    Changes setback line (Superseded by 1330)
1010    Changes setback lines (Superseded by 1330)
1011    Changes setback lines (Superseded by 1330)
1012    Changes setback lines (Superseded by 1330)
1013    Sewer rentals (Repealed by 2297)
1014    Changes name of East Place to West Place to Garland Drive (Special)
1015    Service stations, garages and auto repair shop (Repealed by 2297)
1016    Arterial stops (Repealed by 2297)
1017    Amends 203, building code (Repealed by 1149)
1018    Calls special election (Special)
1019    Amends 1006, 1007, zoning ordinance (Superseded by 1324)
1020    Changes setback lines (Superseded by 1330)
1021    Changes setback lines (Superseded by 1330)
1022    Amends 2501, 2503 of Codified Ord. 4 (Superseded by 1278)
1023    Setback lines in Tract No. 282 (Superseded by 1330)
1024    Setback lines in Tract No. 286 (Superseded by 1330)
1025    Establishes commercial zone (Superseded by 1324)
1026    Rezone (Superseded by 1324)
1027    Changes fire zone (Repealed by 1329)
1028    Rezone (Superseded by 1324)
1029    Adopts budget for 1946-47 (Temporary - Expired)
1030    Fixes tax rate (Temporary - Expired)
1031    Calls special election (Special)
1032    Amends building code (Repealed by 1149)
1033    Creates personnel board (Superseded by 1277)
1034    Repeals part 1 2336 of Codified Ord. 4 (Superseded by 1278)
1035    Approves annexation of Crescent Park No. 4 and adjacent territory
        (Special)
1036    Setback lines (Superseded by 1330)
1037    Parking meters (Repealed by 1058)
1038    Milk inspection (Superseded by 1278)
1039    Setback lines in Oregon Terrace (Superseded by 1330)
1040    Amends 4601, building code (Repealed by 1149)
1041    Traffic restrictions in Lane 12 East (Repealed by 2297)
1042    Disasters (Repealed by 1296)
1043    Bicycle rack, Second and California (Repealed by 2297)
1044    Taxi drivers' permits (Superseded by 1278)
1045    Circuses, menageries, carnivals (Superseded by 1278)
1046    Changes setback line (Superseded by 1330)
1047    Changes setback line (Superseded by 1330)
1048    Parking meters (Repealed by 1058)
1049    Penalty on dog license fees (Superseded by 1278)
1050    Newspaper racks (Superseded by 1278)
1051    Calls election on annexation of Stanford Water District and adjacent
        territory (Special)
1052    Cleaning solvents (Superseded. by 1178)
1053    Double parking (Repealed by 1142)
1054    Zoning in Crescent Park No. 4 and Newell Park No. 1 (Superseded by
        1324)
1055    Setback lines in Crescent Park No. 4 and Newell Park No. 1 (Superseded
        by 1330)
1056    Setback lines in Tract 364, Middlefield Park No. 3 (Superseded by 1330)
1057    Setback lines in Tract No. 365, Millwood Subdivision (Superseded by
        1330)
1058    Repeals parking meter ordinances (Repealer)
1059    Parking meters (Repealed by 1432)
1060    Parking limit at post office (Repealed by 2297)
1061    Establishes setback line in Embarcadero Oaks No. 3 (Superseded by 1330)
1062    Setback lines in Tract 233 (Superseded by 1330)
1063    Workmen's compensation for auxiliary police (Repealed by 2297)
1064    Approves annexation of Stanford Water District and adjacent territory
        (Special)
1065    Neighborhood shopping district zone D-1 (Superseded by 1324)
1066    Parking on First Street (Repealed by 1381)
1067    Bus loading zones on University Avenue (Repealed by 2297)
1068    Amends setback line (Superseded by 1330)
1069    Amends setback line map (Superseded by 1330)
1070    Calls election for councilmen (Special)
1071    Establishes interim zoning and setback lines in Stanford Water District
        and adjacent territory (Superseded by 1324, 1330)
1072    Changes setback lines in Tract 286 (Superseded by 1330)
1073    Establishes parking limit on California Avenue (Repealed by 2297)
1074    Declares result of election and provides for second election (Special)
1075    Declares result of second election (Special)
1076    Provides for issuance of municipal improvement bonds (Special)
1077    Permit fee (Superseded by 1278)
1078    Parking limit on El Camino Real (Repealed by 2297)
1079    Truck routes (Repealed by 1495)
1080    Amends 1012, zoning ordinance (Superseded by 1324)
1081    Bicycle license fees (Superseded by 1278)
1082    Rezone (Superseded by 1324)
1083    Fire zone (Repealed by 1329)
1084    Truck routes (Repealed by 1100)
1085    Name of street, Urban Lane (Special)
1086    Setback lines in Tract No. 425 (Superseded by 1330)
1087    Impounding fees and license fees (Superseded by 1278)
1088    Changing setback line on Everett Avenue (Superseded by 1330)
1089    Rezone (Superseded by 1324)
1090    Rezone (Superseded by 1324)
1091    Establishes fire zone (Repealed by 1329)
1092    Adopts budget (Temporary - Expired)
1093    Fixes tax rate (Temporary - Expired)
1094    Definition of setback line (Superseded by 1330)
1095    Establishes setback line (Superseded by 1330)
1096    Parking meters, amends Ord. 1059 (Repealed by 1432)
1097    Establishments or enterprises involving large assemblages of people and
        automobiles (Repealed by 2297)
1098    Establishes one-way lane in Block 13 (Repealed by 2297)
1099    Consent to improvement of Middlefield Road (Special)
1100    Repeals Ord. 1084, relative truck routes (Repealer)
1101    Amends 1011-A, zoning ordinance, side yard (Superseded by 1324)
1102    Amends 1011-D, zoning ordinance, intervals for detached buildings on
        the same lot (Superseded by 1324)
1103    Changes setback line (Superseded by 1330)
1104    Changes setback line (Superseded by 1330)
1105    Amends 1011-E, zoning ordinance, regarding lot areas (Superseded by
        1324)
1106    Amends 4502, building code, driveways for automobile service stations,
        etc. (Repealed by 1149)
1107    Establishes setback line on Stanford Water District (Superseded by
        1330)
1108    Changes setback line (Superseded by 1330)
1109    Amends 1006 of zoning ordinance (Superseded by 1324)
1110    Changes setback line (Superseded by 1330)
1111    Bus loading zones on University Avenue and Waverley (Repealed by 2297)
1112    Amends Ch. 46 of building code, signs (Repealed by 1149)
1113    Amends 501 of Codified Ord. 4, officers (Superseded by 1277, 1278)
1114    Amends 509 of Codified Ord. 4, personnel officer (Superseded by 1277,
        1278)
1115    Repeals 604 of Codified Ord. 4 (Repealer)
1116    Duties of purchasing agent, adding 511 to Codified Ord. 4 (Superseded
        by 1277)
1117    Amends 1101 of Codified Ord. 4, requirements for purchase (Superseded
        by 1277)
1118    Regulates traffic and parking in community center driveway (Repealed by
        2297)
1119    Vehicles parked upon streets or highways for 120 or more consecutive
        hours (Repealed by 2297)
1120    Calls special election (Special)
1121    Amends 1001, building code (Repealed by 1149)
1122    Rezone (Superseded by 1324)
1123    Changes setback line (Superseded by 1330)
1124    Establishes arterial stops, University Avenue, Middlefield Road and
        Oregon Avenue (Repealed by 2297)
1125    Speed limit on Alma Street (Repealed by 1714)
1126    Names street, Mitchell Lane (Special)
1127    Amendment to contract between city council and board of administration,
        California State Employees' Retirement System (Repealed by 2297)
1128    Changes setback lines (Superseded by 1330)
1129    Changes setback lines (Superseded by 1333)
1130    Emergency ordinance changing zones on Middlefield Road between Marion
        and Moreno Avenues (Superseded by 1324)
1131    Approves annexation of Green Gables Tract No. 2 (Special)
1132    Food regulations, sanitation of restaurants, bakeries and other food
        establishments (Superseded by 1278)
1133    Parking meters; amends Ords. 1059 and 1096 (Repealed by 1432)
1134    Establishes loading zones on High Street (Repealed by 2297)
1135    Establishes limited parking time, and no-parking zone on, Alma Street
        (Repealed by 2297)
1136    Changes street name (Special)
1137    Rezone (Superseded by 1324)
1138    Establishes zoning in the Stanford Water District and adjacent
        territory (Superseded by 1324)
1139    Establishes setback line in the Morton Subdivision No. 434 (Superseded
        by 1330)
1140    Lot cleaning by burning, amending 3203 of Codified Ord. 4 (Superseded
        by 1278)
1141    Trees and hedges (Superseded by 1278)
1142    Repeals double parking ordinance (Repealer)
1143    Parking meters (Repealed by 1432)
1144    Establishes setback lines in Tract No. 487, Green Gables No. 2
        (Superseded by 1330)
1145    Establishes setback lines in Tract No. 499, Reed Tract (Superseded by
        1333)
1146    Establishes setback lines in Tract No. 498, Garland Tract, Unit No. 2
        (Superseded by 1333)
1147    Prohibits the sale of vehicles on public streets in the commercial or
        industrial districts (Superseded by 1278)
1148    Double parking of commercial vehicles (Repealed by 2297)
1149    Building regulations (Repealed by 1675)
1150    No parking zone, parallel parking (Repealed by 2297)
1151    Municipal improvement bonds of 1947 (Special)
1152    Relative to bids (Superseded by 1277)
1153    Amends Ord. 1135, establishes limited parking time on Alma Street
        (Repealed by 2297)
1154    Removes setback lines (Superseded by 1333)
1155    Trees and hedges (Superseded by 1278)
1156    Repeals subsection (3) of 1003, zoning ordinance (Superseded by 1329)
1157    Special election (Special)
1158    Amends 1214 of Codified Ord. 4 (Superseded by 1277, 1278)
1159    Amends 1217 of Codified Ord. 4 (Superseded by 1277, 1278)
1160    Grants nonconforming permit (Repealed by 2297)
1161    Bus loading zone and taxi stand, El Camino Real and California Avenue
        (Taxi stand abolished by 1477)
1162    Bus loading zone and parallel parking zone - California Avenue
        (Repealed by 2297)
1163    Powers of community center and recreation commission (Repealed by 2297)
1164    Projecting signs (Repealed by 1675)
1165    Authorizes an amendment to contract providing for the participation in
        the State Employees' Retirement System (Repealed by 2297)
1166    Rezone, Middlefield Road near Colorado Avenue (Superseded by 1324)
1167    Amends 2353 of Codified Ord. 4, vehicle parking in alleys (Superseded
        by 1278)
1168    Establishes loading zone, First Street (Repealed by 1381)
1169    Parking meters, High Street (Repealed by 1432)
1170    Changes setback line (Superseded by 1330)
1171    Adopts budget for fiscal year 1948-49 (Temporary - Expired)
1172    Fixes tax rate (Temporary - Expired)
1173    Establishes arterial stop, Page Mill Road (Repealed by 2297)
1174    Establishes setback lines (Superseded by 1330)
1175    Rezone, Southern Pacific right-of-way fronting on Alma Street
        (Superseded by 1324)
1176    Parking meters; amends Ord. 1059 (Repealed by 1432)
1177    Rezone (Superseded by 1324)
1178    Improvement bonds of 1948 (Special)
1179    Special election (Special)
1180    Special election (Special)
1181    Establishes setback lines, Lawrence Tract (Superseded by 1330)
        Emergency ordinance, rezone, St. Francis Terrace, Oregon Terrace,
1182    Amarillo Village, Morton Tract, Lawrence Tract, Crescent Park No. 4,
        Newell Park subdivision No. 1 and Green Gables addition subdivisions
        (Superseded by 1324)
1183    Changes names of streets (Special)
1184    Rezone (Superseded by 1324)
1185    Amends plumbing code (Repealed by 1659)
1186    Relates to storage of gasoline (Superseded by 1278)
        Amends Codified Ord. 4; amends 2311, 3(b), regulating vehicular traffic
1187    and official traffic signals by prohibiting right turn against a red or
        "stop" signal at the intersection of El Camino Real Highway and
        California Avenue (Superseded by 1278)
        Amends Ord. 1149, Uniform Building Code, amends 4409, moving of any
1118    building or structure over the public streets without first obtaining a
        permit (Repealed by 1675)
1189    Changes setback lines (Superseded by 1330)
1190    Changes setback lines (Superseded by 1330)
1191    Amends 1589 of Codified Ord. 4, license taxes on amusement devices
        (Superseded by 1278)
1192    Validates assessment proceedings, issuance of improvement bonds
        (Special)
1193    Amends Ord. 844, "Palo Alto Improvement Procedure Code" (Repealed by
        1928)
1194    Changes setback line, Harvard Street near Stanford Avenue (Superseded
        by 1330)
1195    Establishes setback lines on Center Street and Dana Avenue (Superseded
        by 1330)
1196    Amends Codified Ord. 4, regulating the keeping of animals and fowl
        (Superseded by 1278)
        Prohibits parking within fifteen feet of the property line of
1197    intersections in the light industrial district and the third
        residential district (Repealed by 2297)
1198    Rezone of area paralleling El Camino Real Highway, from Fernando Avenue
        to city limits, from second residential (Superseded by 1324)
1199    Changes fire zone (Repealed by 1329)
1200    Amends building code, requiring buildings to be moved to conform to
        code requirements for new buildings (Repealed by 1675)
1201    Rezone, Smith Chase Tract, establishes setback lines (Repealed by 1260)
1202    Establishes limited parking time on Homer Avenue between Alma Street
        and Bryant Street (Repealed by 2297)
1203    Parking meters, amends Ord. 1059 (Repealed by 1432)
1204    Imposes a sales tax and a license tax (Repealed by 2297)
1205    Amendment to the contract providing for the participation in the
        California State Employee's Retirement System (Repealed by 2297)
1206    Changes setback line; southerly side of Fife Avenue, from the
        intersection of Addison Avenue (Superseded by 1330)
1207    Amends 1011-E, zoning ordinance, lot areas (Superseded by 1324)
1208    Rezone, Block 15, Evergreen Park (Superseded by 1324)
1209    Changes fire zone, Block 15, Evergreen Park (Repealed by 1329)
1210    Calls for election of six councilmen and one-half percent tax on sales
        (Special)
1211    Calls for special election to incur bonded indebtedness (Special)
1212    Amends Codified Ord. 4, Art. 24, taxicabs and transportation
        (Superseded by 1278)
1213    Changes name of Santa Barbara Street to Santa Ana (Special)
1214    Changes setback lines, southwesterly side of Webster Street (Superseded
        by 1330)
1215    Declares result of municipal election (Special)
1216    Declares result of second general municipal election (Special)
1217    Rezone, Lot 7, Block 9, Evergreen Park (Superseded by 1324)
        Establishes arterial stops, intersection Hamilton and Lincoln, and at
1218    intersection of Hamilton Avenue, Southwood Drive and Center Drive
        (Repealed by 2297)
1219    Parking meters on Lytton Avenue and Hamilton Avenue between Waverley
        Street and Cowper Street (Repealed by 1432)
1220    Amends 3216, 3218 of Codified Ord. 4, storage of gasoline (Superseded
        by 1278)
        Rezone, Lots 1, 2, 3 and 4. Block 13, Sunnyside Addition, from second
1221    residential to light industrial, changes fire zone on said property
        (Superseded by 1324)
1222    Rezone of lots on the northeasterly side of El Camino Real between Park
        Boulevard and College Avenue (Superseded by 1324)
1223    Directs removal of stop signs on University Avenue at Middlefield Road
        (Repealed by 2297)
1224    Amends 1004 of zoning ordinance, permitting parking lots in third
        residential, zone C (Superseded by 1324)
1225    Adopts budget for fiscal year 1949-50 (Temporary - Expired)
1226    Fixes tax rate (Temporary - Expired)
1227    Parking regulations on off-street parking lot (Repealed by 1432)
1228    Rezone, 333 Channing Avenue (Superseded by 1324)
1229    Annexation, uninhabited territory (Special)
1230    Orders the closing and abandonment of easement in Lot 13 of Tract 581,
        Lawrence Tract (Special)
1231    Rezone. in Tract 632, establishes setback lines (Superseded by 1324,
        1330)
1232    Parking on El Camino Real Parkway and on Churchill Avenue (Repealed by
        2297)
1233    Parking on Churchill Avenue (Repealed by 2297)
        Amends Codified Ord. 4, 2311, 3(b). prohibiting right turn against a
1234    red or "Stop" signal at intersections of El Camino Real and California
        Avenue and at University Avenue and Middlefield Road (Superseded by
        1278)
1235    Establishes Lytton Avenue as an arterial Street (Repealed by 2297)
1236    Fumigation of premises within the city (Repealed by 2297)
1237    Parking meters on Emerson and Alma Streets (Repealed by 1432)
1238    Amends Ord. 1135, no parking zone on Alma Street (Repealed by 2297)
        Amends Codified Ord. 4, 2311, paragraph 3(b). prohibiting right turn
1239    against a red or "Stop" signal at intersections of El Camino Real and
        California Avenue at University Avenue and Middlefield Road, and at
        Embarcadero Road and Middlefield Road (Superseded by 1278)
1240    Amends 1005-A, zoning ordinance (Superseded by 1324)
1241    Amends plumbing code (Repealed by 1659)
1242    Rezone, Lot 15, Block 9, Evergreen Park (Superseded by 1324)
1243    Emergency ordinance establishing limited parking on northeasterly side
        of Alma Street between Forest and Addison Avenues (Repealed by 2297)
1244    Amends 1536 of Codified Ord. 4, itinerant vendors (Superseded by 1278)
1245    Annexation, uninhabited territory known as portion of Lot 6, Greer
        Partition (Special)
1246    Annexation, uninhabited territory known as portion of Lot 5, Greer
        Partition (Special)
1247    Calls a special election for purpose of submitting to voters proposed
        amendment to the Freeholders Charter (Special)
1248    Amends 1002, 1003, zoning ordinance, schools (Superseded by 1324)
1249    Establishes limited parking time, Hamilton Avenue in front of Post
        Office Building (Repealed by 1373)
1250    Amends Codified Ord. 4 by adding subdivision 9 to 3703, public
        nuisances (Superseded by 1278)
        Emergency ordinance establishing no parking and loading zones on
1251    southwesterly side of Florence Street between Lytton Avenue and
        University Avenue (Repealed by 2297)
1252    Parking meters on Waverley Street between Hamilton and Forest Avenues
        (Repealed by 1432)
1253    Parking meters, Alma Street (Repealed by 1256)
1254    Rezone, Tract 629, Crescent Park Addition, establishes setback lines
        (Superseded by 1324, 1330)
1255    Provides for issuance of $1,200,000 principal amount municipal
        improvement bonds of 1950 (Special)
1256    Parking meters, Alma Street, twelve minutes zone, repeals Ord. 1253
        (Repealed by 1432)
        Repeals 2404 of Codified Ord. 4, taxicabs, posting of schedule of rates
1257    and adopts a new 2404, requiring taximeters and posting of schedule of
        rates (Superseded by 1278)
1258    Parking meters, corner High Street and Homer Avenue (Repealed by 1432)
1259    Changes setback line corner Oregon Avenue and Louis Road (Superseded by
        1330)
1260    Repeals Ord. 1201, changes zone in Sierra Tract 596 and establishes
        setback lines (Superseded by 1324, 1330)
1261    Annexation, uninhabited territory known as portion of the Boulware
        Tract (Special)
1262    Amends 4205 of Codified Ord. 4, regulating sunken garbage receptacle
        installations, and requiring permit (Superseded by 1278)
1263    Changes setback line Oregon Avenue near Bayshore Highway (Superseded by
        1330)
        Establishes Crescent Park No. 5 Subdivision in zone A, first
1264    residential district, establishes setback lines (Superseded by 1324,
        1330)
        Establishes Crescent Park No. 6 Subdivision in zone A, first
1265    residential district, and establishes setback lines (Superseded by
        1324, 1330)
1266    Prohibits illuminated signs in residential districts, and amends 4601,
        building code (Repealed by 1675)
1267    Amends Ord. 1255, municipal improvement bonds of 1950 (Special)
        Repeals Div. 1, milk and cream, of Art. 40, Codified Ord. 4, and adopts
1268    a new Div. 1 of Art. 40, regulating the production and sale of dairy
        products, and providing for the granting or denying of permits
        (Superseded by 1278)
1269    Establishes setback lines in Tract 702 (Superseded by 1330)
1270    Establishes setback lines in Tract 715, Avalon Terrace (Superseded by
        1330)
1271    Establishes setback lines in unit 1, Crescent Park Woods, Tract No. 723
        (Superseded by 1330)
1272    Establishes setback lines in Tract 724, Crescent Park Court (Superseded
        by 1330)
1273    Rezone, territory known as portion of Boulware Tract (Superseded by
        1324)
1274    Rezone, southeast corner University Avenue and Middlefield Road,
        changes setback lines (Superseded by 1324)
1275    Establishes arterial stops at intersection of Hamilton Avenue and
        Waverley Street (Repealed by 2297)
1276    Amends Ord. 1149, building code, fences on school properties and city
        property (Repealed by 1675)
1277    Enacts, revises, amends and codifies the administrative, election and
        fiscal ordinances (Repealed by 2146)
1278    Enacts, revises, amends and codifies certain ordinances ("Codified
        Ordinance No. 5") (Repealed by 2297)
1279    Amends 1602(d)(6), 4408, 4409, 4509(b), and 4610, and repeals 204 and
        701(b) of Ord. 1149, building code (Repealed by 1675)
1280    Amends 201, 202, 203. 204, 209, 214, 301,315, 317, 318, 319 and 321,
        and repeals 314, of Ord. 631, plumbing code (Repealed by 1659)
1281    Amends 202, 203A, 205, 302 and 304 of Ord. 632, gas appliance and
        heating (Repealed by 1675)
1282    Amends, F and K(b) of Ord. 619, electrical (Repealed by 1685)
1283    Amends 1002, 1003, 1004, 1005, 11307, 1010, 1010-A, 1013, 1021 and
        1022, 1022-A, 1023 and 1025 of Ord. 234, zoning (Superseded by 1324)
1284    Rezone, Chabot Terrace, Tract 757, establishes setback lines
        (Superseded by 1324)
1285    Changes setback lines, Embarcadero Road and Seale Avenue intersection
        (superseded by 1330)
1286    Adopts budget (Special)
1287    Fixes tax rate (Special)
1288    Establishes setback 'lines, Crescent Park Woods No. 2 (Superseded by
        1330)
1289    Establishes setback lines, Bryson Park Extension (Superseded by 1330)
1290    Rezone Block 6, Bartley Tract (Superseded by 1324)
1291    Amends 1011-A and B of Ord. 234, zoning (Superseded by 1324)
1292    Amends 1012, zoning Ord. 243, minor projections (Superseded by 1324)
1293    Calls special election for charter amendment (Special)
1294    Amends 5.35(d), 11.02, 14.01, 16.02, 17.09 and 19.59 of Codified Ord. 5
        (Superseded by 1603, 1738, 2051, 1570 and 1714)
1295    Amends administrative code, Ord. 1277, adds 254 - 254-3, disaster
        council (Repealed by 2146)
1296    Repeals Ord. 1042, disaster corps, establishes disaster corps (Repealed
        by 1323)
1297    Amends 18.33, Codified Ord. 5, animals suspected of having rabies
        (6.32)
1298    Establishes traffic restrictions, one-way alleys, S-1 and S-2 (Repealed
        by 2297)
1299    Rezone, establishes setback lines, Tract 796 (Superseded by 1324, 1330)
1300    Rezone, establishes setback lines, Tract 805 (Superseded by 1324, 1330)
1301    Amends subdivision 10, 1004, zoning Ord. 234, mortuaries (Superseded by
        1324)
1302    Rezone, Middlefield Road, University to Addison (Superseded by 1324)
1303    Changes setback lines, Seneca Street and Boyce Avenue (Superseded by
        1330)
1304    Amends 1011-A, yards of zoning Ord. 244 (Superseded by 1324)
1305    Rezone, Angela Terrace, establishes setback lines (Superseded by 1324,
        1330)
1306    Establishes one-way alleys, lanes 20 and S-3 (Repealed by 2297)
1307.   Prohibits left turn from Alma on Palo Alto Avenue (Repealed by 2297)
1308    Changes setback lines, Middlefield Road and Loma Verde Avenue
        (Superseded by 1330)
1309    Rezone, establishes setback lines, Tract 706, Green Gables Manor
        (Superseded by 1324, 1330)
1310    Establishes passenger loading zone, Forest Avenue near Waverley
        (Repealed by 2297)
1311    Amends 1004, zoning Ord. 234, use permits requirements (Superseded by
        1324)
1312    Amends 253.3 of Ord. 1277, administrative code (Repealed by 2146)
1313    Repeals Art. 32, Codified Ord. 5, trees, hedges, grass, weeds, etc.,
        adopts new Art. 32A, weed abatement (8.08)
1314    Calls special election on San Antonio Road annexation (Special)
1315    Rezone, Tract 515, Frank's Tract, establishes setback lines (Superseded
        by 1324, 1330)
1316    Subdivision ordinance, repeals conflicts (Repealed by 3157)
1317    Approves annexation of San Antonio Road annexation (Special)
1318    Amends 1011-E of zoning ordinance, lot areas (Superseded by 1324)
1319    Changes setback line and changes fire zone, northwest corner of Cowper
        Street and Marion Avenue (Superseded by 1329, 1330)
1320    Establishes interim zoning regulations in the San Antonio Road
        annexation (Special)
1321    Establishes future width lines and setback lines and regulates
        construction, San Antonio Road annexation (Repealed by 1896)
1322    Issuance and sale of $3,000,000 principal amount of Palo Alto municipal
        improvement bonds of 1950, Series B (Special)
1323    Civil defense and disasters, repeals 1296 (Repealed by 2039)
1324    Zoning ordinance, repeals conflicts (Repealed by 3048)
1325    Amends subdivision (b) of 22.06, building sites, areas and easements,
        of zoning Ord. 1324 (Repealed by 3048)
1326    Establishes no parking zone, northwesterly side of California Avenue
        between Alma and High Streets (Repealed by 2297)
1327    Parking meters, amends 8, Ord. 1059, parking permits for repair
        vehicles (Repealed by 1432)
1328    Changes setback line of Lots 24 and 25, Block 5, Bartley Tract,
        Fernando Avenue (Superseded by 1330)
1329    Establishes fire zones 1, 2 and 3 (Repealed by 1524)
1330    Establishes setback lines (Repealed by 1896)
1331    Amends subdivision (g), 22.07, zoning Ord. 1324, front yards in "R"
        districts (Superseded by 1439)
1332    Amends subdivision b.3 5.35, Codified Ord. 5, taxicab driver permits
        (Superseded by 1603)
13321/2 Amends interim zoning regulations, Ord. 1320, Charleston Gardens Unit
        No. 1, and in Charleston Meadows No. 3 (Special)
1333    Emergency ordinance establishing setback lines on Alma Street, Diss and
        Charleston Roads, Charleston Meadows No. 3 (Repealed by 1896)
1334    Provides for municipal election (Special)
1335    Calls special election, propositions to incur bonded indebtedness
        (Special)
1336    Annexation, Channing Park (Special)
1337    Amends Ord. 1320, interim zoning regulations, Tracts 587, 782 and 800,
        San Antonio Road annexation (Special)
1338    Declares result of general election (Special)
1339    Establishes arterial stops, San Antonio Road and Middlefield (Repealed
        by 2297)
1340    Amends zoning map, suffix "S" added after "M-l" designation (Special)
1341    Amends subdivision (a), 23.02 and subdivision (a), 24.02 of zoning Ord.
        1324, fees for use permits and variances (Superseded by 1521 and 2010)
1342    Amends 5.09.1, Codified Ord. 5 (Superseded by 1603)
1343    Amends zoning map, suffix "S" added after "C-2" designation, portion of
        C-2 zone northeasterly of Cowper Street (Special)
1344    Changes setback line, southwesterly side Cowper Street near
        intersection of Lincoln and Cowper (Repealed by 1896)
1345    Trees and shrubs at intersections (Superseded by 1353)
1346    Changes setback lines, Millwood Subdivision, Byron Street (Repealed by
        1896)
1347    Annexation, Greer Addition (Special)
1348    Changes setback line, Block 59, Seale Addition, Block C, Southgate
        (Repealed by 1896)
1349    Changes setback lines, Block 12, Stanford City, northeasterly corner
        Emerson and El Dorado (Repealed by 1896)
1350    Changes setback line, Block 28, Stanford City Subdivision, South Court
        near Colorado (Repealed by 1896)
1351    Amends zoning Ord. 1324, changing "C-l" to "C-2," Middlefield Road and
        Colorado Avenue (Repealed by 3048)
1352    Amends Ord. 1149, building code, adding 1601(e), awnings and hoods,
        private property (Repealed by 1675)
1353    Regulates planting, maintenance and removal of trees and shrubs in
        parks and public places (8.04)
1354    Amends Ord. 1320, rezones San Antonio Road Annexation (Special)
1355    Adopts budget, 1951-52 (Special)
1356    Fixes tax rate (Special)
1357    Sale of improvement bonds, 1950, "Series C" (Special)
1358    Establishment of arterial streets (Repealed by 2297)
1359    Changes "Pluns Court" to "Kings Lane" (Special)
1360    Establishes no parking zone and parking meter zone, Waverley Street
        northwesterly from Lytton (Repealed by 1432)
1361    Amends 5.35, Codified Ord. 5, taxicab driver permits (Superseded by
        1603)
1362    Rezone, Alma Street at Diss Road, changes fire zone, zoning map
        (Repealed by 1524)
1363    Amends zoning Ord. 1324, changing "R-2" to "R-3" northerly corner
        California Avenue and High Street, zoning map (Special)
1364    Establishes parking meters, city parking lot, Bryant and Forest,
        amending Ord. 1059 (Repealed by 1368)
1365    Provides for issuance of municipal improvement bonds, 1951 (Special)
1366    Amends zoning map, rezones Lot 7, Block 2, Evergreen Park (Special)
1367    Amends 9.15 of Ord. 1324, zoning ordinance, side yard requirements
        adjacent to alley (Superseded by 1426 and 1851)
1368    Establishes parking meters, city parking lot, Bryant and Forest;
        amending Ords. 1059, 1364 (Repealed by 1432)
1369    Amends zoning map, suffix "S" added to all areas zoned C-2, C-3, M-l,
        M-2 and L-M Districts (Special)
1370    Amends 19.02, zoning Ord. 1324, site area requirements of B Districts
        (Superseded by 1651)
1371    Amends zoning map, Maranhao property (Special)
1372    Authorizes amendment to contract, California State Employees'
        Retirement System (Special)
1373    Establishes no parking zone, Hamilton Avenue, front of curb post office
        box (Repealed by 2297)
1374    Establishes no parking zone, Embarcadero Road, Southern Pacific R/W to
        El Camino Real (Repealed by 2297)
        Establishes two-hour parking meter zone, Forest Avenue, Bryant to Alma;
1375    Bryant Street, Hamilton to Forest; Bryant Street midway between Lytton
        and Everett to Forest (Repealed by 1432)
1376    Establishes "park off pavement" zone, Wells Avenue (Repealed by 2297)
1377    Establishes no parking zone, Urban Lane and on Homer Avenue (Repealed
        by 2297)
1378    Amends interim zone map, Ord. 1320 (Special)
1379    Sale of municipal improvement bonds of 1951 (Special)
1380    Repeals 1826 of Codified Ord. 5, temporary permits for dogs (Repealer)
1381    Repeals Ords. 939, 1066, 1168 and subsections (a), (e), (f), (g), (h)
        and (i) of Ord. 955 (Repealer)
1382    Amends Ord. 1324, zoning (Repealed by 3048)
1383    Calls special bond election (Special)
1384    Amends zoning map, Lot 5, Block 7, Hawxhurst Subdivision (Special)
1385    Amends zoning map, Lot 149, C. M. Wooster Subdivision (Special)
1386    Amends Ord. 1320, interim zoning regulations, San Antonio Road
        annexation (Special)
1387    Amends Ord. 1324, Emerson Street, between Colorado and Matadero Canal
        zoning map (Special)
1388    Amends Ord. 1320, zoning map (Special)
1389    Amends Ord. 1320, zoning map (Special)
1390    Amends Ord. 1320, zoning map (Special)
1391    Amends Ord. 1379, improvement bonds (Special)
1392    Amends Ord. 1320, zoning map (Special)
1393    Amends zoning map (Special)
1394    Amends Ord. 1324, zoning (Repealed by 3048)
1395    Amends Ord. 1324, zoning (Superseded by 1613)
1396    Establishes California Avenue as an arterial (Repealed by 2297)
1397    Prohibits parking of motor vehicles by garage repair operators in
        residential districts (Repealed by 1714)
1398    Amends Ord. 1316, subdivisions (Repealed by 3157)
1399    Changes prima facie speed limit of twenty-five miles to thirty-five
        miles on Embarcadero Road (Repealed by 1714)
1400    Amends Ord. 1320, zoning map (Repealed by 3351)
1401    Amends 19.11 of Codified Ord. 5, right-hand turn on red signal
        (Superseded by 1714)
1402    Changes street names (Special)
1403    Amends Ord. 1321, road widths (Repealed by 1896)
1404    Amends zoning map, Ord. 1324 (Special)
1405    Amends second paragraph of 25.04, Art. 25, Codified Ord. 5; also Arts.
        26, 27, 28 and 30, public health (2.08 [Ed. Note])
1406    Establishes two-way stop signs (Repealed by 2297)
1407    Adopts budget, fiscal year 1952-53 (Special)
1408    Fixes tax rate (Special)
1409    Establishes Newell Road as an arterial, intersections of Newell Road
        and Seale Avenue as four-way stops (Repealed by 2297)
1410    Establishes Loma Verde Avenue as an arterial (Repealed by 2297)
1411    Establishes Diss Road as an arterial (Repealed by 2297)
1412    Establishes passenger loading zone (Repealed by 2297)
1413    Parking meters; amends 16 of Ord. 1059 (Repealed by 1432)
1414    Amends Ord. 1397, prohibiting the parking of motor vehicles by garage
        repair operators in residential districts (Repealed by 1714)
1415    Amends Ord. 1135 (Repealed by 2297)
1416    Sale of improvement bonds of 1951, Series C (Special)
1417    Amends Ord. 1320, zoning map (Special)
1418    Amends Ord. 844, improvement procedure code (Repealed by 1928)
1419    Establishes no parking zone (Special)
1420    Amends 4509, building code (Repealed by 1675)
1421    Amends 31.05, 31.09, 31.11, 31.12, 31.15, 31.17 of Codified Ord. 5
        (Superseded by 2029 and part repealed by 1738)
1422    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, San Antonio Road annexation (Special)
1423    Annexation, Stanford lands (Special)
1424    Rezone, Stanford lands (Special)
1425    Amends 15.03 of Ord. 1324, manufacturing of photographic materials
        (Superseded by 1501)
1426    Amends Ord. 1324, zoning (Repealed by 3048)
1427    Amends 19.47 of Codified Ord. 5, prohibiting night parking, providing
        for permits (Superseded by 1714)
1428    Establishes one-way traffic, lane 13 (repealed by 2297)
1429    Establishes arterial stops on First and Second Street at intersection
        with Page Mill Road (Repealed by 2297)
1430    Establishes no parking zone on Lytton Avenue between Middlefield Road
        and Webster Street (Repealed by 2297)
1431    Establishes passenger loading zones in front of theaters and hotels
        having a minimum of sixty rooms (Repealed by 1483)
1432    Establishes parking meter zones and regulations (Repealed by 1714)
1433    Establishes limited parking zones and regulations (Repealed by 17 14)
1434    Amends improvement procedure code relating to the maturity of certain
        bonds (Repealed by 1928)
1435    Regulates the height of fences (Repealed by 1675)
1436    Amends zoning map, Ord. 1324 (Special)
1437    Amends 210.04, 217.3 and 302 of Ord. 1277, administrative code
        (Repealed by 2146)
1438    Changes setback lines, Grant Avenue (Repealed by 1896)
1439    Amends subdivision (g), 22.07, zoning, front yards (Superseded by 2082)
1440    Establishes arterial stop signs, Guinda Street at Channing (Repealed by
        2297)
1441    Establishes arterial stops (Repealed by 2297)
1442    Establishes no parking zone (Repealed by 1727)
1443    Establishes arterial stops (Repealed by 2297)
1444    Establishes one-way traffic, lane 7 West, lane 8 West (Repealed by
        2297)
1445    Establishes bus zone, California Avenue (Repealed by 1727)
1446    Amends subdivision (3), 19.47, Codified Ord. 5; night parking
        (Superseded by 1714)
1447    Amends 3.00, zoning ordinance (Special)
1448    Amends 3.00, zoning ordinance (Special)
1449    Amends Ord. 1432, eliminating parking meter zone (Repealed by 1714,
        1727)
1450    Establishes no parking zone (Repealed by 1727)
1451    Amends 5.03, Codified Ord. 5, definition of solicitor (Superseded by
        1603)
1452    Amends 3.02, zoning ordinance (Special)
1453    Amends 3.02, zoning ordinance (Special)
1454    Amends 3.02, zoning ordinance (Special)
1455    Amends 8B.02, of Ord. 1324, zoning (Repealed by 3048)
1456    Amends 3.02, zoning ordinance (Special)
1457    Amends Art. 25, zoning ordinance, amendments, alterations and changes
        in districts (Superseded by 1589)
1458    Amends Ord. 1324, includes new Art. 21A, "N", special multiple-family
        district regulations (Repealed by 3048)
1459    Amends 4.31 of Ord. 1316, subdivision (Repealed by 3157)
1460    Establishes no parking zone, First Street (Repealed by 1727)
1461    Amends Ord. 1433, establishes two-hour limited parking, Page Mill Road
        (Repealed by 1714)
1462    Establishes stop signs at Newell and North California Avenue, Stanford
        Avenue as an arterial street (Repealed by 2297)
1463    Provides for a municipal election (Special)
1464    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, zoning (Special)
1465    Amends 3.02, Art. 3, zoning (Special)
1466    Amends 11.13 of zoning ordinance (Superseded by 1540)
1467    Establishes arterial stops, El Dorado at Waverley and Stanford Avenue
        at Amherst (Repealed by 2297)
1468    Changes prima facie speed limit on Middlefield Road (Repealed by 1714)
1469    Establishes two-hour limited parking zone, Second Street (Repealed by
        1714 and 1727)
        Changes name of Rochdale Circle to Redwood Circle and Starr King Drive
1470    to Starr King Circle, extension of Starr King Drive to Lindero Drive
        (Special)
1471    Declares result of general municipal election (Special)
1472    Establishes one-way traffic, alley bounded by Forest, Homer, High and
        Emerson Street (Repealed by 2297)
1473    Establishes no parking zone, Embarcadero Road, Kingsley Avenue and
        Emerson Street (Repealed by 1727)
1474    Establishes arterial stop signs, all entrances of Lincoln Avenue with
        Channing Avenue (Repealed by 2297)
1475    Annexation of uninhabited territory, known as Coastwise Annexation
        (Special)
1476    Amends Ord. 1278, Codified Ord. 5, 18.22, dog license fees and
        penalties (Superseded by 2078)
1477    Abolishes taxi-stands (Repealer)
1478    Amends 7.07, Codified Ord. 5, conduct of minors in streets and public
        places (Repealed by 4234)
1479    Adopts budget, 1953-54 [Temporary] (Repealed by 3157)
1480    Fixes tax rate, 1953-54 (Repealed by 3157)
1481    Amends 3.02, Art. 3, zoning ordinance (Special)
1482    Amends 3.02, Art. 3, zoning ordinance (Special)
1483    Establishes passenger loading zones in front of hotels, repeals Ord.
        4131, no parking zones, Alma Street (Repealed by 1727)
1484    Amends 3.02, Art. 3, zoning (Special)
1485    Amends 3.02, Art. 3, zoning (Special)
1486    Amends 109, Ord. 1277, administrative code (Repealed by 2146)
1487    Amends Art. 21A of Ord. 1324, zoning (Repealed by 3048)
1488    Changes Diss Road to East Meadow Drive and Oliver Street to Duncan
        Place (Special)
1489    Changes name of Maybeck Place to Dixon Place (Special)
1490    Amends 3.02, Art. 3, zoning (Special)
1491    Amends improvement procedure code (Repealed by 1928)
1492    Amends 3.02, Art. 3, zoning ordinance (Special)
1493    Amends 3.02, Art. 3, zoning ordinance (Special)
1494    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, zoning (Special)
1495    Establishes truck routes; repeals Ords. 617, 621 (Superseded by 1714)
1496    Approves annexation, "Stanford Annexation No 2" (Special)
1497    Approves annexation, "Stanford Annexation No. 3" (Special)
1498    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, zoning (Special)
1499    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, zoning (Special)
1500    Amends Art. IX of Ord. 1324, zoning (Repealed by 3048)
1501    Amends Art. 15 of Ord. 1324, zoning (Repealed by 3048)
1502    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, zoning (Special)
1503    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, zoning (Special)
1504    Prohibits throwing of rubbish on streets (9.48)
1505    Amends Ord. 1149, building code, regulating fixed metal awnings
        (Repealed by 1675)
1506    Amends 102 of Ord. 1277, administrative code, notice of special
        meetings (Repealed by 2146)
1507    Amends Ord. 1324, zoning, special parking district regulations
        (Repealed by 3048)
1508    Amends 19.36 of Codified Ord. 5, designating certain streets as truck
        routes (Superseded by 1714)
1509    Amends 11.15 of Ord. 1324, zoning (Repealed by 3048)
1510    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, zoning map change (Special)
1511    Amends Ord. 1324, zoning (Repealed by 2716 and 3048)
1512    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, zoning map change (Repealed by 1527)
1513    Establishes arterial stops on certain streets intersecting Lincoln
        Avenue and Hamilton Avenue (Repealed by 2297)
1514    Adds 19.60 of Codified Ord. 5, regulating parking on city property
        (Superseded by 1714)
1515    Prohibits parking on certain portions of Ash Street (Repealed by 1727)
1516    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezoning portions of Lot 1, Block 8, Seale
        Tract No. 5 (Special)
1517    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezoning portions of Fairmeadow Tract No. 892
        (Special)
1518    Amends Ord. 1432, public parking lots and parking meter rates therefor
        (Repealed by 1714 and 1727)
1519    Prohibits parking on Middlefield Road between Lytton Avenue and
        University Avenue (Repealed by 1727)
1520    Amends Ord. 1316, regulating the subdivision of land into less than
        five lots (Repealed by 3157)
        Amends Arts. 23, 24 of Ord. 1324, zoning, establishing the procedure
1521    for the granting of variances and use permits and for the hearing of
        appeals (Repealed by 3048)
1522    Amends 5.14 of Codified Ord. 5, theater and amusement permits
        (Superseded by 1603)
1523    Amends 15.02 of Codified Ord. 5, theaters (Repealed by 1530)
1524    Establishes fire zones 1, 2 and 3; repeals Ord. 1329 (Repealed by 1634)
1525    Amends Art. 5 of Codified Ord. 5, regulating closing out sales
        (Superseded by 1603)
1526    Amends Ord. 1277, administrative code (Repealed by 2146)
1527    Repeals Ord. 1512, rezoning portions of San Antonio Road (Repealer)
1528    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezoning property in the vicinity of Sherman
        Avenue, zone map change (Special)
1529    Amends 253.2, administrative code, regulating the powers and duties of
        the board on commercial amusements (Repealed by 2146)
1530    Repeals portions of 5.14 and all of 15.02 and 15.04 of Codified Ord. 5
        (Repealer)
1531    Calls special election to incur bonded indebtedness, Palo Alto Hospital
        (Special)
1532    Establishes arterial stop signs on Lytton Avenue (Repealed by 2297)
1533    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezoning property in Southgate area, zone map
        change (Special)
1534    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezoning property abutting on San Antonio
        Avenue, zone map change (Special)
1535    Amends Ord. 1277, administrative code, contracts and purchasing
        procedure (Repealed by 2146)
1536    Establishes arterial stop signs on Waverley Street (Repealed by 2297)
1537    Establishes arterial stop signs on Ross Road (Repealed by 2297)
1538    Establishes a ten-minute zone on portion of Cambridge Avenue (Repealed
        by 2297)
1539    Prohibits parking on portion of California Avenue (Repealed by 2297)
1540    Amends 11.13 of Ord. 1324, establishes rear yard requirements in C-
        2 Districts (Repealed by 3048)
1541    Approves annexation of uninhabited territory designated as San Antonio
        Road Annexation No. 2 (Special)
1542    Amends Ord. 1324, zoning, schools, and churches (Repealed by 3048)
1543    Amends paragraph 16 of 27.07 of Codified Ord. 5, regulating the
        wholesomeness of food and drink (Repealed by 4089)
1544    Amends Ord. 1432, establishes parking meter zones (Repealed by 1714 and
        1727)
1545    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezoning territory designated as San Antonio
        Road Annexation No. 2, zone map change (Special)
1546    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezoning Lots 7 and 14, Block 250, Tract 425,
        Bryson Park, zone map change (Special)
1547    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezoning property in Seale Addition No. 2,
        zone map change (Special)
        Amends Ord. 1433, establishes two-hour limited parking zone on portions
1548    of Emerson Street, Channing Avenue and Addison Avenue (Repealed by 1714
        and 1727)
1549    Prohibits parking at all times on Lane 13E and Lane 21 (Repealed by
        2297)
1550    Establishes arterial stop signs on Guinda Street (Repealed by 2297)
1551    Amends 11.14 of Ord. 1324, building height limit (Superseded by 2179)
1552    Repeals 19.30 of Codified Ord. 5, regulating bicycles on sidewalks
        (Repealer)
1553    Prohibits parking on southwest side of Gilman Street between Hamilton
        Avenue and Forest Avenue (Repealed by 1727)
1554    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezoning portions of University Park and
        Seale Addition Nos. 1, 2 and 7, zone map change (Special)
1555    Adopts budget for fiscal year 1954-55 (Special)
1556    Fixes tax rate (Special)
1557    Amends Ord. 1149, building code (Repealed by 1675)
1558    Amends 19.33.1 of Codified Ord. 5, designating certain streets as truck
        routes (Superseded by 1714)
1559    Calls special election for purpose of authorizing fluoridation of
        municipal water supply (Special)
1560    Approves annexation, uninhabited territory designated as San Antonio
        Road Annexation No. 3 (Special)
1561    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezoning portion of San Antonio Road and
        Middlefield Road, zoning map change (Special)
1562    Amends Arts. 7, 8A, 8B and 9 of Ord. 1324, zoning, ambulance service
        (Repealed by 3048)
1563    Amends Art. 22 of Ord. 1324, zoning (Repealed by 3048)
1564    Amends Ord. 1149, ranges and hot plates (Repealed by 1675)
        Amends Ord. 1433, establishes two-hour limited parking zone on portions
1565    of Park Boulevard, Cambridge Avenue and Page Mill Road (Repealed by
        1714 and 1727)
1566    Amends Art. 19 of Codified Ord. 5, decreasing state law maximum speed
        (Superseded by 1714)
1567    Prohibits parking on southerly side of Sherman Avenue between Park
        Boulevard and Birch Street (Repealed by 1727)
1568    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezoning portion of College Terrace, zone map
        change (Special)
1569    Calls special election, annexation of El Camino Real Annexation No. 1
        to city of Palo Alto (Special)
1570    Amends Art. 17 of Codified Ord. 5, fire prevention code (Repealed by
        3214)
        Amends Ord. 1432, establishes public parking lot on Florence Street,
1571    Hamilton Avenue, Gilman Street and parking meter rates (Repealed by
        1714 and 1727)
1572    Establishes arterial stop signs on Fulton (Repealed by 2297)
1573    Establishes arterial stop signs on Forest Avenue (Repealed by 2297)
1574    Changes name of Forest Court to Forest Avenue (Special)
1575    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezoning territory designated as San Antonio
        Road Annexation No. 3, zone map change (Special)
1576    Amends Ord. 1321, setback lines on certain streets in the M-1:S and M-
        2:S Districts (Repealed by 1896)
1577    Authorizes fluoridation of municipal water supply (12.24)
1578    Approves annexation, inhabited territory designated as El Camino Real
        Annexation No. 1 (Special)
1579    Amends 9.02 and 9.03 of Ord. 1324 (Superseded by 1799)
1580    Amends Art. 37 of Codified Ord. 5, rules for the management of the
        water, power and gas divisions (Superseded by 2231)
1581    Changes name of Diss Road to West Meadow Drive, portion between Alma
        and El Camino (Special)
1582    Amends 4602 of Ord. 1149, billboards (Repealed by 1675)
1583    Amends 1510 of Ord. 1149, height of fences (Repealed by 1675)
1584    Amends 4601 of Ord. 1149, billboards (Repealed by 1675)
1585    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezoning portion of Alma Street and
        Greenmeadow Way, zone map change (Special)
1586    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezoning territory designated as El Camino
        Real Annexation No. 1, zone map change (Special)
1587    Establishes arterial stop signs on West Meadow Drive, at intersection
        with El Camino Way (Repealed by 2297)
1588    Prohibits parking on portions of Middlefield Road (Repealed by 1727)
1589    Amends Art. 27 of Ord. 1324, zoning (Repealed by 3048)
1590    Establishes arterial stop signs on Seale Avenue, at intersection with
        Waverley Street (Special - Repealed by 2297)
1591    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezoning southwest corner of Middlefield Road
        and Loma Verde Avenue, zone map change (Special)
1592    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezoning northwest corner of Middlefield Road
        and Loma Verde Avenue, zone map change (Special)
1593    Repeals 7.13 of Codified Ord. 5, prohibiting automatic tobacco vending
        machines (Repealer)
1594    Prohibits parking on east side of Alma Street between Oregon Avenue and
        point south of Colorado Avenue intersection (Repealed by 1727)
1595    Establishes arterial stop signs on Bryant Street (Repealed by 2297)
        Prohibits parking on a potion of Alma Street; establishes taxicab zones
1596    in the Southern Pacific Railway parking area, and prohibits left turn
        from the area (Repealed by 1727)
1597    Amends 12.02 of Ord. 1324, zoning, dry cleaning plants in C-3 District
        (Repealed by 3048)
1598    Provides for submission to voters of proposed ordinance requiring all
        dog to be leashed (Special)
1599    Submission of ordinance prohibiting fluoridation of water (Special)
1600    Calls special election to incur bonded indebtedness for acquisition,
        construction and completion of additional hospital facilities (Special)
1601    Establishes arterial stop signs on Waverley Street (Repealed by 2297)
1602    Amends 8.20, 8B.19 of Ord. 1324, zoning, building height limit
        (Superseded by 2085 and 2175)
1603    Amends Part II of Codified Ord. 5, business licenses (4.04 [Ed. Note],
        4.18)
1604    Designates portions of Charleston Road as East Charleston Road and West
        Charleston Road (Special)
1605    Approves annexation, uninhabited territory designated as El Camino Real
        Annexation No. 2 (Special)
1606    Amends Ord. 1433, establishes two-hour limited parking zone on portions
        of University Avenue and Waverley Street (Repealed by 1714 and 1727)
        Amends 19.61 of Codified Ord. 5, decreasing the prima facie speed limit
1607    on portions of Willow Road, Embarcadero Road Extension and Quarry Road
        (Repealed by 1714)
1608    Amends 4602 of Ord. 1149, billboards (Repealed by 1675)
1609    Provides for general municipal election for purpose of electing five
        councilmen and for voting upon two (Special)
        Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezoning portions of Lots 1 and 2, Block 58,
1610    University Park, otherwise known as 1027 and 1035 Bryant Street
        (Special)
1611    Renumbering and redesignating 7.01 - 7.09 of Codified Ord. 5, closing-
        out sales (4.34)
1612    Amends 603 of Ord. 631, plumbing code (Repealed by 1659)
1613    Amends Art. 16 of Ord. 1324, planned community district regulations
        (Repealed by 3048)
1614    Changes name of Sutter Court to Clara Drive (Special)
1615    Declares results of general municipal erection (Special)
1616    Requires all dogs to be held under leash [Initiative] (6.16 [Ed. Note])
1617    Amends 1701 of Ord. 1149, fire resistance of building enclosure walls
        (Repealed by 1675)
1618    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezoning hospital area (Special)
1619    Amends 18.17 Codified Ord. 5, animal shelter fees, repeals 18.16 (6.12)
1620    Amends Ord. 1432, parking meter zones (Repealed by 1714 and 1727)
1621    Amends Ord. 1433, three-minute loading zone on portion of Alma Street
        (Repealed by 1714 and 1727)
1622    Establishes arterial stop signs on portions of Willow Road and
        Arboretum Road (Repealed by 2297)
1623    Amends Ord. 1433, limited parking zones map, restricting traffic on
        portion of Middlefield (Repealed by 1714 and 1727)
1624    Amends Art. 17 of Codified Ord. 5, fire prevention code (Repealed by
        xxxx)
1625    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezoning area contiguous to Bayshore Highway
        between Colorado Avenue and San Antonio Road (Special)
1626    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezoning area in vicinity of Matadero Canal,
        Loma Verde Avenue, Louis Road and Ross Road (Special)
1627    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezoning area on Louis Road, northwest of Dry
        Creek (Special)
1628    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezoning property at 3210 Middlefield Road
        (Special)
1629    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezoning area on easterly side of San Antonio
        Road and north of Middlefield Road (Special)
1630    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, zoning the El Camino Real Annexation No. 2
        area (Special)
1631    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezoning area located on south side of
        Lambert Avenue without frontage on El Camino (Special)
        Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezoning area bounded by El Camino Real,
1632    Embarcadero Road and the Southern Pacific railroad tracks; town and
        country (Special)
1633    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezoning sections of subdivision of
        Greenmeadow Nos. 1 and 2 (Special)
1634    Establishes fire zones 1, 2 and 3, repeals Ord. 1524 (Repealed by 2104)
1635    Adopts budget for fiscal year 1955-56 (Expired)
1636    Fixes tax rate (Expired)
1637    Amends Ord. 1321, establishes setback lines (SA) (Repealed by 1896)
1638    Amends Ord. 1432, establishes parking meter zones, University Avenue
        business district (Repealed by 1714 and 1727)
1639    Amends 3710 of Ord. 1149, incinerators (Repealed by 1675)
1640    Amends 4601 of Ord. 1149, building code (Repealed by 1675)
1641    Naming streets on Stanford University lands (Special)
1642    Amends 17.1901 of Codified Ord. 5, prohibits burning at dump
        (Superseded by 3123)
1643    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, establishes zones and boundaries in
        Embarcadero - Wildwood Annexation (Special)
1644    Approves annexation, uninhabited territory designated as Embarcadero -
        Wildwood Annexation (Special)
1645    Prohibits parking on Lytton Avenue between Cowper and Webster (Repealed
        by 1727)
1646    Establishes arterial stop sign on Barbara Drive at intersection with
        North California Avenue (Repealed by 2297)
1647    Establishes fees for dumping of refuse at city dump by nonresidents,
        31.19 of Codified Ord. 5 (Superseded by 1777)
1648    Amends Ord. 1433, two-hour limited parking zone on portion of Encina
        Avenue (Repealed by 1714 and 1727)
1649    Amends Ord. 1634, fire zone map (Repealed by 2104)
1650    Amends Ord. 1321, establishes setback lines, Tract 1611, Greendell
        (Repealed by 1896)
1651    Amends 19.02 of Ord. 1324, zoning (Repealed by 3048)
1652    Amends 21A.02 of Ord. 1324, zoning (Repealed by 3048)
1653    Amends Ord. 1324, zoning; adds Art. 9A, A-R District (Repealed by 3048)
1654    Amends 9.03(b) of Ord. 1324, zoning, R-4 general apartment district
        (Superseded by 1799)
1655    Establishes arterial stop signs on Addison Avenue at Channing (Repealed
        by 2297)
1656    Amends Ord. 1277, committee meetings, public exceptions (Repealed by
        2146)
1657    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezone, southeast corner El Camino Real and
        Wells Avenue (Special)
1658    Amends Ord. 844, improvement procedure code, supplemental remedies
        (Repealed by 1928)
        Adopts by reference Uniform Plumbing Code, 1955 Edition, Western
1659    Plumbing Officials Assn., with certain amendments; repeals Ords. 631
        and 1005 (Repealed by 2104)
1660    Establishes no parking, Bryant Court (Repealed by 1727)
1661    Prohibits parking on north side of Loma Verde Avenue between Bryant and
        Ramona Streets (Repealed by 1727)
1662    Amends Ord. 1330, establishes setback lines, Tract 1641, Edgewood
        (Repealed by 1896)
1663    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezoning area on southwest side of
        Middlefield Road between Matadero Creek and Wellsbury Park (Special)
1664    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezoning area on westerly corner of
        Charleston and Middlefield Roads (Special)
        Amends Ord. 1149, emergency measure, no permit fee to be required for
1665    permit to repair or reconstruct structural damage caused by flood
        (Repealed by 1675)
1666    Amends plumbing code (Repealed by 2104)
1667    Amends 31.19 of Codified Ord. 5, regulates rates at city dump (5.20
        [Ed. Note])
1668    Repeals 254, 254.1, 254.2 and 254.3 of Ord. 1277, administrative code
        (Repealed by 2146)
1669    Prohibits parking on Charleston Road in front of Ohlones Elementary
        School (Repealed by 1727)
1670    Prohibits parking on Middlefield Road, Bryson Avenue, Moreno Avenue and
        Colorado Avenue (Repealed by 1727)
1671    Amends 1103 of plumbing code, house sewer materials (Repealed by 2104)
1672    Approves Stanford University Annexation No. 4 (Special)
1673    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, establishes zones for Stanford University
        Annexation No 4, zoning map (Special)
1674    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezoning portion of Bayshore Highway and
        Amarillo Avenue, zoning map (Special)
1675    Repealing Ords. 632 and 1149, adopts by reference Uniform Building
        Code, 1955 Edition, Volume I (Repealed by 2104)
1676    Special election for municipal improvements (Special)
1677    Amends Art. 12, pawnbrokers and secondhand dealers (Repealed by 3288)
1678    Establishes stop sign at intersection of Park Boulevard and Catilleja
        Avenue (Repealed by 2297)
1679    Amends Ord. 1432, parking meter rates (Repealed by 1714 and 1727)
1680    Amends Ord. 1634, adds Stanford Annexation No. 4, fire zone map
        (Repealed by 2104)
1681    Amends Ord. 1634, adds portion of Amarillo Avenue and Bayshore Highway
        to fire zone map (Repealed by 2104)
1681A   Changes name of Montrose Avenue to Louis Road (Special)
1682    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezone portion of Middlefield and Colorado
        Avenues (Special)
1683    Provides for issuance of "Series A" hospital bonds (Special)
1684    Adds 15.04 to Ord. 1324, zoning (Repealed by 3048)
1685    Repeals Ord. 619; National Electrical Code, 1953 Edition, adopted by
        reference (Repealed by 2104)
1686    Amends 17.110, fire prevention (Repealed by 3123)
1687    Amends 7.08, claw and pinball machine (Repealed by 2955)
1688    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, zoning map (Special)
1689    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, zoning map (Special)
1690    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, zoning map (Special)
1691    Amends 3 of Ord. 1683, issuance of hospital bonds (Special)
1692    Adds 109.04 of Ord. 1277, administrative code (Repealed by 2146)
1693    Amends 18.22, dogs (6.16 [Ed. Note])
1694    Amends Ord. 1634, fare zone for portion of Middlefield Road and
        Colorado Avenue (Repealed by 2104)
1695    Amends 423, 2805(a), 3203(f) and 4710(a) of Ord. 1675, building code
        (Repealed by 2104)
1696    Amends Ch. 12, adds Ch. 13 to Ord. 1659, plumbing code (Repealed by
        2104)
1697    Issuance of "Series A" improvement bonds (Special)
1698    Setback requirements for portion of Lambert Avenue (Repealed by 1890)
1699    Establishes stop signs on Everett and Hawthorne Avenues (Repealed by
        2297)
1700    Adopts budget for fiscal year 1956-57 (Special)
1701    Establishes stop sign on Alma Street at Charleston Road (Repealed by
        2297)
1702    Changes name of portion of Louis Road to Montrose Avenue (Special)
1703    Amends 12.02(b) of Ord. 1324, zoning (Repealed by 3048)
1704    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezone, zoning map (Special)
1705    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezone 2499 Cowper Street, zoning map
        (Special)
1706    Parking prohibited on portion of El Camino Real (Repealed by 1727)
1707    Amends 1711 of Ord. 1675, building code (Repealed by 2104)
1708    Amends Ord. 1634, 2499 Cowper Street changed to fire zone 3, fire zone
        map (Special)
1709    City sales and use tax (Repealed by 2756)
1710    Fixes tax rate for 1956-57 (Not codified)
1711    Approves Stanford University Annexation No. 6 (Special)
1712    Establishes stop on Hanover Street at Page Mill Road (Repealed by 2297)
1713    Amends 17.701, liquefied petroleum gases (Superseded by 1772)
1714    Amends Art. 19; repeals ordinances; traffic code (10.08, 10.12, 10.16,
        10.20, 10.24, 10.28, 10.32, 10.48, 10.52, 10.56)
1715    Parking prohibited on portion of Arboretum Road (Repealed by 1727)
1716    Parking prohibited on potions of Middlefield Road at certain hours
        (Repealed by 1727)
1717    Adds Art. 9B to Ord. 1324, zoning (Repealed by 3048)
1718    Amends 21.02(b) of Ord. 1324, zoning (Superseded by 1734)
1719    Repeals 5108 of Ord. 1675, building code (Repealer)
1720    Amends Art. 8, guns and explosives (9.08)
1721    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, establishes zones for Stanford University
        Annexation No. 6, zoning map (Special)
1722    Approves Stanford University Annexation No. 5 (Special)
1723    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, establishes zoning for Stanford University
        Annexation No. 5, zoning map (Special)
1724    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezone, portion of Stanford University lands,
        zoning map (Special)
1725    Amends Ord. 1634 for Stanford University Annexation No. 5, fire zone
        map (Repealed by 2104)
1726    Amends Ord. 1634 for Stanford University Annexation No. 6, fire zone
        map (Repealed by 2104)
1727    Repeals certain ordinances establishing fire zones (Special)
1728    Issuance of "Series B" improvement bonds (Special)
1729    Street names in Stanford University Annexation (Special)
1730    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezone, Alma Street, zoning map (Special)
1731    Removes "S" district from Project 555, California Avenue district
        (Special)
1732    Amends Ord. 1330, setback lines for portion of University Avenue
        (Repealed by 1896)
1733    Amends 4201 (Table 42-B) of Ord. 1675, building code (Repealed by 2104)
1734    Amends 8B.17, 21.02, adds 22.09 to Ord. 1324, zoning (Repealed by 3048)
1735    Names Quarry Road, Welch Road, Pasteur Drive and Stanford University
        lands (Special)
1736    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezoning portion of Churchill Avenue, zoning
        map (Special)
1737    Adds 21.08 to Ord. 1324, zoning (Repealed by 3048)
1738    Amends Art. 11, repeals Art. 14, for-hire vehicles (Repealed by 3286)
1739    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezone, Bryant Street, zoning map (Special)
1740    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezone, Colorado Avenue, zoning map (Special)
1741    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324 rezone portion of Wilkie Way, zoning map
        (Special)
1742    Amends Ord. 1330, setback lines for portion of University Avenue
        (Special)
1743    Amends 3102, 3302, Table 5-A, building code (Repealed by 2104)
1744    Issuance of "Series C" improvement bonds (Special)
1745    General municipal election for the election of councilmen and advisory
        proposition vote (Special)
1746    Results of general municipal election (Special)
1747    Amends 15.11 of Ord. 1324, zoning (Repealed by 3048)
1748    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezone, portion of James Road (Special)
1749    Changes name of Barry Court to Bellview Drive (Special)
1750    Adopts budget for fiscal year 1957-58 (Expired)
1751    Approves Bayshore-Embarcadero Annexation (Special)
1752    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezones portion of Bayshore Highway and
        Amarillo Avenue intersection, zoning map (Special)
1753    Fixes tax rate for fiscal year 1957-58 (Expired)
1754    Issuance of 1955 "Series B" hospital bonds (Special)
1755    Amends 4.07 of Ord. 1603, licenses (Repealed by 4453)
1756    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, zoning of Bayshore - Embarcadero Annexation
        zoning map (Special)
1757    Amends Ord. 1675, building code (Repealed by 2104)
1758    Amends 22.07(b) of Ord. 1324, zoning (Repealed by 3048)
1759    Amends Ord. 1754, "Series B" hospital bonds (Special)
1760    Amends 702(a) of Ord. 1659, plumbing code (Repealed by 2104)
1761    Amends Ord. 1330, setback lines for Byron Street (Repealed by 1896)
1762    Adds Art. 8C to Ord. 1324, zoning (Repealed by 3048)
1763    Amends Ord. 1634, described intersections, fire zone map (Special)
1764    Amends 17.701, fire prevention (Superseded by 1772)
1765    Amends Ord. 1330, setback lines for portion of Park Boulevard (Repealed
        by 1896)
1766    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezone of property on Middlefield Road,
        zoning map (Special)
1767    Changes names of certain streets to Park Boulevard (Special)
1768    Amends 19.151, speed limits (Superseded by 1994)
1769    Amends 4612 of Ord. 1675, building code (Repealed by 2104)
1770    Adds 1.07, issuance of citations for city ordinance violations (1.08)
1771    Designates street to be named Midtown Court (Special)
1772    Amends 17.701, liquefied petroleum gas, fire prevention (15.32)
        Amends Ord. 1330, setback lines for portions of Park Avenue, Leland
1773    Avenue, Stanford Avenue, Oxford Avenue and College Avenue (Repealed by
        1896)
1774    Amends 702a of Ord. 1659, plumbing code (Repealed by 2104)
1775    Amends 23.09, adds 27.13 to Ord. 1324, zoning (Repealed by 3048)
1776    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezones Forest Avenue, zoning map (Special)
1777    Amends 31.19, city dump (Superseded by 1820)
1778    Amends 4605(c) of Ord. 1675, signs (Repealed by 2104)
1779    Amends 4601(d)(3) of Ord. 1675, building code, signs (Repealed by 2104)
1780    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezone El Camino Real near Adobe Creek,
        zoning map (Special)
1781    Amends 19.111, traffic (Repealed by 4588)
1782    Amends Ord. 1324, zoning (Repealed by 3048)
1783    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezone 500 Palo Alto Avenue, zoning map
        (Special)
1784    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezone portion of University Park, zoning map
        (Special)
1785    Eliminates setbacks for College Avenue between Yale Street and Amherst
        Street (Repealed by l896)
1786    Amends 2501(d) of Ord. 1675, building code (Repealed by 2104)
1787    Ord. 1634 amended, fire zone map (Repealed by 2104)
1788    Ord. 1634 amended, fire zone map (Repealed by 2104)
1789    Names Fabian Way, East Meadow Drive and East Meadow Circle (Special)
1790    Amends 9.01(b)(c), bowling alleys (Repealed by 1951)
1791    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezone corner of Colorado Avenue and Greer
        Road, zoning map (Special)
1792    Issuance of 1956 "Series D" improvement bonds (Special)
1793    Changes Elmdale Drive to Moreno Avenue (Special)
1794    Amends Ord. 1330, setback lines for portion of Palo Alto Avenue and
        Ruthven Avenue (Repealed by 1896)
1795    Amends 10.02 of Ord. 1324, zoning (Repealed by 3048)
1796    Adopts budget for fiscal year 1958-59 (Special)
1797    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezone portions of University Park and
        Middlefield Road, amends 9.02, 9.03 (Superseded by 1799)
1798    Amends 22.09 of Ord. 1324, zoning (Repealed by 3048)
1799    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezones portions of University Park and
        Middlefield Road, amends 9.02, 9.03 (Repealed by 3048)
1800    Fixes tax rate for 1958-59 (Special)
1801    Suspending issuance of building permits in the California Avenue
        development area (Special)
1802    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezones corner of Alma and Palo Alto Avenues,
        zoning map (Special)
1803    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezone portion of Ramona Street, zoning map
        (Special)
1804    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezone portion of Ramona Street, zoning map
        (Special)
1805    Adds 4.16, 4.41(a), 22.07(1) to Ord. 1324, zoning (Repealed by 3048)
1806    Amends 5.51 of Ord. 1316, subdivisions (Repealed by 3157)
1807    Approves El Camino Real Annexation No. 3 (Special)
1808    Zoning established for El Camino Real Annexation No. 3 (Special)
1809    Amends 11.11, 11.28, 11.61 of Ord. 1278, taxicabs (Repealed by 3286)
1810    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 324, development plan for property on Middlefield
        Road and Ellsworth (Special)
1811    Amends 4.51 of Ord. 1324, zoning (Superseded by 1821)
1812    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezone 319 Poe Street, zoning map (Special)
1813    Approves Newell Road Annexation (Special)
1814    Approves development plan for El Camino Real Annexation No. 4 (Special)
1815    Approves Bayshore-Embarcadero Annexation No. 2 (Special)
1816    Zoning established for Bayshore-Embarcadero Annexation No. 2 (Special)
1817    Amends 93.02 of Ord. 1324, rezone for Tamarack Court strips, zoning map
        (Special)
1818    Amends Ord. 1330, setback lines on El Camino Real (Repealed by 1896)
1819    Amends Ord. 1634, fire zone map (Repealed by 2104)
1820    Amends 31.19, refuse disposal (Superseded by 2029)
1821    Amends 4.51 of Ord. 1324, zoning (Repealed by 3048)
1822    Amends Ord. 1801, building permits (Temporary)
1823    Amends 22.06(d) of Ord. 1324, zoning (Repealed by 3048)
1824    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezone school district and hospital property,
        zoning map (Special)
1825    Repeals Art. 13 of Ord. 1278, signs (Repealer)
1826    Changes portion of Mackay Drive to Fairfield Court (Special)
1827    Approves Foothills Annexation No. 1-A (Special)
1828    Amends Ord. 1801, building permits (Special)
1829    Adds Ch. 61 to Ord. 1675, air domes (Repealed by 2104)
1830    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezone, California Avenue business district,
        zoning map (Special)
1831    Amends 8C.02, 8C.11, adds Art. 9C to Ord. 1324, zoning (Repealed by
        3048)
1832    Zoning established for Foothills Annexation No. 1-A (Special)
1833    Adds 21.09 to Ord. 1324, zoning (Repealed by 3048)
1834    Amends 5.02(c), 18.04 of Ord. 1324, zoning (Repealed by 3048)
1835    Changing Hillview Street to Hillview Avenue (Special)
1836    Amends 22.07(i) of Ord. 1324, zoning (Repealed by 3048)
1837    Adds Arts. 11A, 11B, 11C, 11D to Ord. 1324, zoning (Superseded by 1840)
1838    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezone, California Avenue business district,
        zoning map (Special)
1839    Adds IV(6) to Ord. 844, improvement procedure code (Repealed by 1928)
1840    Adds Art. 11A, 11B, 11C, 11D to Ord. 1324, zoning (Repealed by 3048)
1841    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezone, California Avenue business district,
        zoning map (Special)
1842    Amends Ch. 46 of Ord. 1675, building code (Repealed by 2104)
1843    Approves Hood Basin enlargement annexation (Special)
1844    Amends 27.13 of Ord. 1324, zoning (Repealed by 3048)
1845    Amends 15.06 of Ord. 1675, Uniform Building Code, fences (Repealed by
        2104)
1846    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezone, 166 Bryant Street, zoning map
        (Special)
1847    Amends 9C.15 and 9C.17 of Ord. 1324, zoning (Repealed by 3048)
1848    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezone, 144 Rinconada Avenue, zoning map
        (Special)
1849    General municipal election: councilmen and referendum proposition
        (Special)
1850    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezone, 4294 Wilkie Way, zoning map (Special)
1851    Amends 8C.15, 8C.20, 9.15, 9.20, zoning (Repealed by 3048)
1852    Amends 1506 of Ord. 1675, Uniform Building Code (Repealed by 2104)
1853    Results of general municipal election (Special)
1854    Amends 8C.03 of Ord. 1324, zoning (Repealed by 3048)
1855    Approves Foothills Annexation No. 2 (Special)
1856    Approves Stanford University Annexation No. 7 (Special)
1857    Amends 18.43, repeals 18.09, 18.10, bees and animals (6.20)
1858    Adopts budget for fiscal year 1959-60 (Special)
1859    Zoning established for Foothills Annexation No. 2 (Special)
1860    Approves Foothills Annexation No. 3 (Special)
1861    Amends 11A.14, 11B.14, 11C.14 of Ord. 1324, zoning (Repealed by 3048)
1862    Names certain streets: East Bayshore Road, West Bayshore Road and
        Fabian Way (Special)
1863    (Failed to pass)
1864    Approves annexation, Foothills Annexation No. 2, as a regular ordinance
        (Special)
1865    Amends Ord. 1324, zoning, amends 6.13 increasing allowable building
        coverage for patio covers (Repealed by 3048)
1866    Amends Ord. 1324, zoning, adds 23.20 establishing procedure on granting
        of variances in conjunction with subdivision maps (Repealed by 3048)
1867    Amends 2.03 of Ord. 1659, Uniform Plumbing Code (Repealed by 2104)
1868    Fixes tax rate (Special)
1869    Amends zoning, amends 20.01, site and design control district
        regulations (Repealed by 3048)
1870    Amends zoning, amends 3.02, R-5 area north of University Avenue
        (Special)
1871    Amends 4610(a) of Ord. 1675, changes sign ordinance for flat signs
        (Repealed by 2104)
1872    Establishes zoning of Stanford University Annexation No. 7 (Special)
1873    Establishes zoning of Stanford University Annexation No. 8 (Special)
1874    Establishes zoning of Flood Basin Enlargement Annexation (Special)
1875    Adds 9C.03 to Ord. 1324, parking garages and parking lots in the HDA
        District under certain conditions (Repealed by 3048)
1876    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezone, Tibbs & Anderson property at 275
        Ventura Avenue (Special)
1877    Approves development plan for the northerly corner of Alma Street and
        Greenmeadow Way (Eichler apartments) (Special)
1878    Approves annexation, Garden Terrace No. 1-A (Special)
1879    Approves annexation, Stanford University Annexation No. 8 (Special)
1880    Establishes zones of Garden Terrace Annexation 1-A (Special)
1881    Amends Ord. 1324, rezone, between end of Wilkie Way and Adobe Creek
        (Special)
1882    Amends 4610(a) of Ord. 1675, Uniform Building Code (Repealed by 2104)
1883    Approves annexation, Garden Terrace No. 1-A (Special)
        Amends Ord. 1278, known as Codified Ord. 5, amends 19.51, sets speed
1884    limit on Arastradero Road at twenty-five miles per hour (Superseded by
        1892)
1885    Amends 1103 of Ord. 1659, Uniform Plumbing Code (Repealed by 2104)
1886    Amends Codified Ord. 5, amends Art. 33, streets and sidewalks (12.04,
        12.08)
1887    Amends 2102(b)(6) of Ord. 1324, increasing parking requirement for
        industrial buildings. (Repealed by 3048)
1888    Amends 701 of Ord. 1277, passage and effective date of ordinances
        (Repealed by 2146)
1889    Amends zoning map of Ord. 1324, zoning ordinances, rezone, district
        between Colorado and Amarillo Avenues (Special)
1890    Amends Ord. 1278, known as Codified Ord. 5, Art. II, taxicab ordinance
        (Repealed by 3286)
1891    Amends 465 of Ord. 1277, redemption fees on tax-deeded property
        (Repealed by 2146)
1892    Amends Ord. 1278, known as Codified Ord. 5, amends 19.151, speed limit
        on Arastradero Road (Superseded by 1994)
1893    Amends 4408 of building code, also 303(a), setting fees for
        applications to move or demolish buildings (Repealed by 2104)
1894    Amends 202, 408.8 of administrative code, legal defense of employees
        and claims against employees (Repealed by 2146)
1895    Amends zoning map, rezone property of Rufus A. Tracy, Jr., 4047-49 El
        Camino Way (Special)
1896    Establishes setback lines, repeals Ords. 1321, 1330 (20.08)
1897    Amends 11B.02 of zoning ordinance, adds self-service laundries
        (Repealed by 3048)
1898    Amends zoning ordinance, adds 4.47 defining "open green area" (Repealed
        by 3048)
1899    Amends zoning map to zone the westerly portion of Foothills Annexation
        No. 3 to R-E:A (Special)
1900    Amends zoning ordinance to establish A-C agricultural conservation
        district regulations (Repealed by 3048)
1901    Amends 23.12(b) of zoning ordinance, variance and use permits (Repealed
        by 3048)
1902    Amends zoning ordinance by zoning the easterly portion of Foothills
        Annexation No. 3 to A-C (Special)
        Rezone property located on the southwesterly side of Middlefield Road
1903    adjacent to Matadero Canal, otherwise known as 2990, 3040 and 3060
        Middlefield Road (Special)
1904    Amends Codified Ord. 5, amends 19.161(a), prohibits bicycle riding in
        any pedestrian underpass (Repealed by 2051)
        Rezone property located between the end of Wilkie Way and West Meadow
1905    Drive and between the commercial frontage behind El Camino Way and
        Mayfield Park (Special)
1906    Amends administrative code, 109.2, 254 and 254.1, variance and use
        permit appeals committee (Repealed by 2146)
1907    Amends zoning ordinance, amends Art. 24, variance and use permit
        appeals procedure (Superseded by 1972)
1908    Amends 1607 and Codified Ord. 5, payment of bicycle license fees into
        the general fund (Superseded by 2051)
1909    Amends 702 administrative code, manner of passage of ordinance
        (Repealed by 2146)
1910    Amends Art. 19, Codified Ord. 5, adds 19.177.5, 19.177.6, permit
        parking (10.60)
1911    Amends Ord. 1675, Uniform Building Code, adds 4622, 4623 and 4624
        advertising signs near Bayshore Freeway (Repealed by 2104)
        Amends the subdivision ordinance, adds subsections 1.5, 1.6 and 2.41,
1912    amends subsections 3.33, 4.11 and 5.14, recording of illegal lot
        divisions, division into less than five lots, and hillside street
        standards (Repealed by 3157)
1913    Amends zoning ordinance, adds Art. 6A regulations for duplex zone
        (Repealed by 3048)
1914    Amends zoning ordinance, amends 22.07, 23.01, 23.09, 23.20 and 24.03,
        variances and use permits (Repealed by 3048)
1915    Amends 1506, fences, building code (Repealed by 2104)
1916    Approves annexation, "Garden Terrace Annexation No. 2" (Special)
1917    Amends Ord. 1278 (Codified Ord. 5), amends 19.151, speed limit on East
        Bayshore Road and West Bayshore Road (Superseded by 1994)
        Amends Ord. 1277, repeals 253, 253.1 and 253.2 doing away with board on
1918    commercial amusements; amends Ord. 1278, repealing subsection C, 6.02
        (Repealed by 2146, 3288)
1919    Amends Ord. 1324, corrects 24.03, setting of hearings of variance and
        use permit appeals committee (Superseded by 1972)
1920    Rezones property at 1028 Cowper Street (Special)
1921    Rezone property at 781-83 Loma Verde (Special)
1922    Rezone property at 1040 Colorado Avenue (Special)
1923    Amends P-C Development Plan for "El Camino Real Annex No. 3" (Repealed
        by 2006)
1924    Amends Codified Ord. 5, amends 33.20, permit requirement for emergency
        repair affecting street and sidewalks (12.08)
1925    Amends 24.02 of Ord. 1324, refilling of variance and use permit appeals
        (Superseded by 2010)
1926    Amends 6.25 of Ord. 1316, sewers (Repealed by 3157)
1927    Amends Art. 30 of Codified Ord. 5, sanitary disposal of sewage (16.10)
1928    Improvement procedure code (Repealed by 2277)
1929    Amends 3.02, zoning, zones Garden Terrace Annexation 2 (Special)
1930    Amends 3.02, zoning, zones Garden Terrace Annexation 3 (Special)
1931    Amends 3.02, zoning, rezones property at Webster and Lytton (Special)
1932    Amends zoning, adds Art. 15A, regulations for LM-1 District (Repealed
        by 3048)
1933    Approves "Bayshore-San Antonio Annexation" (Special)
1934    Amends 3.02, zoning, zones Bayshore-San Antonio Annexation (Special)
1935    Approves annexation, "Garden Terrace Annexation No. 3" (Special)
1936    Amends 3.02, zoning, rezones Casten & Boxon property on Monroe Drive
        (Special)
        Amends 3.02, zoning, amends P-C development plan for the Peery Property
1937    on the southerly corner of the intersection of San Antonio and
        Middlefield Roads (Special)
1938    Amends Art. 2, Art. 6A, zoning, designates duplex district (Repealed by
        3048)
1939    Amends zoning, adds additional uses permitted to 11C.02(k) (Superseded
        by 2025)
1940    Amends 252.4, Ord. 1277, administrative code (Repealed by 2146)
1941    Amends 3.02, zoning, rezone district being 77 acres on Arastradero Road
        (Sylvania Electric Products, Inc.) (Special)
        Amends zoning, inclusion of district designated LM-5, to be known as
1942    Art. 15B, limited manufacturing - large site district regulations
        (Repealed by 3048)
1943    Establishes zoning, Stanford Annexation No. 9 and a portion of
        Foothills Annex No. 1-A (Referred by Ord. 1981)
1944    Amends subsection (e) 414 of Ord. 1277, waiving of bid procedures for
        insurance coverage (Repealed by 2146)
1945    Amends subsections (f) and (j), 4408 of Ord. 1675, relocation of
        buildings (Repealed by 2104)
1946    Amends 3.02, zoning, changing site for new North County Court House
        (Special)
1947    Amends 414(e) of Ord. 1277, bid procedure (Repealed by 2146)
1948    Amends Ord. 1324, rezones Lepera property, southerly corner of
        University Avenue and Webster Street (Special)
1949    Adds subsection 6.20 to Ord. 1316, underground utilities (Repealed by
        3157)
1950    Adds 37.02, 37.03 to Codified Ord. 5, underground utilities (Superseded
        by 2231)
1951    Repeals subdivisions b, c, and d of 9.01 of Codified Ord. 5, hours of
        operation for bowling alleys (Repealer)
1952    Charge for connection to main trunk sewer (Repealed by 2297)
1953    Amends Ord. 1896, eliminates setback lines on both sides of the 200
        block of Sherman Avenue (Special)
1954    Amends 1324, changing district of 25 acres at intersection of Bayshore
        Highway and Embarcadero Road from L-M:A to P-C (Special)
1955    Installation, construction and operation of trampoline centers, permit
        (Superseded by 1959)
1956    Rezone of district for tract 407, Amarillo Village Subdivision
        (Special)
1957    Rezone of district for property at 339 Emerson Street (Special)
1958    Amends administrative code, amends 412, cancellation of accounts
        receivable and refunds of erroneous payments (Repealed by 2146)
1959    Adds Art. 16.5 to Codified Ord. 5, installation of trampoline centers,
        permit (Repealed by 4453)
1960    Adopts budget for the fiscal year, 1960-61 (Special)
1961    Ads Art. 31A [ 331.50 - 31.55] to Codified Ord. 5, private swimming
        pools (Repealed by 4089)
1962    Adds 11C.04 to zoning ordinance, churches in C-2:GM District (Repealed
        by 3048)
1963    Amends 4.25 of zoning ordinance, definition of a "family," 2205, number
        of boarders and lodgers (Repealed by 3048)
1964    Adds 11.02, 11A.02, dry cleaners as uses permitted in C-2 and C-2:CFS
        Districts, zoning (Repealed by 3048)
1965    Amends zoning, covered parking in R Districts (Superseded)
1966    Amends 11.26 of Codified Ord. 5, taxicab insurance (Repealed by 3286)
1967    Repeals subsection (j), 33.30 of Codified Ord. 5, respecting work in
        parkways (Repealer)
1968    Amends 9B.03 of Ord. 1324, uses in P-F District (Repealed by 3048)
1969    Approves Stanford Annexation No. 10 (Special)
1970    Establishes zoning of Stanford Annexation No. 10 (Special)
1971    Amends administrative cede, abolishes variance and use permit appeals
        committee (Repealed by 2146)
1972    Amends zoning, hearing of variance and use permit appeals by the
        planning commission (Repealed by 3048)
1973    Fixes tax rate for 1960-61 (Special)
1974    Fixes ad valorem assessment for 1960-61, University Avenue parking
        district 52-13 (Special)
1975    Fixes ad valorem assessment for 1960-61, University Avenue parking
        district 52-14 (Special)
1976    Fixes ad valorem assessment for 1960-61, California Avenue parking
        district 55-5 (Special)
1977    Fixes ad valorem assessment for 1960-61, California Avenue district,
        Birch Street, project No. 59-3 (Special)
1978    Designates certain street as Wintergreen Way (Special)
1979    Approves Stanford University Annexation No. 9 (Special)
        Amends 9.03 of Codified Ord. 5, eliminating bowling alleys from
1980    establishments prohibited to minors in certain instances (4.52 [Ed.
        Note])
1981    Notice of a special referendum election on ordinance zoning certain
        lands of Stanford University (Special)
1982    Improvement bonds of 1956 (Special)
1983    Amends improvement procedure code, connection charges and city advances
        in utility projects (Repealed by 2277)
1984    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezone, 30-ft. strip of land lying between
        the west terminus of Wilkie Way and West Meadow Drive (Special)
1985    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezone, property of I. Kertz, Ptn. Lot 22,
        Block 6, Seale Sub. No. 5 (Special)
        Validates the organization, boundaries, engineering documents, filing
1986    procedure, notices, assessments, contracts, and assessment bonds
        (Repealed by 2277)
1987    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324 rezone, 3176 Middlefield Road and adjoining
        northerly lot (Special)
1988    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezone, 3 182-90 Middlefield Road (Special)
1989    Adds subsection (f) to 5.03 of Ord. 1324, temporary real estate offices
        in R-E District (Repealed by 3048)
1990    Amends 21A.17 of Ord. 1324, covered parking in R-1:R District (Repealed
        by 3048)
1991    Amends Art. 16.5 of Codified Ord. 5, adds 16.68, filling of open pits
        in abandoned trampoline centers (Repealed by 4453)
1992    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezone, Stanford at 720 Welch Road (Special)
1993    Amends Ord. 1896, removes setback lines for California Avenue along
        both sides from Alma to Middlefield (Special)
        Amends Div. XV, 19 of Codified Ord. 5, special speed zones, increasing
1994    and decreasing state speed limits and changing certain prima facie
        speed limits on W. Meadow Drive and Embarcadero Road (10.56)
1995    Designates a certain street as Porter Drive (Special)
1996    Accepts requirements 13522, California Penal Code, training of law
        enforcement officers (2.36)
        Amends Art. 4 of Codified Ord. 5, regulations for private patrol
1997    service [Ed. Note: Renumbered and relocated by Ord. 4453; see Ed. Note
        at Ch. 4.38] (9.26)
1998    Adds Art. 35 of Codified Ord. 5, abatement of unsafe and unlawful
        conditions in certain instances (9.56)
1999    Amends 33.40 of Codified Ord. 5, liability insurance required (12.08)
2000    Rezone, 724 Arastradero Road (Whelan) (Special)
2001    Rezone, 597 Urban Lane (Special)
2002    Designates certain street now known as First Street as "Wilkie Way"
        (Special)
2003    Amends 3.33 of Ord. 1316, rear lots (Repealed by 3157)
2004    Amends 8.20, 8B.19, zoning, building height limits in R-3:G and R-3:
        P Districts (Superseded by 2085 and 2175)
2005    Amends 12.02, zoning, creameries in C-3 Districts (Repealed by 3048)
2006    Approves development plan for property fronting on "El Camino Real
        Annexation No. 3," repeals Ords. 1814, 1923 (Special)
2007    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezone, district known as 850 Webster Street
        (Special)
2008    Amends 19.152 of Codified Ord. 5, speed limit on Embarcadero Road
        easterly of Bayshore Highway (10.56)
2009    Approves annexation, uninhabited territory, designated "El Camino
        Annexation No. 4" (Special)
2010    Amends 16.04, 23.04, 24.02 and 27.04 of Ord. 1324, amounts of certain
        fees (Repealed by 3048)
2011    Approves annexation, uninhabited territory, designated as "El Camino
        Annexation No. 5" (Special)
2012    Adds Art. 34 to Codified Ord. 5, excavations, grading and fills
        (Superseded by 2104)
2013    Provides general municipal election, electing five councilmen, voting
        upon two charter amendments (Special)
2014    Amends building code, fences along certain rear property lines which
        abut public streets (Repealed by 2104)
2015    Adds 33.50 to Codified Ord. 5, encroachments on public easements
        (12.12)
2016    Establishes zoning of property annexed to the city described as El
        Camino Annexation No. 4 (Special)
2017    Rezone of 261, 269 and 275 Cambridge Avenue (Special)
2018    Rezone 2458 and 2484 Park Boulevard, 230 and 238 Sherman Avenue, and
        2457 and 2540 Birch Street (Special)
2019    Rezone 333 Sherman Avenue (Special)
2020    Rezone property within the right-of-way of Bayshore Freeway, Frontage
        Road and the Bayshore Embarcadero Overpass (Special)
2021    Rezone Lot 140, Wooster Subdivision (Special)
2022    Rezone William Curtner Tract and L. H. Sly Subdivision (Special)
2023    Rezone Rancho Rincon de San Francisquito, being in the 400 block of
        James Road (Special)
2024    Rezone Lots 1, 2, 3, 12, 13, 14 of the Cogan Tract (Special)
        Amends 11C.02, 11C.03, zoning, business and professional offices from
2025    uses permitted - second floor only to uses permitted; to allow business
        and professional offices on the ground floor in the C-2:GM District
        (Repealed by 3048)
2026    Declares the results of the general municipal election (Special)
2027    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezone 575 Arastradero Road (Special)
2028    Amends Ord. 1896, establishes setback lines for San Antonio Road from
        Alma Street to Bayshore Highway (Special)
2029    Amends Art. 31 of Codified Ord. 5, refuse collection and disposal (5.20
        [Ed. Note], 6.32)
2030    Amends subsection b, 17.2342, of Codified Ord. 5 (Repealed by 3123)
2031    Amends 221 of Ord. 1277, establishes office and duties of city
        treasurer, repeals 219 (Repealed by 2146)
2032    Amends 32.13(c) of Codified Ord. 5, public nuisances at traffic
        intersections (8.04)
2033    Amends Ord. 1324, repeals subsection (c) of 22.06 (Repealer)
2034    Amends Ord. 1896, establishes setback lines for Arastradero Road
        (Special)
2035    Amends Ord. 1896, establishes setback line for El Camino Annex. No. 4
        (Special)
2036    Amends Ord. 1896, establishes setback lines for Manuela Avenue, Oakhill
        Avenue, Mesa Avenue, Miranda Avenue, and Arastradero Road (Special)
2037    Amends Ord. 1896, establishes setback lines for Sherman Avenue between
        Park Boulevard and El Camino Real (Special)
2038    Adopts a budget for fiscal year 1961-62 (Special)
2039    Adds section to Codified Ord. 5, Division 10, provisions applicable to
        civil defense and disaster (Superseded by 2146)
2040    Amends 1.6, 1.7 of Ord. 1316, recordation of notices and issuance of
        building permits on illegal subdivisions (Repealed by 3 157)
2041    Approves Stanford Annexation No. 11 (Special)
2042    Establishes the zoning of Stanford Annexation No. 11 (Special)
2043    Fixes tax rate fiscal year 1961-62 (Special)
2044    Fixes ad valorem assessment rate for fiscal year 1961-62, University
        Avenue district off-street parking project No. 52-13 (Special)
2045    Fixes ad valorem assessment rate for fiscal year 1961-62, University
        Avenue district off-street parking project No. 52-14 (Special)
2046    Fixes ad valorem assessment rate for fiscal year 1961-62 California
        Avenue district off-street parking project No. 55-5 (Special)
2047    Fixes ad valorem assessment rate for fiscal year 1961-62, California
        Avenue district - Birch Street, project No. 59-3 (Special)
2048    Fixes ad valorem assessment rate for fiscal year 1961-62, California
        district beautification project No. 60-5 (Special)
2049    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezone of 220 Palo Alto Avenue (Special)
2050    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezone of eight acres in area located on the
        southerly side of the 1700 block of Arastradero Road (Special)
        Amends Art. 16 of Codified Ord. 5, bicycles, roller skates and
2051    coasters, licensing and regulation thereof; repeals 19.161 - 19.164
        (10.64)
2052    Establishes setback lines for Ash Street between Sherman Avenue and
        Page Mill Road (Special)
2053    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezones 4215 Alma Street (Special)
2054    Rezones two parcels of the southerly side of Colorado Avenue (Special)
2055    Amends 3.33 of Ord. 1316, appeals from denials of lot divisions by the
        planning officer (Repealed by 3157)
2056    Amends 9A.02 of Ord. 1324 (Repealed by 3048)
2057    Amends 4614 of Ord. 1675, signs of individual letters (Repealed by
        2104)
2058    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezones 2721 Midtown Court (Special)
2059    Requires sideyard setback in the M-1 District for property abutting an
        R-1 District (Repealed by 3048)
2060    Establishes setback lines for streets in Stanford Industrial Park
        (Special)
2061    Establishes setback lines for Monroe Drive (Special)
2062    Amends uniform local sales and use tax ordinance (Repealed by 2756)
2063    Amends 6.04 of Codified Ord. 5, license fees for tobacco vending
        machines (Repealed by 3288)
2064    Amends Ch. 15 of Ord. 1675, Uniform Building Code, construction of
        fallout shelters (Repealed by 2104)
2065    Approves annexation, uninhabited territory designated "Bayshore -
        Embarcadero Annexation No. 3" (Special)
        Adds subsection 2.5 to 221 of Ord. 1277, authorizing the city treasurer
2066    to destroy paid or canceled bonds and coupons and to delegate said
        authority to the city's fiscal agent (Repealed by 2146)
2067    Amends 11A.02(C) of Ord. 1324, self-operated laundries (Repealed by
        3048)
        Amends 33.02, repeals Arts. 23 and 24 of Codified Ord. 5, nuisances,
2068    Art. 35 unsafe and unlawful conditions and their abatement (9.56,
        12.08)
2069    Establishes zoning of Bayshore - Embarcadero Annexation No. 3 (Special)
2070    Amends Ord. 1634, Fire Zone Map for Bayshore - Embarcadero Annexation
        No. 3 (Repealed by 2104)
2071    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, Lots 19 and 20 and a portion of Lot 21, Block
        8, Seale Tract No. 2, otherwise known as 1851 Alma Street (Special)
2072    Amends 303 of Ord. 1675, building permit fees (Repealed by 2104)
2073    Amends improvement procedure code, payment of assessments and advance
        maturity of bonds (Repealed by 2277)
2074    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezone southwesterly corner of Middlefield
        Road and Charleston Roads (Special)
2075    Amends improvement procedure code, annexation procedures (Repealed by
        2277)
2076    Approves annexation, uninhabited territory designated as Stanford
        Annexation No. 12 (Special)
2077    Establishes zoning of property being annexed and described as Stanford
        Annexation No. 12 (Special)
2078    Amends 18.20, 18.22 of Codified Ord. 5, licensing of dogs (6.16 [Ed.
        Note])
2079    Repeals 408.5, 408.6 and 408.8 of Ord. 1277, filing of claims against
        the city (Repealed by 2146)
2080    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezones 2750 Park Boulevard and 216 Page Mill
        Road (Special)
        Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezones 3293 Alma Street, being Lots 47 and
2081    48, Block 12, Stanford Villa Tract and Lot 30, Block K, Tract 800
        (Special)
2082    Deletes 22.07(g) of Ord. 1324 (Repealer)
2083    Amends Ord. 1634, zoning Stanford Annexation No. 12 in fire zone No. 1
        (Special)
2084    Adopts budget for 1962-63 fiscal year (Special)
2085    Amends 8.20 of Ord. 1324, building height limit for R-3-G, residential
        garden apartment district regulations (Repealed by 3048)
2086    Intention to vacate portion of an unnamed city street in Mayview
        Homesites (Special)
2087    Amends 16.08 of Ord. 1324, procedure for extending time limits in
        development schedules in P-C Districts (Repealed by 3048)
        Changes name of "Codified Ord. 5" to "Palo Alto Municipal Code"
2088    [Editor's Note: This ordinance was adopted July 23, 1962.] (Effect
        throughout code)
2089    Amends 9.03, billiard and pool rooms (4.52 [Ed. Note])
2090    Adopts initiative ordinance amending 251.3 of Ord. 1277 (19.04)
2091    Fixes ad valorem assessment for fiscal year 1962-63, University Avenue
        district off-street parking, project No. 52-13 (Special)
2092    Fixes ad valorem assessment for fiscal year 1962-63, University Avenue
        district off-street parking, project No. 52-14 (Special)
2093    Fixes ad valorem assessment for fiscal year 1962-63, California Avenue
        district off-street parking, project No. 55-5 (Special)
2094    Fixes ad valorem assessment for fiscal year 1962-63, California Avenue
        district - Birch Street, project No. 59-3 (Special)
2095    Fixes and valorem assessment rate for fiscal year 1962-63, California
        Avenue district beautification, project No. 60-5 (Special)
2096    Fixes ad valorem assessment rate for fiscal year 1962-63, California
        Avenue district off-street parking, project No. 60-8 (Special)
2097    Fixes tax rate (Special)
2098    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezones portion of property at 4150
        Middlefield Road (Special)
2099    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezones 490 Sheridan Avenue from HDA to C-3:
        S (Special)
2100    Changes fire zone at 490 Sheridan Avenue (Repealed by 2104)
2101    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezone, fire station site, 600 Arastradero
        Road (Special)
2102    Amends 4.05 of Ord. 1324, defines an alley as a vehicular way (Repealed
        by 3048)
2103    Designates a certain street as May Court (Special)
        Amends Ch. 34; and adopts by reference the Uniform Building Code, 1961
2104    Edition, the Uniform Plumbing Code, 1961 Edition, and the 1959 National
        Electrical Code, (16.20 [Ed. Note], 16.24 [Ed. Note], 16.32, 16.36,
        16.40, 16.44)
2105    Designates a cul-de-sac on Oregon between Cowper and Waverley Streets
        be named "Anton Court" (Special)
2106    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, southerly portion of the property at 4150
        Middlefield Road (Special)
2107    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezones 737 San Antonio Road (Grebmeier)
        (Special)
2108    Amends Ord. 1896, Ord. 2028, establishes setback lines for San Antonio
        Road (Special)
2109    Amends Ord. 1896, establishes setback lines along El Camino Real
        (Special)
2110    Amends Ord. 1896, amends setback lines on the northeasterly side of
        Tasso Street between Lytton and University Avenue (Special)
2111    Adds 4.08.8 to Ord. 1277, procedure for filing claims against employees
        (Repealed by 2146)
2112    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezones 170 and 176 Bryant Street and 246
        Palo Alto Avenue (Special)
2113    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezones northerly corner of Charleston and
        Middlefield Roads (Special)
2114    Amends Ch. 1 of Ord. 1277, repeals 701, 702, and 703 (Repealed by 2146)
2115    Designates new cul-de-sac off Wellsbury Way in the vicinity of
        Middlefield Road to be named "Towle Place" (Special)
2116    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezone 721 and 727 San Carlos Court and 716
        Colorado Avenue and 711 San Carlos Court (Special)
2117    Amends municipal code by adding 17.2206, private fire alarms (Repealed
        by 3123)
        Amends official fire zone map (Section 1601 of the Uniform Building
2118    Code) by changing the property at 721 and 727 San Carlos Court and 716
        Colorado Avenue from fire zone No. 3 to fire zone No. 2 (Special)
2119    Amends 5.17 of Ord. 1316, subdivision (Repealed by 3157)
2120    Designates a street approximately 105.06 feet northwesterly of the
        centerline of Adobe Creek on El Camino Real as Tamarack Court (Special)
2121    Amends subsection (b), 11.15, adds subsection (d), 11.15 to Ord. 1324,
        zoning (Repealed by 3048)
2122    Amends 204, 450, repeals 451 to 467 of Ord. 1277 (Repealed by 2146)
2123    Adds item 33a to 34.102, amends 3601 Uniform Building Code, penthouses
        (Repealed by 3215)
2124    Amends Division 4, Ch. 34, regulating signs (16.20 [Ed. Note])
2125    Amends Division XIII, Ch. 19, 19.131, 19.132, truck routes (10.48)
2126    Designates a street near Embarcadero Road off East Bayshore Road as
        Watson Court (Special)
2127    Adds 701, 702 and 703 to Ord. 1277, adopts state law for the procedure
        for municipal elections, repeals 501 through 523 (Repealed by 2146)
2128    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezone portion of Lot 1, Block 2, University
        Park (Special)
        Amends official fire zone map ( 1601 of the Uniform Building Code) by
2129    changing the property at 120 - 148 Hawthorne Avenue and 200 - 220 High
        Street from fire zone 3 to fire zone No. 1 (Special)
2130    Amends 3.02, Ord. 1324, 641 - 675 Cowper Street and 525 - 533 Forest
        Avenue, approves the P-C development plan (Special)
        Amends official fire zone map ( 1601 of the Uniform Building Code) by
2131    changing the property at 641 - 675 Cowper Street and 525 - 533 Forest
        Avenue from fire zone No. 1 to fire zone No. 3 (Special)
2132    Amends 3.02, zoning, rezones portion of Foothills annexation No. 3
        (Special)
2133    Amends setback ordinance by amending setbacks on Moreno, Bryson and
        Colorado Avenues (Special)
2134    Amends 3.02, zoning, rezones portion of Blocks 39, 40, University Park
        Tract (Special)
        Amends Official Fire Zone Map ( 1601 of the Uniform Building Code) by
2135    changing the property at 701, 703, 705, 711 and 727 Cowper Street, and
        524, 526, 532, 534, 543, 545, 555 and 569 Forest Avenue from fire zone
        No. 1 to fire zone No. 3 (Special)
2136    Amends Ord. 1896, amends setback lines on Arastradero Road (Special)
2137    Amends item 30, 34.203, adds subsections (e), (f), 1004, materials
        (Repealed by 3215)
2138    Provides for submission to voters referendum propositions (Special)
2139    Provides general municipal election for the purpose of electing six
        councilmen, voting upon two referendum propositions (Special)
2140    Amends Ord. 1324, amends 6A.09, 6A.11, 6A.12 and adds 4.20, two story
        construction in the R-DUP District (Repealed by 3048)
2141    Declares results of general municipal election (Special)
2142    Adds Division 22.5, possession, sale and use of fireworks and amends
        8.02(e); repeals 17.2204 (9.08)
2143    Amends 3.02, Ord. 1324, rezones 3501 - 3525 Alma Street (Special)
2144    Amends subsection (f), 34.419, painted alterations of nonconforming
        signs (16.20 [Ed. Note])
2145    Amends 3.02, Ord. 1324, rezones 527, 535, and 555 Everett Avenue
        (Special)
        Amends Ch. 1 and 2, incorporates administrative code as Ch. 2; repeals
2146    Ord. 1277 and amendments (1.04, 1.08, 2.08 [Ed. Note], 2.12, 2.16, 2.20
        [Ed. Note], 2.28 [Ed. Note], 2.36, 2.40, 2.44)
2147    Amends 3.02, Ord. 1324, rezones 2727 Midtown Court (Special)
2148    Amends 3.02, Ord. 1324, rezones Amarillo Park Site - Drive-In Theater
        (Special)
        Amends Official Fire Zone Map ( 1601 of the Uniform Building Code) by
2149    changing the property known as Amarillo Park Site - Drive-In Theater
        from fire zone No. 2 to No. 3 for one portion and fire zone No. 3 to
        No. 2 for another portion (Special)
2150    Designates street entering Embarcadero Road opposite the driveway to
        the Palo Alto Airport as Embarcadero Way (Special)
2151    Adopts budget for the fiscal year 1963-64 (Special)
2152    Amends 3.02, Ord. 1324, rezones 980 Middlefield Road (Special)
2153    Amends 3.02, Ord. 1324, rezones 528 Arastradero Road and 4186 El Camino
        Real (Special)
        Amends Official Fire Zone Map ( 1601 of the Uniform Building Code) by
2154    changing the property known as 528 Arastradero Road and 4186 El Camino
        Real from fire zone No. 3 to fire zone No. 2 (Special)
2155    Amends Ord. 1896, setback lines on Sherman Avenue (Special)
2156    Amends Ord. 1324, amends Art. 9A.10, minimum lot requirements in
        administrative-research districts (Repealed by 3048)
        Amends Ord. 1896, eliminates setback lines in the University Avenue
2157    area bounded by Alma, Middlefield, San Francisquito Creek and Addison
        (not including Alma and Middlefield) (Special)
2158    Amends Ord. 1324, amends sections establishing automobile parking
        (Repealed by 3048)
2159    Fixes ad valorem assessment for fiscal year 1963-64, California Avenue
        district - Birch Street project No. 59-3 (Special)
2160    Fixes ad valorem assessment for fiscal year 1963-64, California Avenue
        district off-street parking project No. 55-5 (Special)
2161    Fixes ad valorem assessment for fiscal year 1963-64, University Avenue
        district off-street parking project No. 52-14 (Special)
2162    Fixes ad valorem assessment for fiscal year 1963-64, University Avenue
        district off-street parking project No. 52-13 (Special)
2163    Fixes ad valorem assessment rate for fiscal year 1963-64, California
        Avenue district off-street parking project No. 60-8 (Special)
2164    Fixes ad valorem assessment rate for fiscal year 1963-64, California
        Avenue district beautification project No. 60-5 (Special)
2165    Fixes tax rate for the fiscal year 1963-64 (Special)
2166    Designates the undeveloped portion of Wellsbury Way as Towle Way
        (Special)
2167    Amends 3.02, Ord. 1324, rezones 2450 West Bayshore Frontage Road
        (Special)
2168    Amends items 33, 36 and 38, 34.102, requirements for illumination of
        exit signs and wet standpipe construction (Repealed by 3215)
2169    Amends 19.132 truck routes (Superseded by 2181)
2170    Amends 3.02, Ord. 1324, rezones 633 Lytton Avenue (Special)
2171    Amends Ord. 1896, amends setback lines on Lytton Avenue (Special)
2172    Amends 3.02, Ord. 1324, rezones 579 University Avenue (Special)
        Amends Official Fire Zone Map ( 1601 of Uniform Building Code) by
2173    changing 579 University Avenue from fire zone 3 to fire zone 1
        (Special)
2174    Amends 19.93, use of streets for storage of vehicles (Repealed by 4588)
2175    Amends 88.19, Ord. 1324, building height limit in R-3-P Districts
        (Repealed by 3048)
2176    Amends 19.132, destination definition (Superseded by 2181)
2177    Amends 19.132, truck weight increase (Superseded by 2181)
2178    Amends 19.132, destination definition; truck weight increase
        (Superseded by 2181)
2179    Amends Ord. 1324, amends 11.14 (Repealed by 3048)
2180    Adds 7.13, landing of aircraft (9.44)
2181    Amends 19.132, truck routes (10.48)
        Amends Ord. 1928, adds to Art. 1, Ch. 6, 314, 315 and 316, cost of
2182    collecting for division of assessments, and distribution of redemption
        fund surpluses (Repealed by 2277)
2183    Amends 19.151, decreasing the speed limit of portions of Middlefield
        Road (Repealed by 2340)
2184    Amends 10.02, 11.02, 11.03, 12.02, 12.03, 13.02, 13.03, 14.02 and
        14.03, Ord. 1324, zoning (Repealed by 3048)
2185    Adds 2.126, 2.127 to Division 1, Chapter 2, city council organization
        and procedure (Repealed by 3488)
2186    Amends 3.02, Ord. 1324, rezone 310 - 312 Ramona Street (Special)
2187    Amends official fire zone map ( 1601 of the Uniform Building Code),
        property at 310 - 312 Ramona Street from fire zone 3 to 1 (Special)
2188    Amends 19.152, speed limit on portions of Hillview Avenue (10.56)
        Amends 7.02, 7.18, 8.02, 8A.02 and 8C.18, Ord. 1324, permitting
2189    multiple-family structures and eliminating boarding and lodging houses
        in the R-2 Districts (Repealed by 3048)
2190    Amends Ord. 1324, adds Art. 17B, F, flood plain district regulations
        (Repealed by 3048)
2191    Amends 19.152, decreasing speed limit on Alexis Drive (10.56)
        Amends 19.152, decreasing the prima facie speed limit on Oregon Avenue
2192    from the east city limits to Alma Street and Page Mill Road from Alma
        Street to El Camino Real (10.56)
2193    Approves annexation, uninhabited territory designated as "San
        Francisquito Annexation" (Special)
2194    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezone of San Francisquito Annexation
        (Special)
2195    Amends 2.103, agenda of city council meetings (Repealed by 3488)
2196    Amends 31.24, schedule of fees for the use of the sanitary refuse
        disposal area (5.20 [Ed. Note])
2197    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezones 2855 Middlefield Road (Special)
2198    Adopts budget for the fiscal year 1964-65 (Special)
2199    Amends 3.02, Ord. 1324, rezones 180 Bryant Street (Special)
        Adds 4.76, 6A.13, 7.20, 8.21, 8A.19, 8B.20, 8.21 and 9.21 to Ord. 1324,
2200    requiring usable open space in certain zone districts (Repealed by
        3048)
2201    Adds Art. 19A "-L" special apartment lot area district regulations to
        Ord. 1324 (Repealed by 3048)
        Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezones area bounded by Waverley - San
2202    Francisquito Creek - Middlefield and Lytton, and area bounded by
        Waverley - Lytton - Alma and San Francisquito Creek (Special)
2203    Approves annexation, uninhabited territory designated as "Arastradero -
        Maybell Annexation" to the city of Palo Alto (Special)
        Amends Ord. 1928, amends 63 and 65, posting and mailing of notices;
2204    repeals Ch. 4, liens; amends 249; and adds Art. 8, comprising 400 to
        436, to Ch. 6, bond plan G, vehicle off-street parking bonds (Repealed
        by 2277)
2205    Amends 19.94 and 19.116, prohibiting the parking of certain vehicles
        (Repealed by 4588)
2206    Fixes the tax rate for the fiscal year 1964-65 at $.80 (Special)
        Fixes ad valorem assessment for fiscal year 1964-65, University Avenue
2207    district, off-street parking project No. 52-13 and project No. 52-14
        (Special)
2208    Fixes ad valorem assessment for fiscal year 1964-65, California Avenue
        district off-street parking project No. 55-5 (Special)
2209    Fixes ad valorem assessment for fiscal year 1964-65, California Avenue
        district - Birch Street, project No. 59-3 (Special)
2210    Fixes ad valorem assessment for fiscal year 1964-65, California Avenue
        district beautification, project No. 60-5 (Special)
2211    Fixes ad valorem assessment for fiscal year 1964-65, California Avenue
        district off-street parking project No. 60-8 (Special)
2212    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezones 246 Palo Alto Avenue (Special)
        Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezones 101, 125, 133, 201, 211, 225, 235,
2213    245, 251, 305, 311,319, 325, 329, 335, 343 and 351 Middlefield Road
        (Special)
2214    Adds Ch. 36, Division 4, official plan line regulations (20.04)
        Amends official fire zone map ( 1601 of the Uniform Building Code) by
2215    establishing the property known as Arastradero - Maybell Annexation as
        fire zone No. 3 (Special)
2216    Designates street along the southerly boundary of Arastradero - Maybell
        annexation as Clemo Avenue (Special)
2217    Authorizes amendment to the contract between city and state employees'
        retirement system, persons compensated on an hourly basis (Special)
2218    Establishes zoning of property being annexed and described as
        Arastradero - Maybell annexation (Special)
2219    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezones 105 and 145 San Antonio Avenue
        (Special)
        Amends official fire zone map ( 1601 of the Uniform Building Code) by
2220    changing the property known as 105 and 145 San Antonio Avenue from fire
        zone No. 2 to fire zone No. 3 (Special)
        Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezone R-3 and R-5 Districts bounded
2221    generally by Alma Street, San Francisquito Creek, Middlefield Road and
        Lytton Avenue (Special)
2222    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezones 518 and 536 Fulton Street (Special)
2223    Amends 2.157, vote necessary for council action (Repealed by 3488)
2224    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezones 2655, 2705, and 2723 Birch Street
        (Special)
        Amends 19.152, decreasing the prima facie speed limit on Manuela
2225    Avenue, Miranda Avenue, Welch Road and Pasteur Drive, and a portion of
        Quarry Road, and declaring an emergency (10.56)
2226    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezones 645, 647, 649, 651, 665 and 667
        Lytton Avenue and 360 Middlefield Road (Special)
2227    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezones 308 and 318 Middlefield Road, 654 and
        666 Everett Avenue and 305 Byron Street (Repealed by 2229)
2228    Amends 2.102, defines quorum (Repealed by 3488)
2229    Repeals Ord. 2227 (Repealer)
2230    Holding and setting aside for park and recreation purposes certain
        lands (Repealed by 2252)
2231    Amends Ch. 37, utilities, and establishing underground regulations
        (12.04, 12.16, 12.20)
2232    Rezones area bounded generally by Laguna Avenue, Los Robles Avenue,
        Amaranta Avenue and the Loma Vista Elementary School (Special)
2233    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezones 403 Curtner Avenue (Special)
        Amends official fire zone map ( 1601 of the Uniform Building Code) by
2234    changing the property known as 403 Curtner Avenue from fire zone No. 2
        to fire zone No. 3 (Special)
2235    Repeals 20.07 (Repealer)
2236    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezones 449 - 455 East Charleston Road
        (Special)
2237    Amends municipal code by adding Ch. 2, conduct in parks (Title 22 [Ed.
        Note])
2238    Amends 1 of Ord. 2230, adds to exhibit A-2 (city owned Baylands), the
        area known as "the duck pond" (Repealed by 2252)
2239    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezones 2675 Hanover Street (Special)
2240    Unassigned
2241    Designates street along the cul-de-sac easterly from El Camino Way near
        Meadow Drive as El Camino Way (Special)
2242    Amends 2.121, 2.122, 2.123, 2.124 and 2.125, standing committees and
        procedural rules (Repealed by 3488)
2243    Adopts budget for the fiscal year 1965-66 (Special)
2244    Amends Ord. 1896, eliminates setback requirements of the north side of
        San Antonio Avenue from Alma Street to Middlefield Road (Special)
        Designates an alley in the California Avenue business district, located
2245    between Cambridge Avenue and California Avenue and generally between
        Park Boulevard and El Camino Real as New Mayfield Lane (Special)
2246    Fixes tax rate for the fiscal year 1965-66 (Special)
2247    Fixes ad valorem assessment for fiscal year 1965-66, California Avenue
        district, Birch Street, project No. 59-3 (Special)
2248    Fixes ad valorem assessment for fiscal year 1965-66, University Avenue
        district off-street parking projects No. 52-13 and No. 52-14 (Special)
2249    Fixes ad valorem assessment for fiscal year 1965-66, California Avenue
        district off-street parking project No. 55-5 (Special)
2250    Fixes ad valorem assessment for fiscal year 1965-66, California Avenue
        district off-street parking project No. 60-8 (Special)
2251    Fixes ad valorem assessment for fiscal year 1965-66, California Avenue
        district beautification project No. 60-5 (Special)
2252    Reserves for park, playground, recreation or conservation purposes
        lands pursuant to Art. VIII of the Charter (Title 22 [Ed. Note])
        Makes additional appropriation in the capital improvement fund -
2253    furnishings and equipment for the Mayfield and University Park fire
        stations project No. 65-31 (Special)
        Amends municipal code by adding Division 5 to Ch. 2, contracts and
2254    purchasing procedures, and repeals 2.413, 2.414, 2.416 and 22.01
        (Repealed by 3927)
2255    Adds 22.10 to Ord. 1324, regulating working on motor vehicles and the
        storage of parts in residential areas (Repealed by 3048)
2256    Makes additional appropriation in the capital improvement fund -
        municipal service center buildings, project No. 63-13 (Special)
2257    Unassigned
2258    Approves annexation, uninhabited territory designated as "El Camino -
        Maybell Annexation" to the city of Palo Alto (Special)
2259    Approves annexation, uninhabited territory designated as "Alma Street
        Annexation" to the city of Palo Alto (Special)
2260    Amends 2.201, 2.202, 2.203 and 2.204, required council votes on certain
        matters (2.08 [Ed. Note])
2261    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, establishes zoning of certain property known
        as the "El Camino - Maybell Annexation" as C-3:S, R-5 and R-1 (Special)
        Amends official fire zone map ( 1601 of the Uniform Building Code) by
2262    establishing fire zones 2 and 3 for the El Camino - Maybell Annexation
        (Special)
2263    Amends Ord. 1896, establishes setbacks on El Camino Real and Maybell
        Avenue for the El Camino - Maybell Annexation (Special)
2264    Makes additional appropriation in the capital improvement fund -
        Mitchell Park tennis courts, project No. 65-7 (Special)
2265    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, establishes the zoning of certain property
        known as "Alma Street Annexation" as R-1:B-8:A (Special)
        Amends official fire zone map ( 1601 of the Uniform Building Code) by
2266    establishing fire zone 3 for the property known as "Alma Street
        Annexation" (Special)
2267    Approves, adopts plan for the construction of tennis courts in Mitchell
        Park, project No. 65-7 (Special)
        Amends Ord. 1324, adopts regulations requiring site and design control
2268    on "C" and "M" district properties adjacent to any R-1 or R-DUP
        District (Repealed by 3048)
2269    Amends Ord. 2252, adds 21.1, Esther Clark Park (Title 22 [Ed. Note])
2270    Amends 11.03 of Ord. 1324, permits gasoline service stations under
        certain conditions (Repealed by 3048)
2271    Unassigned
2272    Makes additional appropriations in the capital improvement fund
        (Special)
2273    Makes additional appropriation in the capital improvement fund
        (Special)
2274    Amends Ord. 1324, adds 22.11, requirements for the improvement and
        maintenance of parking lots (Repealed by 3048)
2275    Makes additional appropriations in the sewer utility fund, Charleston
        trunk sewer, project No. 65 (Special)
2276    Amends 2.105, 2.109, 2.122 and 2.126, city council organization and
        procedure (Repealed by 3488)
        Adds Ch. 40, municipal code procedure for acquisition or construction
2277    of local improvements and the levy of assessments and issuance of
        assessment bonds; repeals Ords. 1928 and 1986 (Title 13)
2278    Makes additional appropriations in the capital improvement fund
        (Special)
2279    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezones certain public property and 2211 Park
        Blvd. (Special)
        Amends 19.132(a) and (d), changing the designation of limited truck
2280    routes to local truck routes; also changes multiple delivery zone
        (10.48)
2281    Amends 19.132(d), deletes a portion of Embarcadero Road from the list
        of limited truck routes (10.48)
2282    Amends 19.132(d), designation of Oregon Avenue as a limited truck route
        (10.48)
2283    Makes additional appropriations in the capital improvement fund
        (Special)
2284    Amends Ord. 2252, adds 9.1, 9.2 and 9.3 being those parcels of the Lee
        property acquired as additions to Foothill Park (Title 22 [Ed. Note])
2285    Makes additional appropriations in the capital improvement fund
        (Special)
2286    Approves, adopts plan for the development of Amarillo Park, project No.
        62.4 (Special)
        Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezones Stanford University lands on the
2287    south side of El Camino Real in the 2800, 2900 and 3000 blocks
        (Special)
2288    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezones approximately 16.1 acres on the
        easterly side of the 600 and 700 blocks on Page Mill Road (Special)
        Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezones property bounded by Embarcadero Road,
2289    East Bayshore Frontage Road and Bayshore Freeway, and rescinding such
        portions of Ord. 1954 and Res. 3572 as may apply (Special)
        Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezones approximately 439 acres of the Rancho
2290    El Corte de Madera and establishing PC zoning for approximately 220
        acres of unincorporated property known as "Arastradero Hills
        Annexation" to be effective upon its annexation (Special)
2291    Repeals certain sections of the municipal code (Repealer)
        Amends official fire zone map ( 1601 of the Uniform Building Code) by
        changing the property known as the commercial area of the Sunset
2292    International Petroleum Corporation development known as Arastradero
        Hills from fire zone No. 3 to fire zone No. 2 and by applying fire zone
        No. 3 to approximately 220 acres of property known as Arastradero Hills
        Annexation, to be effective upon its annexation (Special)
2293    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezones 472 Sheridan Avenue (Special)
        Amends official fire zone map ( 1601 of the Uniform Building Code) by
2294    changing the property known as 472 Sheridan Avenue from fire zone No. 3
        to fire zone No. 2 (Special)
2295    Authorizes interim expenditure of funds pending adoption of a final
        1966-67 budget (Special)
2296    Adopts budget for the fiscal year 1966-67 (Special)
2297    Repeals certain obsolete and superseded ordinances (Repealer)
2298    Approves annexation, uninhabited territory designated as "Arastradero
        Hills Annexation" (Special)
2299    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezones certain property in vicinity of
        Embarcadero Road easterly of Bayshore Freeway (Special)
2300    Amends A-15.1, A-21.2 and A-21.3 to Ord. 2252, parcels acquired (Title
        22 [Ed. Note])
2301    Amends 8B.02(d), 9A.02, adds 9A.03, Ord. 1324, restrictions on uses
        permitted in R-3:P and A-R Districts (Repealed by 3048)
2302    Amends 9A.13 of Ord. 1324, deletes reference to use permit pertaining
        to off-street parking in A-R District (Repealed by 3048)
2303    Repeals 19.84 and 1111 - 1119 of plumbing code (Repealer)
2304    Amends 20.06, use of sidewalk elevators (9.48)
2305    Amends 27.17, adds 2.222, repeals 25.02, 25.04, powers and duties of
        health officer (2.08 [Ed. Note])
2306    Adds 10.04, definitions for hypnotism and fortunetelling (Repealed by
        4745)
2307    Amends 3.10, 3.33 and 4.11, adds 4.50 in Ord. 1316, fees for filing
        subdivision maps (Repealed by 3157)
2308    Approves, adopts plan for development of South Palo Alto Neighborhood
        Park (Special)
2309    Fixes tax rate for fiscal year 1966-67 (Special)
2310    Fixes ad valorem assessment for fiscal year 1966-67, California Avenue
        district beautification project No. 60-5 (Special)
2311    Fixes ad valorem assessment for fiscal year 1966-67, California Avenue
        district off-street parking project No. 60-8 (Special)
2312    Fixes ad valorem assessment for fiscal year 1966-67, California Avenue
        district off-street parking project No. 55-5 (Special)
2313    Fixes ad valorem assessment for fiscal year 1966-67, California Avenue
        district Birch Street project No. 59-3 (Special)
2314    Fixes ad valorem assessment for fiscal year 1966-67, California Avenue
        district - Birch Street project No. 59-3 (Special)
2315    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezones seven parcels of land owned by city
        and county (Special)
2316    Adds 2.210.6, establishes division of communications (2.08 [Ed. Note])
2317    Amends budget for fiscal year 1966-67, additional appropriation for
        salary adjustments (Special)
2318    Amends 19.177, time during which non-permit holders are permitted in
        permit parking lots (Repealed by 4159)
2319    Amends budget for fiscal year 1966-67 (Special)
2320    Amends budget for fiscal year 1966-67 (Special)
2321    Suspends issuance of building permits in certain zones pending planning
        commission study and recommendations to the council (Special)
2322    Amends 2.124, meeting date of the committee on finance (Repealed by
        3488)
2323    Amends 2.101, 2.123 and 2.125, time of meetings of city council and
        council committees (Repealed by 3488)
2324    Amends 2.104, city council order of business (Repealed by 3488)
2325    Extends provisions of Ord. 2321, suspending issuance of certain
        building permits (Special)
2326    Adopts fire prevention code (Repealed by 3123)
2327    Adds 3.26, 3.27 to Ord. 1316, dedications for school purposes (Repealed
        by 3157)
2328    Amends Ch. 9, regulates billiard, poolrooms, cardrooms and bowling
        establishments (4.52 [Ed. Note])
2329    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezone (Special)
2330    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezone (Special)
2331    Amends 19.152, decreases speed limit on Foothill Expressway (10.56)
2332    Amends 2.450(a), assessments (2.28 [Ed. Note])
        Adds 4.44, defines neighborhood recreational use, amends 8.03, 8A.03,
2333    8B.03, 8C.03, 9.03 and 9C.03, 18.04, 18.18, 18.20, 18.22, 18.24, 18.26,
        18.34 (Repealed by 3048)
2334    Amends 1966-67 budget, appropriation for construction of Channing Trunk
        Sewer (Special)
2335    Amends 2.408.3, adds 2.421, payment of claims (2.28 [Ed. Note])
2336    Amends fire zone map (Special)
2337    Approves and adopts plan for development of Foothills Park boat dock
        and overlook improvements (Special)
2338    Amends 1966-67 budget, appropriation for storm drains improvement
        (Special)
2339    Amends 1966-67 budget, appropriation for purchase of electrical
        substation site (Special)
2340    Amends 19.152, establishes speed limits on Embarcadero Road, deletes
        19.151, increase of state speed limit (10.56)
2341    Amends Ch. 9, regulates billiard, poolrooms, cardrooms and bowling
        establishments (4.52 [Ed. Note])
2342    Amends 1966-67 budget, appropriation to complete stage 2 improvements
        in Amarillo Park (Special)
2343    Amends Ord. 1810, development plan for certain property (Special)
2344    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, zone map change (Special)
2345    Amends Ch. 28, regulates drive-in restaurants, refreshment stands
        (5.12)
2346    Amends 1966-67 budget, appropriation for reconstruction of South Court
        (Special)
2347    Adds 22.07(m) to Ord. 1324, regulates extension of minor encroachments
        of existing buildings (Repealed by 3008)
2348    Amends 22.11(d) of Ord. 1324, extension of compliance date for paving
        of parking lots (Repealed by 3008)
2349    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezone (Special)
2350    Amends 3.10, 3.31, 3.33 and 4.11 of Ord. 1316, number and time for
        subdivision maps (Repealed by 3157)
2351    Amends Ord. 2252, deletes certain lands dedicated for park, playground,
        recreation or conservation purposes (Title 22 [Ed. Note])
2352    Authorizes close of 1966-67 budget (Special)
2353    Designates portion of Junipero Serra Boulevard as Miranda Avenue
        (Special)
2354    Approves and adopts plan for construction of additional restroom
        facilities at the municipal golf course (Special)
2355    Adds 7.14, prohibiting impersonation of certain public officials (9.22)
2356    Amends 20.04, prohibits leaving free samples or unordered merchandise
        upon any private premises (Repealed by 2681)
2357    Adds 4.00D to Ord. 1603, hours for soliciting (4.10)
2358    Adopts 1967-68 budget (Special)
2359    Amends 11.32, medical examination for taxicab driver's permit (Repealed
        by 3286)
2360    Amends 11.62(a), maximum time limitation between taxicab inspections
        (Repealed by 3286)
2361    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezone (Special)
2362    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezone of certain property (Special)
2363    Amends 37.202 of Ord. 2231, establishes Underground Utility District
        No. 4 (12.16)
2364    Adds 22.07(g) to Ord. 1324, requires setbacks from creeks (Repealed by
        3008)
2365    Amends 3.02 of Ord. 1324, rezone (Special)
2366    Adds 3.26 to Ord. 1316, preliminary soil report (Repealed by 3157)
2367    Adopts Palo Alto Municipal Code, 1967 Edition and various secondary
        codes (Not codified in PAMC, 1997 Edition)
2368    Adopts plan for development of Faber Tract, a portion of Byxbee Park
        (Special)
2369    Fixes tax rate for 1967-68 (Special)
2370    Fixes ad valorem assessment for 1967-68, beautification project No. 60-
        5 (Special)
2371    Fixes ad valorem assessment for 1967-68, off-street parking project No.
        60-8 (Special)
2372    Fixes ad valorem assessment for 1967-68, off-street parking project No.
        55-5 (Special)
2373    Fixes ad valorem assessment for 1967-68, off-street parking projects
        Nos. 52-13 and 52-14 (Special)
2374    Fixes ad valorem assessment for 1967-68, Birch Street project No. 59-3
        (Special)
2375    Amends 19.152, speed limits (10.56)
2376    Amends Arts. 13 and 14 of Ord. 1324, zoning (Repealed by 3048)
2377    Amends 1967-68 budget (Special)
2378    Rezone (Special)
2379    Amends 1967-68 budget (Special)
2380    Amends 18.88.110, parking lot requirements (Repealed by 3048)
2381    Amends 1967-68 budget (Special)
2382    Amends 18.16.100, 18.18.100, 18.20.100, 18.22.100, 18.24.100, 18.34.100
        and 18.85,110, off-street parking requirements (Repealed by 3048)
2383    Adds 18.04.175, studio dwelling defined (Repealed by 3048)
2384    Rezone (Special)
2385    Fire zone change (Special)
2386    Amends setback lines map (Special)
2387    Amends 18.88.110, surface parking lots (Repealed by 3048)
2388    Amends 10.44.010 and 10.60.030, parking restrictions (Repealed by 4588)
        Amends 2.08.170, 2.08.190, 2.12.090, 2.28.070, 2.28.080, 4.04.050,
2389    4.10.080 and 4.14.040, repeals 6.28.030, technical amendments (2.08
        [Ed. Note], 2.28 [Ed. Note], 4.04 [Ed. Note])
2390    Amends 16.20.180, roof sign height (Repealed by 2749)
2391    Amends 16.20.090, signs, adds 16.20.055, master sign permit (16.20)
2392    Amends 16.20.200, combination signs (16.20 [Ed. Note])
2393    Amends 16.20.180, roof sign location (Repealed by 2749)
2394    Amends 6.12.010 and 6.12.020, impounded animals (6.12)
2395    Amends Ch. 6.16, dogs (6.16)
2396    Amends 6.20.010, animals at large (6.20)
2397    Amends 10.60.140, permit parking (Repealed by 4159)
2398    Adds Ch. 2.34, real property transfer tax (2.34)
2399    Amends 2.04.050, 2.04.110, 2.04.120, 2.04.130, 2.04.160, 2.04.170,
        2.04.200, 2.04.220 and 2.04.240, city council (Repealed by 3488)
2400    Amends 2.04.140, city council (Repealed by 3488)
2401    Rezone (Special)
2402    Amends 13.16.130, supplemental remedies (13.16)
2403    Amends Ch. 4.30, soliciting funds (4.30 [Ed. Note])
2404    Amends 1967-68 budget (Special)
2405    Amends 1967-68 budget (Special)
2406    Annexation (Special)
2407    Establishes fire zones for annexation 1-67 (Special)
2408    Prezoning for annexation 1-67 (Special)
        Amends 18.38.030, 18.38.110, 18.40.040, 18.50.040, 18.60.050, 18.62.050
2409    and 18.64.050, adds 18.38.025, 18.40.025, 18.40.085 and 18.50.025,
        zoning (Repealed by 3048)
2410    Amends 10.44.010, parking restrictions (Repealed by 4588)
2411    Amends 12.16.020, establishes underground utility district 5 (12.16)
2412    Adopts plan to enlarge zoo area of Palo Alto Junior Museum in Rinconada
        Park (Special)
2413    Amends 1967-68 budget (Special)
2414    Designates street 800 feet easterly of East Bayshore Frontage Road as
        Faber Place (Special)
2415    Amends 1967-68 budget (Special)
2416    Amends 12.16.020, establishes Underground Utility District No. 6
        (12.16)
2417    Amends Ch. 16.28, excavations, grading, fills (16.28)
2418    Amends Ch. 18.94, nonconforming uses, non-complying buildings,
        establishes schedule for removal of certain uses (Repealed by 3048)
2419    Adds Ch. 18.95, special amortization districts (Repealed by 3048)
2420    Amends 2.30.090, adds 2.30.091 - 2.30.093, nondiscrimination in
        performance of city contracts (Repealed by 3927)
2421    Adopts plan for development of Baylands Athletic Center, project No.
        66-18 (Special)
2422    Adds 10.44.090, ignitions to be locked, keys removed (Repealed by 4588)
2423    Amends 1967-68 budget (Special)
2424    Amends 1967-68 budget (Special)
2425    Amends 18.84.020, special parking district regulations (Repealed by
        3048)
2426    Amends 16.20.180, location of roof signs (Repealed by 2749)
2427    Annexation (Special)
2428    Amends 16.20.010, 16.20.170 and 16.20.180, signs (16.20 [Ed. Note])
        Amends 2.08.020, 2.08.160 - 2.08.205, 2.08.290, adds 2.08.285 and
2429    2.08.295, reorganizes department of administrative services, creates
        department of community services (2.08 [Ed. Note])
2430    Rezone (Special)
        Amends 21.04.020, 21.04.030, 21.04.040, 21.08.010, 21.08.040,
2431    21.08.070, 21.12.040, 21.12.070, 21.16.010, 21.16.030, 21.16.110,
        21.18.010, Ch. 21.32, repeals 21.12.030, subdivision (Repealed by 3157)
2432    Amends 18.50.020, gasoline service station (Repealed by 3048)
2433    Rezone (Special)
2434    Adopts plan for development of Mitchell Park Recreation Center
        Building, project No. 66-15 (Special)
2435    Amends 1967-68 budget (Special)
2436    Amends Chs. 16.04, 16.08, 16.16, building, plumbing and electrical
        codes (16.04 [Ed. Note], 16.08 [Ed. Note], 16.16 [Ed. Note])
2437    Rezone (Special)
2438    Fire zone change (Special)
2439    Fire zone change (Special)
        Adopts plan for remodeling existing barn into interpretive center and
2440    constructing maintenance yard facility in Foothills Park, project No.
        63-9 (Special)
2441    Adopts 1968-69 budget (Special)
2442    Amends 4.52.040, billiard room hours for minors (4.52 [Ed. Note])
        Amends 13.04.150, 13.12.050, 13.16.150 and 13.20.100, adds 13.12.060,
2443    special assessments and assessment bond procedure (13.04, 13.12, 13.16,
        13.20)
2444    Adds Ch. 18.79, "-C" civic center district regulations (Repealed by
        3048)
2445    Authorizes closing of 1967-68 budget (Special)
2446    Amends 1968-69 budget (Special)
2447    Amends 2.08.100, designates day following Thanksgiving a holiday (2.08
        [Ed. Note])
2448    Adopts plan for development of Juana Briones Park, project No. 65-2
        (Special)
2449    Amends 2.30.091, certificate of nondiscrimination (Repealed by 3927)
2450    Annexation (Special)
2451    Annexation (Special)
        Amends 2.08.010, 2.08.220, 2.08.310, 2.28.190, 8.08.090, 9.56.050,
2452    12.16.040, 13.16.150, 16.40.170, 18.90.030, functions and duties of
        city assessor, repeals 2.08.140 (2.08 [Ed. Note], 2.28 [Ed. Note],
        8.08, 9.56, 12.16, 13.16, 16.40)
2453    Amendment to contract between city and board of administration of the
        California Public Employees' Retirement System (Special)
2454    Calls special election on question of discontinuance of use of certain
        lands as a public park (Special)
2455    Amends 18.94.120(b) and (c), zoning (Repealed by 3048)
2456    Rezone (Special)
2457    Rezone (Special)
2458    Rezone (Special)
2459    Fixes tax rate for fiscal year 1968-69 (Special)
2460    Fixes ad valorem assessment for 1968-69, off-street parking project
        Nos. 52-13 and 52-14 (Special)
2461    Fixes ad valorem assessment for 1968-69, off-street parking project No.
        55-5 (Special)
2462    Fixes ad valorem assessment for 1968-69, California Avenue district -
        Birch Street project No. 59-3 (Special)
2463    Fixes ad valorem assessment for 1968-69, beautification project No. 60-
        5 (Special)
2464    Fixes ad valorem assessment for 1968-69, off-street parking project No.
        60-8 (Special)
2465    Calls special municipal bond election for sewage treatment facilities
        (Special)
2466    Adopts plan for development of portions of Rinconada Park (Special)
2467    Adds 22.08.211, Rinconada Park Addition (Title 22 [Ed. Note])
2468    Adopts plan for dredging of Palo Alto Yacht Harbor (Special)
2469    Adopts plan for development of Baylands nature interpretive center
        (Special)
2470    Amends 10.64.180(a), adds 10.28.050 and 10.32.040, bicycles (10.28,
        10.32, 10.64)
2471    Rezones and establishes zone (Special)
2472    Amends 1968-69 budget (Special)
2473    Amends Ch. 18.79, zoning (Repealed by 3048)
2474    Adopts a plan for development of Byxbee Park and city-owned Baylands
        (Special)
2475    Adopts Duck Pond development plan (Special)
2476    Amends 4.42.180(6), medical examination for taxicab driver (Repealed by
        3286)
2477    Rezone (Special)
        Validates organization, boundaries, engineering documents, filing
2478    procedures, notices, assessments, contracts and assessment bonds [See
        Title 13 Ed. Note] (Not codified )
2480    Amends 1968-69 budget (Special)
2481    Amends 22.08.020, parcel deleted from Byxbee Park and city-owned
        Baylands (22.08 [Ed. Note])
2482    Amends 1968-69 budget (Special)
2483    Amends 1968-69 budget (Special)
2484    Amends Ch. 22.04, park and recreation building use and regulations
        (Title 22 [Ed. Note])
2485    Adds Ch. 2.22, human relations commission (2.22)
2486    Amends 12.16.020, underground utility districts (12.16)
2487    Amends 18.88.100 working on motor vehicles (Repealed by 3048)
2488    Adds 22.08.001, 22.08.002, 22.08.003, 22.08.004, 22.08.005, 22.08.006,
        22.08.007, park dedications, repeals 22.08.290 (Title 22 [Ed. Note])
2489    Amends 16.20.010, 16.20.230, adds 16.20.105, flashing and moving signs
        (16.20 [Ed. Note])
2490    Amends 12.16.020, underground utility districts (12.16)
2491    Rezone (Special)
2492    Rezone (Special)
2493    Amends 1968-69 budget (Special)
2494    Suspends issuance of building permits in certain districts (Repealed by
        2506)
2495    Amends 2.04.050, council meeting agenda (Repealed by 3488)
2496    Amends 10.32.040 and 10.64.180(a), traffic (10.32, 10.64)
        Amends 18.38.020, 18.44.020, 18.50.020, 18.54.110, 18.56.110,
2497    18.58.050, 18.60.060, 18.62.040 and 18.64.040, zoning (Repealed by
        3048)
2498    Amends 13.16.150, special assessment and assessment bond procedures
        (13.16)
2499    Amends 1968-69 budget (Special)
2500    Amends 18.88.110 and adds 18.88.120, zoning (Repealed by 3048)
2501    Amends 1968-69 budget (Special)
2502    Amends 12.16.020, underground utilities (12.16)
2503    Amends Ord. 2494, suspension of building permits (Repealed by 2506)
2504    Amends 18.22.100, zoning (Repealed by 3048)
2505    Suspends issuance of building permits in certain districts (Special)
2506    Rescinds Ords. 2494 and 2503, suspension of building permits (Repealer)
2507    Adopts 1969-70 budget (Special)
2508    Amends 10.60.030 and 10.60.140, traffic (Repealed by 4159)
2509    Authorizes closing of 1968-69 budget (Special)
2510    Amends 2.08.100 holidays (2.08 [Ed. Note])
2511    Amends 5.20.010 and 5.20.230, refuse (5.20 [Ed. Note])
2512    Amends 18.92.020 and 18.92.040, zoning (Repealed by 3048)
2513    Rezone (Special)
2514    Amends 1969-70 budget (Special)
2515    Rezone (Special)
2516    Amends 21.32.020, subdivisions (Repealed by 3157)
2517    Rezone (Special)
2518    Rezone (Special)
2519    Adds 21.32.015, subdivisions (Repealed by 3157)
2520    Amends 2.04.260, 2.08.120, repeals 2.04.290, 4.42.160, 4.42.310 and
        4.42.320 (2.08 [Ed. Note])
2521    Fixes ad valorem assessment for 1969-70, off-street parking projects
        Nos. 52-13 and 52-14 (Special)
2522    Fixes tax rate for 1969-70 (Special)
2523    Fixes ad valorem assessment for 1969-70, off-street parking project No.
        55-5 (Special)
2524    Fixes ad valorem assessment for 1969-70, off-street parking project No.
        59-3 (Special)
2525    Fixes ad valorem assessment for 1969-70, off-street parking project No.
        60-5 (Special)
2526    Fixes ad valorem assessment for 1969-70, off-street parking project No.
        60-8 (Special)
2527    Adds 12.16.091 - 12.16.097, financing service connection conversions
        (12.16)
        Amends 2.08.020, 2.08.150, 2.08.170, 2.08.180, 2.08.190, 2.08.200,
        2.08.205, 2.08.210, 2.08.230, 2.08.240, 2.08.280, 2.08.300, 4.18.020,
2528    6.28.040, 13.16.150, 18.98.030, 18.98.040, 18.98.050, 18.98.060,
        18.98.080, 21.08.060 and Ch. 21.32; repeals 21.08.240; administrative
        changes (2.08 [Ed. Note], 4.18, 6.28 [Ed. Note], 13.16)
        Validates organization, boundaries, engineering documents, filing
2529    procedures, notices, assessments, contracts and assessment bonds [See
        Title 13 Ed. Note] (Not codified )
2530    Amends 22.04.040 and Exh. A (Title 22 [Ed. Note])
2531    Amends 1969-70 budget (Special)
2532    Amends 18.10.030, 18.22.020, 18.22.030 and 18.26.030; repeals 18.04.150
        and 18.04.390, zoning (Repealed by 3048)
2533    Rezone (Special)
2534    Adopts plan for development of Baylands Nature Interpretive Center
        (Special)
2535    Establishes street names (Special)
2536    Rezone (Special)
2537    Amends 2.22.010, 2.22.020 and 2.22.030, human relations commission
        (2.22)
2538    Amends 1969-70 budget (Special)
2539    Suspends issuance of building permits for certain structures (Special)
2540    Amends 1969-70 budget (Special)
2541    Amends 10.56.010, decrease of speed on certain portions of Willow Road
        (10.56)
2542    Amends 1969-70 budget (Special)
2543    Amends 12.36.010, Underground Utility District No. 12 (12.36)
2544    Amends 10.36.010, parking (Repealed by 4588)
2545    Rezone (Special)
2546    Fire zone change (Special)
2547    Amends 2.04.010, council meeting place (Repealed by 3488)
2548    Rezone (Special)
2549    Amends 1969-70 budget (Special)
2550    Special election (Special)
2551    Rezone (Special)
2552    Rezone (Special)
2553    Adds Chapter 9.60, Civic Center Block regulations (Repealed by 4575)
2554    Rezone (Special)
2555    Amends 22.04.070(b), crowd control at public gatherings (Title 22 [Ed.
        Note])
2556    Amends 9.12.010, open air loudspeakers (9.12)
2557    Amends 1969-70 budget (Special)
2558    Amends 16.20.010, 16.20.060, 16.20.065, 16.20.310, temporary signs
        (16.20)
2559    Rezone (Special)
2560    Adds Ch. 18.87, mechanical access parking facilities (Repealed by 3048)
2561    Amends 2.20.010, 2.20.020, 2.20.030, planning commission, deletes
        2.16.040 (2.20 [Ed. Note])
2562    Adopts 1970-71 budget (Special)
2563    Rezone (Special)
2564    Authorizes closing of 1970-71 budget (Special)
2565    Rezone (Special)
        Amends 4.04.060, 4.10.040, 4.10.060, 4.14.040, 5.20.230, 6.12.020,
2566    6.16.020, 9.04.020, 10.44.020, 12.08.040, 18.98.040, and 21.18.010,
        fees (4.04 [Ed. Note], 4.10, 5.20 [Ed. Note], 6.12, 6.16, 12.08)
2567    Adds Ch. 2.33, transient occupancy tax (2.33)
2568    Rezone (Special)
2569    Amends 2.08.100, holidays (2.08 [Ed. Note])
2570    Temporary deletion of land from 22.08.230, El Camino Park. Land to
        revert to previous uses on October 14, 1970 (Special)
2571    Adds 13.12.080, parking authority (13.12)
2572    Assessment (Special)
2573    Assessment (Special)
2574    Assessment (Special)
2575    Assessment (Special)
2576    Tax rate for 1970-71 (Special)
2577    Adds 16.04.075, building code amendment (Repealed by 3215)
2578    Amends 2.04.010, council meeting (Repealed by 3488)
2579    Amends 2.04.230, 2.04.250, 2.04.260 and 2.04.270, committees (Repealed
        by 3488)
2580    Budget appropriation (Special)
2581    Amends 16.04.075, building code (Repealed by 2591)
2582    Amends 16.20.140, signs (16.20 [Ed. Note])
2583    Adds 22.08.212, Rinconada Park Addition (Title 22 [Ed. Note])
2584    Rinconada Park improvement (Special)
2585    Rezone (Special)
2586    Amendment of employee retirement system contract (Special)
2587    1970-71 budget appropriation adjustment (Special)
2588    1970-71 budget appropriation adjustment (Special)
2589    Rezone (Repealed by 2597)
2590    Amends 18.26.030, zoning (Repealed by 3048)
2591    Adds 16.04.077, demolition permits, repeals Ord. 2581 (Repealed by
        3215)
2592    Rezone (Special)
2593    Adds Chapter 10.10, temporary street closures (10.10)
2594    Amends 22.04.020, 22.04.060, 22.04.100, 22.04.180, 22.04.310, park
        regulations (Title 22 [Ed. Note])
2595    Amends 10.44.020, street parking (Repealed by 4588)
2596    Amends 1970-71 budget (Special)
2597    Repeals Ord. 2589, rezone (Repealer)
2598    Rezone (Special)
2599    Adopts Hoover Park development plan (Not codified)
2600    Amends 16.16.010, 16.16.030, 16.16.060, 16.16.090, 16.16.280 and
        16.16.350, repeals 16.16.020, electrical code (16.16 [Ed. Note])
2601    Amends 6.16.010 - 6.16.050 and 6.16.070 - 6.16.090, dogs (6.16)
        Amends 18.40.030, 18.42.025, 18.44.025, 18.46.040, 18.48.025,
2602    18.50.030, 18.54.030, 18.56.030 and 18.90.085, on-sale liquor license
        (Repealed by 3048)
2603    Adds 22.08.290, Timothy Hopkins Park (Title 22 [Ed. Note])
2604    Adds 22.08.300, El Palo Alto Park (Title 22 [Ed. Note])
        Adds 16.04.105, 16.04.115, 16.04.315, 16.04.390 and 16.04.410; amends
        16.04.010, 16.04.020. 16.04.070, 16.04.090, 16.04.100, 16.04.120,
2605    16.04.190, 16.04.220, 16.04.270, 16.04.280, 16.04.300 16.04.310,
        16.04.370 and 16.04.380; repeals 16.04.150, 16.04.240, 16.04.330,
        16.04.340 and 16.04.350, building code (16.04 [Ed. Note])
        Amends 16.08.010, 16.08.030, 16.08.120, 16.08.140, 16.08.150, 16.08.165
2606    and 16.08.170, repeals 16.08.180 - 16.08.200, plumbing code (Repealed
        by 3215)
2607    Amends 2.04.230, 2.04.250 and 2.04.260, repeals 2.04.270, standing
        committees of city council (Repealed by 3488)
2608    Budget for 1971-72 (Special)
2609    Closing budget 1970-71 (Special)
2610    Adds 22.04.320, amends 22.04.030, 22.04.040, 22.04.080, 22.04.130 and
        22.04.260, park regulations (Title 22 [Ed. Note])
        Amends 2.08.020, 2.08.260, 2.08.270, 2.08.310, 12.16.010, 12.16.050,
        12.16.070, 12.16.080, 12.16.092, 12.16.093, 16.08.160, 16.16.130,
2611    16.16.140, 16.16.150, 16.16.250, 16.32.030, 16.32.040 and 21.32.040,
        department of utilities (2.08 [Ed. Note], 12.16, 16.16 [Ed. Note],
        16.32)
2612    Establishes six-month moratorium on land division and construction
        (Special)
2613    Amends 1971-72 budget (Special)
2614    Rezone (Special)
2615    Rezone (Special)
2616    Adds subsection (13) to 12.16.020, Underground Utility District No. 13
        (12.16)
2617    Amends 2.04.180, prohibits smoking in council conference room (Repealed
        by 3488)
2618    Fixes tax rate for 1971-72 (Special)
2619    Amends 1971-72 budget (Special)
2620    Amends 18.88.100, vehicle work on residential lot (Repealed by 3048)
2621    Fixes ad valorem assessment for 1971-72 (Special)
2622    Fixes ad valorem assessment for 1971-72 (Special)
2623    Fixes ad valorem assessment for 1971-72 (Special)
2624    Fixes ad valorem assessment for 1971-72 (Special)
2625    Amends 1971-72 budget (Special)
2626    Adds 16.04.420 - 16.04.440, housing code (Repealed by 3215)
        Amends 2.24.140, disability pay, 5.20.230(b), refuse disposal, and
2627    22.04.150(a), use of Foothills Park (5.20 [Ed. Note], Title 22 [Ed.
        Note])
2628    Amends 12.16.020, Utility District No. 14 (12.16)
2629    Amends 1971-72 budget (Special)
2630    Amends 1971-72 budget (Special)
2631    Amends 1971-72 budget (Special)
2632    Amends 1971-72 budget (Special)
2633    Amends 2.04.200, city council minutes (Repealed by 3488)
2634    Amends 1971-72 budget (Special)
        Amends 2.08.130(6), 2.08.200(9), (10), 2.24.010 and 2.28.030, adds
2635    2.08.075, 2.28.075, 2.28.200 and 2.30.075, accounting and auditing
        procedures, insurance and liability coverage (2.08 [Ed. Note], 2.28
        [Ed. Note])
2636    Repeals 9.32.090, hypnotism (Repealer)
2637    Rezone (Special)
2638    Amends 1971-72 budget (Special)
2639    Amends 1971-72 budget (Special)
2640    Rezone (Special)
2641    Amends Ch. 2.12, emergency organization and functions (2.12)
        Amends 2.30.020, 2.30.040, 2.30.050, 2.30.070, 2.30.080, 2.30.100 -
2642    2.30.140 and 2.30.180, contracts and purchasing procedure (Repealed by
        3927)
2643    Amends Exh. A-12 of 22.08.150, dedication of Hoover Park (Title 22 [Ed.
        Note])
2644    Amends 1971-72 budget (Special)
2645    Amends 10.04.050, holidays, and adds 10.36.090, parking (Repealed by
        4588)
2646    Amends 1971-72 budget (Special)
        Moratorium on subdivisions, divisions of land, zone changes, use
2647    permits, and building and grading permit issuance in area southerly of
        Junipero Serra freeway, known as The Foothills, for six months
        (Special)
2648    Amends 1971-72 budget (Special)
2649    Rezone (Special)
2650    Amends 6.16.020 and 6.16.030, dog licenses (6.16)
2651    Rezone (Special)
        Adds 10.64.004, 10.64.008, 10.64.185 and 10.64.187, amends 10.04.040,
        10.64.100, 10.64.180 and 10.64.190, bicycle lanes and regulations,
2652    business district defined, repeals 10.64.110 and 10.64.150 [Ed. Note:
        The sections of Ch. 10.64 were subsequently renumbered by Ord. 2877]
        (10.64)
2653    Adds subsection (15) to 12.16.020, underground utilities (12.16)
2654    Adds Ch. 18.71, O-S Open Space District (Repealed by 3048)
2655    Amends 18.88.120(d), permit to construct paved areas (Repealed by 3048)
2656    Rezone (Special)
2657    Adds Ch. 9.14, smoking in theaters (9.14 [Ed. Note])
2658    Fire zone changes (Special)
2659    Budget for 1972-73 (Special)
2660    Closing budget for 1971-72 (Special)
2661    Amends 10.48.090(2), truck route regulations (10.48)
        Adds 2.08.165, amends 2.08.010, 2.08.020, 2.08.150, 2.08.160, 2.08.170,
        2.08.180, 2.08.190, 2.08.200, 2.08.205, 2.08.210, 2.08.220, 2.08.230,
2662    2.08.240, 2.08.250, 2.08.260, 2.08.275, 2.08.280, 2.08.285, 2.08.290,
        2.08.295, 2.08.300, 2.08.310, 8.08.020, 8.08.030, 8.08.050, 8.08.060,
        8.08.070, and 8.08.080 officers and departments (2.08 [Ed. Note], 8.08)
2663    Agricultural preserves (Not codified)
2664    Adds Ch. 9.10, noise abatement (9.10 [Ed. Note])
2665    Rezone (Special)
2666    Rezone (Special)
2667    Rezone (Special)
2668    Amends 1972-73 budget (Special)
        Amend Chs. 6.04, 6.08, 6.12 and 6.28 and 2.08.220, 4.04.020, 4.04.050,
2669    4.18.010, 6.16.030, 6.16.040, 6.16.050, 6.16.070, 6.16.090, 6.20.050,
        6.32.020 and 6.32.040, animals (2.08 [Ed. Note], 4.04 [Ed. Note], 4.18,
        6.04, 6.08, 6.12, 6.16, 6.20, 6.28, 6.32)
2670    Adds 18.90.160, variance duration (Repealed by 3048)
2671    Rezone (Special)
2672    Tax rate for 1972-73 (Special)
2673    Ad valorem assessment for 1972-73 (Special)
2674    Ad valorem assessment for 1972-73 (Special)
2675    Ad valorem assessment for 1972-73 (Special)
2676    Amends 1972-73 budget (Special)
2677    Adds 4.42.365, amends 4.42.030, 4.42.050, 4.42.140, 4.42.190 and
        4.42.360, vehicles for hire (Repealed by 3286)
2678    Rezone (Special)
2679    Amends 1972-73 budget (Special)
2680    [Number not used]
        Adds 1.08.110, 9.44.020, 9.44.030 and subsections (d) and (e) to
        4.10.050, amends 94.10.050(c), 4.30.010, 9.44.020 and chapter name of
2681    Ch. 9.44, nonpayment of city fees, peddlers, soliciting funds,
        handbills and advertising, repeals Ch. 9.04 (1.08, 4.10, 4.30 [Ed.
        Note], 9.44 [Ed. Note])
        Adds 2.20.015, 2.22.015, planning commission and human relations
2682    commission appointments (2.20 [Ed. Note], 2.22) ( 2.22.015 repealed by
        5208)
2683    Adds (c) to 2.04.060, amends 2.04.060(a), order of business at council
        meetings (Repealed by 3488)
2684    Amends 1972-73 budget (Special)
2685    Amends 1972-73 budget (Special)
2686    Amends 1972-73 budget (Special)
2687    Amends Ord. 1896, establishes two-hundred-foot setback from Skyline
        Boulevard, Page Mill Road and Arastradero Road (Special)
2688    Rezone (Special)
2689    Amends 1972-73 budget (Special)
2690    Adds 10.04.045, 10.08.025, community service officer (10.08)
2691    Amends 1972-73 budget (Special)
2692    Rezone (Special)
2693    Amends 1972-73 budget (Special)
2694    Deletes 2.04.060(a)(10) and renumbers (11) and (12), order of business
        of council meetings (Repealed by 3488)
2695    Amends Ch. 2.28, fiscal procedures (2.28 [Ed. Note])
2696    Amends 1972-73 budget (Special)
2697    Amends 1972-73 budget (Special)
2698    Adds Title 11, environmental impact procedure (Repealed by 3061)
        Moratorium on demolition of Type V structures used partly or wholly for
2699    residential or dwelling purposes located within boundaries of
        University Avenue fire zone 1 for nine months to conduct studies,
        exception procedure (Special)
2700    Rezone (Special)
2701    Amends 1972-73 budget (Special)
2702    Amends 1972-73 budget (Special)
2703    Adds Ch. 16.48, architectural review, amends 18.88.120(c), plan review
        (Repealed by 4826)
2704    Amends 16.20.190(g), adds (h) to 916.20.190, election signs (16.20 [Ed.
        Note])
2705    Rezone, amends fire zone map (Special)
2706    Rezone (Special)
2707    Transfer of funds (Special)
2708    Transfer of funds (Special)
2709    Adds Ch. 4.15, owning and managing apartment complexes (Repealed by
        2866)
2710    Appropriation (Special)
2711    Rezone (Special)
2712    Rezone (Special)
2713    Amends 10.12.040(b) and 10.36.070(a), traffic (10.12)
2714    Amends 5.08.290, food handlers, repeals 4.14.160 (Repealed by 4089)
2715    Appropriation (Special)
2716    Rezone, amends 18.87.020, zoning, repeals Ch. 18.58 and 18.42.040,
        18.44.040, 18.46.050, 18.48.040 and 18.79.080 (Repealed by 3048)
2717    Amends 16.48.020, architectural review (Repealed by 4826)
2718    Suspends operation of 3 of Ord. 2740, architectural review board
        (Special)
2719    Appropriation (Special)
2720    Amends 4.15.010(1), apartment complexes (Repealed by 2866)
2721    Amends Ord. 2709 2, apartment complexes (Not codified)
2722    Appropriation (Special)
2723    1973-74 budget (Special)
2724    Closes 1972-73 budget (Special)
2725    Grants easement to Pacific Gas and Electric Co. (Special)
2726    Amends 16.08.160, Uniform Plumbing Code, adds Ch. 16.09, industrial
        wastes (16.09 [Ed. Note]) (Ch. 16.09 repealed by 5084)
2727    Appropriation (Special)
2728    Names street (Special)
2729    Amends 18.90.085, alcoholic beverages (Repealed by 3048)
2730    Rezone (Special)
2731    Appropriation (Special)
2732    Appropriation (Special)
2733    Appropriation (Special)
        Adds 18.04.144, 18.04.145 and 18.04.215, amends 18.10.030(a), 18.12.030
2734    (a), 18.14.030(a), 18.20.030(b), 18.24.030(c), 18.90.040(a) and adds
        (d) to 18.88.050, zoning (Repealed by 3048)
2735    Reclassifies positions (Special)
2736    1973-74 tax rate (Special)
2737    Appropriation (Special)
2738    Adds Ch. 9.64, abandoned vehicles [Ed. Note: Renumbered and relocated
        by Ord. 4453] (10.34)
2739    Amends 2.08.180(7), 2.30.040(e), 2.30.080(a) and 2.30.100, adds (c) to
        2.30.050, purchasing (2.08 [Ed. Note])
2740    Amends Ch. 10.56, special speed zones (10.56)
2741    1973-74 ad valorem assessments (Special)
2742    1973-74 ad valorem assessments (Special)
2743    1973-74 ad valorem assessments (Special)
2744    Rezone (Special)
        Amends 18.24.110, 18.26.120, 18.32.060, 18.34.110, 18.40.080,
2745    18.48.080, 18.54.090(a), 18.56.090(a), 18.79.050, 18.90.030(b),
        18.90.060; adds 18.22.140, 18.26.140, zoning (Repealed by 3048)
2746    Amends 1973-74 budget (Special)
2747    Amends 2.16.030; adds 2.04.390, expense allowances (2.16)
2748    Amends 1973-74 budget (Special)
2749    Amends 16.20.105 and 16.20.200, signs; repeals 16.20.180 (16.20 [Ed.
        Note])
2750    Extends moratorium of Ord. 2699 (Special)
2751    Temporarily halts conversion of apartment buildings into condominiums
        (Special)
2752    Adds Ch. 4.32, soliciting information for commercial purposes (4.32)
        Amends 4.30.030, 4.30.040, 4.30.050, 4.30.070 and 4.30.080, soliciting
2753    funds; repeals 4.30.060, 4.30.100, 4.30.110 and 4.30.120 (4.30 [Ed.
        Note])
2754    Amends 4.10.040; adds 4.10.055, 4.10.090 and 4.10.100, peddlers and
        solicitors (4.10)
2755    Amends Ch. 4.04, business licenses (4.04)
2756    Amends Ch. 2.32, sales and use tax; repeals Ords. 1709 and 2062 (2.32)
2757    Amends 12.16.020, Underground Utility District No. 16 (12.16)
2758    Amends retirement system contract (Special)
2759    Amends 1973-74 budget (Special)
2760    Amends 1973-74 budget (Special)
2761    Amends 1973-74 budget (Special)
2762    Amends 1973-74 budget (Special)
2763    Amends 1973-74 budget (Special)
        Amends 18.40.020(a), 18.40.030(b), 18.50.020(a), 18.50.030(a),
2764    18.54.020(a), 18.54.030(a); adds Chs. 18.17 and 18.23 and 18.40.020(h),
        18.40.035, 18.40.100, 18.50.020(f), 18.50.035, 18.50.090, 18.54.020(e),
        18.54.035 and 18.54.120, zoning (Repealed by 2775)
2765    Amends Ord. 2750 to extend moratorium and temporarily suspend Ch. 16.32
        (Special)
2766    Approves annexation (Special)
2767    Amends 4.42.290, taxicabs (Repealed by 3286)
2768    Amends 13.16.080 and Ch. 21.18, assessments and fees (13.16)
2769    Amends 1973-74 budget (Special)
2770    Amends 1.08.010; adds 6.16.110, 6.20.040 and 6.20.100, violations
        (1.08, 6.16, 6.20)
2771    Amends 10.64.185, bicycles [Ed. Note: This section was subsequently
        renumbered by Ord. 2877 to be 10.64.140] (10.64)
2772    Amends 1973-74 budget (Special)
2773    Amends 10.44.020, parking (Repealed by 4588)
2774    Adds Ch. 2.10, conflict of interest guidelines (Repealed by 3325)
2775    Repeals Ord. 2764, zoning (Repealer)
2776    Adds Ch. 2.11, disclosure of financial interests (Repealed by 3161)
2777    Rezone and fire zone reclassification (Special)
2778    Amends 16.20.280, signs (16.20 [Ed. Note])
2779    Amends 1973-74 budget (Special)
2780    Amends 1973-74 budget (Special)
2781    Amends 1973-74 budget (Special)
2782    Amends 1973-74 budget (Special)
2783    Amends 1973-74 budget (Special)
2784    Amends 2.24.140, temporary disability payments (Repealed by 4122)
2785    Rezone (Special)
        Amends (a) and deletes (h) of 18.38.020, adds 18.38.035, amends (a) and
        deletes (g) of 18.40.020, deletes (b) and reletters (c) and (d) of
        18.40.030, adds 18.40.035, amends 18.42.030. 18.44.030, 18.46.030 and
        18.48.030, amends (a) and deletes (e) of 18.50.020, amends 18.50.030,
2786    adds 18.50.035, amends (a), deletes (c) and reletters (d) of 18.54.020,
        deletes (a) and reletters (c) and (c) of 18.54.030, adds 18.54.035.
        amends (a), deletes (c) and reletters (d) of 18.56.020, deletes (a) and
        reletters (b), (c) and (d) of 18.56.030, adds 18.56.035, adds (c) to
        18.60.030, (c) to 18.62.030 and (c) to 18.64.030, zoning (Repealed by
        3048)
2787    Sanitary sewer easement relocation agreement (Special)
2788    Amends 1973-74 budget (Special)
2789    Extends suspension of conversion of apartment buildings to condominiums
        (Special)
2790    Amends 18.08.010, 18.08.020 and 18.96.020 and adds Ch. 18.81, zoning
        (Repealed by 3048)
2791    Amends retirement system contract (Special)
2792    Approves and adopts expansion plan for lawn bowling green clubhouse
        (Special)
2793    Approves and adopts improvement plan for Mitchell Park (Special)
2794    Approves and adopts plan for College Terrace Library preschool center
        (Special)
2795    Approves and adopts improvement plan for Foothills Park Oak Grove
        restroom (Special)
2796    Approves and adopts improvement plan for Peers Park (Special)
2797    Amends 1973-74 budget (Special)
2798    Amends (j), (m), (t), (u) and (dd) of 13.16.150 and adds (y) to
        13.16.130 and 13.16.160, assessment bond procedures (13.16)
2799    Adopts 1974-75 budget (Special)
2800    Adds 16.20.145, fuel price signs (16.20 [Ed. Note])
2801    Amends 1974-75 budget (Special)
2802    Amends 1974-75 budget (Special)
2803    Amends 1974-75 budget (Special)
2804    Amends 1974-75 budget (Special)
2805    Amends 1974-75 budget (Special)
2806    Amends 1974-75 budget (Special)
2807    Tax rate for 1974-75 (Special)
        Amends 2.04.110(c)(2)(B) and 2.04.375, council procedures, amends
        2.08.020, first sentence of 2.08.160, 2.08.165 and 2.08.170, amends
        first sentence of and adds (10) to 2.08.180, amends 2.08.190, adds
        2.08.195, amends first sentence, (1) and (4) of and adds (10) to
2808    2.08.200, adds 2.08.203, amends first sentence and (1), (5) and (6),
        deletes (9) and renumbers (10) through (12) of 2.08.240, amends
        2.08.250, amends first sentence and (5), (8), (10) and (11) of
        2.08.260, amends first two sentences, deletes (7) and renumbers (8) of
        2.08.275 and amends first sentence and (8) of 2.08.300, offices and
        departments (2.08 [Ed. Note])
        Amends 16.04.010, 16.04.020, 16.04.040, 16.04.050, 16.04.115,
        16.04.160, 16.04.170, 16.04.190, 16.04.270, 16.04.300, 16.04.310,
        16.04.320, 16.04.380, 16.04.400, 16.04.410, 16.04.420, 16.04.430 and
2809    16.04.440 and adds 16.04.125, 16.04.145, 16.04.150, 16.04.240,
        16.04.263, 16.04.265 and 16.04.295, uniform codes; deletes 16.04.110,
        16.04.140, 16.04.200, 16.04.210, 16.04.280 and 16.04.315 (16.04 [Ed.
        Note])
2810    Amends Ch. 16.08, plumbing code (Repealed by 3215)
2811    Amends Ch. 16.16, electrical code (16.16 [Ed. Note])
2812    Amends Title 15, fire prevention (Repealed by 3123)
2813    Amends 2.22.050 and adds 2.22.060 and 2.22.070, human relations
        commission (2.22)
2814    Adds (17) to 12.16.020, underground utility districts (12.16)
2815    Fixes ad valorem assessment for 1974-75, California Avenue district
        off-street parking project No. 55-5 (Special)
2816    Fixes ad valorem assessment for 1974-75, California Avenue district
        off-street parking project No. 60-8 (Special)
2817    Fixes ad valorem assessment for 1974-75, University Avenue district
        off-street parking project Nos. 52-13 and 52-14 (Special)
2818    Amends 16.20.120(d), 16.20.170(a)(1) and 16.20.170(b)(1) and adds (d)
        to 16.20.230 and 16.20.320, signs (16.20 [Ed. Note])
2819    Amends 1974-75 budget (Special)
2820    Amends 1974-75 budget (Special)
2821    Adds Chs. 16.38 and 21.33, condominium conversions (16.38)
2822    Approves and adopts Baylands pistol range improvement plan (Special)
2823    Street renaming (Special)
2824    Amends 1974-75 budget (Special)
2825    Amends 1974-75 budget (Special)
2826    Amends 1974-75 budget (Special)
2827    Adds 22.08.065, Cogswell Plaza Extension (Title 22 [Ed. Note])
2828    Approves and adopts plans for the improvement of the Cogswell Plaza
        Extension (Special)
2829    Approves contract amendment (Special)
2830    Rezone (Special)
2831    Names bicycle/pedestrian bridge (Special)
2832    Amends 1974-75 budget (Special)
2833    Adds Ch. 4.54, massage establishments (4.54)
2834    Adds (18) to 12.16.020, underground utility districts (12.16)
2835    Adds 16.04.185, special flood hazard area (Repealed by 3158)
2836    Rezone (Special)
2837    Adds (5) to 18.71.060, uses requiring use permits (Repealed by 3048)
2838    Approves and adopts plans for the improvement of the Palo Alto Yacht
        Harbor (Special)
        Amends 2.04.060(a)(3) and (4) and 2.04.240(a); adds 2.04.060(d) and
2839    2.04.065; renumbers old 2.04.060(a), city council regulations (Repealed
        by 3488)
2840    Authorizes contract amendment (Special)
2841    Rezone (Special)
2842    Amends 9.14.020, 9.14.030 and 9.14.040; adds 9.14.050, smoking
        restrictions (9.14 [Ed. Note])
2843    Adds 2.40.040, municipal election contribution publication (2.40)
2844    Adds 10.32.050, pedestrians on Foothill Expressway (10.32)
2845    Amends 1974-75 budget (Special)
2846    Approves and adopts plan for storage building in Foothills Park
        (Special)
2847    Amends 16.48.020, architectural review applicability (Repealed by 4826)
2848    Amends 16.20.200, adds 16.20.180 and subsections (5b) to 16.20.010, (i)
        to 16.20.190 and (e) to 16.20.230, sign regulations (16.20 [Ed. Note])
2849    Amends 1974-75 budget (Special)
2850    Amends 1974-75 budget (Special)
2851    Adds 22.08.185, Monroe Mini-Park (Title 22 [Ed. Note])
2852    Amends subsection (2) of subdivision F of 16.38.060, property report
        relating to community housing (16.38)
2853    Approves and adopts plan for groundwater recharge system (Special)
2854    Approves and adopts plan for bicycle/pedestrian bridge and pathway in
        Timothy Hopkins Creekside Park (Special)
2855    Amends 1974-75 budget (Special)
2856    Rezone (Special)
2857    Rezone (Special)
2858    Amends 1974-75 budget (Special)
2859    Annexation (Special)
2860    Adopts 1975-76 budget (Special)
2861    Amends 22.08.010, John Lucas Greer Park (Title 22 [Ed. Note])
2862    Amends 5.20.230, refuse disposal area fees (5.20 [Ed. Note])
        Amends 4.10.040, 4.42.390, 4.52.110, 6.12.020, 10.64.060 (repealed by
        5432), 11.08.040, 15.04.240, 16.04.090, 16.20.050, 16.24.100,
2863    16.48.060, 16.48.100, 18.82.010, 18.90.040, 18.90.100, 18.92.020,
        21.32.090, 21.36.010, Ch. 21.18 and subsections (b) of 4.10.060, (a) of
        6.16.030, (g) of 15.04.190 and (b) of 16.08.120, fees (4.52 [Ed. Note],
        6.12, 6.16, 10.64, 16.20 [Ed. Note], 16.24 [Ed. Note])
2864    Approves and adopts plan for improvement of Byxbee Park and city-owned
        Baylands (Special)
2865    Adds 16.24.120, fences (16.24 [Ed. Note])
2866    Repeals Ch. 4.15 (Repealer)
2867    Amends 1975-76 budget (Special)
2868    Tax rate for 1975-76 (Special)
2869    Fixes ad valorem assessment for 1975-76, University Avenue district
        off-street parking projects Nos. 52-13 and 52-14 (Special)
2870    Fixes ad valorem assessment for 1975-76, California Avenue district
        off-street parking project No. 55-5 (Special)
2871    Fixes ad valorem assessment for 1975-76, California Avenue district
        off-street parking project No. 60-8 (Special)
2872    Approves and adopts plans for improvement of Palo Alto Yacht Harbor
        (Special)
2873    Amends 1975-76 budget (Special)
2874    Amends 1975-76 budget (Special)
2875    Amends 1975-76 budget (Special)
2876    Amends 1975-76 budget (Special)
        Amends 10.64.010 (repealed by 5432) and 10.64.020, renumbers and amends
        10.64.050, 10.64.070 and 10.64.100, and renumbers 10.64.040, 10.64.060
        (repealed by 5432), 10.64.120, 10.64.130, 10.64.140 10.64.160,
2877    10.64.170, 10.64.180, 10.64.185, 10.64.187, 10.64.190, 10.64.200,
        10.64.210, 10.64.220, 10.64.230, 10.64.240, 10.64.250, 20.64.260,
        10.64.270 and 10.64.280, bicycles, roller skates and coasters, repeals
        10.64.030, 10.64.080 and 10.64.090 (10.64)
2878    Improvement plan for Esther Clark Park (Special)
2879    Amends 1975-76 budget (Special)
2880    Rezone (Special)
2881    Amends 1975-76 budget (Special)
2882    Amends 1975-76 budget (Special)
2883    Amends 1975-76 budget (Special)
2884    Annexation (Special)
2885    Amends 1975-76 budget (Special)
2886    Amends 1975-76 budget (Special)
2887    Amends 1975-76 budget (Special)
2888    Amends 18.04.144, zoning (Repealed by 3048)
2889    Improvement plan for El Camino Park (Special)
2890    Rezone (Special)
2891    Amends 10.56.010 and 10.56.030, speed limits (10.56)
2892    Adds Chs. 2.18, visual arts jury, and 2.26, visual art in public places
        (2.18 [Ed. Note], 2.26)
2893    Approves and adopts plan for dog exercise areas in Greer Park, Hoover
        Park and Mitchell Park (Special)
2894    Rezone (Special)
2895    [Number not used]
2896    Amends 1975-76 budget (Special)
2897    Amends 1975-76 budget (Special)
2898    Amends fire zone map (Special)
2899    Amends 1975-76 budget (Special)
2900    Amends 1975-76 budget (Special)
2901    Annexation (Special)
2902    Improvement plan for Eleanor Park (Special)
2903    Temporary prohibition of establishment of certain businesses (Expired)
2904    Amends 1975-76 budget (Special)
2905    Temporary prohibition of establishment of certain businesses (Not
        codified)
2906    Amends 16.04.190, building code (Repealed by 3215)
2907    Amends 16.04.185(a), building code (Repealed by 3158)
2908    Rezone (Special)
2909    Amends 1975-76 budget (Special)
2910    Amends 6.20.050, animal care, and adds Ch. 6.22, pet shops [Ed. Note:
        Ch. 6.22 renumbered and relocated by Ord. 4453] (6.20, 4.59)
2911    Prohibits the establishment of certain businesses and the issuance of
        certain permits and licenses (Expired)
2912    Adds subsection (i) to 16.04.185, building code (Repealed by 3158)
2913    Adds 22.04.155 and subsection (e) to 22.04.150, amends subsections (a),
        (d), (f) and (k) of 22.04.150, parks (Title 22 [Ed. Note])
2914    Improvement plan for Palo Alto Yacht Harbor (Special)
2915    Improvement plan for Timothy Hopkins Creekside Park (Special)
2916    Rezone (Special)
2917    Rezone (Special)
2918    Rezone (Special)
2919    Adds 10.40.045, parking regulations (Repealed by 4588)
2920    Amends 18.32,010 and 18.32.030, zoning (Repealed by 3048)
        Adds subsection (16) to 4.54.110, amends Ch. 4.54 to change references
2921    to "city treasurer" to "chief of police," amends 4.54.040, 4.54.060(2),
        4.54.070, 4.54.080, 4.54.090, 4.54.140, 4.54.150, massage
        establishments (4.54)
2922    Amends 4.52.020, 4.52.030, 4.52.100(a), and 4.52.110, billiard and
        poolrooms (4.52 [Ed. Note])
2923    Amends 1975-76 budget (Special)
2924    Adds subsection (f) to 2.22.060, amends 2.22.010, human relations
        commission (2.22)
2925    Amends 2.20.010, planning commission (2.20 [Ed. Note])
2926    Amends 2.18.010, visual arts jury (2.18 [Ed. Note])
2927    Adds Ch. 18.99, amends 16.48.020, 18.68.070, 18.82.010 and 18.98.050,
        zoning (Repealed by 4826)
2928    Amends 2.33.020, transient occupancy tax (2.33)
2929    Adopts 1976-77 budget, authorizes closing of 1975-76 budget (Special)
2930    Rezone (Special)
2931    Adds 2.20.040, planning commission (2.20 [Ed. Note])
2932    Extends prohibition regarding certain businesses enacted in Ord. 2911
        (Special)
2933    Adds Ch. 4.39, private intrusion alarms (Repealed by 3909)
2934    Special election (Special)
2935    Amends 1976-77 budget, establishes special assessment project (Special)
2936    Adds subsection (7) to 9.08.020, guns and explosives (9.08)
2937    Amends 6.12.020 and 6.16.030, animal impoundment fees and dog license
        fees (6.12, 6.16)
2938    Rezone (Special)
2939    Amends 1976-77 budget (Special)
2940    Tax rate for 1976-77 (Special)
2941    Fixes ad valorem assessment for 1976-77 (Special)
2942    Fixes ad valorem assessment for 1976-77 (Special)
2943    Fixes and valorem assessment for 1976-77 (Special)
2944    Annexation (Special)
2945    Annexation (Special)
        Amends 4.54.030 and 4.54.050, adds subsections (17) and (18) to
2946    4.54.110 and Ch. 4.55, adult entertainment, massage parlors (4.54,
        4.55)
2947    Amend 1976-77 budget (Special)
2948    Amends 1976-77 budget (Special)
2949    Adds 6.12.025, dog impoundment (6.12)
2950    [Number not used]
2951    Places moratorium on new building projects, zoning changes and use
        changes in designated area (Special)
2952    Rezone (Special)
2953    Adds 4.10.085, mechanical amusement devices (Repealed by 2982)
2954    Amends 1976-77 budget (Special)
2955    Repeals Ch. 9.36, gambling devices (Repealer)
2956    Mechanical amusement devices (Special)
2957    Adds 18.04.055, 18.04.285, (e) to 18.12.030, (e) to 18.14.030, (c) to
        18.16.030 and 18.90.087 (Repealed by 3048)
2958    Places moratorium on new building projects, zoning changes and use
        changes in designated area (Special)
2959    Amends 1976-77 budget (Special)
        Amends 1.08.110, (6) of 2.08.150, (8) of 2.08.300, (b) of 4.04.080, (c)
        of 4.04.190, 4.10.040, 4.10.060, 4.10.070, 4.10.080, (b) of 4.10.085,
        (b) of 4.14.020, (b) of 4.14.030, 4.14.040, (b) of 4.18.030, (c) of
        4.18.040, 4.18.050, 4.32.050, 5(e) of 4.34.030, 4.34.040, 4.38.020,
        4.38.080, 4.42.380, 4.42.390, 4.48.050, 4.48.070, 4.52.110, 4.54.040,
        4.54.070, (2) of 4.54.090, 4.54.140, 4.54.150, 4.55.040, 4.55.100, (a)
        and (b) of 5.08.030, 5.10.130, 5.12.010, (a) and (c) of 5.20.230,
        6.12.020, 6.12.025, 6.16.030, 6.16.060, 6.28.040, 6.32.020, 6.32.050,
2960    (d) of 10.40.045, (1) of 10.60.070, 10.64.060 (repealed by 5432),
        11.08.040, 12.08.040, 13.16.080, 15.04.070, 15.04.090, 15.04.240,
        16.04.090, 16.04.100, 16.04.410, 16.08.120, 16.08.150, 16.16.050,
        16.20.050, 16.20.060, 16.24.100, 16.24.120, (A) of 16.28.100,
        16.32.030, (A) of 16.32.040, 16.38.020, 16.48.060, 18.82.010,
        18.90.040, 18.90.100, 18.92.020, 18.98.040, 18.99.060, 21.18.010,
        21.18.020, permits (1.08, 2.08, 4.04, 4.10, 4.18, 4.32, 4.34, 4.52 [Ed.
        Note], 4.54, 4.55, 5.12, 5.20 [Ed. Note], 6.12, 6.16, 6.28, 6.32,
        10.64, 12.08, 13.16, 16.04 [Ed. Note], 16.16 [Ed. Note], 16.20 [Ed.
        Note], 16.24 [Ed. Note], 16.28, 16.32, 16.38)
2961    Amends 1976-77 budget (Special)
2962    Rezone (Special)
2963    Amends 1976-77 budget (Special)
2964    Increases area of moratorium for new buildings, zone and use changes
        initiated in Ord. 2958 (Special)
2965    Amends 1976-77 budget (Special)
2966    Amends 1976-77 budget (Special)
2967    Rezone (Special)
2968    Rezone (Special)
2969    Adds Ch. 4.51, bingo games (4.51)
2970    Amends 1976-77 budget (Special)
2971    Approves and adopts plan for construction in Byxbee Park (Special)
2972    Amends 10.64.160, 10.64.180, 10.64.230, 10.64.240, (f) of 22.04.150,
        22.04.220, repeals 10.64.220 (10.64, Title 22 [Ed. Note])
2973    Appropriations (Special)
2974    Appropriations (Special)
2975    Moratorium on building projects (Special)
2976    Appropriations (Special)
2977    Amends 2.28.170, insurance (2.28 [Ed. Note])
2978    Appropriations (Special)
2979    Restrictions on water usage (Repealed by 3038)
2980    Appropriations (Special)
2981    Appropriations (Special)
2982    Adds 4.10.110, 4.10.120, 4.10.130, 4.10.140 and 4.10.150; repeals
        4.10.085, mechanical amusement devices (4.10)
2983    Amends 1976-77 budget and table of organization (Special)
2984    Amends 16.48.020(b) and 16.48.090, landscaping (Repealed by 4826)
2985    Amends (f) of 13.16.150, assessment bond procedures (13.16)
2986    Adds 22.08.035, Bol Park (Title 22 [Ed. Note])
2987    Amends Ord. 2958, moratorium on building projects (Special)
2988    Appropriations (Special)
2989    Appropriations (Special)
2990    Appropriations (Special)
2991    Approves and adopts landscape plans for duck pond area of Palo Alto
        Yacht Harbor (Special)
2992    Adds (d) to 2 of Ord. 2958 (Special)
2993    1977-78 budget (Special)
2994    Appropriations (Special)
2995    Rezone (Repealed by 3009)
2996    Amends 16.20.010(15), signs (16.20 [Ed. Note])
2997    Approves construction plans for Palo Alto Municipal Golf Clubhouse
        (Special)
2998    Amends Ch. 16.16, electrical code (16.16 [Ed. Note])
2999    Adds 4.52.120, cardrooms (4.52 [Ed. Note])
3000    Appropriations (Special)
3001    Adds customer service clerk to table of organization for treasurer's
        office (Special)
3002    (Not used)
3003    Appropriations (Special)
3004    Appropriations (Special)
3005    Amends Ord. 2979 1(3), water restriction (Repealed by 3038)
3006    Amends Ch. 6.24, stables (6.24)
3007    Rezone (Special)
3008    Adds 10.10.010(d), sidewalk sales (10.10)
3009    Repeals Ord. 2995 (Repealer)
3010    Amends contract between city and board of administration of California
        Public Employees' Retirement System (Special)
3011    Appropriations (Special)
3012    Fixes tax rate for fiscal year 1977-78 (Special)
3013    Fixes ad valorem assessment for fiscal year 1977-78 (Special)
3014    Fixes ad valorem assessment for fiscal year 1977-78 (Special)
3015    Increases capital improvement fund appropriation (Special)
3016    Extends term of moratorium on all new building projects, etc. as
        imposed by Ord. 2975 (Special)
3017    Adds 4.52.130 through 4.52.190, cardrooms (4.52 [Ed. Note])
3018    Amends budget for 1977-78 (Special)
3019    Amends budget for 1977-78 (Special)
3020    Amends 18.08.040, rezone (Special)
3021    Approves lease of golf course facility with city (Special)
3022    Amends budget for fiscal year 1977-78 (Special)
3023    Amends 18.08.040, rezone (Special)
3024    Limits new development of certain properties (Special)
3025    Extends term of Ord. 2958, moratorium on new building projects, etc.
        (Special)
3026    Amends budget for 1977-78 (Special)
3027    Amends budget for 1977-78 (Special)
3028    Amends 18.08.040, rezone (Special)
3029    Amends 18.04.285; adds (e) to 18.90.087, zoning (Repealed by 3048)
3030    Approves and adopts plan for construction and placement of a bicycle/
        pedestrian bridge (Special)
3031    Increases 1977-78 budget for police department (Special)
3032    Amends budget for 1977-78 (Special)
3033    Amends 4.10.120, mechanical amusement devices (4.10)
        Amends subsection (1) of 5.20.010, 5.20.040, subsections (2) and (3) of
3034    5.20.090, 5.20.110, 5.20.130, (b) of 5.20.140, 5.20.180, 5.20.190,
        5.20.200; adds 5.20.115, 5.20.145, 5.20.240, 5.20.250, refuse
        collection and disposal (5.20 [Ed. Note])
3035    Adds (19) to 12.16.020, underground utility (12.16)
3036    Amends 18.08.040, rezone (Special)
3037    Approves and adopts a plan for commencement of refuse disposal on
        previously filled areas (Special)
3038    Repeals Ords. 2979 and 3005 (Repealer)
3039    Amends budget for fiscal year 1977-78 (Special)
3040    Amends budget for 1977-78 (Special)
3041    Amends 18.08.040, specifying development plan conditions (Special)
3042    Extends term of moratorium on new building projects in designated area
        (Special)
3043    Approves and authorizes amendment concerning golf course leases
        (Special)
3044    Amends budget for fiscal year 1977-78 (Special)
3045    Amends budget for fiscal year 1977-78 (Special)
3046    Amends budget for fiscal year 1977-78 (Special)
3047    Amends budget for fiscal year 1977-78 (Special)
3048    Repeals and replaces Title 18, zoning (18.01, 18.04, 18.08, 18.12 [Ed.
        Note], 18.30(B), 18.68, 18.30(E), 18.30(H), 18.30(G), 18.70, 18.80)
3049    Adds 4.04.210, laundromats (4.04)
3050    Prezone (Special)
3051    Prezone (Special)
3052    Amends 1977-78 budget (Special)
3053    Amends 1977-78 budget (Special)
3054    Amends Ch. 16.08, plumbing code (Repealed by 3215)
3055    Adds subsection (c) to 10.64.130, bicycles (10.64)
        Amends 16.04.010, 16.04.020, 16.04.040, 16.04.050, 16.04.075,
        16.04.077, 16.04.260, 16.04.295, 16.04.310, 16.04.390; repeals
3056    16.04.115, 16.04.130, 16.04.150, 16.04.240, 16.04.263, 16.04.270,
        16.04.300, 16.04.320 and 16.04.370, and renumbers remaining sections
        accordingly; repeals Ch. 16.28, housing codes (16.04 [Ed. Note])
3057    Renovation plans (Special)
3058    Amends 1977-78 budget (Special)
3059    Adopts plan for renovating Greer Park (Special)
3060    Amends subsection (a) of 2.08.100, holidays (2.08 [Ed. Note])
3061    Repeals Title 11, environmental impact procedure (Repealer)
3062    Adopts 1978-79 budget (Special)
3063    Adds 16.20.125, signs (16.20 [Ed. Note])
        Amends designated portions of 18.04.030, (1) of 18.10.050 and
        18.12.050, (q) of 18.17.050, (1) of 18.17.050, (e) of 18.37.040, (a)(1)
        of 18.37.070, (a)(1) of 18.41.070, (q) of 18.43.030, (a)(1) of
3064    18.43.070, (r) of 18.45.030, (a)(1) of 18.45.070, (a)(1) of 18.55.070,
        (a)(1) of 18.60.070, (b)(13)(a) of 18.83.060, designated portions of
        18.83.110, (b) of 18.90.080, and 18.01.050, 18.12.070, 18.17.070,
        18.21.070, 18.23.070, 18.25.070, 18.27.070, 18.29.070, 18.32.030,
        18.43.040, 18.45.040, zoning (18.01, 18.04, 18.12 [Ed. Note])
3065    Amends (a)(B) of 12.08.060, maximum driveway widths (12.08)
3066    Amends zoning map (Special)
3067    Amends 22.08.020, parks (Title 22 [Ed. Note])
3068    Adds Title 11, environmental impact procedure (11.04)
3069    Amends 1978-79 budget (Special)
        Amends (a) of 18.90.010, (c) of 18.94.070 and 18.12.070, 18.17.070,
3070    18.21.070, 18.23.070, 18.25.070, 18.27.070, 18.29.070, 18.68.020 and
        18.88.140, zoning (18.12 [Ed. Note], 18.38)
3071    Amends setback map (Special)
3072    Amends 1978-79 budget (Special)
3073    Adopts construction plan flood basin mitigation project (Special)
3074    Fixes tax rate for 1978-79 (Special)
3075    Fixes ad valorem assessment for 1978-79 (Special)
3076    Fixes ad valorem assessment for 1978-79 (Special)
3077    Adopts construction and placement of storm drain (Special)
3078    Amends budget for 1978-79 (Special)
3079    Amends (16) of 15.04.365, fire prevention requirements (Repealed by
        3123)
3080    Amends fire zone map (Special)
3081    Prezone (Special)
3082    Adopts construction plan (Special)
3083    Adds Ch. 12.28, utility systems revenue bonds (12.28)
3084    Adopts plan for installation of landscape improvements (Special)
3085    Amends Ch. 10.56, special speed zones (10.56)
3086    Amends budget for 1978-79 (Special)
3087    Amends budget for 1978-79 (Special)
3088    Amends budget for 1978-79 (Special)
3089    Amends budget for 1978-79 (Special)
3090    Rezone (Special)
3091    Prezone (Special)
3092    Adopts plans for fuel storage system (Special)
3093    Amends 1978-79 budget (Special)
3094    [Number not used]
3095    Amends (17) of 4.54.100, massage establishments (4.54)
3096    Adds 22.08.310, park dedications (Title 22 [Ed. Note])
3097    Imposes moratorium on issuance of permits for establishment of uses
        requiring liquor beverage licenses (Repealed by 3104)
3098    Amends 18.47.010 and 18.47.040, zoning (18.30(B))
3099    Approves and adopts plans for an addition to a structure at El Camino
        Park (Special)
3100    Amends budget for fiscal year 1978-79 (Special)
3101    Amends budget for fiscal year 1978-79 (Special)
3102    Rezone (Special)
3103    Adds (c) to 53 of 18.04.030; adds subsection (1) to 18.41.040; amends
        (h) of 18.41.030 (18.04)
3104    Repeals Ord. 3097 (Repealer)
3105    Rezone (Special)
3106    Amends budget for fiscal year 1978-79 (Special)
3107    Rezone (Special)
        Adds definitions for "canopy" and "patio cover" to 18.04.030; also adds
        subsection (d) to 18.72.040 and 18.82.055; amends subsections (41) and
        (56) and illustrations attached to 18.04.030, subsection (i) of
        18.23.050, subsection (j) of 18.37.040, subsections (a)(1), (b)(1) of
        18.37.070, subsection (k) to 18.41.050, subsection (a)(1) of 18.41.070,
        subsection (i) of 18.43.040, subsection (a)(1) of 18.43.070 and
3108    subsections (b)(1) and (3) of 18.43.070, subsection (i) of 18.45.040,
        subsection (a)(1) of 18.45.070, subsection (c) of 18.47.040, subsection
        (a)(1) of 18.55.070, subsection (a)(1) of 18.60.070, subsection (h) of
        18.68.090, subsection (b)(3) of 18.68.150 and 18.68.020 and 18.68.110,
        subsection (e) of 18.83.110, subdivisions (2) and (3) of subsection (b)
        of 18.88.030, 18.88.090, subsection (b)(3) of 18.94.070, zoning (18.04,
        18.30(B), 18.38, 18.70)
3109    Amends 2.04.030, city council meetings (Repealed by 3488)
3110    Rezone (Special)
3111    Rezone (Special)
3112    Rezone (Special)
        Adds Ch. 4.56. hot tub/sauna establishments; amends subsection (c) of
        4.52.140 and 4.52.100, cardrooms, subdivisions (b) and (c) of
3113    subsection 17 in 4.54.110, 4.54.030, 4.54.060 and 4.54.180, massage
        establishments, subdivisions (2) and (3) of subsection (p) of 4.55.070,
        4.55.030 and 4.55.150, adult entertainment establishments (4.52 [Ed.
        Note], 4.54, 4.55, 4.56)
3114    Amends 1978-79 budget (Special)
3115    Requires posting of hours of operation of gasoline service stations
        (Not codified)
        Authorizes amendment to contract between city and board of
3116    administration of California Public Employees' Retirement System
        (Special)
3117    Rezone (Special)
3118    Amends subsection b of 2.26.050, art in public places (2.26)
3119    Repeals 16.08.050 and reinstates Section 12 of the Uniform Plumbing
        Code (Repealer)
3120    Repeals Ord. 3115 (Repealer)
3121    Amends 1978-79 budget (Special)
3122    Appropriation (Special)
3123    Repeals and replaces Ch. 15.04, Uniform Fire Code; repeals Ords. 2812
        and 2030 (Repealed by 3214)
3124    Adopts budget for fiscal year 1979-80 (Special)
3125    Amends 1978-79 budget (Special)
3126    Validates changes made to National Electric Code (Not codified)
3127    Amends 22.04.320, park closure hours (Title 22 [Ed. Note])
3128    Amends 12.12.010, building on public easement (12.12)
3129    Amends 1978-79 budget (Special)
        Adds material to 18.10.030, 18.12.030, 18.17.030, 18.21.030, 18.23.030,
        18.25.030, subparagraphs (5) through (10) in 18.32.040, subsection (b)
        to 18.32.070, (c) to 18.37.070, 18.41.070, 18.43.070, 18.45.070 and
        18.55.070, (b) to 18.68.150, adds material to 18.71.050, subsection (e)
        of 18.83.110, (d) to 18.90.120 and adds new 18.88.170; amends
        subsections (22), (32), (49), (90) and illustration caption of
        18.04.030, alphabetizing and renumbering definitions as necessary,
        subsections (b) of 18.10.040, (1) of 18.10.050, (c) of 18.12.040, (1)
3130    of 18.12.050, (c) of 18.17.040, (i) of 18.17.050, (c) of 18.21.040, (1)
        of 18.21.050, (c) of 18.23.040, (i) of 18.23.050, (c) of 18.25.040, (i)
        of 18.25.050, 18.27.050, and 18.29.050, (c)(2) of 18.37.070, (b)(4)of
        18.88.030, (c) of 18.88.050, (c) and tables of 18.90.120, (b) of
        18.94.070, first paragraph of 18.98.090 and 18.43.070 and 18.88.100,
        revises references to effective date throughout the title; deletes
        subsection (a)(1) of 18.32.070, (b)(1) of 18.37.070, (b)(1) of
        18.41.070, (b)(1) of 18.43.070, (b)(1) of 18.45.070, (b)(1) of
        18.55.070, (a)(1) of 18.68.150, zoning (18.04, 18.12 [Ed. Note], 18.38,
        18.70, 18.80)
3131    Amends 1978-79 budget (Special)
        Amends subsections (2) of 2.30.030, (b) and (f) of 2.30.040, (a) of
3132    2.30.050, (a), (b) and (c) of 2.30.080, (c) of 2.30.090 and 2.30.060,
        2.30.070, 2.30.078, and 2.30.091, contracts and purchasing procedure
        (Repealed by 3927)
3133    Rezone (Special)
3134    Rezone (Special)
3135    Rezone (Special)
3136    Adds subsection (21) to 12.16.020, underground utilities (12.16)
3137    Amends 1979-80 budget (Special)
3138    Amends 1979-80 budget (Special)
3139    Amends 1979-80 budget (Special)
3140    Amends 1979-80 budget (Special)
3141    Amends 1979-80 budget (Special)
3142    Adds subsection (20) to 12.16.020, underground utilities (12.16)
3143    Adopts and approves park improvement plan (Special)
3144    Rezone (Special)
3145    Amends 1979-80 budget (Special)
3146    Amends 1979-80 budget (Special)
3147    Amends 1979-80 budget (Special)
3148    Special election (Special)
3149    Amends prefacing language and subsection (6) of 2.08.300; repeals
        subsection (7) of 2.08.300, inspection services (2.08 [Ed. Note])
3150    Adds subsection (e) to 10.40.045, parking permits (Repealed by 4588)
3151    Amends 1979-80 budget (Special)
3152    Amends 1979-80 budget (Special)
3153    Amends 2 of Ord. 3148, special election provisions (Special)
3154    Assessment levy (Special)
3155    Assessment levy (Special)
3156    Fixes tax rate for 1979-80 (Special)
3157    Repeals and replaces Title 21, subdivisions (21.04, 21.08, 21.12,
        21.16, 21.20, 21.24, 21.28, 21.32, 21.36, 21.40, 21.44)
3158    Adds 21.20.320 and Ch. 16.52; deletes 16.04.185, flood hazard
        regulations (16.52, 21.20)
3159    Amends 1979-80 budget (Special)
3160    Approves and adopts park improvement plan (Special)
3161    Adds Ch. 2.09; repeals Ch. 2.11; conflict of interest code (2.09)
3162    Adds 2.16.015; repeals 2.18.060 and 2.22.040, leaves of absence for
        members of commissions and boards (2.16)
3163    Amends subsection l(c) of Ord. 1362, sales and service of mopeds in PC
        zone (Special)
3164    Rezone (Special)
3165    Approves and adopts park improvement plan (Special)
3166    Amends 1979-80 budget (Special)
3167    Amends 1979-80 budget (Special)
3168    Amends 1979-80 budget (Special)
3169    Adds 16.20.095, off-site advertising by art organizations (16.20 [Ed.
        Note])
        Adds 16.09.015, 16.09.035, 16.09.075, 16.09.095, 16.09.120, 16.09.130,
3170    16.09.140, 16.09.150 and 16.09.160; amends 16.09.010 and 16.09.110,
        industrial wastes (16.09 [Ed. Note]) (Repealed by 5084)
3171    Amends subsection (c) of 18.94.070, zoning (18.70)
3172    Approves and adopts park improvement plan (Special)
3173    Amends 1979-80 budget (Special)
3174    Amends 1979-80 budget (Special)
3175    Amends 1979-80 budget (Special)
3176    Approves and adopts park improvement plan (Special)
3177    Amends 1979-80 budget (Special)
3178    Amends subsection (c) of 18.88.050; also amends 21.04.040; repeals
        21.04.050, zoning and subdivisions (21.04)
3179    Amends 1979-80 budget (Special)
3180    Amends 1979-80 budget (Special)
3181    Rezone (Special)
3182    Rezone (Special)
3183    Rezone (Special)
        Adds 9.56.120, 9.56.130, 15.04.012, 15.04.013, 16.04.412, 16.04.442,
        16.04.444, 16.08.081, 16.08.082, 16.16.012, 16.16.013, 16.20.322,
3184    16.20.323, 18.01.085; amends subsection (1) of 9.56.010, 9.56.020,
        16.04.070, citation authority and penalties for specified violations
        (9.56, 16.16 [Ed. Note], 16.20 [Ed. Note], 18.01)
3185    Adds 9.14.040 through 9.14.090; amends 9.14.010 and 9.14.020; renumbers
        9.14.040 and 9.14.050, smoking (9.14)
3186    Amends 1979-80 budget (Special)
        Amends subsections (14), (41), (125) and renumbers 18.04.030,
3187    subsection (a) of 18.83.070, subsection (e) of 18.83.110, accompanying
        tables and caption, subsection (a) of 18.88.090, subsection (c)(5) of
        18.94.070, zoning (18.04, 18.70)
3188    Approves and adopts park improvement plan (Special)
3189    Adds 2.40.050 and 2.40.060; amends 2.40.040, municipal elections (2.40)
3190    Amends 1979-80 budget (Special)
3191    Authorizes bond issue (Special)
3192    Amends Ch. 8.08, weed abatement (8.08)
3193    Rezone (Special)
3194    Rezone (Special)
3195    Amends 1979-80 budget (Special)
3196    Amends 1979-80 budget (Special)
3197    Adds Ch. 16.49; amends 16.48.070, historic preservation (16.49 [Ed.
        Note])
3198    Approves and adopts park improvement plan (Special)
3199    Adds Ch. 9.57, narcotics paraphernalia (9.57)
3200    Amends 1979-80 budget (Special)
3201    Adds 22.08.068, Downtown Park North (Title 22 [Ed. Note])
3202    Amends 1979-80 budget (Special)
3203    Amends 2.04.240(a), 2.04.250 and 2.04.260, committees (Repealed by
        3488)
3204    Amends 18.94.070(c)(3), (4), zoning (18.70)
3205    Adds 5.20.260, recyclable materials collection (5.20)
3206    Amends subsections 3(c) and (e) of Ord. 1992, rezone (Special)
3207    Amends 1979-80 budget (Special)
3208    Amends 1979-80 budget (Special)
3209    Amends 9.56.030(17), (18), nuisances (9.56)
3210    Approves and adopts park improvement plan (Special)
3211    Amends 1979-80 budget (Special)
3212    Adopts 1980-81 budget (Special)
3213    Amends 1979-80 budget (Special)
3214    Repeals and replaces Ch. 15.04, Uniform Fire Code (Repealed by 3670)
        Repeals and replaces Chs. 16.04 and 16.08, except 16.04.020, 16.04.400
3215    and 16.04.410; Uniform Building, Housing and Plumbing Codes (16.04 [Ed.
        Note], 16.08 [Ed. Note])
3216    Amends 1980-81 budget (Special)
3217    Adds 16.20.052, signs (16.20 [Ed. Note])
3218    Adds 2.18.070(d); amends 2.18.070(a), visual arts jury (2.18 [Ed.
        Note])
3219    Adds 2.26.030(10), (11), (12) and (13); amends 2.26.020(b), visual art
        in public places (2.26)
3220    Amends 21.40.050(c), community housing (Not codified)
3221    City council salaries (Repealed by 3488)
3222    Assessment levy (Special)
3223    Assessment levy (Special)
3224    Fixes tax rate for 1980-81 (Special)
3225    Amends 1980-81 budget (Special)
3226    Amends 1980-81 budget (Special)
3227    Adds 12.16.020(22), underground utilities (12.16)
3228    Adds 22.08.320, Sarah Wallis Park (Title 22 [Ed. Note])
3229    Approves and adopts park improvement plan (Special)
3230    Approves and adopts park improvement plan (Special)
3231    Amends 1980-81 budget (Special)
3232    Amends 1980-81 budget (Special)
        Adds 22.04.330, 22.04.340, 22.04.350 and 22.04.360; and amends
3233    22.04.030 and 22.04.320, park regulations; amends 10.64.160, 10.64.170,
        10.64.180, 10.64.190 and 10.64.200, traffic (10.64, Title 22 [Ed.
        Note])
3234    Health facility financing (Not codified)
3235    Rezone (Special)
3236    Amends 1980-81 budget (Special)
3237    Amends 1980-81 budget (Special)
3238    Adds 10.56.015 and a new speed zone to 10.56.010, traffic (10.56)
3239    Amends 1980-81 budget (Special)
3240    Establishes Capital Improvement Project No. 80-13; amends 1980-81
        budget (Special)
3241    Rezone (Special)
3242    Amends 1980-81 budget (Special)
3243    Adds 16.49.040(c); amends Ch. 16.49 and 16.48.070, historic
        preservation (16.49 [Ed. Note])
3244    Amends 1980-81 budget (Special)
3245    Amends 1980-81 budget (Special)
3246    Amends 21.40.050(c), community housing (Not codified)
3247    Amends 1980-81 budget (Special)
3248    Adds 16.04.450 and 16.04.460, State Historical Building Code (16.04
        [Ed. Note])
3249    Amends 2.04.060, city council meetings (Repealed by 3488)
3250    Rezone (Special)
3251    Adds 21.40.050(c)(1), community housing (Not codified)
3252    Adds Ch. 9.68, rent stabilization (9.68)
3253    Amends 1980-81 budget (Special)
3254    Amends 1980-81 budget (Special)
        Adds 18.12.070(c), 18.17.070(c), 18.21.070(c), 18.23.070(c), 18.25.070
        (c), 18.27.070(c), 18.29.070(c), zoning; amends 16.04.105, Uniform
3255    Building Code, and 18.04.030(54), 18.04.030(85), 18.83.060(b),
        18.88.030(b)(1), 18.90.100 and 18.90.120(c) (Table B), zoning (16.04
        [Ed. Note], 18.04, 18.12 [Ed. Note])
3256    Amends city retirement contract (Special)
        Adds 6.12.050, 6.16.102, 6.16.105, 6.20.110, 6.20.120, 6.20.130,
        6.20.140, 6.20.150, 6.20.160, 6.20.170, 6.22.060, 6.22.070, 6.22.080,
        6.22.090, 6.22.095, 6.22.100 and 6.22.105; amends 2.08.220, 6.04.010,
        6.04.020, 6.04.040, 6.04.050, 6.04.060, 6.04.070, 6.04.080, 6.04.090,
3257    6.04.100, 6.04.110, 6.08.020, 6.08.030, 6.08.040, 6.12.010, 6.12.030,
        6.16.030, 6.16.040, 6.16.050, 6.16.070, 6.16.080, 6.20.020, 6.20.030,
        6.20.050, 6.20.080, 6.20.090, 6.22.020 and 6.22.040, Ch. 6.28, and
        6.32.020, 6.32.030 and 6.36.010, animals (2.08 [Ed. Note], 6.04, 6.08,
        6.12, 6.16, 6.20, 6.22, 6.28, 6.32, 6.36)
3258    [Number not used]
3259    Establishes Capital Improvement Project No. 80-41; amends 1980-81
        budget (Special)
3260    Amends 1980-81 budget (Special)
3261    Amends 1980-81 budget (Special)
3262    Establishes Capital Improvement Project No. 80-92; amends 1980-81
        budget (Special)
3263    Amends 2.18.010 and 2.18.040(a), visual arts jury (2.18 [Ed. Note])
3264    Authorizes debt note issuance by Northern California Power Agency
        (Special)
3265    Amends 22.08.230, El Camino Park (Title 22 [Ed. Note])
3266    Rezone and development plan approval (Special)
3267    Fire department staffing; amends 1980-81 budget (Special)
3268    Rezone (Special)
3269    Amends 1980-81 budget (Special)
3270    Adds Chs. 5.25 and 5.26, aerial pesticide spraying (Repealed by 4342)
3271    Amends 1980-81 budget (Special)
3272    Amends 1980-81 budget (Special)
        Amends 18.90.020(b)(1), (2), 18.90.030(b), (c), 18.94.070(c)(1) - (6),
3273    18.98.060(a), (b), 18.98.090 and 18.98.100, zoning, and amends
        21.12.090(f), subdivisions (18.70, 18.80, 21.12)
3274    Amends 1980-81 budget (Special)
3275    Establishes Capital Improvement Project No. 80-95; amends 1980-81
        budget (Special)
3276    Amends 1980-81 budget (Special)
3277    Adds 18.88.180, clothesline restrictions in residential zones (Repealed
        by 4934)
3278    Amends 1980-81 budget (Special)
3279    Establishes Capital Improvement Project No. 80-70; amends 1980-81
        budget (Special)
3280    Appropriation of funds for capital improvement projects (Special)
3281    Rezone (Special)
3282    Approves and adopts park improvement plan (Special)
3283    Rezone (Special)
3284    Extends to October 31, 1981, the termination date of moratorium
        established in Ords. 3246 and 3251 (Not codified)
        Authorizes amendment to contract between city and board of
3285    administration of California Public Employees' Retirement System
        (Special)
3286    Repeals and adds Ch. 4.42, taxicabs and other for-hire vehicles (4.42)
        ( 4.42.160 repealed by 5454)
3287    Authorizes bond issue by Northern California Power Agency for Project
        No. 1 (Special)
3288    Adds 4.10.160 - 4.10.280; repeals Ch. 4.14, business licenses (4.10)
3289    Adopts 1981-82 budget (Special)
3290    Adds Ch. 9.58, medfly emergency (Not codified)
        Adds 18.10.030(i), 18.12.030(f), 18.17.030(g), 18.21.030(i), 18.23.030
3291    (i), 18.25.030(i), 18.27.030(i), 18.29.030(i), 18.71.050(g), 18.72.030
        (d) and 18.88.160(g); amends 18.04.030(9b) and 18.88.140, zoning
        (18.04, 18.12 [Ed. Note])
3292    Rezone (Special)
3293    Rezone (Special)
3294    Rezone (Special)
        Amends 16.38.020(b) and 16.38.050, building regulations, and amends
3295    entirety of Ch. 21.40, conversions of rental housing to condominiums
        and other community housing projects (16.38, 21.40)
3296    Assessment for California Avenue district off-street parking project
        No. 60-8 (Special)
3297    Assessment for California Avenue district off-street parking project
        No. 55-5 (Special)
3298    Authorizes bond issue by Northern California Power Agency for Shell
        East Block Project, second phase (Special)
3299    [Number not used]
3300    Amends 1981-82 budget (Special)
3301    Amends 1981-82 budget (Special)
3302    Amends 1981-82 budget (Special)
3303    Amends 1981-82 budget (Special)
3304    Amends 1981-82 budget (Special)
3305    Adds 22.08.330, park dedications (Title 22 [Ed. Note])
3306    Amends 1981-82 budget (Special)
3307    Amends 1981-82 budget (Special)
3308    Amends 1981-82 budget (Special)
3309    Amends 1981-82 budget (Special)
3310    Authorizes city retirement agreement (Special)
3311    Amends Ord. 2224, rezone (Special)
3312    Rezone (Special)
3313    Authorizes bond issuance by Northern California Power Agency (Special)
3314    Authorizes note issuance by Northern California Power Agency (Special)
        Adds 16.09.031, 16.09.032, 16.09.061, 16.09.141; amends 16.09.010,
3315    16.09.060, 16.09,080, industrial wastes (16.09 [Ed. Note]) (Repealed by
        5084)
3316    Amends 1981-82 budget (Special)
3317    Amends 1981-82 budget (Special)
3318    Amends 1981-82 budget (Special)
3319    Amends Ord. 2006, development plan (Special)
3320    Amends 1981-82 budget (Special)
3321    [Number not used]
3322    Amends 1981-82 budget (Special)
3323    Amends 1981-82 budget (Special)
3324    Amends 1981-82 budget (Special)
3325    Repeals Chs. 2.10, 2.11 (Repealer)
3326    Adds Ch. 19.06, specific plans (19.06)
3327    Amends 9.68.020(d), 9.68.030, rental housing stabilization (9.68)
3328    Rezone (Special)
3329    Amends 1981-82 budget (Special)
3330    Amends 1981-82 budget (Special)
3331    Amends 1981-82 budget (Special)
3332    Amends Ch. 16.16, electrical code (16.16 [Ed. Note])
        Amends 2.18.030, 2.20.015, 2.22.015, 16.48.040, 16.49.040, vacancy
3333    filling on certain boards (2.18 [Ed. Note], 2.20 [Ed. Note], 2.22,
        16.49 [Ed. Note]) ( 2.22.015 repealed by 5208)
3334    Amends 9.48.010, 16.20.110(a), banner permits (9.48, 16.20 [Ed. Note])
3335    Amends 2.04.395, council members' salaries (Repealed by 3488)
3336    Adds Ch. 9.70, housing resale control (9.70)
3337    Amends 1981-82 budget (Special)
3338    Amends 1981-82 budget (Special)
3339    Amends 1981-82 budget (Special)
        Amends Ch. 18.83 and 18.04.030, 18.32.040, 18.37.040, 18.41.040,
3340    18.43.040, 18.45.040, 18.55.040, 18.60.040, 18.71.050, 18.71.140,
        18.88.030, 18.90.040, 18.90.080, 21.20.300, zoning and land use (18.04,
        21.20)
3341    Amends 10.36.030, vehicles on streets (Repealed by 4588)
3342    Amends 1981-82 budget (Special)
3343    Amends 1981-82 budget (Special)
3344    Amends 1981-82 budget (Special)
        Adds 18.12.080, 18.68.160 and 21.08.060; amends 18.04.030, 18.12.050,
        18.32.050, 18.37.040, 18.41.070, 18.43.040, 18.45.040, 18.55.040,
3345    18.68.140, 18.71.080, 18.90.080, 18.90.100, 18.92.010, 18.92.040,
        18.93.050, 18.98.050, 18.99.040, 18.99.060, 21.08.060 [renumbered to be
        21.08.070], 21.12.090, 21.16.010, 21.20.240, zoning and subdivisions
        (18.04, 18.12 [Ed. Note], 18.38, 18.80, 21.08, 21.12, 21.16, 21.20)
3346    Adds 22.08.340, parks (Title 22 [Ed. Note])
3347    Amends city retirement contract agreement (Special)
3348    Amends 2.28.240, claim settlements (2.28 [Ed. Note])
3349    Amends 18.04.030, 18.83.080, zoning (18.04)
3350    Amends Ord. 2365, rezone (Special)
3351    Amends Ord. 2592; repeals Ord. 1400, rezone (Special)
3352    [Number not used]
3353    Amends 1981-82 budget (Special)
3354    Amends 1981-82 budget (Special)
3355    Amends 2.22.020, human relations commission (2.22)
3356    Amends 1981-82 budget (Special)
3357    Amends 1981-82 budget (Special)
3358    Amends 1981-82 budget (Special)
3359    Adds 22.08.350, parks (Title 22 [Ed. Note])
3360    Adopts plans for El Camino Park lighting project (Special)
3361    Amends 1981-82 budget (Special)
3362    Adopts 1982-83 budget (Special)
3363    Adds 10.44.015; amends 10.44.020, parking (Repealed by 4588)
3364    Adds Ch. 9.04 and 9.60.070; amends 10.10.020, alcoholic beverages
        (9.04, 10.10)
3365    Rezone (Special)
3366    Imposes moratorium on issuance of demolition permits for residential
        structures in portion of RM-3 zone (Not codified)
3367    Adds 10.60.140(g), parking (Repealed by 4159)
3368    Amends Ch. 4.30 and 4.04.200, soliciting funds (4.04, 4.30)
3369    Amends 1982-83 budget (Special)
3370    Adds 22.04.370 and 22.04.380, parks (Title 22 [Ed. Note])
3371    Special election to consider Charter amendments (Special)
3372    Amends 1982-83 budget (Special)
3373    Amends 18.83.060(b) and (b)(3), 18.83.080 and 18.90.010(a), zoning
        (Repealed by 4964)
3374    Adds Ch. 16.56, handicapped access regulations (16.56)
3375    Amends 1982-83 budget (Special)
3376    1982-83 assessment for the California Avenue district off-street
        parking project No. 60-8 (Special)
3377    1982-83 assessment for the California Avenue district off-street
        parking project No. 55-5 (Special)
3378    Adds 18.12.040(h), zoning (18.12[Ed. Note])
3379    Amends 9.04.020, alcoholic beverages (9.04)
3380    Adds Ch. 2.11, cable television lobbying (Repealed by 3677)
3381    Adds 21.12.110; amends 18.93.010 and 18.93.080, subdivisions (21.12)
3382    Rezone (Special)
3383    Adds 22.08.360, parks (Title 22 [Ed. Note])
3384    Rezone (Special)
3385    Amends 1982-83 budget (Special)
3386    Adds 16.20.195; deletes 16.20.190(h) and renumbers 16.20.190(i) to be
        16.20.190(h), signs (16.20 [Ed. Note])
3387    Adds 6.20.180 and 6.20.190, police dogs (6.20)
3388    Adds Ch. 13.24, downtown business improvement area (Repealed by 3591)
3389    Amends 16.20.195, signs (16.20 [Ed. Note])
3390    Approves member agreement between Northern California Power Agency and
        certain participating members (Special)
3391    Authorizes closing of 1981-82 budget (Special)
3392    Amends 1982-83 budget (Special)
3393    Amends 1982-83 budget (Special)
3394    Amends 16.20.195, signs (16.20 [Ed. Note])
3395    [Number not used]
3396    Adopts plan for improvement of municipal golf course maintenance
        facilities (Special)
3397    Amends 1982-83 budget (Special)
3398    Amends 1982-83 budget (Special)
3399    Amends 1982-83 budget (Special)
3400    Amends 1982-83 budget (Special)
3401    Amends 1982-83 budget (Special)
3402    Amends 1982-83 budget (Special)
3403    Extends moratorium on issuance of demolition permits for residential
        structures in certain portion of RM-3 zone (Special)
3404    Utilities department solar program (2.48)
3405    Rezone (Special)
3406    Adds Ch. 10.46, residential permit parking (10.46 [Ed. Note]) (Repealed
        by 3433)
3407    Amends 1982-83 budget (Special)
3408    Adds subsection (24) to 12.16.020, Underground Utility District No. 24
        (12.16)
3409    Extends moratorium on issuance of demolition permits for residential
        structures in certain portion of RM-3 zone (Special)
3410    Amends 1982-83 budget (Special)
3411    Adds Ch. 9.70, discrimination in housing against families with minor
        children (9.70)
3412    Amends 1982-83 budget (Special)
3413    Adds 18.32.040(c) and (d) and repeals 18.32.030(b) and (c), zoning
        (Repealed by 4964)
        Adds 2.08.215, 2.08.241, 2.08.242, 2.08.243, 2.08.244, 2.08.245,
        2.08.246, 2.08.301 and 2.08.302; amends 2.08.160, 2.08.170, 2.08.180,
3414    2.08.190, 2.08.203, 2.08.2 10, 2.08.240, 2.08.250, 2.08.260, 2.08.275,
        2.08.280, 2.08.290, 2.08.295, 2.08.300, 2.08.310, 2.28.120, 2.28.130
        and 2.28.140; repeals 2.08.165, 2.08.195, 2.08.200 and 2.08.285; city
        administration (2.08 [Ed. Note], 2.28 [Ed. Note])
3415    Amends 1982-83 budget (Special)
3416    Amends Ch. 16.48, architectural review (Repealed by 4826)
3417    Budget amendment (Special)
3418    Amends 18.68.150(a); renumbers 18.68.140(1) and (2) to (a) and (b) and
        18.68.150(1), (2), (3) and (4) to (a), (b), (c) and (d); zoning (18.38)
3419    Amends Ord. 2006, planned community (Special)
3420    Amends 9.68.020(d)(1) and (2), condominiums (9.68)
3421    Public power revenue bonds (Special)
3422    Note issuance authorized (Special)
3423    Public power revenue refunding bonds (Special)
3424    Amends 5.20.030, rubbish collection (5.20)
3425    Amends 2.33.020, transient occupancy tax (2.33)
3426    Amends 1982-83 budget (Special)
3427    Amends 1982-83 budget (Special)
3428    Rezone (Special)
3429    Rezone (Special)
3430    Amends 1982-83 budget (Special)
3431    Amends 1982-83 budget (Special)
3432    Amends 1982-83 budget (Special)
3433    Amends Ch. 10.46, residential permit parking (10.46) (Repealed by 5060)
3434    Fence replacement plan (Special)
3435    Adds Title 17, hazardous materials storage (17.04, 17.08, 17.12, 17.16,
        17.20, 17.24, 17.28, 17.32, 17.40, 17.44, 17.48, 17.52, 17.56)
3436    Bicycle path construction plan (Special)
3437    Rezone (Special)
3438    Rezone (Special)
3439    Amends 1982-83 budget (Special)
3440    Jobs with peace (Special)
3441    Rezone (Special)
3442    Erosion control plan (Special)
3443    Rezone (Special)
3444    Adopts 1983-84 budget (Special)
3445    Amends 16.20.195, election signs (16.20 [Ed. Note])
3446    Adds Ch. 18.19, RMD two unit multiple-family residence district
        (Repealed by 4875)
3447    Adds Ch. 18.30, neighborhood preservation combining district (Repealed
        by 4875)
3448    Rezone (Special)
3449    Demolition moratorium terminated (Special)
3450    Amends 1983-84 budget (Special)
3451    Golf course fencing plan (Special)
3452    Erosion repair plan (Special)
3453    Off street parking project assessment (Special)
3454    Off street parking project assessment (Special)
3455    Rezone (Special)
        Authorizes amendment to contract between the city and the Board of
3456    Administration of the California Public Employees' Retirement System
        (Special)
3457    Amends 1983-84 budget (Special)
3458    Amends 1983-84 budget (Special)
3459    Amends 1983-84 budget (Special)
3460    Amends 1983-84 budget (Special)
3461    Adds Ch. 2.10, CATV franchises (2.10 [Ed. Note])
3462    Rezone (Special)
3463    Amends Ord. 2637, rezone (Special)
3464    Adds subsection (25) to 12.16.020, Underground Utility District No. 25
        (12.16)
        Adds 18.32.070(c), 18.37.070(d), 18.41.040(m), 18.41.070(f), 18.43.040
        (l), 18.43.070(e), 18.45.040(m), 18.45.050(k)(4), 18.45.070(e),
        18.55.070(e), 18.60.040(g), 18.60.070(d), 18.88.020(e) and 18.90.085;
        amends first paragraph only of 18.10.050, 18.12.050, 18.15.040,
        18.17.050, 18.21.050, 18.23.050, 18.25.050, 18.27.050, 18.29.050,
        18.32.050, 18.37.050, 18.41.050, 18.43.050, 18.45.050, 18.55.050,
        18.60.050, 18.63.040, 18.71.030, 18.72.050 and 18.88.030(b); amends
3465    18.30.050(c)(2), 18.32.070(a)(1) and (b), 18.41.050(1), 18.41.070(a)
        (1), 18.43.050(k), 18.43.070(a)(1), 18.45.070(a)(1), (b)(1) and (c),
        18.55.040(e), 18.55.070(b)(1) and (c), 18.68.150(b) and (e), 18.83.050
        (e), 18.83.060(a), (b) and (e), 18.83.080, 18.90.030(b), 18.98.060(a)
        (1) and (2), 18.98.090 and 21.12.090(f)(1) and (2); renumbers
        subsections (55), (56) and (57) of 18.04.030 to be (56), (57) and adds
        a new subsection (55) and subsections (b), (c) and (d) of 18.90.080 to
        be (c), (d) and (e) and adds a new subsection (b); and repeals
        18.90.087, zoning (18.04, 18.12 [Ed. Note], 18.38, 18.80, 21.12)
3466    Approves a member agreement between Northern California Power Agency
        and certain participating members (Special)
3467    Approves a member agreement between Northern California Power Agency
        and certain participating members (Special)
3468    Moratorium on issuance of conditional use permits for second detached
        single-family dwelling units in R-1 districts (Repealed by 3489)
3469    Amends 1983-84 budget (Special)
3470    Adds Ch. 9.78, mosquito abatement (9.78)
3471    Approves amendment to a member agreement between Northern California
        Power Agency and certain participating members (Special)
3472    Approves amendment of the schedule of project participants and
        transmission service shares (Special)
3473    Approves amendment to a member agreement between Northern California
        Power Agency and certain participating members (Special)
        Moratorium on processing of applications for constructing new square
3474    footage in the East Bayshore Area and for remodeling in the GM District
        within the East Bayshore Area (Special)
3475    Amends 18.12.040(h), zoning (18.12)
3476    Amends Ch. 9.14, smoking regulated or prohibited (9.14 [Ed. Note])
3477    Amends 1983-84 budget (Special)
3478    Authorizes closing of 1982-83 budget (Special)
        Authorizes amendment to contract between the city and the Board of
3479    Administration of the California Public Employees' Retirement System
        (Special)
3480    Plan for expansion of city sanitation company yard facilities (Special)
        Moratorium on processing of applications for construction exceeding a
3481    certain size or height in the area of California Avenue, El Camino Real
        and Park Boulevard (Special)
3482    Amends 1983-84 budget (Special)
3483    Amends 10.56.010, 10.56.020 and 10.56.030, special speed zones (10.56)
3484    Amends 4.30.100(a), soliciting funds (4.30)
3485    Amends 10.40.010 and 10.40.020, stopping, standing and parking for
        loading and unloading (Repealed by 4588)
3486    Amends 16.48.120, architectural review (Repealed by 4826)
        Moratorium on processing of all applications for planning approvals in
3487    the area generally bounded by Park Boulevard, Lambert Avenue, Ash
        Street, including and surrounding the former Maximart site (Special)
3488    Repeals and replaces Ch. 2.04, council organization and procedure
        (Repealed by 4207)
3489    Amends 18.12.040(h); and repeals Ord. 3468, zoning (18.12 [Ed. Note])
3490    Rezone (Special)
3491    Rezone (Special)
3492    Amends 1983-84 budget (Special)
3493    Amends 1983-84 budget (Special)
3494    Amends 1983-84 budget (Special)
3495    Amends 2.32.130, sales and use tax (2.32)
        Adds 17.04.030(d), 17.08.030, 17.12.020(c)(5), 17.24.045 and 17.52.035;
3496    and amends 17.12.010, 17.12.020(c)(2)(iv) and (c)(4) and 17.12.030(b)
        and (c), hazardous materials storage (17.04, 17.12)
3497    Adds Ch. 18.57 and 18.63.050, and amends 18.08.020, 18.63.030 and
        18.63.040, zoning (18.08)
3498    Rezone (Special)
3499    Rezone (Special)
3500    Amends 1983-84 budget (Special)
3501    Rezone (Special)
3502    Adds 18.83.015; and amends 18.83.030, 18.83.070 and 18.83.080 Table 1,
        zoning (Repealed by 3696)
3503    Amends 9.14.090(a)(2) and (a)(5), smoking (9.14 [Ed. Note])
3504    Plan for improvement and construction of Blanco Reservoir at Foothills
        Park (Special)
3505    Amends 9.70.020, 9.70.030 and 9.70.040, resale controls for units
        originally financed with mortgage revenue bonds (9.70)
        Plans for a portion of the Baylands bicycle trail over a portion of
3506    Byxbee Park, the city-owned Baylands and the municipal golf course
        (Special)
        Adds 2.08.035, 2.08.153 and 2.08.155; amends 2.04.060(a), 2.08.010,
        2.24.080(e), 2.24.100(a) and (b), 2.26.020(a), 2.28.060, 2.28.080,
        2.28.110(c) - (f), 2.28.120(d), 2.28.130, 2.28.140(a) and (c),
3507    2.28.170, 2.28.180, 2.28.200, 2.28.230, 2.28.240(b), 2.30.040(e),
        2.30.070, 4.51.220 and 13.16.150(i); and repeals 2.08.130,
        administrative changes regarding abolition of office of city controller
        and creation of department of finance (2.08 [Ed. Note], 2.26, 2.28 [Ed.
        Note], 4.51, 13.16)
3508    Amends 1983-84 budget (Special)
3509    Amends 1983-84 budget (Special)
3510    Amends 1983-84 budget (Special)
3511    Amends 1983-84 budget (Special)
3512    Amends 18.08.010 and adds Ch. 18.31, zoning (18.08)
3513    Rezone (Special)
        Amends 2.04.060, 2.08.010, 2.24.080, 2.24.100, 2.26.020, 2.28.060,
        2.28.080, 2.28.110(c), (d), (e) and (f), 2.28.120(d), 2.28.130,
3514    2.28.140(a) and (c), 2.28.170, 2.28.180, 2.28.200, 2.28.230, 2.30.040
        (e), 2.30.070, 4.51.220, 13.16.150(i); adds 2.08.035, 2.08.153 and
        2.08.155; repeals 2.08.130, department of finance (2.08 [Ed. Note],
        2.26, 2.28 [Ed. Note], 4.51, 13.16)
3515    Confidential budget amendment (Special)
3516    Amends 1983-84 budget (Special)
3517    Rezone (Special)
3518    Moratorium on processing of all applications for planning approvals and
        building permits at 1681 - 1691 El Camino Real (Special)
3519    Amends 18.08.010 and 18.90.085; adds Chs. 18.44 and 18.46, zoning
        (18.08, 18.30(A))
3520    Rezone (Special)
3521    Amends 18.83.015, 18.83.030, 18.83.070, 18.83.080; repeals 7 and 8 of
        Ord. 3502, zoning (Repealed by 4964)
3522    Amends 1983-84 budget (Special)
3523    Amends 16.49.040(3)(a), historic resources board (16.49 [Ed. Note])
3524    Rezone (Special)
3525    Amends 1983-84 budget (Special)
        Moratorium on processing of all applications received after April 23,
3526    1984, for planning approvals in the general manufacturing district
        along Park Boulevard (Special)
3527    Amends 1983-84 budget (Special)
3528    Amends 1983-84 budget (Special)
3529    Amends 1983-84 budget (Special)
3530    Amends 1983-84 budget (Special)
3531    Repeals Ch. 18.79; setback line adjustment; rezone (Repealer/Not
        codified)
3532    Rezone (Special)
3533    Amends subsection (k), renumbers subsection (l) to be (m) and adds new
        subsection (l) to 18.41.050. zoning (Repealed by 4923)
3534    Amends 1983-84 budget (Special)
3535    Approves plan for restroom and security lights in John Lucas Greer Park
        (Special)
        Amends subsections (42), (43), (56), (61), (124) and (127) of
        18.04.030, and amends 18.08.010, 18.10.040(f), 18.12.040(c), 18.12.050
        (g), 18.12.080(b), 18.17.040(c), 18.19.040(c), 18.21.040(c), 18.23.040
        (c), 18.27.030(b), 18.29.030(b), 18.37.030(c), 18.41.030(c), 18.43.030
3536    (f), 18.45.030(g), 18.55.030(h), 18.57.040(h), 18.60.070(b)(1),
        18.60.070(b)(2), 18.83.080 (Table 1), 18.88.030(b), 18.90.030(b),
        18.94.070(c), 18.98.060(a)(2), 20.08.010 and 21.12.090(f)(2); adds
        18.10.030(j), 18.12.030(g), 18.17.030(h), 18.19.030(i), 18.21.030(j),
        18.23.030(j), 18.25.030(j), 18.71.050(i) and 18.71.060(g), zoning
        (18.04, 18.08, 18.12 [Ed. Note], 18.70, 18.80, 20.08, 21.12)
3537    Rezone (Special)
3538    Amends 18.23.070(a), zoning (Repealed by 3807)
3539    Extends moratorium on processing of all applications for planning
        approval established by Ord. 3487 (Special)
3540    Amends 1983-84 budget (Special)
3541    Rezoning (Special)
3542    Removes special setback for property at 1681 - 1691 El Camino Real
        (Special)
3543    Corrects property description and map in Exh. A-14 of 22.08.170, parks
        (Title 22 [Ed. Note])
3544    Adopts 1984-85 budget (Special)
3545    Amends 1984-85 budget (Special)
        Amends 2.08.155, 2.08.180, 2.08.190, 2.08.205, 2.08.215, 2.08.260,
        2.08.275, 2.08.276, 2.08.280, 2.08.290, 2.08.295, 2.08.310 and
3546    2.28.120; adds 2.08.130, 2.08.200 and 2.08.249; repeals 2.08.160,
        2.08.170 and 2.08.203, duties of various city offices and departments
        (2.08 [Ed. Note], 2.28 [Ed. Note])
3547    Moratorium on processing of all applications for planning approvals for
        certain uses in all CS and GM zones (Special)
3548    Rezone (Special)
3549    Rezone (Special)
3550    Amends 1984-85 budget (Special)
3551    Rezone (Special)
3552    Terminates moratorium established by Ord. 3487 and extended by Ord.
        3539 (Special)
3553    Amends 18.57.050 and 18.57.070(b), zoning (Repealed by 4883)
3554    Rezone (Special)
3555    Terminates moratorium established by Ord. 3526 for the GM area on Park
        Boulevard (Special)
3556    Amends 2.18.030 and 2.18.040, visual arts jury (2.18 [Ed. Note])
3557    Adopts plans for golf course cart paths over a portion of Byxbee Park,
        the city-owned Baylands and municipal golf course (Special)
3558    700 Welch Road; amends Ord. 1992 (Special)
3559    Amends Ch. 16.20, signs (16.20)
3560    Adds Ch. 16.47, approval of projects with impacts on housing (16.47)
        (Repealed by 5408)
3561    Amends 1984-85 budget (Special)
3562    1984-85 assessment for the California Avenue district off-street
        parking project No. 55-5 (Special)
3563    1984-85 assessment for the California Avenue district off-street
        parking project No. 60-8 (Special)
3564    Amends 1984-85 budget (Special)
3565    Adds 18.45.070(f); and amends 18.45.030(b) and (n), zoning (Repealed by
        4923)
3566    Amends 1984-85 budget (Special)
3567    Rezone (Special)
3568    Amends 1984-85 budget (Special)
3569    Amends 1984-85 budget (Special)
3570    Moratorium on construction of new square footage and conversion of non-
        office uses to office uses in downtown area (Repealed by 3696)
3571    Rezone (Special)
3572    Amends 18.57.040, zoning (Repealed by 4883)
3573    Adds Ch. 18.58, general manufacturing combining district (1)
        regulations (Repealed by 3890)
3574    Rezone (Special)
3575    Adds 16.48.150, architectural review processing when moratorium imposed
        (Repealed by 4826)
3576    Amends 1984-85 budget (Special)
        Adds 18.12.040(i), 18.88.030(b)(4) and 21.12.040(t); and amends
3577    18.12.030(a), 18.83.070(a)(4), 21.04.030(24) and (25) and 21.08.060,
        subdivisions and zoning (18.12 [Ed. Note], 21.04, 21.08, 21.12)
3578    Closes 1983-84 budget (Special)
3579    Amends 1984-85 budget (Special)
3580    Amends 1984-85 budget (Special)
3581    Rezone (Special)
3582    Rezone (Special)
        Adds 18.32.030(b), 18.41.040(n), 18.41.040(o), 18.43.040(m) and
        18.45.040(n); renumbers 18.04.030(16) and (17) to be 18.04.030(17) and
        (18), 18.71.140(c) - (i) to be 18.71.140(d) - (j) and 18.83.070(a)(2) -
        (6) to be 18.83.070(a)(3) - (7) and adds 18.04.030(16), 18.71.140(c)
3583    and 18.83.070(a)(2); and amends 10.04.020, 18.04.030(7), 18.12.070(a),
        18.17.070(a), 18.19.070(a), 18.21.050(g), 18.21.060(b)(3), 18.21.070
        (a), 18.23.050(g), 18.23.060(b)(3), 18.23.070(a), 18.25.050(g),
        18.25.060(b)(3), 18.25.070(a), 18.27.050(g), 18.27.060(b)(3), 18.27.070
        (a), 18.29.050(g), 18.29.060(3), 18.29.070(a), 18.37.070(a)(1),
        18.41.070(a)(1), 18.43.070(a)(1), 18.45.070(a)(1), 18.55.070(a)(1),
3584    Amends 18.04.030(13), zoning (18.04)
3585    Amends 1984-85 budget (Special)
3586    Amends l(c) of Ord. 3570, moratorium in downtown area (Repealed by
        3696)
3587    Extends moratorium established by Ord. 3547 (Special)
3588    Rezone (Special)
3589    Adds 2(a) to Ord. 3570, moratorium in downtown area (Repealed by 3696)
3590    Amends 1984-85 budget (Special)
3591    Disestablishes parking and business improvement area established by
        Ord. 3388; and repeals Ch. 13.24 (Repealer)
3592    Amends 4.54.110(16) and 4.56.100(r), hot tub, sauna and massage
        establishments (4.54, 4.56)
3593    Amends 4.10.050, solicitors and peddlers (4.10)
3594    Amends 1984-85 budget (Special)
3595    Adds 16.20.260 and 16.20.270, signs (16.20)
3596    Amends 1984-85 budget (Special)
3597    Adds 16.47.020(e), approval of projects with impacts on housing (16.47)
        (Repealed by 5408)
3598    Amends Ord. 3502 7, zoning (Not codified)
3599    Amends 1984-85 budget (Special)
3600    Amends 1984-85 budget (Special)
3601    Amends 1984-85 budget (Special)
3602    Amends 1984-85 budget (Special)
3603    Amends 1984-85 budget (Special)
3604    Amends 2.32.020, sales and use tax (2.32)
3605    Adds 12.16.020(26), Underground Utility District No. 26 (12.16)
3606    Rezone (Special)
3607    Amends 18.08.040, zoning (Repealed by 3672)
3608    Renumbers 16.47.050 to be 16.47.060; and adds 16.47.050, approval of
        projects with impacts on housing (16.47) (Repealed by 5408)
3609    Amends 9.10.020(c), noise (9.10 [Ed. Note])
3610    Adopts and approves plans for fire facility within Foothills Park
        (Special)
3611    Amends 1984-85 budget (Special)
3612    Amends subsection (a), and repeals subsection (c), of 4.10.060,
        auctioneers (4.10)
3613    Amends 1984-85 budget (Special)
3614    Amends 1984-85 budget (Special)
3615    Approves and adopts plan for improvement and construction of Blanco
        water line at Foothills Park (Special)
3616    Adds 12.16.020(27), Underground Utility District No. 27 (12.16)
3617    Amends 1984-85 budget (Special)
3618    Amends 9.14.010, 9.14.080 and 9.14.090(a)(2), smoking regulated or
        prohibited (9.14 [Ed. Note])
3619    Adds 12.16.020(28), Underground Utility District No. 28 (12.16)
3620    Extends moratorium established by Ord. 3587 (Special)
3621    Amends 1984-85 budget (Special)
3622    Adopts 1985-86 budget (Special)
3623    Rezone (Special)
3624    Fixes assessment for 1985-86, off-street parking project No. 55-5
        (Special)
3625    Amends 2 and 3 of Ord. 3570, downtown development moratorium (Repealed
        by 3696)
3626    Amends 7 of Ord. 3502, zoning (Repealed by 3696)
3627    Amends 10.46.030, residential permit parking (10.46) (Repealed by 5060)
3628    Amends 1985-86 budget (Special)
3629    Amends 1985-86 budget (Special)
3630    Adopts plans for community park at Downtown Park North (Special)
3631    Amends 18.37.050(g), 18.41.050(g) and 18.45.050(g), zoning (Repealed by
        4923)
        Adds 18.04.030(7), 18.32.040(b)(1), 18.60.050(g)(1) and 18.60.050(h)
3632    (1), amends 18.43.040(g), 18.45.040(h) and 18.63.050, and renumbers
        18.04.030(7) to be 18.04.030(8), and 18.32.040(b)(1) - (b)(11) to be
        18.32.040(b)(2) - 18.32.040(b)(12), zoning (18.04)
3633    Demolition and building permits moratorium (Special)
3634    Amends 1985-86 budget (Special)
3635    Amends 1985-86 budget (Special)
3636    School bus liability insurance (Not codified)
3637    Demolition and building permits moratorium (Repealed by 3662)
3638    Amends 1985-86 budget (Special)
3639    Amends 1985-86 budget (Special)
3640    Amends 9.10.060(d), noise abatement (9.10 [Ed. Note])
3641    Authorizes Transmission Agency of Northern California to issue revenue
        bonds, notes and other evidences of indebtedness (Special)
3642    Amends 1985-86 budget (Special)
3643    Rezone (Special)
        Adds 22.08.155, 22.08.175, 22.08.225 and 22.08.370; and amends
3644    22.08.150, 22.08.170 and 22.08.220, park dedications (Title 22 [Ed.
        Note])
3645    Adds 10.56.025; and amends 10.56.010, 10.56.015, 10.56.020 and
        10.56.030, special speed zones (10.56)
3646    Closes 1984-85 budget (Special)
3647    Grants CATV franchise (Special)
3648    Amends 1985-86 budget (Special)
3649    Amends 5 of Ord. 3637, demolition and building permits moratorium
        (Repealed by 3662)
3650    Property exchange (Special)
3651    Amends 1985-86 budget (Special)
3652    Extends moratorium established by Ord. 3547 (Special)
3653    Rezone (Special)
3654    Rezone (Special)
3655    Rezone (Special)
3656    Amends 10.44.020(a), stopping, standing and parking (Repealed by 4588)
3657    Amends 18.43.050(g), zoning (Repealed by 4925)
        Establishes a maximum allowance of new square footage to be approved
3658    for construction at the Stanford shopping center and imposes a
        moratorium on further applications above that allowance until July 1,
        1987 (Special)
3659    Adds Ch. 18.13, R-1 single-family residence combining district (sub)
        regulations (Repealed by 3905)
3660    Rezone (Special)
3661    Rezone (Special)
3662    Adds 18.12.055; and repeals Ords. 3637 and 3649, zoning (18.12 [Ed.
        Note])
3663    Adds Ch. 18.48; and amends 18.08.010 and 18.57.060 and Ch. 18.55,
        zoning (18.08)
3664    Rezone (Special)
3665    Adding Ch. 16.46, approval of projects with impacts on traffic in the
        San Antonio/West Bayshore Area (16.46)
3666    Adds Ch. 16.42, seismic hazards identification program (16.42)
3667    Amends Ch. 16.04 and adopts the findings for local amendments to the
        1985 Uniform Building Code (16.04 [Ed. Note])
3668    Amends Ch. 16.08 and adopts the findings for local amendments to the
        1985 Uniform Plumbing Code (16.08 [Ed. Note])
3669    Amends Ch. 16.16 and adopts the findings for local amendments to the
        1984 National Electrical Code (16.16 [Ed. Note])
3670    Repeals and replaces Ch. 15.04, Uniform Fire Code (Repealed by 3921)
3671    Amends 1985-86 budget (Special)
3672    Rezone; repeals Ord. 3607 (Special)
3673    Amends 1985-86 budget (Special)
3674    Amends 1985-86 budget (Special)
3675    Imposes moratorium on certain types of remodeling of residences in R-
        1 Districts (Special)
3676    Amends 1985-86 budget (Special)
3677    Repeals Ch. 2.11 (Repealer)
3678    Rezone (Special)
3679    Amends 1985-86 budget (Special)
3680    Extends moratoria on new square footage and the conversion of non-
        office uses to office uses in the downtown area (Repealed by 3696)
3681    Extends off-street parking and loading regulations in the downtown area
        (Repealed by 3696)
3682    Adds 12.16.020(29), Underground Utility District No. 29 (12.16)
        Adds (38) to 18.04.030, (k) to 18.10.040, (h)(3) to 18.12.050, (c) to
        18.12.080, (h) to 18.71.060 and (f) to 18.88.090; amends (a)(2) and (b)
        of 18.12.080, (g) of 18.57.040, (c) and (d) of 18.68.150, 18.88.090,
3683    18.94.080, (c) of 18.94.090, 21.08.030 and 21.08.050; repeals (a) of
        18.10.030 and reletters following subsections; and repeals (h) of
        18.71.050 and reletters following subsections, zoning and subdivisions
        (18.04, 18.12 [Ed. Note], 18.38, 18.70, 21.08)
3684    Amends 10.64.240, bicycles, roller skates and coasters (10.64)
3685    Amends 1985-86 budget (Special)
3686    Amends 1985-86 budget (Special)
3687    Approves amendment to lease agreement between City of Palo Alto Golf
        Course Corporation and city (Special)
3688    Rezone (Special)
        Adds Ch. 21.13; renumbers (36) and (37) of 21.04.030(b) to be (37) and
3689    (38), and adds new (1); amends 16.48.130 and 18.82.080, vesting
        tentative maps (18.30(G), 21.04, 21.13)
3690    Amends 1985-86 budget (Special)
3691    Adopts 1986-87 budget (Special)
3692    Amends 1985-86 budget (Special)
3693    Rezone (Special)
3694    Amends 1986-87 budget (Special)
3695    Amends 1986-87 budget (Special)
3696    Adds Ch. 18.49, zoning; repeals Ords. 3502, 3570, 3586, 3589, 3626,
        3680 and 3681 (Repealed by 4923)
3697    Rezone (Special)
3698    Rezone (Special)
3699    Imposes moratorium on development or demolition in downtown area
        historic sites (Repealed by 3718)
3700    Zoning (Special)
3701    Renumbers subsections (17) - (38) of 21.04.030 to be subsections (18) -
        (39) and adds a new subsection (17), subdivisions (21.04)
3702    Amends 1986-87 budget (Special)
        Adds 18.04.030(117); amends 18.04.030(44), (64), (65), 18.29.050(h),
3703    (i), 18.44.040(b), 18.83.060(d); renumbers 18.04.030(117) and (118) to
        be (118) and (119); repeals 18.04.030(76)(a), (b), zoning (18.04)
3704    Amends Ch. 2.33, transient occupancy tax (2.33)
        Moratorium on issuing land use approvals or building permits for uses
3705    not in conformance with floor area ratio policy of Golden Triangle Task
        Force (Special)
3706    Amends 1986-87 budget (Special)
3707    Zoning (Special)
3708    Amends 1986-87 budget (Special)
        Adds 2.04.365; and amends 2.04.050(a), 2.04.060(b) and (c), 2.08.330
3709    (a), 4.04.210, 12.16.040(a) and 16.32.090, miscellaneous provisions
        (2.08 [Ed. Note], 4.04, 12.16, 16.32)
3710    Amends 1986-87 budget (Special)
3711    Amends 1986-87 budget (Special)
3712    Rezone (Special)
3713    Amends 1986-87 budget (Special)
3714    Closes 1985-86 budget (Special)
3715    Adds 2.30.050(d), contracts and purchasing procedure - property control
        (Repealed by 3927)
        Adds 17.16.025 and 17.48.015; amends 17.16.020(k), and 17.20.010 -
3716    17.20.030; and repeals 17.20.015, hazardous materials storage (17.16,
        17.20, 17.48)
3717    Amends 1986-87 budget (Special)
3718    Repeals moratorium imposed by Ord. 3699 (Repealer)
3719    Adds 6.20.045, care and keeping of animals (6.20)
        Adds 4.10.035, 4.10.045, 4.10,057 and 12.12.020; renumbers and amends
3720    4.10.030 to be 4.10.025 and adds a new 4.10.030; and repeals 4.10.050
        (3)(f), commercial sidewalk encroachments and pushcart vendors (4.10,
        12.12)
3721    Amends Ch. 16.49, historic preservation (16.49) ( 16.49.030 repealed by
        5208)
3722    Amends 1986-87 budget (Special)
3723    Amends 1986-87 budget (Special)
3724    Amends 1986-87 budget (Special)
3725    Amends 1986-87 budget (Special)
3726    Rezone (Special)
3727    Amends 1986-87 budget (Special)
3728    Amends 1986-87 budget (Special)
3729    Amends 1986-87 budget (Special)
3730    Amends 1986-87 budget (Special)
        Adds 2.08.182, 2.08.184, 2.08.186, 2.08.252, 2.08.254, 2.08.256 and
3731    2.08.258; amends 2.08.020, 2.08.155, 2.08.200, 2.08.210, 2.08.220,
        2.08.245, 2.08.249, 2.08.250, 2.08.260, 2.08.280, 2.08.290, 2.08.295
        and 2.08.302, officers and departments (2.08 [Ed. Note])
3732    Amends 1986-87 budget (Special)
3733    Seismic reinforcement of Foothills Park Dam (Special)
3734    Rezone (Special)
        Amends 16.20.140(b)(1), 18.04.030(43), (95), (116), 18.10.030(i), (j),
        18.10.040(f), 18.12.030(g), (h), 18.12.040(c), 18.17.030(h), (i),
3735    18.17.040(c), 18.19.030(i), (j), 18.19.040(c), 18.21.030(j), (k),
        18.21.040(c), 18.23.030(j), (k), 18.23.040(c), 18.25.030(j), (k),
        18.25.040(c), 18.83.080, zoning (16.20, 18.04, 18.12 [Ed. Note])
3736    Amends 18.49.100(b)(1)(iii) and (3), zoning (Repealed by 4923)
3737    Adopts parking lot plan (Special)
3738    Amends 1986-87 budget (Special)
3739    Amends 1986-87 budget (Special)
3740    Amends 1986-87 budget (Special)
        Amends 18.12.070(a), 18.17.070(a), 18.19.070(a), 18.21.070(a).
3741    18.23.070(a), 18.25.070(a), 18.27.070(a) and 18.29.070(a), zoning
        (18.12 [Ed. Note])
3742    Adopts improvement for golf course (Special)
3743    Rezone (Special)
3744    Cable television franchise (Special)
3745    Adds subsection (30) to 12.16.020, underground utilities (12.16)
3746    Amends 2 of Ord. 3705, moratorium for land use (Special)
3747    Approves development agreement (Special)
3748    Adds 2.40.035, municipal elections (2.40)
3749    Amends 22.04.300, park and recreation building use and regulations
        (Title 22 [Ed. Note])
3750    Amends 18.37.050(g)(3), 18.41.050(g)(3), 18.43.050(g)(2), 18.45.050(g),
        5 of Ord. 3631 and 4 of Ord. 3658, zoning (Repealed by 3854)
3751    Adds 9.10.080 and 9.10.020(h) and (i); and amends 9.10.060, noise (9.10
        [Ed. Note])
3752    Repeals 5 of Ord. 3716 (Repealer)
3753    Rezone (Special)
3754    Amends Ch. 16.24 and 16.48.050(d) and 18.90.010, fences (16.24)
3755    Amends 4.32.110, soliciting information for commercial purposes (4.32)
3756    Adopts 1987-88 budget (Special)
        Renumbers subsection (121) of 18.04.030 to be (119), and adds 18.04.030
        (120); renumbers subsections (122), (123) and (124) of 18.04.030 to be
        (121), (122) and (123) and adds a new subsection (124); renumbers
        subsection (j) of 18.41.030 to be (o) and adds a new subsection (j);
        adds 18.41.040(p); amends 18.41.050(m); renumbers subsection (r) of
        18.43.030 to be (s) and adds a new subsection (r); adds 18.43.040(n);
        amends 18.43.050(c); renumbers subsection (t) of 18.45.030 to be (u)
        and adds a new subsection (t); adds 18.45.040(o) and 18.45.050(k)(5);
3757    amends 18.49.050 and 18.49.070(a); renumbers subsections (q), (r) and
        (s) of 18.55.030 to be (r), (s) and (t) and adds a new subsection (q);
        adds 18.55.040(h); amends 18.55.050(k)(3); renumbers subsections (m),
        (n) and (o) of 18.57.040 to be (n), (o) and (p) and adds a new
        subsection (m); adds 18.57.050(i); renumbers subsections (p), (q) and
        (r) of 18.58.040 to be (q), (r) and (s) and adds a new subsection (p);
        adds 18.58.050(i); renumbers subsections (i) and (j) of 18.60.030 to be
        (j) and (k) and adds a new subsection (i); adds 18.60.040(h); amends
        18.60.050(k) and 18.83.080 and adds 18.88.190, zoning (18.04)
3758    Temporarily adds 4.10.051, licenses obtained by application to chief of
        police (Expired - See Ed. Note at code section)
3759    Development plan (Special)
3760    Amends 1987-88 budget (Special)
3761    Amends 1987-88 budget (Special)
3762    Amends 2.08.010, holidays (2.08 [Ed. Note])
3763    Adds 9.10.060(k), noise (9.10 [Ed. Note])
3764    Amends 2.04.010, council meetings (Repealed by 4207)
3765    Amends 1987-88 budget (Special)
3766    Amends 1987-88 budget (Special)
3767    Amends 1987-88 budget (Special)
3768    Adds 9.14.010(i) and (j), 9.14.095 and 9.14.096, smoking regulated or
        prohibited (9.14 [Ed. Note])
3769    Approves lease for youth hostel (Special)
3770    Rezone (Special)
3771    Renumbers 21.08.070 to be 21.08.080 and adds a new 21.08.070,
        subdivisions (21.08)
3772    Amends 1987-88 budget (Special)
3773    Amends Ch. 6.28, dangerous and wild animals (6.28)
3774    Amends 1987-88 budget (Special)
3775    Rezone (Special)
3776    Amends 1987-88 budget (Special)
3777    Amends 1987-88 budget (Special)
3778    Amends 1987-88 budget (Special)
3779    Rezone (Special)
3780    Change of appropriation limit (Special)
3781    Adds Ch. 2.35, utility users tax (2.35)
3782    Amends 1987-88 budget (Special)
3783    Adds 18.04.030(147) and 18.32.040(b)(11); renumbers 18.32.040(b)(11)
        and (12) to : 18.32.040(b)(12) and (13), zoning (18.04)
3784    Amends 1987-88 budget (Special)
3785    Amends 1987-88 budget (Special)
3786    Closes 1987-88 budget (Special)
3787    Amends 1987-88 budget (Special)
3788    Amends 1987-88 budget (Special)
3789    Amends Exh. A-21.7 of 22.08.310, park dedication (Title 22 [Ed. Note])
3790    Adds subsection (1) to 9.10.060, noise abatement (9.10 [Ed. Note])
3791    Rezone (Special)
3792    Amends 18.47.010, 18.47.020 and 18.47.040, zoning (18.30(B))
3793    Adds Ch. 17.34 and 17.32.150, 17.32.160 and 17.32.170; repeals Ch.
        17.36, hazardous materials storage (17.32)
3794    Amends subsections (a) and (b) of 1.08.010, violations and penalties
        (1.08)
        Adds 16.52.170, 16.52.180, 16.52.190 and 16.52.200; amends 16.52.020,
3795    16.52.040, 16.52.060, 16.52.070, 16.52.110 and 16.52.120; repeals and
        replaces 16.52.130, 16.52.140, 16.52.150 and 16.52.160, flood hazard
        regulations (16.52)
        Adds 16.48.065; amends 16.48.040, 16.48.050(f) and (h), 16.48.060,
3796    16.48.070, 16.48.080, 16.48.090, 16.48.120(c) and 16.48.130(a),
        architectural review (Repealed by 4826)
3797    Amends 1987-88 budget (Special)
3798    Adds 18.32.040(b)(11), (12) and (13); renumbers 18.32.040(b)(11) and
        (12) as 18.32.040(b)(14) and (15), zoning (Repealed by 4964)
3799    Amends 1987-88 budget (Special)
3800    Amends 1987-88 budget (Special)
3801    Amends 1987-88 budget (Special)
3802    Amends 1987-88 budget (Special)
3803    Amends 1987-88 budget and establishes storm drainage enterprise fund
        (Special)
3804    Amends 1987-88 budget (Special)
3805    Amends 1987-88 budget (Special)
3806    Moratorium on issuing building permits for single-family dwellings
        which do not meet certain criteria (Repealed by 3905)
        Adds Chs. 18.22, 18.24, 18.26 and 18.28; amends 18.04.030, 18.37.070
        (a), 18.41.070(a), 18.43.070(a), 18.45.070(a), 18.49.060(b)(5),
3807    18.49.070(b), 18.49.080(b), 18.49.090(b), 18.55.070(a) and 18.60.070
        (a), zoning; repeals Chs. 18.21, 18.23, 18.25, 18.27 and 18.29 and
        18.49.070(d), zoning (18.04)
3808    Rezone (Special)
3809    Amends 1987-88 budget (Special)
        Adds Ch. 18.64 and 18.37.070(e), 18.41.070(g), 18.43.070(f), 18.45.070
3810    (g) 18.49.040(g), 18.55.070(h) and 18.60.070(e), zoning (Repealed by
        4933)
3811    Rezone (Special)
3812    Amends 1987-88 budget (Special)
3813    Amends 1987-88 budget (Special)
3814    Amends 4 of Ord. 3806, exception to moratorium on certain variance
        applications (Repealed by 3905)
3815    Amends 4 of Ord. 3631 and 4 of Ord. 3658 and 18.37.050(g)(3), 18.41.050
        (g)(3), 18.43.050(g)(2) and 18.45.050(g), zoning (Repealed by 3854)
3816    Amends 1987-88 budget (Special)
3817    Adopts 1987-88 budget (Special)
3818    Amends 1987-88 budget (Special)
3819    Amends 1987-88 budget (Special)
3820    Amends 1988-89 budget (Special)
3821    Amends 1988-89 budget (Special)
3822    Moratorium on acceptance of certain applications for tentative
        subdivision maps (Repealed by 3850)
3823    Amends 1988-89 budget (Special)
3824    Adds Ch. 12.32, water use regulations (Repealed by 3884)
3825    Amends Ord. 3819, budget (Special)
3826    Amends 6.16.030, dogs (6.16)
3827    Amends 1988-89 budget (Special)
3828    Amends Exh. A-21.5 of Ch. 22.08, park dedications (Title 22 [Ed. Note])
3829    Amends Ord. 3631, authorization of bond issuance (Special)
3830    Amends 1988-89 budget (Special)
3831    Amends 1988-89 budget (Special)
3832    Amends 1988-89 budget (Special)
3833    Amends 6 of Ord. 3822, moratorium on acceptance of certain applications
        for tentative subdivision maps (Repealed by 3850)
3834    Amends 5 of Ord. 3806, moratorium on building permit issuance (Repealed
        by 3905)
3835    Adds 10.44.021; amends 10.44.020, stopping, standing and parking
        (Repealed by 4588)
3836    Amends 1988-89 budget (Special)
3837    Amends 1988-89 budget (Special)
3838    Amends Ord. 3822, moratorium on acceptance of certain applications for
        tentative subdivision maps (Repealed by 3850)
3839    Amends 1988-89 budget (Special)
3840    Amends 1988-89 budget (Special)
3841    Adds 2.08.247; amends 2.08.240 and 2.08.250, officers and departments;
        repeals 2.08.260 (2.08)
3842    Amends 18.60.030, zoning (Repealed by 4883)
3843    Amends 18.26.060, zoning (Repealed by 4964)
3844    Rezone (Special)
3845    Adds Ch. 4.57, dealers in concealable firearms (4.57)
3846    Amends municipal fee schedule (Not codified)
3847    Authorizes 1987-88 budget closure (Special)
3848    Amends 1988-89 budget (Special)
3849    Amends 1988-89 budget (Special)
        Adds 21.20.301, subdivisions; amends 18.04.030, 18.12.040, 18.12.055
3850    and 18.90.050, zoning, and 21.04.030 and 21.20.300, subdivisions;
        repeals Ords. 3822, 3833 and 3838 (18.04, 18.12 [Ed. Note], 21.04,
        21.20)
3851    Amends 1988-89 budget (Special)
3852    Amends 1988-89 budget (Special)
3853    Amends 1988-89 budget (Special)
        Amends 18.37.050(g)(3), 18.41.050(g)(3), 18.43.050(g)(2), 18.45.050(g),
3854    4 of Ord. 3658 and 5 of Ord. 3631, zoning; repeals Ords. 3750 and 3815
        (Repealed by 3890)
3855    Amends 10.48.090, trucks and truck routes (10.48)
3856    Adds Ch. 9.09, assault weapons (Repealed by 4464)
3857    Amends 10.56.010, 10.56.020 and 10.56.030, speed zones (10.56)
3858    Amends 1988-89 budget (Special)
3859    Amends 2.04.060, council procedure (Repealed by 4207)
3860    Amends 1988-89 budget (Special)
3861    Amends 18.10.040, 18.12.040, 18.12.055, 18.71.060, and Table 1 of
        18.83.080, zoning (18.12 [Ed. Note])
3862    Development plan (Special)
3863    Amends 1988-89 budget (Special)
3864    Amends 1988-89 budget (Special)
3865    Amends 1988-89 budget (Special)
3866    Amends 1988-89 budget (Special)
3867    Amends 1988-89 budget (Special)
3868    Amends 1988-89 budget (Special)
3869    Adds Ch. 5.30, chlorofluorocarbon processed food packaging (5.30)
        (Repealed by 5039)
3870    Amends 1988-89 budget (Special)
3871    Amends 1988-89 budget (Special)
3872    Rezone (Special)
3873    Amends 1988-89 budget (Special)
3874    Adds 12.16.020(31), Underground Utility District No. 31 (12.16)
3875    Amends 1988-89 budget (Special)
3876    Amends 16.49.030(a), historic preservation (16.49) (Repealed by 5208)
3877    Amends 1988-89 budget (Special)
3878    Amends 1988-89 budget (Special)
3879    Amends 1988-89 budget (Special)
        Adds 10.64.241, 10.64.242, 10.64.243, 10.64.244, 10.64.245 and
3880    10.64.251; amends 10.64.160, 10.64.190, 10.64.200, 10.64.230 and
        10.64.240; bicycles, roller skates and coasters (10.64)
        Amends 2.12.100 and 2.32.170, administrative code; 9.10.060 and
        9.24.060, public peace, morals and safety; 15.04.012, Uniform Fire
3881    Code; 16.04.060, 16.04.270, 16.08.020, 16.16.012 and 16.42.090(b),
        building regulations; and 18.01.080, zoning (2.12, 2.32, 9.10 [Ed.
        Note], 9.24 [Ed. Note], 16.04 [Ed. Note], 16.08 [Ed. Note], 16.16 [Ed.
        Note], 16.42, 18.01)
3882    Amends 9.60.020 and 9.60.070, Civic Center Block regulations (Repealed
        by 4575)
3883    Adopts 1989-90 budget (Special)
3884    Repeals and replaces Ch. 12.32, water use regulations (12.32)
3885    Rezone (Special)
3886    Amends 18.94.070, zoning (18.70)
3887    Adds 13.16.170 and 13.16.180, assessment bond procedure (13.16)
3888    Amends Ch. 2.18 and 2.26.020(b) and (c), 2.26.030, 2.26.040, 2.26.050
        (a) and 2.26.060, administrative code (2.18, 2.26)
3889    Amends Ch. 16.09, sewer use ordinance (16.09) (Repealed by 5084)
        Adds Ch. 18.48; amends 18.04.030(102.5), 18.08.010, 18.08.020,
        18.08.030, 18.41.030, 18.41.050, 18.41.070(a), 18.43.050, 18.43.070(a),
3890    18.45.040, 18.45.050, 18.45.070, 18.55.050, 18.57.060, 18.82.010,
        18.94.010, 18.94.080 and 18.94.100, zoning; repeals Chs. 18.48 and
        18.58 and Ord. 3854 (18.04, 18.08, 18.30(D), 18.30(G), 18.70)
        Amends 18.32.050, 18.37.050, 18.60.050, 18.63.030, 18.63.040; amends
3891    chapter title of Ch. 18.63; repeals and replaces 18.63.050, zoning
        (Repealed by 4964)
3892    Rezone (Special)
3893    Rezone (Special)
        Adds Ch. 16.45, transportation impact fee for new nonresidential
3894    development in the Stanford Research Park/El Camino Real CS zone
        (16.45)
3895    Rezone (Special)
3896    Amends 18.04.030(33), (63) and (114), 18.26.050(d), 18.49.100(b)(3) and
        18.92.020(b), zoning (18.04)
3897    Amends 1989-90 budget (Special)
3898    Amends 1989-90 budget (Special)
3899    Amends 1989-90 budget (Special)
3900    Amends 1989-90 budget (Special)
3901    Amends 21.04.030(16.1), subdivisions (21.04)
3902    Amends Ord. 2637, rezone (Special)
3903    Amends 1989-90 budget (Special)
3904    Amends 1989-90 budget (Special)
        Adds 18.10.080 and 18.12.090; amends 18.04.030(15), (44) and (65),
        18.08.020, 18.08.030, 18.10.050, 18.10.060, 18.12.050, 18.12.060,
3905    18.12.080, 18.83.060(b), 18.83.080 (Table 10), 18.88.030, 18.88.040 and
        18.94.100, zoning; repeals Ch. 18.13 and Ords. 3806, 3814 and 3834
        (18.04, 18.08, 18.12 [Ed. Note], 18.80)
3906    Rezone (Special)
3907    Amends 1989-90 budget (Special)
3908    Adds Ch. 5.35, retail sales requirement for paper bags (5.35) (Repealed
        by 5032)
3909    Repeals and replaces Ch. 4.39, private intrusion alarms (4.39)
3910    Adds 2.08.243 and 12.04.041, relating to storm and surface water
        management (12.04)
3911    Amends Ch. 16.04, building code (16.04 [Ed. Note])
3912    Amends Ch. 16.08, plumbing code (16.08 [Ed. Note])
3913    Amends Ch. 16.16, electrical code (16.16 [Ed. Note])
3914    Amends 1989-90 budget (Special)
3915    Amends 1989-90 budget (Special)
3916    Amends 1989-90 budget (Special)
3917    Amends 1989-90 budget (Special)
3918    Authorizes closing of 1988-89 budget (Special)
3919    Rezone (Special)
3920    Adopts methane gas recovery system development plan for portion of
        Byxbee Park (Special)
3921    Amends Ch. 15.04, Uniform Fire Code (Repealed by 4566)
3922    Amends 1989-90 budget (Special)
3923    Amends 1989-90 budget (Special)
3924    Amends 1989-90 budget (Special)
3925    Rezone (Special)
3926    Rezone (Special)
3927    Adds Ch. 2.31; amends 2.08.180; repeals and replaces Ch. 2.30,
        administrative code (2.08 [Ed. Note], 2.30 [Ed. Note], 2.31)
3928    Amends 1989-90 budget (Special)
3929    Amends 9.68.030(d), rental housing stabilization (9.68)
        Adds 2.08.235, 2.08.236, 2.08.237, 2.08.239, 2.08.243, 2.08.278,
        2.08.282 and 2.08.303; amends 2.08.020, 2.08.182, 2.08.184, 2.08.244,
3930    2.08.245, 2.08.247, 2.08.275, 2.08.276, 2.08.280, 2.08.290, 2.08.295,
        2.08.310, 2.18.050, 2.18.070, 2.26.020(d), 2.26.030 and 2.26.050(d),
        administrative code; repeals 2.08.240, 2.08.241, 2.08.242, 2.08.243 and
        2.08.246 (2.08 [Ed. Note], 2.18, 2.26)
3931    Amends 2.18.040, public art commission (2.18)
3932    Appropriation (Special)
3933    Appropriation (Special)
3934    Appropriation (Special)
3935    Appropriation (Special)
3936    Appropriation (Special)
3937    Appropriation (Special)
3938    Appropriation (Special)
3939    Appropriation (Special)
3940    Appropriation (Special)
3941    Appropriation (Special)
3942    Appropriation (Special)
3943    Appropriation (Special)
3944    Adds 4.55.075 and amends 4.55.020, adult entertainment establishments
        (4.55)
3945    Appropriation (Special)
3946    Transfer of funds (Special)
3947    Amends 4.04.140, 4.55.030 and 4.55.070, adult entertainment
        establishments (4.04, 4.55)
3948    Appropriation (Special)
3949    Capital improvement project (Special)
3950    Appropriation (Special)
3951    Amends Ch. 2.28, fiscal procedures (2.28)
3952    Adds 15.04.343, amends 15.04.083 and repeals 15.04.307, fire code
        (Repealed by 4566)
3953    Amends 1989-90 budget (Special)
3954    Appropriation (Special)
3955    Amends 1989-90 budget (Special)
3956    Amends 1989-90 budget (Special)
3957    Appropriation (Special)
3958    Adopts improvement plan (Special)
3959    Appropriation (Special)
3960    Adds 12.32.015, water use regulations (Suspended by Ord. 4150 - See Ed.
        Note at code section)
3961    Amends 1989-90 budget (Special)
3962    Appropriation (Special)
3963    Amends 12.16.020(32), underground utilities (12.16)
3964    Amends 12.32.010, water use regulations (12.32)
3965    Rezone (Special)
3966    Rezone (Special)
3967    Appropriation (Special)
3968    Amends 1990-91 budget (Special)
3969    Appropriation (Special)
3970    Appropriation (Special)
3971    Appropriation (Special)
3972    Rezone (Special)
3973    Appropriation (Special)
3974    Rezone (Special)
3975    Amends 1990-91 budget (Special)
3976    Amends 1989-90 budget (Special)
3977    Imposes moratorium on issuance of building permits in certain zoning
        districts (Special)
3978    Amends 1990-91 budget (Special)
3979    Amends 1990-91 budget (Special)
3980    Amends 1990-91 budget (Special)
3981    Amends 1990-91 budget (Special)
3982    Amends Ch. 8.08, weed abatement (8.08)
        Amends title name of Title 6, Animals; amends 6.04.020, 6.04.050,
3983    6.04.060, 6.04.070, 6.04.080, 6.04.090, 6.04.100, 6.04.110, 6.20.020,
        6.20.030, 6.20.035, 6.20.040, 6.20.060, 6.20.070, 6.20.080, 6.20.090,
        6.20.120, 6.20.160, and 6.20.170, animals (6.04, 6.20)
3984    Amends 12.32.015, water use regulations (Suspended by Ord. 4150 - See
        Ed. Note at code section)
3985    Amends Exh. A-19 of 22.08.230, park dedications (Title 22 [Ed. Note])
3986    Amends 1990-91 budget (Special)
3987    Amends 1990-91 budget (Special)
3988    Adds 16.09.106, 16.09.111 and 16.09.112; amends 16.09.010 and
        16.09.110, sewer use (16.09) (Repealed by 5084)
3989    Rezone (Special)
3990    Amends 1990-91 budget (Special)
3991    Amends Ch. 10.56, special speed zones (10.56)
3992    Amends 2.30.030 and 2.30.150, contracts and purchasing procedures (2.30
        [Ed. Note])
3993    Amends 1990-91 budget (Special)
3994    Rezone (Special)
3995    Rezone (Special)
3996    Adds Ch. 10.70, transportation demand management (Repealed by 4229)
3997    Amends 1990-91 budget (Special)
3998    Amends 1990-91 budget (Special)
3999    Amends 1990-91 budget (Special)
4000    Authorizes closing of 1989-90 budget (Special)
4001    Amends 1990-91 budget (Special)
        Amends Title 17, hazardous materials storage; repeals 17.08.030,
4002    17.20.030, 17.20.060 and 17.52.035 (17.04, 17.08, 17.10, 17.12, 17.16,
        17.20, 17.23, 17.24, 17.28, 17.32, 17.40, 1744, 17.48, 17.52 and 17.56)
4003    Authorizes amendment to contract between city and the California Public
        Employees' Retirement System (Special)
4004    Amends 1990-91 budget (Special)
4005    Amends 1990-91 budget (Special)
4006    Amends 1990-91 budget (Special)
4007    Amends 1990-91 budget (Special)
4008    Amends 1990-91 budget (Special)
4009    Adds 2.30.075, contracts and purchasing procedures (2.30 [Ed. Note])
4010    Amends 1990-91 budget (Special)
4011    Amends 2.09.010, 2.09.040, 2.09.050 and 2.09.060, repeals 2.09.070 and
        2.09.080, conflict of interest code (2.09)
4012    Amends 1990-91 budget (Special)
4013    Amends 1990-91 budget (Special)
4014    Amends 15.04.010, and adds 15.04.345, fire prevention code (Repealed by
        4566)
4015    Amends 1990-91 budget (Special)
        Amends 18.04.030, 18.08.020, 18.10.040, 18.10.050, 18.12.040,
        18.12.050, 18.12.055, 18.12.070, 18.17.050, 18.17.070, 18.19.050,
        18.19.070, 18.22.050, 18.22.090, 18.24.050, 18.24.090, 18.26.050,
        18.26.090, 18.32.050, 18.37.050, 18.41.050, 18.43.050, 18.45.050,
4016    18.45.070, 18.46.060, 18.49.040, 18.49.080, 18.49.090, 18.55.050,
        18.55.070, 18.57.070, 18.60.050, 18.71.060, 18.72.050, 18.90.010,
        18.90.080, 18.90.120, 18.94.040, 18.94.060, 18.94.070 and 18.94.100;
        adds 18.71.115 and 18.90.105; and repeals Ch. 18.31; zoning (18.04,
        18.08, 18.12 [Ed. Note], 18.30(A), 18.70)
4017    Amends zoning map (Special)
4018    Amends 1990-91 budget (Special)
4019    Amends 1990-91 budget (Special)
4020    Amends 1990-91 budget (Special)
4021    Amends 1990-91 budget (Special)
4022    Adopts Palo Alto Harbor Improvement Plan (Special)
4023    Adopts the ITT Marsh Enhancement Plan (Special)
4024    Amends 1990-91 budget (Special)
4025    Amends 1990-91 budget (Special)
4026    Amends 1990-91 budget (Special)
4027    Adds Ch. 2.23, utilities advisory commission (2.23) ( 2.23.020 repealed
        by 5208)
4028    Amends 12.60.020, Underground Utility District No. 33 (12.16)
4029    Amends 1990-91 budget (Special)
4030    Rezone (Special)
4031    Amends 1990-91 budget (Special)
4032    Amends 2.33.010, definition of rent (2.33)
        Validates the enactment and enforcement of specified lost ordinances,
4033    Nos. 3051, 3052, 3053, 3054, 3055, 3056, 3057, 3058, 3059, 3060 and
        3061 (Special)
4034    Amends Ch. 16.16, electrical code (16.16 [Ed. Note])
4035    Rezone (Special)
4036    Amends 2.04.230, 2.04.240, 2.04.250, 2.04.260 and. 2.08.155, council
        standing committee (2.08 [Ed. Note])
4037    Amends 1990-91 budget (Special)
4038    Amends 12.32.015, water shortage regulations (Suspended by Ord. 4150 -
        See Ed. Note at code section)
4039    Validates proceedings for the levy and establishment of storm drainage
        fees (Special)
4040    Adds 22.04.335, alcoholic beverages in John Lucas Greer Park (Title 22
        [Ed. Note])
4041    Amends 12.32.010, 12.32.030 and 12.32.040, water use regulations
        (12.32)
4042    Adopts 1991-92 budget (Special)
        Amends Title 18, Zoning; adds 18.17.055, 18.17.080 and 18.19.080;
4043    amends 18.04.030, definitions; 18.12.070, R-1 District; 18.17.050,
        18.17.070, 18.17.090, R-2 District; 18.19.050 and 18.19.090, RMD
        District; 18.60.040, LM District (18.04, 18.12 [Ed. Note])
4044    Amends 1991-92 budget (Special)
4045    Amends 1991-92 budget (Special)
4046    Amends 2.40.030, waiver of candidate's filing fees (2.40)
4047    Amends 16.49.030, historic resources board (16.49) (Repealed by 5208)
4048    Rezone (Special)
4049    Amends 1991-92 budget (Special)
4050    Approves the Palo Alto Medical Foundation Development Agreement
        (Special)
4051    Amends 9.04.010 and 9.04.020, alcoholic beverages in Ramona Plaza Alley
        (9.04)
4052    Rezone (Special)
4053    Rezone (Special)
4054    Rezone (Special)
4055    Amends 1991-92 budget (Special)
4056    Amends Ch. 9.14, smoking and tobacco regulations (9.14) ( 9.14.080
        repealed by 5418)
4057    Amends 22.04.330 and 22.04.350; adds 22.04.331 and 22.04.332; deletes
        9.04.030 consumption of alcohol in parks (Title 22 [Ed. Note])
4058    Amends 1991-92 budget (Special)
4059    Amends 2.30.040, real property contracts - leases, rentals or purchases
        (2.30 [Ed. Note])
4060    Amends 1991-92 budget (Special)
4061    Amends 1991-92 budget (Special)
4062    Amends 1991-92 budget (Special)
4063    Amends zoning map (Special)
4064    Closes 1991-92 budget (Special)
4065    Amends 1991-92 budget (Special)
        Adds 17.32.180; amends 16.48.120, 17.10.120, 17.12.020, 17.16.025,
4066    17.24.020, 17.24.040, 17.32.100, 17.32.170, 17.34.010 - 17.34.070 and
        17.48.010, hazardous materials storage (17.10, 17.12, 17.16, 17.24,
        17.32, 17.48)
4067    Approves and adopts plan for improvements to Lytton Plaza (Special)
4068    Amends 22.04.150, Foothills Park (Title 22 [Ed. Note])
        Adds 18.22.100, 18.24.100, 18.26.100, 18.32.080, 18.37.080, 18.41.080,
4069    18.43.080, 18.45.080, 18.49.140, 18.55.080, 18.60.080 and 18.68.170,
        recycling storage (18.38)
        Adds 16.09.091, 16.09.101, 16.09.102, 16.09.103 and 16.09.113; amends
4070    16.09.010, 16.09.020(f), 16.09.110(e), (f), (g), 16.09.140 and
        16.09.160 (16.09) (Repealed by 5084)
4071    Amends 2.04.010 and 2.04.060, regular meeting times of city council
        (Repealed by 4207)
4072    Amends 1991-92 budget (Special)
4073    Amends Ch. 2.34, real property transfer tax (2.34)
4074    Amends 1991-92 budget (Special)
4075    Amends 2.04.230 and 2.04.240, regular meeting times of standing
        committees (Repealed by 4207)
4076    Adds 22.04.321 and 22.04.322; amends 22.04.320, prohibits trespassing
        after hours in city parks (Title 22 [Ed. Note])
4077    Amends 16.48.050, applicability of Ch. 16.48, architectural review
        (Repealed by 4826)
4078    Amends 1991-92 budget (Special)
4079    Amends 18.41.060, 18.43.060, 18.45.060 and Ch. 18.83, parking and
        loading regulations (Repealed by 4964)
4080    Amends 1991-92 budget (Special)
        Adds 16.24.065, fences; amends 16.12.050, private swimming pools;
        amends Ch. 18.90 in entirety, variances, home improvement exceptions,
        and conditional use permits; adds subsections (m) to 18.10.050, (o) to
        18.12.050, (p) to 18.17.050, and (o) to 18.19.050; amends 18.04.030(a)
4081    (65), 18.10.040(k), 18.12.040(h), 18.12.055(b), 18.22.050(e),
        18.88.090, 18.92.010, 18.92.020, 18.92.060, 18.92.070, 18.94.070,
        zoning; repeals 18.10.080, 18.12.090, 18.17.090, 18.19.090, exceptions
        to site development regulations for home improvements and minor
        additions (16.24, 18.04, 18.12 [Ed. Note], 18.70)
4082    Amends 1991-92 budget (Special)
4083    Amends 1991-92 budget (Special)
4084    Amends 1991-92 budget (Special)
4085    Amends 1991-92 budget (Special)
4086    Amends 1991-92 budget (Special)
4087    Amends 18.60.040, retail services as conditional use in LM Zone
        (Repealed by 4883)
4088    Amends 1991-92 budget (Special)
        Repeals Ch. 5.04, milk and milk products; Ch. 5.08, restaurants and
4089    food establishments; Ch. 5.10, drive-in restaurants; Ch. 16.12, private
        swimming pools (Repealer)
4090    Amends Ch. 16.04, Uniform Building and Mechanical Codes (16.04 [Ed.
        Note])
4091    Amends Ch. 16.08, Uniform Plumbing Code (16.08 [Ed. Note])
4092    Amends Ch. 15.04, Uniform Fire Code (Repealed by 4566)
4093    Amends 199 1-92 budget (Special)
4094    Amends 1991-92 budget (Special)
4095    Amends 2.30.020, 2.30.070, 2.30.110, contracts and purchasing
        procedures (2.30 [Ed. Note])
4096    Amends 1991-92 budget (Special)
4097    Amends 1991-92 budget (Special)
        Adds Ch. 18.50 ground floor combining district (GF) regulations; amends
4098    18.49.120, ground floor (GF) regulations, 18.90.060, conditional use
        permit (18.30(C)) (18.30(C) repealed by 5065)
4099    Amends 12.20.010, utility rules and regulations (12.20)
4100    Rezone (Special)
4101    Adds Ch. 18.13, single-story height combining district (S) regulations
        (Repealed by 4869)
4102    Amends 18.94.100, noncomplying facility-replacement (18.70)
4103    Amends 1992-93 budget (Special)
4104    Amends 22.08.330, Arastra Property park lands (Title 22 [Ed. Note])
4105    Amends 1992-93 budget (Special)
4106    Adds 12.32.050, water efficient landscape [Ed. Note: Renumbered by Ord.
        4162 to be 12.32.040] (12.32) (Repealed by 5108)
4107    Amends 1992-93 budget (Special)
4108    Amends 1992-93 budget (Special)
4109    Amends Ch. 21.13, vesting tentative maps (21.13)
4110    Rezone (Special)
4111    Amends 1992-93 budget (Special)
4112    Amends 12.16.020, establishes Underground Utility District No. 34
        (12.16)
4113    Zoning variance (Special)
4114    Amends 1992-93 budget (Special)
4115    Amends 1992-93 budget (Special)
4116    Amends 1992-93 budget (Special)
4117    Amends 1992-93 budget (Special)
4118    Appropriation for capital improvement (Special)
4119    Amends 1992-93 budget (Special)
4120    Amends 22.04.321, use of or trespass at skateboard facility prohibited
        when closed at John Lucas Greer Park (Title 22 [Ed. Note])
4121    Closing of 1991-92 budget (Special)
        Amends 2.08.020, approval of city manager's appointments; 2.08.205,
4122    department of human resources; repeals Ch. 2.24, board of compensation
        referees (2.08 [Ed. Note])
        Adds 16.48.135, exceptions to site development, parking and loading
4123    requirements; also adds Ch. 18.91, design enhancement exception process
        (Repealed by 4826)
        Amends 21.08.030, 21.08.050, 21.08.060, 21.08.070, 21.08.080, lot line
4124    adjustments; also amends 21.44.010, certificate of compliance (21.08,
        21.44)
4125    Amends 1992-93 budget (Special)
4126    Amends 1992-93 budget (Special)
4127    Amends zoning map (Special)
4128    Amends Ch. 4.52, billiard rooms, cardrooms and bowling alleys (4.52)
4129    Amends 2.04.230, 2.04.240, standing committees (Repealed by 4207)
4130    Amends zoning map (Special)
4131    Amends zoning map (Special)
4132    Amends zoning map (Special)
4133    Temporarily suspends portion of 2.04.050 for thirty days (Not codified)
4134    Amends 1992-93 budget (Special)
4135    Amends 1992-93 budget (Special)
4136    Amends 1992-93 budget (Special)
4137    Amends 1992-93 budget (Special)
4138    Amends 12.16.200, underground utility districts (12.16)
4139    Amends 18.32.040, conditional uses in PF District (Repeald by 4964)
        Amends 18.04.030, 18.12.070, 18.17.070, 18.19.070, 18.22.090,
        18.24.090, 18.26.090,18.37.050, 18.41.050, 18.43.050, 18.45.050,
4140    18.46.060, 18.49.040, 18.55.050, 18.55.070, 18.57.070, 18.60.050 and
        repeals 18.63.050, grandfathered nonconforming uses in residential,
        commercial and industrial zones (18.04, 18.12 [Ed. Note], 18.30(A))
4141    Amends 18.94.070, termination date for nonconforming uses (18.70)
4142    Amends 18.94.070, termination date for nonconforming uses (18.70)
4143    Amends 1992-93 budget (Special)
4144    Amends 1992-93 budget (Special)
4145    Validates lost Ord. 1316, subdivisions (Special)
4146    Amends zoning map (Special)
4147    Amends zoning map (Special)
4148    Adds 22.04.336 and 22.04.337, alcoholic beverages prohibited without
        permit in Rinconada Park and Mitchell Park (Title 22 [Ed. Note])
4149    Amends 1992-93 budget (Special)
4150    Suspends 12.32.015 and 12.32.030, water emergency measures (12.32)
4151    Amends 1992-93 budget (Special)
4152    Amends 1992-93 budget (Special)
4153    Amends 1992-93 budget (Special)
4154    Amends 1992-93 budget (Special)
4155    Amends 1992-93 budget (Special)
4156    Amends 1992-93 budget (Special)
4157    Amends 1992-93 budget (Special)
4158    Amends 1992-93 budget (Special)
4159    Repeals and reenacts Ch. 10.60, parking violations (10.60)
4160    Amends 1992-93 budget (Special)
4161    Amends 1992-93 budget (Special)
        Adds 12.20.020; amends and renumbers 12.32.050 to be 12.32.040; repeals
4162    former 12.32.040; utilities (12.20, 12.32 [Ed. Note]) ( 12.32.040
        repealed by 5108)
4163    Amends 1993-94 budget (Special)
4164    Adds 9.14.025; amends 9.14.010, 9.14.060, 9.14.070, 9.14.100; repeals
        9.14.110, smoking regulations (9.14)
4165    Amends 1993-94 budget (Special)
4166    Amends 1993-94 budget (Special)
4167    Amends 1993-94 budget (Special)
4168    Amends 1993-94 budget (Special)
4169    Amends 1993-94 budget (Special)
4170    Amends 1993-94 budget (Special)
4171    Amends 1993-94 budget (Special)
4172    Amends 1993-94 budget (Special)
4173    Amends zoning map (Special)
4174    Amends 18.94.070, termination date for nonconforming use (18.70)
4175    Amends 18.94.070, termination date for nonconforming use (18.70)
4176    Amends 1993-94 budget (Special)
4177    Amends 1993-94 budget (Special)
4178    Amends 1993-94 budget (Special)
4179    Amends 1993-94 budget (Special)
4180    Amends 1993-94 budget (Special)
        Amends 4.10.050; adds 4.10.052 and 4.10.058, solicitors and peddlers;
4181    amends 18.98.090, recommendations by planning commission; temporarily
        suspends 18.90.110, temporary use permits for the period of during the
        World Cup Soccer Games (4.10, 18.98)
4182    Amends zoning map (Special)
4183    Amends 1993-94 budget (Special)
4184    Amends 1993-94 budget (Special)
4185    Amends 1993-94 budget (Special)
4186    Approves development agreement with board of trustees of Leland
        Stanford Junior University (Special)
4187    Amends 1993-94 budget (Special)
4188    Amends 1993-94 budget (Special)
4189    Amends zoning map (Special)
4190    AAmends zoning map (Special)
4191    Amends 1993-94 budget (Special)
4192    Amends 1993-94 budget (Special)
4193    Amends 1993-94 budget (Special)
4194    Amends 1993-94 budget (Special)
4195    Amends zoning map (Special)
4196    Amends 1993-94 budget (Special)
4197    Amends 1993-94 budget (Special)
4198    Amends 10.40.020, signs or curb markings to indicate no stopping and
        parking regulations (Repealed by 4588)
4199    Amends 1993-94 budget (Special)
4200    Amends 1993-94 budget (Special)
4201    Amends 1993-94 budget (Special)
4202    Amends 1993-94 budget (Special)
4203    Approves and adopts plan for improvements to Bol Park (Special)
4204    Amends 1.08.110, fees for licenses, permits, services, etc.; use of
        city facility or service (1.08)
4205    Amends 1993-94 budget (Special)
4206    Amends 10.56.010, 10.56.020, 10.56.030, speed limits (10.56)
4207    Amends Ch. 2.04, council organization and procedures (2.04)
4208    Amends 12.16.020, establishes Underground Utility District No. 35
        (12.16)
4209    Amends 1993-94 budget (Special)
4210    Amends 1993-94 budget (Special)
4211    Amends 1993-94 budget (Special)
4212    Amends 1993-94 budget (Special)
4213    Amends 1993-94 budget (Special)
        Approves and adopts plans for the transmission of reclaimed water to
4214    the Palo Alto Municipal Golf Course and Municipal Service Center
        (Special)
4215    Amends 1993-94 budget (Special)
4216    Amends 1993-94 budget (Special)
4217    Amends 1993-94 budget (Special)
4218    Adds Ch. 18.97, development project preliminary review procedures
        (18.79)
4219    Amends 1993-94 budget (Special)
4220    Amends 4.10.050, 4.10.052, 4.10.057, 4.10.058, vending regulations for
        World Cup Soccer Games (4.10)
4221    Approves and adopts plans for the construction of a concession stand
        and storage facility for the Baylands Athletic Center (Special)
4222    Amends 1993-94 budget (Special)
4223    Amends 4.42.010, 4.42.020, 4.42.070, 4.42.080, 4.42.090, 4.42.130,
        4.42.210, taxicabs (4.42)
4224    Amends 16.24.020, fences on University Avenue (16.24)
4225    Amends 18.10.040 and 18.71.060, driveway access (Repealed by 4964)
4226    Amends 1993-94 budget (Special)
4227    Adopts 1994-95 budget (Special)
4228    Amends 1993-94 budget (Special)
4229    Amends Ch. 10.70, trip reduction and travel demand; repeals Ord. 3996
        (10.70) (Repealed by 5406)
4230    Amends 1993-94 budget (Special)
4231    Amends 1994-95 budget (Special)
4232    Amends 1994-95 budget (Special)
4233    Adds Ch. 9.50, graffiti (9.50)
4234    Repeals and reenacts Ch. 9.24, curfew (Repealed by expiration, 10/31/
        95; see Ed. Note at Ch. 9.24)
4235    Amends California Public Employees' Retirement System agreement
        (Special)
4236    Amends California Public Employees' Retirement System agreement
        (Special)
4237    Amends 1994-95 budget (Special)
4238    Amends zoning map (Special)
4239    Amends 1994-95 budget (Special)
4240    Amends 1994-95 budget (Special)
4241    Amends 1994-95 budget (Special)
4242    Amends California Public Employees' Retirement System agreement
        (Special)
4243    Amends zoning map (Special)
4244    Amends 1994-95 budget (Special)
4245    Amends 1994-95 budget (Special)
4246    Amends 1994-95 budget (Special)
4247    Amends 1994-95 budget (Special)
4248    Amends 1994-95 budget (Special)
4249    Amends 1994-95 budget (Special)
4250    Adds 16.04.145, 16.04.146, amendments to Uniform Building Code (16.04
        [Ed. Note])
4251    Amends 1994-95 budget (Special)
        Amends 16.09.005, 16.09.010, 16.09.032, 16.09.091, 16.09.095,
4252    16.09.101, 16.09.105, 16.09.106, 16.09.110, 16.09.115, 16.09.140,
        16.09.141; adds 16.09.114, 16.09.116, 16.09.117, 16.09.121, 16.09.142,
        16.09.143, 16.09.144, 16.09.165, sewers (16.09) (Repealed by 5084)
4253    Amends 1994-95 budget (Special)
4254    Closing of 1993-94 budget (Special)
4255    Amends 1994-95 budget (Special)
        Adds Ch. 16.57, in-lieu parking fee for new nonresidential development
4256    in the commercial downtown (CD) zoning district; amends 18.49.100,
        parking regulations in the CD zoning district (16.57)
4257    Amends 1994-95 budget (Special)
4258    Amends 1994-95 budget (Special)
4259    Amends 1994-95 budget (Special)
4260    Amends 1994-95 budget (Special)
4261    Amends 18.49.060(b), exceptions to FAR regulations in the CD zoning
        district (Repealed by 4923)
4262    Rezone (Special)
4263    Amends 1994-95 budget (Special)
4264    Amends 1994-95 budget (Special)
4265    Amends 1994-95 budget (Special)
4266    Amends 1994-95 budget (Special)
4267    Amends 1994-95 budget (Special)
4268    Amends zoning map (Special)
4269    Amends 1994-95 budget (Special)
4270    Amends 1994-95 budget (Special)
4271    Amends 1994-95 budget (Special)
4272    Amends 1994-95 budget (Special)
4273    Amends 1994-95 budget (Special)
4274    Amends Ch. 2.08, officers and departments; also amends Ch. 2.28, fiscal
        procedures (2.08, 2.28)
4275    Amends California Public Employees' Retirement System agreement
        (Special)
4276    Amends 1994-95 budget (Special)
4277    Amends 1994-95 budget (Special)
4278    Adopts 1995-96 budget (Special)
4279    Adds 2.34.095, conveyances not subject to tax - release of ownership
        interest by a co-owner (2.34)
4280    Adds 12.16.020(36), Underground Utility District No. 36 (12.16)
4281    Amends 1994-95 budget (Special)
4282    Amends 1995-96 budget (Special)
4238    Rezone (Special)
4284    Amends 1995-96 budget (Special)
4285    Adds 1.04.071, judicial review (1.04)
4286    Adds Ch. 18.85, special regulations for hazardous waste facilities
        (18.62)
4287    Amends 16.09.010, 16.09.143, sewer use (16.09) (Repealed by 5084)
4288    Amends 1995-96 budget (Special)
4289    Approves and adopts plan for improvements to El Camino Park (Special)
4290    Amends 1995-96 budget (Special)
4291    Amends 1995-96 budget (Special)
4292    Amends 1995-96 budget (Special)
4293    Amends 1995-96 budget (Special)
4294    Adds 9.14.110; amends 9.14.010, 9.14.070 and 9.14.100, outdoor smoking
        restrictions; repeals 9.14.060 (9.14)
4295    Amends 1995-96 budget (Special)
4296    Amends zoning map (Special)
4297    Amends 1995-96 budget (Special)
4298    Amends 10.56.010, 10.56.015, 10.56.020, 10.56.025, 10.56.030, speed
        zones (10.56)
4299    Amends 1995-96 budget (Special)
4300    Amends 1995-96 budget (Special)
4301    Amends 22.04.333, consumption of alcoholic beverages in Boulware Park
        prohibited without a permit (Title 22 [Ed. Note])
4302    Amends 1995-96 budget (Special)
4303    Amends Ch. 16.08, Uniform Plumbing Code (16.08)
4304    Amends Ch. 16.04, Uniform Building Code (16.04)
        Amends 16.20.020, 16.20.030, 16.20.040, 16.20.060, 16.20.160,
4305    16.20.240, 16.20.270, signs; 16.24.080, fences, violations and
        penalties; 16.48.050, architectural review, applicability of chapter
        (16.20, 16.24)
4306    Amends Ch. 16.16, Uniform Electrical Code (16.16)
4307    Amends Ch. 15.04, Uniform Fire Code (Repealed by 4566)
4308    Amends 1995-96 budget (Special)
4309    Amends municipal fee schedule for 1995-96 (Special)
4310    Amends 2.31.040, disposition of unclaimed property other than vehicles
        (2.31)
4311    Amends 1995-96 budget (Special)
4312    Amends 1995-96 budget (Special)
4313    Closes 1994-95 budget (Special)
4314    Amends 18.94.010, nonconforming use, required termination (18.70)
4315    Amends zoning map (Special)
4316    Amends 18.24.040, 18.26.040, conditional use permits (Repealed by 4964)
4317    Amends 1995-96 budget (Special)
4318    Amends 1995-96 budget (Special)
4319    Amends 1995-96 budget (Special)
4320    Amends 1995-96 budget (Special)
4321    Approves and adopts plan for improvements to El Palo Alto Park
        (Special)
4322    Amends 1995-96 budget (Special)
 
Ord. Eff. Date Description and Disposition
Ord.  Eff.     Description and Disposition
      Date
4323  1/16/96  Amends 1995-96 budget, providing additional appropriation for capital improvement
               project 9357 (Special)
4324  1/16/96  Amends 1995-96 budget, accepting grant from California Arts Council (Special)
4325  1/16/96  Amends Ch. 10.60, Parking Violations (10.60)
4326  1/16/96  Amends municipal fee schedule for 1995-96 (Special)
               Amends 1995-96 budget, providing additional appropriation for planning and
4327  1/16/96  attorney support to continue preparation of the "Transfer of Development Rights
               Ordinance" (Special)
4328  2/12/96  Amends 1995-96 budget, providing a housing loan to the city manager (Special)
4329  3/22/96  Adds Ch. 9.79, Newsracks; also amends municipal fee schedule by providing fees
               for impounded newsracks (Repealed by 4531)
4330  3/22/96  Amends 18.32.040, conditional uses in the PF Public Facilities District
               regulations (Repealed by 4964)
4331  3/22/96  Rezones property at 795 El Camino Real from CS to PF (Rezone)
4332  3/22/96  Amendment to Palo Alto Medical Foundation development agreement (Special)
4333  2/20/96  Amends 1995-96 budget, providing additional appropriation for emergency repair of
               the main power supply to the Civic Center (Special)
4334  3/11/96  Amends 1995-96 budget, providing additional appropriation for the department of
               planning and community environment for the hiring of contract planners (Special)
4335  3/11/96  Amends 1995-96 budget, providing additional appropriation to conduct an
               organizational review of the utilities department (Special)
4336  3/18/96  Amends 1995-96 budget, providing additional appropriation for capital improvement
               project 9509 (Special)
4337  4/25/96  Amends 2.04.220, meetings of standing committees (2.04)
4338  4/25/96  Amends 2.04.200, authority of city manager to process council mail (2.04)
4339  5/1/96   Rezones property at 315-335 Everett Avenue/332 Bryant Court from RM-30 to PC
               District (Rezone)
4340  4/15/96  Amends 1995-96 budget (Special)
               Adds 4.42.085, testing of taxicab and for-hire vehicle drivers for controlled
4341  5/16/96  substances and alcohol; amends 4.42.010(a), and repeals 4.42.010(b), pertaining
               to definitions for taxicabs and for-hire vehicles (4.42)
4342  5/16/96  Repeals Chs. 5.25 and 5.26 (Repealer)
4343  4/15/96  Amends 1995-96 budget, providing additional appropriation for fuel storage tank
               upgrade (Special)
               Amends 1995-96 budget, providing additional appropriation for community services
4344  4/22/96  department in recognition of receipt of funds from the public library fund of the
               state library (Special)
4345  4/22/96  Amends 1995-96 budget, recognizing receipt of a grant from the Library Services
               and Construction Act (Special)
4346  4/22/96  Amends 1995-96 budget, providing for and funding of golf course improvements
               (Special)
4347  6/6/96   Adds 2.16.040, prohibiting board and commission members from being financially
               interested in contracts with the city (2.16)
4348  5/6/96   Amends 1995-96 budget, authorizing free parking for the first hour at attendant
               lots (Special)
4349  5/6/96   Amends 1995-96 budget, creating capital improvement project for refurbishing of
               city council chambers (Special)
4350  5/28/96  Amends 1995-96 budget, providing funding for financial advisor for golf course
               improvements (Special)
4351  6/28/96  Amends Ch. 4.57, firearms dealers (4.57)
4352  6/24/96  Adopts budget for 1996-97 fiscal year; adopts 1997-98 fiscal year in concept only
               (Special)
4353  6/24/96  Amends 1995-96 budget, providing additional appropriation for facility roof
               replacement (Special)
4354  8/8/96   Rezones property at 2700 Ash Street from RM-40 to PC District (Rezone)
4355  7/15/96  Amends 1996-97 budget, providing additional appropriation for the Palo Alto
               Together Program (Special)
               Urgency ordinance providing for intermediate tree preservation and management
4356  7/22/96  regulations [Ed. Note: Effectiveness terminates January 1, 1997, when Ord. 4362
               becomes effective.] (Not codified)
4357  7/22/96  Amends 1996-97 budget, providing additional appropriation for Civic Center garage
               improvements (Special)
               Adds 9.04.030, prohibiting the possession of open containers of alcoholic
4358  8/22/96  beverages within licensed package stores, their adjacent parking lots and
               sidewalks (9.04)
4359  8/22/96  Repeals and replaces Ch. 9.44, hereafter entitled "Solicitation of Employment,
               Business or Contributions within Public Parking Lots" (9.44)
               Amends 1996-97 budget, providing additional appropriation for salary and benefit
4360  8/5/96   increases based on memorandum of agreement with Palo Alto Peace Officers'
               Association (Special)
               Amends 1996-97 budget, providing additional appropriation for community services
4361  8/5/96   department to receive matching grant funds from the arts council of Santa Clara
               (Special)
4362  1/1/97   Adds Ch. 8.10, "Tree Preservation and Management Regulations" [Ed. Note: See Ord.
               4356, which adopted similar but interim regulations covering this area.] (8.10)
               Amends 1996-97 budget, creating and funding a telecommunications program,
4363  8/5/96   including creating a capital improvement project, and extending a loan from the
               electric fund (Special)
4364  8/5/96   Amends 1996-97 budget, providing additional appropriation for capital improvement
               project, Americans with Disabilities Act compliance (Special)
4365  8/5/96   Amends 1996-97 budget, providing additional appropriation for council chambers
               refurbishing project (Special)
4366  8/12/96  Amends 1996-97 budget, providing additional appropriation for Midtown
               revitalization project (Special)
4367  8/12/96  Amends 1996-97 budget, providing additional appropriation for a seasonal jobs for
               the homeless pilot program (Special)
4368  9/10/96  Amends Chs. 22.04 and 22.08 (including the Appendix thereto), constituting a full
               amendment of Title 22, the Parks code (22.04, 22.08)
4369  9/16/96  Imposes moratorium on certain development and demolition of pre-1940 residences
               [Expires 11/15/96] (Special)
4370  9/16/96  Amends 1996-97 budget, providing additional appropriation for site acquisition
               and development of housing for persons with developmental disabilities (Special)
4371  9/24/96  Amends 1996-97 budget, providing additional appropriation for telecommunications
               program and increasing the loan from the electric fund (Special)
4372  9/24/96  Amends 1996-97 budget, providing additional appropriation for fuel storage tank
               upgrade capital improvement project (Special)
4373  9/24/96  Amends Ord. 4369, moratorium on certain development and demolition of pre-1940
               residences; also extends effective period [Extended until 11/30/96] (Special)
4374  9/30/96  Rezones property at 101 Alma Street from PC [Ord. 1802] to PC District (Rezone)
4375  10/7/96  Amends 1996-97 budget, receiving funds from sale of real property, Meadows Well
               Site, 3896 Duncan Place (Special)
               Amends 1996-97 budget, providing allocation of revenue from airports commission
4376  10/15/96 of the City and County of San Francisco, to be used for marsh restoration at
               Harbor Point (Special)
4377  10/15/96 Amends 1996-97 budget, to receive outside funds for capital improvement project
               18617, art in public places (Special)
4378  10/15/96 Amends 1996-97 budget, creating the Shasta Rewind Project Reserve (Special)
               Amends 1996-97 budget, providing for additional appropriation for salary and
4379  10/21/96 benefit increases retroactive to July 1, 1996, for certain management and
               confidential employees (Special)
4380  10/21/96 Establishes exception to moratorium on certain development and demolition of pre-
               1940 residences, as adopted by Ord. 4369 (Special)
4381  11/28/96 Adds Ch. 16.50, Preservation of Pre-1940 Historic Residences [Note: Added as
               interim regulations - Expired 3/31/99] (Expired)
               Amends 1996-97 budget, providing additional appropriation for planning department
4382  10/28/96 to hire certain technical and support personnel to implement interim regulations
               for demolition of residential structures constructed prior to 1940 (Special)
4383  10/28/96 Amends 1996-97 budget, providing additional appropriation for editing and
               publishing services related to the Comprehensive Plan (Special)
4384  12/4/96  Establishes exception to moratorium on certain development and demolition of pre-
               1940 residences, as adopted by Ord. 4369 (Special)
4385  12/4/96  Amends 18.90.055, home improvement exceptions, zoning (Repealed by 4826)
4386  11/4/96  Amends 1996-97 budget, providing additional appropriation for preservation of
               unit at 922 Bautista Court (Special)
4387  11/25/96 Amends 1996-97 budget, providing additional appropriation for award of contract
               for Palo Alto Harbor marsh restoration (phase III) (Special)
4388  12/2/96  Amends 1996-97 budget, providing additional appropriation for the police
               department to receive supplemental funding for COPS Program (Special)
4389  1/9/97   Rezones property at 901-909 Alma Street from CD-S(P) to PC District (Rezone)
4390  12/9/96  Amends 1996-97 budget, providing additional appropriation for purchasing of two
               transport-capable fire engines (Special)
               Amends 1996-97 budget, providing additional appropriation for salary and benefit
4391  12/16/96 increases beginning July 1, 1996 for employees represented by the International
               Association of Firefighters Local 1319 (Special)
4392  1/16/97  Adds Ch. 18.87, Transferable Development Rights, and amends 18.49.060, pertaining
               to site development regulations in the CD District (Repealed by 4964)
4393  12/16/96 Creates special revenue subfund known as "Local Law Enforcement Fund," and
               appropriates funds thereto (Special)
4394  12/16/96 Amends 1996-97 budget, providing additional appropriation for project
               expenditures in CIP No. 19411, Alma Street bike bridge (Special)
4395  1/13/97  Closes budget for fiscal year 1995-96 (Special)
4396  1/21/97  Amends 1996-97 budget, recognizing and implementing bond financing of the
               termination payment for the Washington Water Power contract (Special)
               Amends 1996-97 budget, providing additional appropriation for community services
4397  1/27/97  department to receive matching grant funds from the California Arts Council
               (Special)
4398  2/21/97  Rezones Charleston Meadows Tract 795 from R-1 single-family residence to R-1(S),
               single-family residence, single-story height combining (Rezone)
               Amends 1996-97 budget, providing additional appropriation for amendment of the
4399  2/24/97  table of organization, and to amend the municipal fee schedule for the permit
               streamlining program (Special)
4400  2/24/97  Amends 1996-97 budget, providing additional appropriation for interim golf course
               improvements (Special)
4401  3/24/97  Amends 1996-97 budget, providing additional appropriation for La Comida senior
               nutrition program (Special)
4402  3/24/97  Amends 1996-97 budget, increasing animal services revenues and amending the
               municipal fee schedule to include new flea product sales (Special)
               Amends 1996-97 budget, providing additional appropriation for community services
4403  3/24/97  department in recognition of receipt of funds from the public library fund of the
               state library (Special)
4404  4/24/97  Adds 9.48.025, prohibiting sitting or lying down on University Avenue public
               sidewalks (9.48)
4405  4/24/97  Amends 9.48.010 and 9.48.020, obstructing streets and sidewalks (9.48)
4406  4/24/97  Amends Ch. 10.10, temporary street closures (10.10)
4407  3/24/97  Amends 1996-97 budget, providing additional appropriation for CIP No. 19406,
               Rinconada pool site improvements, for replacement of children's pool (Special)
4408  5/8/97   Adds subsection (37) to 12.16.020, Underground Utility District No. 37 (12.16)
               Amends 1996-97 budget, providing additional appropriation for costs associated
4409  4/7/97   with the revised processing of transfer of development rights applications
               (Special)
4410  5/23/97  Rezones property at 400 Emerson Street from PC-planned community district, to CD-
               C(P) downtown commercial pedestrian combining district (Rezone)
               Adds 16.50.065, and amends 16.50.020, 16.50.080 and 16.50.120, pertaining to
4411  5/23/97  preservation of pre-1940 historic residences [Note: Pursuant to Ord. 4381, Ch.
               16.50 (and amendments thereto) were added as interim regulations; these
               regulations expired 3/31/99] (Expired)
               Amends 1996-97 budget, providing additional appropriation for interim regulations
4412  4/22/97  for demolition of residential structures constructed prior to 1940 and for the
               permanent historic preservation ordinance and historic inventory (Special)
4413  4/28/97  Amends 1996-97 budget, adjusting budgeted revenues and expenditures in accordance
               with the recommendations of the midyear report (Special)
               Adds 16.50.085, pertaining to preservation of pre-1940 historic residences [Note:
4414  6/5/97   Pursuant to Ord. 4381, Ch. 16.50 (and amendments thereto) were added as interim
               regulations; these regulations expired 3/31/99] (Expired)
4415  6/5/97   Amends 13.12.050, parking districts (13.12)
               Amends 1996-97 budget, recognizing grant from Library Services and Construction
4416  5/19/97  Act, and providing additional appropriation for library automation CIP No. 19418
               (Special)
               Adds 22.04.334, 22.04.338 and 22.04.339, prohibiting consumption of alcoholic
4417  6/19/97  beverages in Scott Street Minipark, Don Secondo Robles Park and Timothy Hopkins
               Creekside Park (22.04)
4418  6/2/97   Amends 1996-97 budget, providing additional appropriation for housing for persons
               with developmental disabilities at 2700 Ash Street (Special)
4419  6/2/97   Amends 1996-97 budget, providing additional appropriation for repair and purchase
               of equipment at city golf course restaurant (Special)
4420  6/2/97   Amends 1996-97 budget, for funding of joint construction project with Pacific
               Bell and in connection with CIP No. 8928 (Special)
4421  7/20/97  Adds 22.04.341, prohibiting consumption of alcoholic beverages in El Palo Alto
               Park (22.04)
4422  6/9/97   Urgency ordinance declaring the establishment and operation of medical marijuana
               dispensaries to be a prohibited use under the Zoning Ordinance (Not codified)
4423  7/23/97  Adds 22.08.380, creating Dr. Thomas M. and Dora Moody Williams Park (22.08)
               Adds 2.40.070, establishing a voluntary campaign expenditure ceiling for election
4424  7/23/97  to city offices (2.40) (Suspended from enforcement by city council on June 15,
               1999)
4425  6/23/97  Adopts budget for 1997-98 fiscal year (Special)
               Rezones property at 600 Sand Hill Road and a portion of 1000 Sand Hill Road from
4426  8/14/97* PF to PC and from RM-30 to PC, respectively [* Ed. Note: See 6 of this ordinance
               regarding a special provision whereby this ordinance may be suspended and
               inoperative.] (Rezone)
               Rezones property at 600, 700 and 1000 Sand Hill Road from RM-30 to PF and from PF
4427  8/14/97* to RM-30 [* Ed. Note: See 4 of this ordinance regarding a special provision
               whereby this ordinance may be suspended and inoperative.] (Rezone)
               Amends 18.43.050, community commercial district site development regulations [*
4428  8/14/97* Ed. Note: See 4 of this ordinance regarding a special provision whereby this
               ordinance may be suspended and inoperative.] (Repealed by 4923)
               Rezones property at 180 El Camino Real from CC to CC(L) (Stanford Shopping
4429  8/14/97* Center) [* Ed. Note: See 4 of this ordinance regarding a special provision
               whereby this ordinance may be suspended and inoperative.] (Rezone)
               Changes setback line along portion of Sand Hill Road [* Ed. Note: See 4 of this
4430  8/14/97* ordinance regarding a special provision whereby this ordinance may be suspended
               and inoperative.] (Special)
               Prezones as RM-40 a portion of a new parcel to be created by realignment of
4431  8/14/97* Pasteur Drive and prezones as PF(L) an area of land that will become part of
               Pasteur Drive [* Ed. Note: See 4 of this ordinance regarding a special provision
               whereby this ordinance may be suspended and inoperative.] (Prezone)
               Rezones a portion of a new parcel to be created by realignment of Pasteur Drive
4432  8/14/97* at Sand Hill Road from PF(L) to RM-40 [* Ed. Note: See 4 of this ordinance
               regarding a special provision whereby this ordinance may be suspended and
               inoperative.] (Rezone)
               Approves development agreement between city and the board of trustees of the
4433  8/14/97* Leland Stanford Junior University [* Ed. Note: See 5 of this ordinance regarding
               a special provision whereby this ordinance may be suspended and inoperative.]
               (Special)
4434  7/14/97  Amends 2.40.035, printing full text of proposed ordinance or measure in the
               sample ballot (2.40)
4435  7/21/97  Amends 1997-98 budget, for golf course improvements, in connection with CIP No.
               19624 (Special)
4436  8/28/97  Rezones property at 390 Lytton Avenue from CD-C(P) to PC planned community
               (Rezone)
4437  7/28/97  Amends 1997-98 budget to provide additional appropriation for refund of planning
               and building fees for the American Heritage Museum (Special)
4438  9/4/97   Approves and adopts plan for golf course improvements (Special)
4439  9/4/97   Amends 2.08.050, rules and regulations for public use of city buildings and other
               facilities (2.08)
4440  9/4/97   Amends 2.04.370, expense allowance for council members, and also amends 2.04.380,
               salary of council members (2.04)
4441  8/11/97  Amends 1997-98 budget, to increase revenues and expenditures in the youth and
               teen programs functional area of the community services department (Special)
               Amends 1997-98 budget, to provide additional appropriation for the community
4442  8/11/97  services department to receive matching grant funds from the National Endowment
               for the Arts (Special)
               Amends 1997-98 budget, to accept grant and to provide additional appropriation
4443  8/11/97  for the community services department to receive matching grant funds from the
               Arts Council of Santa Clara County (Special)
               Amends effective period of Ch. 16.50, Preservation of Pre-1940 Historic
4444  8/11/97  Residences [Note: Pursuant to Ord. 4381, Ch. 16.50 (and amendments thereto) were
               added as interim regulations; these regulations expired 3/31/99] (Expired)
4445  9/8/97   Amends 1997-98 budget, to provide additional appropriation for utilities customer
               information system capital improvement project (Special)
4446  9/15/97  Amends 1997-98 budget, to accept State of California funding for 9-1-1 program
               (Special)
4447  10/23/97 Changes zone classification of property at 4290 El Camino Real from PC-planned
               community to the R-1 single family residence district (Rezone)
4448  10/23/97 Reclassifies property at 4290 El Camino Real from PC-planned community to the R-
               1 single family residence district (Rezone)
               Amends 1997-98 budget, to provide additional appropriation to fund a coordinated
4449  9/22/97  area plan for the Palo Alto Medical Foundation (PAMF) sites and portions of the
               south of Forest area (SOFA) (Special)
4450  10/30/97 Changes zone classification of property collectively known as "Charleston Meadows
               Tract 840" from R-1 to R-1(S) (Rezone)
4451  11/6/97  Amends Ch. 5.20, Collection, Removal and Disposal of Solid Waste and Recyclable
               Materials (5.20)
               Adds Ch. 1.12, Administrative Penalties -- Citations; also adds Ch. 1.16,
4452  11/6/97  Administrative Penalties -- Continuing Violations -- Compliance Orders (1.12,
               1.16)
               Amends 1.08.010, 2.04.160, 2.30.020, 2.31.040, 4.52.060, Ch. 4.38 [renumbered as
               Ch. 9.26], 4.38.090 [renumbered as 9.26.010], 4.38.100 [renumbered as 9.26.020],
               5.12.010, 6.16.080, 6.16.100, 6.20.030, 6.20.100, 6.20.170, 6.20.110, Ch. 6.22
               [renumbered as Ch. 4.59], 9.10.080, 9.56.120, 9.56.130, Ch.. 9.57 [renumbered as
               Ch. 4.58], 9.60.060, Ch. 9.64 [renumbered as Ch. 10.34], 9.74.060, 10.24.010,
               10.36.030, 10.36.040, 10.36.090, 10.60.010, 10.64.010 [repealed by 5432],
4453  11/6/97  10.64.150, 16.57.045 [renumbered as 16.04.095], 18.88.160, 18.90.110, 22.04.150
               and 22.04.160; repeals 2.08.370, 4.02.210, Ch. 4.48, 4.10.051, 4.10.060,
               4.10.080, 4.10.160, 4.10.170, 4.10.180, 4.10.190, 4.38.010, 4.38.020, 4.38.030,
               4.38.040, 4.38.050, 4.38.060, 4.38.070, 4.38.080, 4.38.110, 4.38.120, 4.38.130,
               4.38.140, Ch. 4.46, 6.20.070, 6.20.180, 6.20.190, 9.16.010, 9.20.010, 9.32.100,
               9.60.040, 10.12.030, 10.16.030, 10.28.010, 10.64.040 and 10.52.020 (1.08, 2.04,
               2.30 [Ed. Note], 2.31, 4.52, 4.58, 4.59, 9.10 [Ed. Note], 9.26, 5.12, 9.60, 6.16,
               6.20, 9.56, 10.24, 10.34, 10.36, 10.60, 10.64, 16.04, 22.04)
4454  11/6/97  Adds Ch. 19.10, Coordinated Area Plans (19.10)
4455  10/6/97  Amends 1997-98 budget, to provide additional appropriation for downtown area
               enforcement (Special)
4456  10/6/97  Amends 1997-98 budget, to provide additional appropriation for election expenses
               associated with the November 1997 election (Special)
               Amends 1997-98 budget, to provide additional appropriation for litigation
4457  10/6/97  associated with the City of Menlo Park s challenge to the Stanford Sand Hill Road
               Corridor Projects (Special)
4458  10/20/97 Amends 1997-98 budget, to provide additional appropriation for Capital
               Improvement Project No. 18617, art in public places (Special)
               Amends 1997-98 budget, to provide additional appropriation for salary and benefit
4459  10/20/07 increases retroactive to July 1, 1997, for management and confidential employees
               (Special)
4460  11/20/97 Amends 2.36.030 and 2.36.040, personnel procedures (2.36)
4461  10/20/97 Amends 1997-98 budget, to provide additional appropriation for professional
               financial advisor services (Special)
               Amends Ch. 2.30, Contracts and Purchasing Procedures, and also amends 2.31.010
4462  12/2/97  and 2.31.090, relating to purchasing procedures and disposition of surplus
               property (2.30 [Ed. Note], 2.31)
4463  12/2/97  Reclassifies property known as 425-435 Sheridan /440-460 Page Mill Road from RM-
               40 to PC-planned community (Rezone)
4464  12/2/97  Repeals Ch. 9.09, Assault Weapons (Repealer)
4465  1/1/98   Reclassifies property known as 675-695 El Camino Real/31 Wells Avenue from CS-
               service commercial to PC-planned community (Rezone)
4466  1/1/98   Reclassifies portion of property collectively known as "Blossom Park Unit 1 Tract
               709" from R-1 to R-1(S) (Rezone)
4467  12/8/97  Amends 1997-98 budget, to provide additional appropriation to pay for an audit of
               the Santa Clara County Transportation Authority Airport Enterprise Fund (Special)
               Amends 1997-98 budget, to provide additional appropriation for police department
4468  12/8/97  to receive supplemental funding for the Citizens Options for Public Safety (COPS)
               Program (Special)
               Amends 1997-98 budget, to accept a block grant from US Department of Justice
4469  12/8/97  Bureau of Justice Assistance for a local law enforcement program for the police
               department (Special)
4470          Pending
4471          Pending
               Adds definition for "carport," and amends definition for "gross floor area" to
4472  1/16/98  18.04.030, zoning definitions; also amends 18.88.020, accessory uses and
               facilities (18.04)
4473  12/15/97 Amends 1997-98 budget, to provide additional appropriation for Capital
               improvement Project No. 19620, Civic Center LAN upgrade (Special)
4474  1/12/98  Amends 1997-98 budget, to provide additional appropriation for Capital
               Improvement Project No. 19530, downtown parking structure (Special)
4475  1/12/98  Amends 1997-98 budget, to provide funding of increased work in water and gas
               customer design and connection capital improvement projects (Special)
4476  1/26/98  Amends 1997-98 budget, to provide additional appropriation for compensation of
               Palo Alto Sanitation Company (PASCO) (Special)
               mends 1997-98 budget, to provide additional appropriation for pre-development
4477  2/2/98   costs associated with acquisition of Sheridan Apartments by the Palo Alto Housing
               Corporation (Special)
4478  2/2/98   Interim ordinance prohibiting removal of specified protected oak trees [In effect
               until 12/31/98, unless extended by council action] (Not codified)
4479  2/17/98  Amends 1997-98 budget, to provide additional appropriation for city contribution
               to cost of structural repair of Williams Property, 351 Homer Avenue (Special)
4480  2/17/98  Amends 1997-98 budget, to provide additional funding for fiber optic customer
               design and connection services capital improvement projects (Special)
4481  2/17/98  Amends 1997-98 budget, to provide additional appropriation to fund purchase of
               reserve aerial ladder truck apparatus (Special)
4482  2/17/98  Amends 1997-98 budget, to provide additional funding for water service and
               hydrant replacement capital improvement project (Special)
4483  3/25/98  Adds subsection (38) to 12.16.020, Underground Utility District No. 38 (12.16)
4484  2/23/98  Interim ordinance permitting provision of specified services to homeless and low-
               income persons [In effect until June 30, 1998] (Special)
4485  3/16/98  Increases table of organization for fiscal year 1997-98 to staff family resources
               center (Special)
4486  3/16/98  Amends 1997-98 budget, to provide additional funding for electric service,
               transformers and meters capital improvement project (Special)
4487  3/16/98  Amends 1997-98 budget, to provide additional appropriation for creation of
               Capital Improvement Project No. 19818, road bump project for Ross Road (Special)
               Amends 1997-98 budget, to increase revenues and expenditures associated with the
4488  3/16/98  city's contract with the golf course professional and to amend golf fees in
               municipal fee schedule (Special)
               Amends 1997-98 budget, to provide additional appropriation for construction and
4489  3/16/98  administration of bicycle storage facility at University Avenue train depot
               (Special)
               Amends 1997-98 budget, to provide additional appropriation for salaries and
4490  3/16/98  benefits and to amend table of organization to add position of deputy city
               manager - special projects (Special)
               Amends Ord. 4381, in order to extend period within which Ch. 16.50 shall be in
4491  7/5/98   effect [Note: Pursuant to Ord. 4381, Ch. 16.50 (and amendments thereto) were
               added as interim regulations; these regulations expired 3/31/99] (Expired)
               Amends 1997-98 budget, to provide additional appropriation for preparation of
4492  4/6/98   feasibility study for the construction of a pedestrian/bicycle railroad crossing
               (Special)
4493  4/6/98   Amends 1997-98 budget, to provide additional appropriation for Capital
               Improvement Project No. 18516, MSC seismic improvements (Special)
4494  4/6/98   Amends 1997-98 budget, to provide additional appropriation for golf course
               improvements, Capital Improvement Project No. 19624 (Special)
4495  4/6/98   Amends 1997-98 budget, to provide additional appropriation for tank investigation
               and removal, Capital Improvement Project No. 19101 (Special)
4496  4/6/98   Amends 1997-98 budget, to adjust budgeted revenues and expenditures in accordance
               with midyear report (Special)
4497  4/27/98  Amends 1997-98 budget, to provide additional appropriation for planning office
               space, Capital Improvement Project No. 19819 (Special)
4498  5/4/98   Amends 1997-98 budget, to accept grant from California Arts Council, and to
               provide additional appropriation for community services department (Special)
4499  5/11/98  Amends 1997-98 budget, to provide additional appropriation to increase police
               information systems master plan, Capital Improvement Project No. 19109 (Special)
               Amends 1997-98 budget, to accept grant from the Public Fund of the State Library,
4500  5/11/98  and to provide additional appropriation for community services department
               (Special)
4501  5/11/98  Amends 1997-98 budget, to provide additional appropriation for overhead
               maintenance work on the electric system (Special)
4502  5/11/98  Amends 1997-98 budget, to provide additional appropriation to Palo Alto community
               child care in support of a pre-kindergarten program (Special)
               Amends 1997-98 budget, to provide additional appropriation for Palo Alto housing
4503  5/18/98  corporation, for funding, acquisition and rehabilitation of Sheridan Apartments
               Project (Special)
4504  5/26/98  Amends 1997-98 budget, to provide additional appropriation for Rinconada Pool
               site improvements, Capital Improvement Project No. 19406 (Special)
4505  6/8/98   Amends 1997-98 budget, to provide additional appropriation for creation of
               Capital Improvement Project No. 19821, emergency notification system (Special)
4506  6/8/98   Amends 1997-98 budget, to provide additional appropriation for creation of
               Capital Improvement Project No. 19820, public safety building (Special)
4507  6/22/98  Adopts 1998-99 budget [Note: Fees effective 9/1/98] (Special)
               Amends 1998-99 budget, to provide additional appropriation for (i) acquisition of
4508  7/13/98  leased space for utilities engineering, (ii) creation of Capital Improvement
               Project No. 19921, relocation/consolidation of Level A archival storage, and
               (iii) reduce general fund reserves (Special)
               Amends 1998-99 budget, to provide additional appropriation for increase in city's
4509  7/20/98  annual rental payment to school district for lease and covenant not to develop
               extended day care center at Hoover School site (Special)
4510  7/20/98  Amends 1998-99 budget, to provide additional appropriation for salary and benefit
               increases retroactive to May 1, 1998 for classified personnel (Special)
4511  8/27/98  Rezone of property at 4100 and 4120 El Camino Real from RM-20 and RM-30 to PC-
               Planned Community (Rezone)
4512  8/27/98  Amends 4 of Ord. 4381, extending period (until March 31, 1999) within which PAMC
               Ch. 16.50 (Interim Historic Regulations) shall be in effect (Expired)
4513  8/10/98  Amends 1998-99 budget, to provide additional appropriation for salary and benefit
               increases retroactive to July 1, 1998 for police personnel (Special)
4514  8/10/98  Amends 1998-99 budget, to provide additional appropriation for Phase I - San
               Francisquito Creek bank stabilization and revegetation study (Special)
4515  8/10/98  Amends 1998-99 budget, to provide additional appropriation for major intersection
               improvements, Capital Improvement Project No. 19073 (Special)
               Amends 1998-99 budget, to provide additional appropriation for addition of five
4516  8/10/98  full-time positions and associated resources to the planning and community
               environment department (Special)
4517  8/10/98  Amends 1998-99 budget, to provide additional appropriation for interim historic
               regulations administration (Special)
4518  8/10/98  Amends 1998-99 budget, to provide additional appropriation for an interim
               historic inventory consultant (Special)
               Amends contract between city and board of administration of the public employees'
4519  10/15/98 retirement system (military service credit for local fire fighter members)
               (Special)
               Amends 16.50.020, 16.50.080 and 16.50.090, Preservation of Pre-1940 Historic
4520  10/15/98 Residences [Note: Pursuant to Ord. 4381, Ch. 16.50 (and amendments thereto) were
               added as interim regulations; these regulations expired 3/31/99] (Expired)
4521  10/15/98 Amends 22.04.321, regulating the skateboard facility in John Lucas Greer Park
               (22.04)
4522  9/14/98  Amends 1998-99 budget, to provide additional appropriation for reclassification
               of CDBG coordinator position to senior planner position (Special)
4523  9/22/98  Amends 1998-99 budget, to provide additional appropriation for one-stop
               development center at 285 Hamilton Ave. (Special)
               Amends 1998-99 budget, to accept grant from Arts Council of Santa Clara County
4524  10/5/98  and to provide additional appropriation for the community services department
               (Special)
               Amends 16.50.020, definitions pertaining to preservation of pre-1940 historic
4525  11/5/98  residences [Note: Pursuant to Ord. 4381, Ch. 16.50 (and amendments thereto) were
               added as interim regulations; these regulations expired 3/31/99] (Expired)
4526  10/5/98  Amends 1998-99 budget, to provide additional appropriation for recruitment
               assistance (Special)
4527  10/13/98 Amends 1998-99 budget (Special)
4528  11/26/98 Amends 16.57.010, 16.57.030 and 16.57.040, in-lieu parking fees for
               nonresidential development within University Avenue assessment district (16.57)
4529  11/26/98 Adds Ch. 2.24, Library Advisory Commission (2.24) ( 2.24.020 repealed by 5208)
               (Ch. 2.24 repealed by 5498)
4530  10/26/98 Amends 1998-99 budget (Special)
               Repeals and replaces Ch. 9.79, newsracks; also amends 9.48.020; repeals Ord. 4329
4531  12/1/98  [Ed. Note: See 7 of this ordinance regarding specific effective dates for certain
               sections of this ordinance] (9.48, 9.79)
4532  12/22/98 Amends contract between city and board of administration of the public employees'
               retirement system (Special)
4533  11/23/98 Amends 1998-99 budget (Special)
4534  11/23/98 Amends 1998-99 budget (Special)
4535  1/7/99   Amends zoning map, changing classification of a portion of "Barron Park" Tract
               714, Tract 4738 and Parcel Map 7721 from R-1 to R-1(S) (Rezone)
4536  1/7/99   Amends 1998-99 budget, to provide additional appropriation for council chambers
               refurbishing, Capital Improvement Project No. 19625 (Special)
4537  12/14/   Reclassifies property known as "Barron Park" Tract 714, portions of Tract 4738
      98t      and parcel Map 7721, from R-1 to R-1(S) (Rezone)
4539  12/14/98 Amends 1998-99 budget, to provide additional appropriation for Stanford West
               Underground Extension, Capital Improvement Project No. 9901 (Special)
4540  12/14/98 Amends 1998-99 budget, to provide additional appropriation for police department
               to receive supplemental funding for "COPS" program (Special)
4541  2/11/99  Amends zoning map, changing classification of a portion of "Meadow Park" Tract
               1722, and a portion of Tract 1977 from R-1 to R-1(S) (Rezone)
4542  1/11/99  Amends 1998-99 budget, to provide additional appropriation for additional
               positions and implementation of emergency management plan (Special)
4543  1/11/99  Amends 1998-99 budget, to provide additional appropriation for preservation of
               below-market-rate unit at 922 Bautista Court (Special)
4544  1/19/99  Closes 1997-98 budget (Special)
               Amends 1998-99 budget, to provide additional appropriation for rental agreement
4545  1/25/99  with JCDecaux for installation and maintenance of automatic public toilets
               (Special)
4546  2/16/99  Amends 1998-99 budget, to accept grant and to provide additional appropriation in
               support of new additions to library collections (Special)
4547  2/16/99  Amends 1998-99 budget, to accept grant from California Arts Council and to
               provide additional appropriation for community services department (Special)
4548  3/25/99  Adds 22.04.035, enforcement of park regulations by park rangers (22.04)
               Urgency ordinance regulating demolition and major alteration of historic
4549  2/22/99  resources; providing for protection of property following expiration of Ch. 16.50
               on March 31, 1999 (Repealed by 4633)
4550  3/15/99  Amends 1998-99 budget, to accept grant from state library and to provide
               additional appropriation for community services department (Special)
               Amends 1998-99 budget, to provide additional appropriation to supplement
4551  3/15/99  acquisition costs for Palo Alto Gardens Apartments at 648 San Antonio Road
               (Special)
4552  4/5/99   Amends 1998-99 budget, to provide additional appropriation for legal contract
               assistance in city attorney's office (Special)
4553  4/5/99   Amends 1998-99 budget, to provide additional appropriation for phase 2 of San
               Francisquito Creek stabilization and revegetation study (Special)
               Amends 1998-99 budget, to provide additional appropriation for wastewater solids
4554  4/12/99  disposal for incinerator improvements, Capital Improvement Project No. 9707
               (Special)
4555  4/19/99  Amends 1998-99 budget, to adjust budgeted revenues and expenditures in accordance
               with mid-year report (Special)
4556  4/19/99  Amends 1998-99 fee schedule for services provided at the development center
               (Special)
               Adds 16.52.165, Standards for Recreational Vehicles, and amends 16.52.020,
4557  6/3/99   16.52.040, 16.52.060, 16.52.100, 16.52.110, 16.52.120, 16.52.130, 16.52.150,
               16.52.170, 16.52.180, 16.52.190 and 16.52.200, to conform to current minimum
               standards for National Flood Insurance Program (16.52)
               Repeals and reenacts Chs. 10.04 [Definitions], 10.36 [Stopping, Standing and
               Parking - generally], 10.40 [Stopping, Standing and Parking - Loading and
4558  6/3/99   Unloading], 10.44 [Stopping, Standing and Parking - Prohibited or Restricted];
               also amends 10.60.070, permit parking in city lots (10.04, 10.36, 10.40, 10.44,
               10.60)
               Repeals and replaces Ch. 16.04, Building Code; adopts 1998 California Building,
4559  6/10/99  Mechanical, and Building Conservation Codes [Note: Provisions became operative 7/
               1/99] (16.04 [Ed. Note])
4560  6/10/99  Repeals and replaces Ch. 16.08, Plumbing Code; adopts 1998 California Plumbing
               Code [Note: Provisions became operative 7/1/99] (16.08)
4561  6/10/99  Repeals and replaces Ch. 16.16, Electrical Code; adopts 1998 California
               Electrical Code [Note: Provisions became operative 7/1/99] (16.16)
4562  5/10/99  Amends 1998-99 budget, to provide additional appropriation and to establish
               Capital Improvement Project No. 9916, Fiber to the Home (FTTH) trial (Special)
               Adds 12.12.030, exemptions; and amends 12.08.010, 12.08.120 and 12.12.020,
4563  6/24/99  pertaining to permits to work in the right-of-way and permits relating to
               sidewalk encroachment (12.08, 12.12)
4564  6/24/99  Repeals and replaces Ch. 16.28, Grading and Erosion and Sediment Control [Note:
               Provisions became operative 7/1/99] (16.28)
4565  5/24/99  Amends 1998-99 budget, to provide additional appropriation for El Camino Real
               intersection safety improvements, Capital Improvement Project No. 19523 (Special)
4566  6/24/99  Repeals and reenacts Title 15 in entirety; adopts 1998 California Fire Code
               [Note: Provisions became operative 7/1/99] (Repealed by 4764)
4567  5/24/99  Amends 1998-99 budget, to provide additional appropriation for public safety,
               Capital Improvement Project No. 19820 (Special)
4568  7/8/99   Amends Ch. 8.10, Tree Preservation and Management Regulations (8.10)
               Amends 1998-99 budget, to provide additional appropriation for services
4569  6/15/99  associated with cable refranchising renewal proceedings and transfer of ownership
               of cable franchise (Special)
4570  6/28/99  Budget amendment (Special)
               Amends historic preservation regulations. [Ed. Note: This ordinance was passed by
4571  ---      the council on June 28, 1999. However, it has been subject to petition and
               referendum by the electorate, and is suspended and without effect pending the
               outcome of the referendum (Suspended)
4572  8/12/99  Amends Ch. 1.12, Administrative Penalties - Citations; also amends Ch. 1.16,
               Administrative Compliance Orders (1.12, 1.16)
4573  8/12/99  Repeals Ch. 17.34, relating to environmental review of hazardous materials
               storage permits (Repealer)
4574  8/12/99  Amends 17.48.010, relating to enforcement of hazardous materials storage
               regulations (17.48)
4575  8/26/99  Repeals and replaces Ch. 9.60, Civic Center Block regulations (9.60)
4576  8/26/99  Approves and adopts plan for improvements to Elinor Cogswell Plaza (Special)
4577  8/26/99  Approves and adopts plan for improvements to Edith Eugenie Johnson Park (Special)
4578  8/26/99  Approves and adopts plan for improvements to El Camino Park (Special)
4579  8/2/99   Amends 1999-2000 budget, to provide additional appropriation for downtown urban
               design improvements, Capital Improvements Project No. 19608 (Special)
               Amends 1999-2000 budget, to provide additional appropriation for salary and
4580  8/9/99   benefit increases retroactive to July 1, 1999, for management and confidential
               employees (Special)
4581  8/9/99   Amends 1999-2000 budget, to provide additional appropriation for start-up cost of
               residential mixed paper curbside recycling program (Special)
4582  8/11/99  Amends 1999-2000 budget, to provide additional appropriation for executive
               recruitment services (Special)
4583  10/12/99 Amends contract with public employees' retirement system (Special)
4584  9/21/99  Amends 1999-2000 budget, to accept grant from art center foundation and to
               provide additional appropriation for community services department (Special)
4585  9/21/99  Amends 1999-2000 budget, to accept grant from Arts Council of Santa Clara and to
               provide additional appropriation for community services department (Special)
               Amends 1999-2000 budget, to accept grant from Friends of the Palo Alto Public
4586  9/21/99  Library and to provide additional appropriation for community services department
               in support of new additions to library collections (Special)
4587  10/26/99 Adds Ch. 2.25, establishing the parks and recreation commission (2.25) ( 2.25.020
               repealed by 5208)
4588  10/26/99 Amends 9.48.025, prohibition on sitting or lying down on University Avenue public
               sidewalks (9.48)
               Adds 2.30.076, rewards for information leading to arrest and conviction of
4589  11/4/99  criminals; also amends 2.30.140, exceptions to competitive bidding (2.30 [Ed.
               Note])
4590  11/4/99  Amends 1.12.030, administrative citation (1.12)
4591  10/4/99  Budget amendment (Special)
4592  10/4/99  Budget amendment (Special)
4593  10/12/99 Budget amendment (Special)
4594  11/18/99 Amends 18.94.070, required termination dates, standards, for nonconforming uses;
               zoning (18.70)
4595  11/25/99 Approves and adopts plan for improvements to Byxbee Park and the city-owned
               Baylands (Special)
4596  11/25/99 Approves and adopts plan for improvements to Foothills Park (Special)
4597  11/22/99 Amends 1999-2000 budget, accepting block grant from U.S. Dept. of Justice for
               local law enforcement program for the police department (Special)
4598  11/22/99 Amends 1999-2000 budget, to provide additional appropriation for police
               department to receive supplemental funding for the COPS program (Special)
4599  11/22/99 Amends 1999-2000 budget, to provide additional appropriation for information
               technology strategic plan and phase one implementation plan (Special)
4600  1/6/00   Approves and adopts plan for improvements to El Camino Park (Special)
4601  1/6/00   Amends 2.08.130, office and duties of the city auditor (2.08)
4602  12/14/99 Amends 1999-2000 budget, to provide additional appropriation for Stanford West
               Underground Extension, Capital Project No. 9901 (Special)
4603  1/14/00  Adds Ch. 10.45, valet parking (10.45)
4604  1/20/00  Approves and adopts plan for improvements to John Lucas Greer Park (Special)
4605  12/20/99 Amends 1999-2000 budget, to provide additional appropriation for downtown parking
               structure feasibility study, Capital Project No. 19530 (Special)
4606  2/18/00  Amends Ch. 2.20 in entirety, planning and transportation commission (2.20)
               ( 2.20.015 and 2.20.040 repealed by 5208)
4607  1/18/00  Amends 1999-2000 budget, to increase management fee in regard to services at the
               Palo Alto Municipal Golf Course (Special)
               Amends 1999-2000 budget, to provide additional appropriation for rehabilitation/
4608  1/18/00  augmentation for purchase of rights-of-way for Amarillo Avenue and Embarcadero
               Way relief sewer project, Capital Project No. 9173 (Special)
4609  ---      (Pending)
4610  3/9/00   Adds 22.04.215, launch and takeout from ramp or dock; also amends 22.04.210 and
               22.04.290, park regulations (22.04)
4611  3/9/00   Amends zoning map, changing classification of property at 445 Bryant Street
               (parking lots S/L) from PF and CD-C(P) to PC (Rezone)
4612  3/9/00   Amends zoning map, changing classification of property at 528 High Street
               (parking lot R) from PF to PC (Rezone)
4613  2/14/00  Amends 1999-2000 municipal fee schedule, to reflect addition of state-mandated
               fees for owners of unaltered dogs and cats (Special)
4614  3/24/00  Adds Ch. 9.45, solicitation in streets, commercial parking areas, and in and
               adjacent to driveway entrances (9.45)
4615  2/22/00  Closes 1998-99 fiscal year budget (Special)
4616  2/22/00  Amends 1999-2000 budget, to provide additional appropriation for Johnson Park
               lighting improvements, Capital Project No. 19903 (Special)
4617  ---      (Pending)
4618  4/6/00   Amends 5.20.290, penalty for violation of regulations governing collection,
               removal and disposal of solid waste and recyclables (5.20)
4619  3/6/00   Amends 1999-2000 budget, to provide additional appropriation cotion to Miller &
               Van Eaton, LLP, for telecommunications contract services (Special)
4620  3/20/00  Amends zoning map, prezoning property known as 1237-1275 San Antonio Road to PF
               (D) (Prezone)
4621  3/27/00  Amends 1999-2000 budget, to provide additional appropriation for compensation and
               benefits related to the new city manager (Special)
4622  3/27/00  Amends 1999-2000 budget, to provide additional appropriation for additional adult
               crossing guard services (Special)
4623  3/27/00  Amends 1999-2000 budget, to provide additional appropriation for fiber optic
               design and connection services, Capital Project No. 9802 (Special)
4624  5/3/00   Amends 2.08.200, department of utilities (2.08)
4625  5/10/00  Amends 9.48.040, discarding rubbish on streets (9.48)
4626  5/10/00  Adopts South of Forest Area Coordinated Area Plan, Phase 1 (Special)
4627  5/10/00  Approves development agreement with Palo Alto Medical Foundation (Special)
4628  4/10/00  Amends 1999-2000 budget, to provide additional appropriation for acquisition of
               real estate owned by Palo Alto Medical Foundation (Special)
               Amends 1999-2000 budget to accept grant from Public Fund of the State Library and
4629  4/17/00  to provide an additional appropriation for the community services department
               (Special)
4630  5/24/00  Amends 1999-2000 budget, to adjust budget revenues and expenditures in accordance
               with midyear report (Special)
4631  4/24/00  Amends 1999-2000 budget, to provide additional appropriation for addition of
               full-time position for infrastructure management plan (Special)
4632  5/1/00   Amends 1999-2000 budget, to provide additional appropriation for contract
               assistance in city attorney's office (Special)
4633  6/8/00   Repeals Ord. 4549 (Repealer)
4634  6/8/00   Amends Ch. 9.10, noise (9.10)
               Amends contract with board of administration of public employees' retirement
4635  6/22/00  system pertaining to employees within "local firefighter classification"
               (Special)
4636  6/22/00  Amends Ch. 2.10 in entirety, cable television and open video systems - award of
               franchises by city council (2.10)
4637  6/22/00  Amends zoning map and rezones property at 3000 El Camino Real (Palo Alto Square)
               from PC planned community 2533 to PC planned community 4637 (Rezone)
               Amends budget for fiscal year 1999-2000 to accept grant from the California Arts
4638  5/22/00  Council and to provide additional appropriation for community services department
               (Special)
4639  6/22/00  Adds Ch. 9.06, wood burning fireplaces and appliances (9.06) (Repealed by 5108)
               Amends budget for fiscal year 1999-2000 to provide additional appropriation for
4640  6/12/00  Wastewater Collection Extension System Capital Improvement Project Number 8020
               (Special)
4641  6/19/00  Adopts budget for fiscal year 2000-01 (Special)
               Amends Palo Alto Municipal Code, to correct outdated references and technical
               errors; specifically, amends 4.52.040, 4.54.110, 4.57.070, 4.57.110, 8.04.010,
               8.08.030, 8.08.070, 9.04.020, Ch. 9.50, 10.44.010, 10.64.170, 10.64.180,
               12.04.020, 12.16.030, 13.04.110, 13.04.160, 15.04.083, 15.04.343, 16.04.120,
4642  7/27/00  16.04.140, 16.09.020, 16.09.110, 16.10.030, 16.20.190, 16.38.030, 16.42.020,
               16.45.030, 17.10.170, 18.01.050, 18.04.030, 18.08.010, 18.08.020, 18.10.050,
               18.12.050, 18.22.050, 18.24.050, 18.85.050, 18.90.100, 18.93.050, 21.12.070,
               21.16.010, 21.24.010 (4.52, 4.54, 4.57, 8.04, 8.08, 9.04, 9.50, 10.44, 10.64,
               12.04, 12.16, 13.04, 15.04, 16.04, 16.09, 16.10, 16.20, 16.38, 16.42, 16.45,
               17.10, 18.01, 18.04, 18.08, 18.12 [Ed. Note], 18.62, 21.12, 21.16, 21.24)
4643  7/27/00  Approves and adopts plan for improvements to Mitchell Park (Special)
4644  7/27/00  Approves and adopts plan for improvements to Bol Park (Special)
4645  7/27/00  Approves and adopts plan for improvements to Eleanor Park (Special)
4646  7/27/00  Authorizes traffic enforcement on certain private roads and parking facilities
               within Stanford shopping center and Stanford West apartments (Special)
4647  7/27/00  Adds 2.40.015, mail ballot elections (2.40)
4648  7/27/00  Amends zoning map, rezoning property at 3000 El Camino Real from PC Planned
               Community 2533 to PC Planned Community 4648 (Rezone)
4649  6/26/00  Amends 1999-2000 budget to accept various donations and provide an additional
               appropriation for the community services department (Special)
4650  7/17/00  Amends budget for fiscal year 2000-01 to provide additional appropriation for
               Public Safety Capital Improvement Project Number 19820 (Special)
               Amends zoning map, rezoning property at 801 and 1101 Welch Road from OR Office
4651  8/24/00  Research to PF Public Facilities and removing the landscaping combining district
               from a portion of the median of Pasteur Drive between Welch Road and Stanford
               University Hospital (Rezone)
4652  7/31/00  Amends budget for fiscal year 2000-01 to provide additional appropriation for Gas
               Fund commodity purchase and transmission costs (Special)
               Amends budget for fiscal year 2000-01 to provide additional appropriation for
4653  8/7/00   transcription services in the Planning and Community Environment Department
               (Special)
4654  8/7/00   Amends budget for fiscal year 2000-01 to accept funding from state Office of
               Traffic Safety for Traffic Safety Program (Special)
4655  10/17/00 Adds 1.04.072, expedited judicial review (1.04)
4656  10/17/00 Amends 9.79.040, pertaining to newsrack permits (9.79)
4657  10/17/00 Amends zoning map and rezones property known as Channing Park Tract 883 and 909
               from R-1 to R-1(S) (Rezone)
4658  10/17/00 Amends 2.10.500 and Appx. A to Ch. 2.10, repealing Internet and cable modem
               service standards (2.10)
4659  10/10/00 Amends budget for fiscal year 2000-01 to provide appropriation for Cubberley
               Theatre chiller replacement, Capital Improvement Project No. 10120 (Special)
               Amends budget for fiscal year 2000-01 to accept grant from Arts Council Silicon
4660  10/10/00 Valley and to provide additional appropriation for the Community Services
               Department (Special)
               Adds 21.16.280, final or parcel map amendments; also amends 21.04.030 (b)(25),
4661  11/22/00 (26), 21.08.030, 21.08.050, 21.16.200, 21.44.010 and 21.44.020; repeals 21.08.060
               and 21.08.070; and renumbers 21.08.080 to be 21.08.060; all pertaining to
               subdivisions (21.04, 21.08, 21.16, 21.44)
4662  10/23/00 Amends budget for fiscal year 2000-01 to accept and expend grant funding in the
               Police Department; adds a sergeant position (Special)
4663  11/13/00 Amends budget for fiscal year 2000-01 adding 2.5 full-time equivalent positions
               in the Planning and Community Environment Department (Special)
               Amends budget for fiscal year 2000-01 to provide additional appropriation for CIP
4664  11/13/00 10020, office space renovation project, and to approve transfer from Electric
               Fund public benefit program (Special)
4665  11/13/00 Amends budget for fiscal year 2000-01 to provide additional appropriation for CIP
               10020, office space renovation project (Special)
               Amends budget for fiscal year 2000-01 to accept grant from Friends of Palo Alto
4666  11/20/00 Public Library and to provide additional appropriation for Community Services
               Department in support of additions to library collections (Special)
4667  12/27/00 Adds Ch. 10.47, Large Vehicle Parking; also amends 10.60.010, to provide for
               penalties for violation of Ch. 10.47 (10.47, 10.60)
4668  12/11/00 Amends budget for fiscal year 2000-01 to provide additional appropriation for
               acquisition of Pinkerton property located at 806-808 Waverley Street (Special)
4669  12/18/00 Amends budget for fiscal year 2000-01 to provide appropriation for Homer
               undercrossing project, CIP 10121 (Special)
4670  12/18/00 Amends budget for fiscal year 2000-01 to provide additional appropriation for CIP
               9916, Fiber to the Home (FTTH) trial (Special)
4671  12/18/00 Amends budget for fiscal year 2000-01 to provide additional appropriation for Gas
               Fund commodity purchase costs (Special)
4672  12/19/00 Approves Buena Vista Mobilehome Park affordable housing preservation strategy,
               and voluntary 5 cap on rent increases [Expires May 1, 2001] (Special)
4673  2/8/01   Approves and adopts improvement plan for Mitchell Park (Special)
4674  1/16/01  Authorizes closing of budget for fiscal year 1999-2000 (Special)
4675  1/16/01  Adds, on interim basis, 18.41.035, Charleston Center ground floor regulations
               [Extended by Ord. 4684] (Expired - See Ord. 4787)
4676  1/16/01  Adds 18.41.037, Midtown Shopping District ground floor regulations [Extended by
               Ord. 4685] (Expired - See Ord. 4786)
4677  1/22/01  Amends budget for fiscal year 2000-01 to provide additional appropriation for
               contribution to county housing trust (Special)
4678  1/22/01  Amends budget for fiscal year 2000-01 to provide additional appropriation for
               preservation of below-market rate unit at 2464 West Bayshore Road(Special)
4679  1/22/01  Amends budget for fiscal year 2000-01 to provide 4.0 full-time equivalent
               positions in the Utilities Department for dark fiber leasing program (Special)
4680  3/8/01   Amends 8.10.020 and 8.10.050, pertaining to protected trees (8.10)
4681  2/5/01   Amends budget for fiscal year 2000-01 to provide additional appropriation in the
               demolition and relocation costs at former Medical Foundation Properties (Special)
               Amends Section 18.08.040 (zoning map) to change the classification of property at
4682  3/24/01  the intersection of El Camino Real and Wells Avenue, known as 675-695 El Camino
               Real/Wells Avenue from PC 4465 to PC (Rezone)
               Authorizes city manager to enter into long-term contracts for purchase of power
4683  2/20/01  and energy in anticipation of immediate and substantial loss of the city's power
               now furnished by the Western Area Power Administration and declaring the urgency
               thereof to take effect immediately (Special)
               Amends budget for fiscal year 2000-01 to accept grant from public fund of the
4686  3/12/01  state library and to provide an additional appropriation for the community
               services department (Special)
               Amends budget for fiscal year 2000-01 to adjust budgeted revenues and
4687  4/09/01  expenditures in accordance with the recommendations in the midyear report
               (Special)
               Amends budget for fiscal year 2000-01 to accept grant from the California Arts
4688  4/09/01  Council and grant from the Palo Alto Art Center Foundation and to provide an
               additional appropriation for the community services department (Special)
4691  04/23/01 Approves first amendment to development agreement between board of trustees of
               Leland Stanford Junior University and the city dated August 14, 1997 (Special)
4692  04/23/01 Amends Ch. 2 04, to establish new city council procedures (2.04)
               Amends budget for fiscal year 2000-01 to provide additional appropriation from
4693  04/23/01 electric fund supply rate stabilization reserve to the electric fund public
               benefit program operating expense (Special)
               Amends budget for fiscal year 2000-01 to provide additional appropriation for
4694  04/23/01 short-term rental of back-up generators and associated services, and for CIP 9803
               (Special)
4695  05/14/01 Amends budget for fiscal year 2000-01 for legal services for PG&E bankruptcy
               proceedings (Special)
4696  05/14/01 Adds Ch. 9 76, Mobilehome Park Conversion (9.76)
               Amends budget for fiscal year 2000-01 to accept grant from the Friends of the
4697  05/21/01 Palo Alto Junior Museum and Zoo and to provide additional appropriation for
               community services department (Special)
               Amends budget for fiscal year 2000-01 to accept revenue from State Traffic
4698  05/21/01 Congestion Relief Fund and to provide additional appropriation CIP 9630, street
               maintenance (Special)
4699  05/21/01 Amends budget for fiscal year 2000-01 to provide additional appropriation for gas
               fund commodity purchase costs (Special)
4700  05/21/01 Amends budget for fiscal year 2001-02 to provide appropriation for natural gas
               back-up generators, CIP 0121 (Special)
4701  6/4/01   Amends budget for fiscal year 2000-01 to increase revenue and expenses for CIP
               19801, school site irrigation (Special)
4702  6/4/01   Amends budget for fiscal year 2000-01 for dark fiber optics commercial customer
               design and connection services, CIP 9801 (Special)
4703  6/4/01   Amends budget for fiscal year 2000-01 for compensation plan for Service Employees
               International Union (SEIU) (Special)
4704  6/4/01   Amends budget for fiscal year 2000-01 for design and construction administration
               services, CIP 19530 (Special)
               Amends budget for fiscal year 2000-01 to provide additional appropriation for
4705  6/4/01   Redwood General & Mechanical for the Cubberley chiller replacement project, CIP
               10120 (Special)
4706  6/11/01  Adopts budget for fiscal year 2001-02 and in concept approves budget for fiscal
               year 2002-03 (Special)
               Amends budget for fiscal year 2000-01 to provide appropriation for acquisition of
4707  6/11/01  residential property in accordance with the housing assistance provision of the
               city manager's employment agreement (Special)
4708  6/25/01  Amends 2.08.010 to add division of human services to the department of community
               services (2.08)
4709  7/16/01  Amends budget for fiscal year 2001-02 to correct municipal fee schedule for an
               omitted fee change (Special)
4710  7/23/01  Clarifies and restates certain budgetary actions related to the intended rebate
               of a portion of the utility users tax (Repealed by 4737)
4711  9/6/01   Designates the city council as the redevelopment agency for the city (Special)
4712  10/11/01 Amends 10.64.250, reducing penalties for violations of regulations on bicycles,
               roller skates, skateboards and coasters (10.64)
4713  10/11/01 Amends 22.08.030, formally renaming "Arastra Property" as "Arastradero Preserve"
               (22.08)
4714  10/11/01 Approves and adopts plan for improvements to Arastradero Preserve (Not codified)
4715  10/11/01 Authorizes amendment to contract between city and board of administration of
               California Public Employees' Retirement System, for local fire members (Special)
4716  11/19/01 Amends 18.04.030, 18.12.050, 18.88.030 and 18.88.090, adopting changes into the
               single-family (R-1) zoning district regulations (18.04, 18.12 [Ed. Note])
4717  11/19/01 Adds Ch. 18.14, R-1 Single Family Individual Review [In effect through November
               18, 2006 unless extended or made permanent prior thereto] (Repealed by 4869)
4718  9/19/01  Amends budget for fiscal year 2001-02 to provide additional appropriation for
               planning department organization (Special)
4719  9/19/01  Amends budget for fiscal year 2001-02 to provide additional appropriation for
               library master plan, CIP 10204 (Special)
4720  10/25/01 Approves and adopts plan for improvements to Foothills Park (Not codified)
4721  11/22/01 Amends 18.08.040 (Zoning Map) to change classification of portion of property
               known as Tract 1371 from R-1 to R-1(S) (Rezone)
4722  1/1/02   Amends 8.04.050 and 9.56.030, both pertaining to nuisances, and reducing sight
               obstructions in order to improve street and sidewalk safety (8.04, 9.56)
4723  11/19/01 Amends budget for fiscal year 2001-02 to provide additional appropriation for
               SCADA system upgrades, CIP 0210 (Special)
4724  1/3/02   Authorizes city manager to purchase portion of city's energy requirements during
               2005-2010 period under specified terms and conditions (Not codified)
4725  1/3/02   Changes classification of property at 2425 Embarcadero Way from PC-3020 to PC-
               4725 (Rezone)
4726  1/3/02   Amends Ch. 4.39, private intrusion alarms (4.39) (4.39.040 repealed by 5441)
4727  1/3/02   Amends 9.10.060, increasing noise restrictions on certain specified sites and for
               certain specified activities (9.10)
4728  1/3/02   Adds Ch. 9.72, mandatory Response to Request for Discussion of Disputes Between
               Landlords and Tenants (9.72)
4729  12/10/01 Amends budget for fiscal year 2001-02 to accept COPS grant funding (Special)
               Amends 18.04.030, 18.41.030, 18.43.030, 18.45.030 and 18.49.050, prohibiting
4730  1/17/02  conversion in commercial districts of ground floor non-office uses to medical,
               professional, administrative and general business offices (18.04, 18.49)
4731  12/17/01 Amends budget for fiscal year 2001-02 to establish CIP 10223 and accepts grant
               funds from CALTRANS, pertaining to projects on El Camino Real (Special)
               Amends budget for fiscal year 2001-02 to accept grant funds from California Arts
4732  1/14/02  Council for CIP 10224, the Children's Theatre sound and light systems upgrade
               (Special)
4733  2/24/02  Amends contract with CALPERS, pertaining to local police members (Special)
4734  1/22/02  Closes budget for fiscal year 2000-01 (Special)
4735  2/4/02   Amends budget for fiscal year 2001-02 to provide appropriation related to city's
               option to acquire housing site on Channing Avenue (Special)
               Amends budget for fiscal year 2001-02 by transferring funds from CIP 19109,
4736  2/19/02  police information systems master plan, to provide additional appropriation for
               fire/communications computer system, CIP 19312 (Special)
4737  3/11/02  Amends budget for fiscal year 2001-02 to adjust budgeted revenues and
               expenditures in accordance with midyear report; repeals Ord. 4710 (Not codified)
               Amends budget for fiscal year 2001-02 to accept grant from public fund of the
4738  3/18/02  state library, to provide additional appropriation for CIP 10204, library master
               plan (Special)
4739  4/18/02  Amends Ch. 9.06, Wood Burning Fireplaces and Appliances (9.06)) (Repealed by
               5108)
4740  5/2/02   Amends 2.30.120, open purchase contracts (2.30 [Ed. Note])
               Amends budget for fiscal year 2001-02 to provide additional appropriation for
4741  4/8/02   construction of prefabricated bridge at the Arastradero Preserve, CIP 10001,
               (Special)
4742  5/9/02   Adds Ch. 16.58, Development Impact Fees for Parks, Community Centers and
               Libraries (16.58)
4743  5/9/02   Amends 16.47.020 and 16.47.040, pertaining to approval of projects with impacts
               on housing (16.47) (Repealed by 5408)
4744  5/8/02   Amends 16.45.060, calculation of transportation impact fee (16.45)
               Adds 16.48.160; also amends 1.08.010, 1.08.050, 1.12.030, 1.16.040, 1.16.080,
4745  5/9/02   8.04.020, 9.56.020, 9.56.030 and 16.28.400; and repeals Ch. 9.32 (Hypnotism and
               Fortune Telling); all pertaining to obsolete and outdated provisions related to
               code enforcement and municipal prosecution (1.08, 1.12, 1.16, 8.04, 9.56, 16.28)
4746  6/6/02   Amends 22.04.340, motorized vehicles and generators in parks and open space land
               (22.04)
4747  6/6/02   Amends 18.08.040 (Zoning Map) to change classification of property known as 535
               Everett Avenue from PC 2145 to PC 4747 (Rezone)
               Amends budget for fiscal year 2001-02 to provide additional appropriation to
4748  5/13/02  accept donation from Peery & Arrillaga Foundation into CIP 10010, park facilities
               improvements (Special)
4749  5/13/02  Amends budget for fiscal year 2001-02 to provide additional appropriation for
               residential real estate loan to director of administrative services (Special)
               Amends budget for fiscal year 2001-02 to provide additional appropriation to
4750  5/20/02  accept grant from Palo Alto Art Center Foundation and transfer form community
               services department to CIP 10204, library master plan (Special)
4751  6/20/02  Amends 16.24.020, standard fences, height and location regulations; also amends
               18.88.070, watercourse or channel (16.24)
4752  7/4/02   Approves and adopts plan for capital improvements to Hoover Park (Special)
4753  ---      Pending
4754  7/4/02   Amends subsection (f) of 9.10.060, pertaining to leaf blowers (9.10)
               Amends budget for fiscal year 2001-02 to accept revenue from state traffic
4755  6/10/02  congestion relief fund and VTA, and to provide additional appropriation to CIP
               9630, street maintenance (Special)
4756  ---      Budget amendment (Special)
4757  8/5/02   Submits proposition of incurring bonded debt for purpose of acquisition,
               construction and improvement of library and community center facilities (Special)
4758  9/5/02   Approves and adopts plan for improvements to memorial grove at Eleanor Pardee
               Park (Special)
4759  9/5/02   Amends 18.08.040 (Zoning Map) to change classification of properties on Van Auken
               Circle, Amarillo Avenue and Greer Road from R-1 to R-1(S) (Rezone)
               Adds 16.09.104, 16.09.145 and 16.09.146; also amends 16.09.010, 16.09.031,
               16.09.032, 16.09.033, 16.09.060, 16.09.061, 16.09.090, 16.09.095, 16.09.101,
4760  9/5/02   16.09.103, 16.09.105, 16.09.106, 16.09.110, 16.09.113, 16.09.115, 16.09.116,
               16.09.117, 16.09.143, 16.09.144, 16.09.155 and 16.09.160; all pertaining to sewer
               use (16.09) (Repealed by 5084)
4761  ---      Budget amendment (Special)
4762  11/7/02  Amends subsection (a)(2) of 18.32.070, pertaining to special conditions for
               public facilities district regulations (Repealed by 4964)
4763  11/7/02  Amends 16.45.050, 16.47.030 and 16.58.030, to create certain development impact
               fee exemptions (16.45, 16.47, 16.58) (Ch. 16.47 repealed by 5408)
4764  11/15/02 Repeals and replaces Title 15, Fire Prevention; adopts 2001 Edition of the
               California Fire Code (15.04) (Repealed by 4975)
4765  10/21/02 Amends budget for fiscal year 2002-03 to provide for staff position changes in
               the utilities department (Special)
4766  10/21/02 Amends budget for fiscal year 2002-03 to provide additional appropriation for CIP
               19913, reallocation funds from COPS (Special)
4767  10/21/02 Amends budget for fiscal year 2002-03 to provide additional appropriation to
               assist with cost of sound wall at Middlefield Road tennis facility (Special)
4768  12/13/02 Amends 18.88.160, vehicle and equipment repair and storage (Repealed by 4934)
4769  12/13/02 Amends Ch. 16.04, building code, in entirety [Operative 11/1/2002] (16.04)
               (Repealed by 4976)
4770  12/13/02 Amends Ch. 16.08, plumbing code, in entirety [Operative 11/1/2002] (16.08)
               (Repealed by 4978)
4771  12/13/02 Amends Ch. 16.16, electrical code, in entirety [Operative 11/1/2002] (16.16)
               (Repealed by 4979)
4772  ---      Amends budget for fiscal year 2002-03 to provide appropriation for title
               insurance in conjunction with purchase of Cubberley Property (Special)
4773  12/2/02  Amends budget for fiscal year 2002-03 to accept grant funding to provide for
               staffing changes in the police department (Special)
               Amends budget for fiscal year 2002-03 to accept and expend grant funds for
4774  12/16/02 construction of trails, Bay Trail path and footbridge (CIP 10001); construction
               of Baylands parking lot (CIP 10003); and design and fabrication of exhibits
               (Special)
4775  1/13/03  Amends budget for fiscal year 2002-03 to provide appropriation for preparation of
               massing model for SOFA (Special)
               Amends budget for fiscal year 2002-03 to provide appropriation to the Jewish
4776  1/13/03  Community Center for refurbishing costs at the Cubberley Community Center
               (Special)
4777  1/13/03  Closes budget for fiscal year 2001-02 (Special)
4778  3/13/03  Amends 9.10.060, special provisions pertaining to noise regulation (9.10)
               Amends 18.08.040 (Zoning Map) to change classification of property known as 800
4779  3/21/03  High Street from CD-S(P) to PC, and to approve a variance from height requirement
               (Rezone)
4780  3/3/2003 Amends budget for fiscal year 2002-03 to provide appropriation from the
               residential housing in-lieu fund to the Opportunity Center project (Special)
4781  3/3/2003 Interim prohibition on new ground floor office space in Charleston Center or
               Midtown Shopping District [expires April 17, 2003 unless extended] (Not codified)
4782  4/16/    Amends 18.08.040 (Zoning Map) to change classification of property known as 33-49
      2003     Encina Ave. from CS to PC (Rezone)
               Extends prohibition on new ground floor office space in Charleston Center or
4783  4/14/    Midtown Shopping District [expires March 3, 2004 unless extended or replaced
      2003     earlier with permanent ordinances 4786 and 4787] (Expired due to adoption of Ord.
               4786)
4784  4/14/    Declaration of council policy to implement Charleston Road Corridor Traffic
      2003     Management and Safety Study (Not codified)
4785  4/21/    Amends budget for 2002-03 fiscal year to adjust revenues and expenditures in
      2003     accordance with mid-year report (Not codified)
               Adds 18.41.037, Midtown Shopping Center Ground Floor Regulations; effects
4786  6/5/2003 termination, in conjunction with adoption of Ord. 4787, of interim Ord. 4783
               (Repealed by 4923)
               Adds 18.41.035, Charleston Center Ground Floor Regulations; effects termination,
4787  6/5/2003 in conjunction with adoption of Ord. 4786, of interim Ord. 4783 (Repealed by
               4923)
4788  6/5/2003 Amends Zoning Map by changing designation of parcel at 2300 East Bayshore Rd.
               from PC to LM(D)(3) (Rezone)
               Amends budget for fiscal year 2002-03 to accept and expend grant and street
4789  5/5/2003 improvement funds for CIP 19310, Embarcadero Road pedestrian/bicycle bridge and
               bike path extension project (Special)
4790  5/12/    Amends budget for fiscal year 2002-03 to provide additional appropriation for
      2003     completion of Roth Building wings, CIP 10304 (Special)
               Amends budget for fiscal year 2002-03 to accept gift from Friends of the Palo
4791  5/19/    Alto Library and to accept grant from public fund of the state library and to
      2003     provide an additional appropriation for the community services department
               (Special)
               Amends budget for fiscal year 2002-03 to provide additional appropriation for
4792  6/9/2003 state bridge seismic retrofit grant funding for Sand Hill Road bridge, CIP 10018
               (Special)
4793  6/16/    Adopts budget for fiscal year 2003-04 and in concept approves budget for fiscal
      2003     year 2004-05 (Not codified)
      7/17/    Amends 18.10.030, 18.10.040, 18.12.030, 18.12.040, 18.12.050, 18.12.070,
4794  2003     18.30.040, 18.71.050, 18.71.060 and 18.83.050, all pertaining to second dwelling
               units (18.12 [Ed. Note])
4795  7/17/    Adds Ch. 9.73, City Policy Against Arbitrary Discrimination (9.73)
      2003
4796  8/14/    Approves and adopts plan for improvements to Terman Park (Not codified)
      2003
4797  8/14/    Amends 16.20.100 and 16.20.160, amending the sign ordinance to provide for bus
      2003     shelter advertising (16.20)
               Amends budget for fiscal year 2003-04 to accept and expend grant funds and loan
               from general fund budget stabilization reserve for construction of bicyclist and
4798  7/14/    pedestrian tunnel under Caltrain tracks connecting South of Forest Area and
      2003     Downtown Palo Alto to Palo Alto Medical Foundation, Sheraton Hotel and
               surrounding area (CIP 10121, Homer Avenue Caltrain Undercrossing Project)
               (Special)
4799  8/28/    Adds Ch. 16.11, Stormwater Pollution Prevention (Repealed by 5671) (16.11)
      2003
               Amends budget for fiscal year 2003-04 to provide an additional appropriation to
4800  8/4/2003 CIP project PD-02017, public safety mobile data computer system; reallocates
               funds from Citizens for Public Safety (COPS) (Special)
               Authorizes city manager to purchase portion of city's energy requirements during
4801  10/7/    2005 - 2007 period [Block 1 purchases], 2005 - 2006 period [Block 2 purchases],
      2003     and 2005 period [Block 3 purchases] under specified terms and conditions (Not
               codified)
4802  -        Amends 2003-04 municipal fee schedule to correct an inaccurate fee change (Not
               codified)
      10/21/   Amends 18.94.070, Nonconforming use - Required termination, to change the
4803  2003     required termination date for the monotype print art studio use at 440 Pepper
               Street (18.70)
4804  11/7/    Adds Ch. 12.10, Street Cut Fees (12.10)
      2003
4805  -        Amends budget for fiscal year 2003-04 (Special)
      10/14/   Amends 2003-04 budget to accept and expend local law enforcement block grant
4806  2003     (LLEBG) funding and to transfer matching funds in from police department to LLEBG
               subfund (Special)
4807  11/27/   Approves and adopts plan for improvements to Terman Park (Not codified)
      2003
4808  12/25/   Adopts Phase 2 of the South of Forest Coordinated Area Plan, and amend Zoning Map
      2003     (Not codified)
4809  12/25/   Adds 2.08.230, department of libraries; also amends 2.08.020 and 2.08.210,
      2003     pertaining to city officers and departments (2.08)
4810  1/8/2004 Authorizes city manager to purchase portion of the city's natural gas
               requirements from certain prequalified suppliers, 2004 - 2009 (Not codified)
4811  2/5/2004 Amends budget for fiscal year 2003-04 to increase revenue expense for CIP OS-
               98012 (Arastradero Preserve gateway facility project) (Special)
4812  2/5/2004 Authorizes city manager to purchase portion of the city's electricity
               requirements from certain prequalified suppliers, 2004 - 20011 (Not codified)
4813  2/5/2004 Amends 2.08.200, pertaining to the department of utilities (2.08)
4814  2/5/2004 Amends 12.16.020 by adding subsection (39), establishing Underground Utility
               District No. 39 (12.16)
4815  2/5/2004 Adds 22.08.390, South of Forest Coordinated Area Plan Phase I Park (22.08)
4816  2/5/2004 Authorizes closing of budget for fiscal year 2002-03 (Special)
      3/21/    Amends budget for fiscal year 2003-04 to accept grants from various arts
4817  2004     organizations, and to provide additional appropriation to community services
               department (Special)
4818  3/2/2004 Adopts plans for native plant potting area in Baylands (Not codified)
4819  3/1/2004 Establishes Downtown Palo Alto Business Improvement District (Not codified)
4820  4/16/    Amends 16.09.106, 16.09.110, 16.09.112, 16.09.113 and 16.09.116, all pertaining
      2004     to sewer use (16.09) (Repealed by 5084)
4821  4/16/    Amends budget for fiscal year 2003-04 to adjust budgeted revenues and
      2004     expenditures in accordance with recommendations in midyear report (Special)
4822  5/11/    Amends 12.16.020 by establishing underground utility district No. 40 (12.16)
      2004
4823  4/12/    Amends budget for fiscal year 2003-04 to accept grant from state public library
      2004     fund and to provide an additional appropriation for library department (Special)
4824  6/4/2004 Amends 16.52.040 and 16.52.130, pertaining to flood hazard regulations (16.52)
      6/18/    Amends Ord. 4763, relating to imposition and collection of certain development
4825  2004     impact fees on residential dwelling units smaller than or equal to 900 square
               feet (Not codified)
               Adds Chs. 2.21 (Architectural Review Board), 18.76 (Permits and Approvals), 18.77
               (Procedures for Permits and Approvals), and 18.78 (Appeals); repeals Chs. 16.48,
               18.90, 18.91, 18.92, 18.93 and 18.99; also adds 18.88.200 and 18.88.210: also
               amends 4.56.100, 8.10.050, 8.10.060, 8.10.140, 9.04.020, 16.20.020, 16.20.030,
               16.20.040, 16.20.050, 16.20.100, 16.20.110, 16.20.160, 16.20.170, 16.24.090,
               16.46.030, 16.47.020, 16.47.040, 16.49.050, 18.04.030, 18.10.040, 18.10.050,
               18.12.040, 18.12.050, 18.12.060, 18.12.070, 18.15.040, 18.17.040, 18.17.050,
               18.17.070, 18.19.040, 18.19.070, 18.22.040, 18.22.050, 18.22.090, 18.22.100,
               18.24.040, 18.24.050, 18.24.090, 18.24.100, 18.26.040, 18.26.050, 18.26.090,
               18.26.100, 18.28.020, 18.30.020, 18.30.040, 18.32.040, 18.32.050, 18.32.080,
               18.37.040, 18.37.050, 18.37.080, 18.41.035, 18.41.037, 18.41.040, 18.41.050,
4826  7/7/2004 18.41.080, 18.43.040, 18.43.050, 18.43.080, 18.44.040, 18.45.040, 18.45.070,
               18.45.080, 18.46.050, 18.46.060, 18.47.040, 18.48.050, 18.49.030, 18.49.090,
               18.49.140, 18.50.030, 18.55.040, 18.55.050, 18.55.070, 18.55.080, 18.57.050,
               18.57.070, 18.60.040, 18.60.050, 18.60.070, 18.60.080, 18.63.040, 18.64.030,
               18.68.040, 18.68.065, 18.68.070, 18.68.110, 18.68.170, 18.71.060, 18.71.030,
               18.72.040, 18.72.050, 18.82.055, 18.82.060, 18.82.070, 18.83.015, 18.83.030,
               18.83.100, 18.83.120, 18.83.130, 18.87.060, 18.94.070, 18.98.050, 18.98.100,
               20.04.130, 21.12.110 and 21.13.020; all pertaining to streamlining planning
               procedures (2.21, 4.56, 8.10, 9.04, 16.20, 16.24, 16.46, 16.47, 16.49, 18.04,
               18.12 [Ed. Note], 18.30(A), 18.30(B), 18.30(C), 18.30(D), 18.30(G), 18.38, 18.52,
               18.54, 18.70, 18.76, 18.77, 18.78, 18.80, 20.04, 21.12, 21.13) ( 2.21.020
               repealed by 5208; 16.47.020 and 16.47.040 repealed by 5408)
4827  7/7/2004 Amends in entirety Ch. 2.30, Contracts and Purchasing procedures (2.30)
               Amends budget for fiscal year 2003-04 to accept and expend $57,036 from state
4828  6/7/2004 grant and the Leland Stanford Junior excess cost agreement funds into CIP PE-
               00018, Sand Hill Road bridge seismic retrofit (Special)
               Authorizes negotiation and execution of Western Area Power Administration custom
4829  7/7/2004 products contract and subscribes to day-ahead firming service product under
               specified terms and conditions during period 1/1/2005 through 9/30/2005 (Special)
4830  7/14/    Adds Ch. 5.24, Requirement to Divert Construction and Demolition Waste from
      2004     Landfill (5.24)) (Repealed by 5108)
4831  7/21/    Amends Zoning Map by changing classification of property known as 2701 El Camino
      2004     Real from CN and RM-40 to PC planned community 4831 (Not codified)
               Amends budget for fiscal year 2003-04 to establish CIP PD-04011, Civic Center
4832  6/21/    parking - security upgrade; to provide appropriation in amount of $75,000 from
      2004     University Avenue parking district, electric fund operating budget, and police
               department communication services existing operating budget (Special)
4833  6/28/    Adopts budget for fiscal year 2004-05 (Special)
      2004
               Amends budget for fiscal year 2003-04 to return unspent capital improvement
4834  6/28/    program project balances totaling $4,321,436 consisting of $150,479 to general
      2004     fund budget stabilization reserve and $4,170,957 to infrastructure reserve
               (Special)
4835  7/28/    Amends 22.08.330 by renaming dedicated parkland called "Arastradero Preserve" as
      2004     "Enid Pearson Arastradero Preserve" (22.08)
      7/12/    Amends budget for fiscal year 2004-05 to provide additional appropriation of
4836  2004     $37,000 from park impact fee fund into CIP PG-02018, Palo Alto Sofa Park
               (Special)
4837  9/1/2004 Adds 2.40.080, No Use of Board or Commission Titles in Ballot Arguments (2.40)
4838  9/1/2004 Amends 22.08.390, renaming South of Forest Coordinated Area Plan Phase I Park as
               Palo Alto Heritage Park (22.08)
4839  10/15/   Amends Exhibit A-17 to 22.08.210, to correct boundaries of Rinconada Park (22.08)
      2004
               Amends budget for fiscal year 2004-05 to provide additional appropriation of
4840  9/27/    $206,150 for anticipated increased contract costs for preparation of
      2004     environmental impact report (EIR) on Stanford/Mayfield Development Agreement and
               associated legal services (Special)
4841  9/27/    Amends budget for fiscal year 2004-05 to provide additional appropriation of
      2004     $150,000 for legal contract assistance (Special)
4842  11/3/    Approves and adopts plans for improvements to Bayland Athletic Center (Not
      2004     codified)
      11/3/    Amends Planned Community district PC-2592 to permit certain automobile dealership
4843  2004     design features; amends Zoning Map by changing classification of property known
               as 690 San Antonio Road from PC-2592 to PC 4843 (Rezone)
               Amends 18.08.040 (Zoning Map) to change classification of property located at
4844  11/3/    3045 Park Boulevard from "GM(B)" to "GM(B)(AD)" and to change the zone
      2004     classification of property located at 4190 El Camino Real, 3290 Park Boulevard,
               762 San Antonio Road, and 4180 El Camino Real from "CS" to "CS(AD)" (Rezone)
      11/3/    Adds Ch. 18.65, Auto Dealer Combining District; amends 18.04.030 by adding
4845  2004     subsection (a)(12.5), automobile dealership; also amends Minimum Off-Street
               Parking Requirements table of 18.83.050 (18.04, 18.30(F), 18.83)
      11/3/    Amends Planned Community district PC-2554 to permit certain automobile dealership
4846  2004     design features; amends Zoning Map by changing classification of property located
               at 1730 Embarcadero Road from PC-2554 to PC 4846 (Rezone)
      11/4/    Amends Planned Community district PC-3350 to permit certain automobile dealership
4847  2004     design features; amends Zoning Map by changing classification of property located
               at 1766 Embarcadero Road PC-3550 to PC 4847 (Rezone)
               Amends 18.43.030(m), Community Commercial District regulations; also amends
4848  11/3/    Zoning Map by changing classification of properties located at 2401, 2409 and
      2004     2417 Park Avenue and 101 California Avenue from CC(2)(R)(P) to CC(2)(P) (Repealed
               by 4923)
      11/24/   Amends 18.08.040, the Zoning Map, to change classification of certain properties
4849  2004     on Allen Court, specifically that property known as Tract 1137 from R-1 to R-1(S)
               (Rezone)
4850  10/25/   Amends budget for fiscal year 2004-05 to implement organizational restructuring
      2004     of community services department (Special)
               Amends budget for fiscal year 2004-05 to approve transfer of appropriation from
      11/08/   CIP WS-02005, El Camino Park reservoir and pump station with $443,325; to CIP WS-
4851  2004     01010, reservoir booster improvements; $92,561 to CIP WS-01011, district system
               water quality enhancements; and $44,467 to CIP WS-01012, booster station
               improvements-PRV's (Special)
4852  10/25/   Amends budget for fiscal year 2004-05 to add senior deputy city attorney position
      2004     to table of organization (Special)
               Amends budget for fiscal year 2004-05 to establish CIP PD-05010, to purchase
4853  11/08/   hardware and installation of in-car video recording systems in police patrol
      2004     vehicles and to provide an appropriation in the amount of $200,000 from
               technology fund (Special)
4854  12/16/   Amends 2.08.210, Department of community services (2.08)
      2004
4855  12/23/   Approves and adopts plans for parking lot improvements in Byxbee Park (Not
      2004     codified)
      12/13/   Amends budget for fiscal year 2004-05 to provide additional appropriation of
4856  2004     $61,000 from the infrastructure reserve into CIP PG-00010, Park facilities
               improvements (Special)
4857  12/12/   Amends budget for fiscal year 2004-05 to transfer to the infrastructure reserve
      2004     the amount of $35,881,000 from the general fund to the capital fund (Special)
4858  2/10/    Amends 12.16.020 by establishing Underground Utility District No. 44 (12.16)
      2005
4859  2/19/    Amends Exhibit A-17 of 22.08.210, to adjust boundary of Rinconada Park (22.08)
      2005
      1/18/    Amends budget for fiscal year 2004-05 to provide additional appropriation of
4860  2005     $335,000 from infrastructure reserve into CIP PF-01005, Lucie Stern Community
               Center improvements (Special)
4861  1/18/    Authorizes closing of budget for fiscal year 2003-04 (Special)
      2005
               Adds 18.32.090, Transfer of development rights; also amends subsections (c) and
4862  3/10/    (d) of 18.49.060, 18.49.070 and 18.87.010, all amendments pertaining to inclusion
      2005     of certain city-owned buildings as sender sites in the Transferable Development
               Rights Program (Repealed by 4964)
4863  3/7/2005 Amends budget for fiscal year 2004-05 to adjust budgeted revenues and
               expenditures in accordance with recommendations in midyear report (Special)
4864  4/21/    Amends 22.04.310 and 22.08.330, both pertaining to the Enid Pearson Arastradero
      2005     Preserve (22.04, 22.08)
4865  4/21/    Amends 22.04.150, Foothills Park (22.04)
      2005
4866  4/21/    Adds 6.20.055, Animals in vehicles (6.20)
      2005
      4/11/    Amends budget for fiscal year 2004-05 to provide additional appropriation of
4867  2005     $266,900 for preservation of two below-market-rate units at 777 San Antonio Road,
               Unit 57 and 444 San Antonio Road, Unit 1D (Special)
      5/10/    Amends 22.04.220 to deregulate operation of skateboards, roller skates and
4868  2005     coasting devices on Renzel Trail and other paved off-road multi-use open space
               trails (22.04)
               Adds 18.77.075, Low- density residential review process; also adds 18.98.035,
               Application for single-story overlay districts; amends 18.04.030, 18.08.020,
               18.08.030, 18.77.080, 18.83.050, 18.88.030, 18.88.090 and 18.98.020; revises and
4869  5/24/    restates Ch. 18.12, R-1 Single family residence district regulations, in its
      2005     entirety; repeals Chs. 18.13, 18.14 and 18.15, and 18.77.120; all pertaining to
               amendment of Zoning Ordinance, updating R-1 zone district regulations, R-
               1 individual review process, and home improvement exception process (18.04,
               18.08, 18.12, 18.77, 18.80) (18.12.070 Repealed by 5412)
      6/24/    Approves development agreement between board of trustees of Leland Stanford
4870  2005     Junior University and City of Palo Alto, including Mayfield lease for Stanford/
               Palo Alto community playing fields (Not codified)
4871  6/24/    Adds Ch. 18.62, Alternative Development Standards; also amends 18.60.050 and
      2005     18.63.040, pertaining to floor area ratios and site coverage (18.60)
               Amends budget for fiscal year 2004-05 to provide additional appropriation of
4872  6/6/2005 $651,393 from Infrastructure Reserve into CIP project number PE-00107, Briones
               Park Improvements (Special)
               Amends budget for fiscal year 2004-05 to provide additional appropriation of
4873  6/6/2005 $46,800 from Infrastructure Reserve into CIP project number PF-01005, Lucie Stern
               Community Center improvements (Special)
4874  6/6/2005 Amends budget for fiscal year 2004-05 to provide additional appropriation of
               $21,500,000 for settlement agreement with Enron Companies (Special)
4875  7/14/    Repeals and replaces Ch. 18.10 (Low-Density Residential Districts); also repeals
      2005     Chs. 18.17, 18.19 and 18.30 (18.10) (18.10.070 Repealed by 5412)
4876  6/20/    Adopts budget for fiscal year 2005-06 and in-concept approval of budget for
      2005     fiscal year 2006-07 (Special)
      7/18/    Amends budget for fiscal year 2005-06 to provide additional appropriation of
4877  2005     $15,219 from Infrastructure Reserve into CIP project number OS-00003, open space
               parking improvements (Special)
               Adds 16.11.031, Hydromodification management measures required; also amends
4878  10/12/   16.11.020, 16.11.040 and 16.11.050, pertaining to stormwater pollution
      2005     prevention, in order to implement new regional water quality control board permit
               requirements (Repealed by 5671) (16.11)
      9/12/    Amends budget for fiscal year 2005-06 to provide additional appropriation of
4879  2005     $1,110,305 for acquisition of 13-acre open space Bressler Property from Peninsula
               Open Space Trust (Special)
4880  12/11/   Adds Ch. 16.60, Charleston Arastradero Corridor Pedestrian and Bicyclist Safety
      2005     Impact Fee (16.60)
      11/11/   Amends 18.04.030 and Table 3 (Summary of gross floor area for low density
4881  2005     residential districts) of Ch. 18.12, R-1 single-family residence district
               regulations (Withdrawn - Not codified)
4882  11/24/   Establishes Underground Utility District No. 41 (12.16)
      2005
      12/15/   Adds Ch. 18.20, Office, Research and Manufacturing Districts; amends 18.04.030,
4883  2005     Definitions; and repeals Chs. 18.37, 18.55, 18.57, 18.60 and 18.63; all
               pertaining to Zoning (18.04, 18.20)
4884  12/15/   Amends Ch. 18.20, Office, Research and manufacturing Districts (18.20)
      2005
               Amends budget for fiscal year 2005-06 to provide additional appropriation from
      11/14/   water fund rate stabilization reserve of $244,980 into CIP project number WS-
4885  2005     01010, reservoir booster station improvements; $71,916 into CIP project number
               WS-01011, distribution system water quality enhancements; and $37,825 into CIP
               project number WS-01012, booster station improvements (Special)
4886  1/5/2006 Amends 22.08.330, adding Parcel 3 to the Enid Pearson Arastradero Preserve
               (22.08)
      12/12/   Amends budget for fiscal year 2005-06 to implement conversion of four public
4887  2005     employee retirement system (PERS) "exempt" hourly positions to SEIU classified
               positions in the community services department (Special)
               Amends budget for fiscal year 2005-06 to accept grant funding from citizens for
               public safety (COPS) in amount of $100,000 in the supplemental law enforcement
4888  12/12/   services special revenue fund (SLESF) for purchase of mobile audio visual (MAV)
      2005     systems for police motorcycles, upgrade and purchase of a covert vehicle tracking
               system, upgrade of light bars for patrol vehicle, and upgrade of patrol vehicle
               program (Special)
4889  3/2/2006 Amends 18.65.020 and 18.65.070, pertaining to the Auto Dealer Combining District
               (18.30(F))
      12/19/   Amends budget for fiscal year 2005-06 to provide additional appropriation of
4890  2005     $965,000 to CIP project number PL-05002, Charleston/Arastradero Corridor Plan
               (Special)
4891  2/17/    Amends 18.04.030 and Table 3 of Ch. 18.12, amending provisions for calculation of
      2006     carport area into gross square footage (18.04, 18.12)
4892  1/17/    Closes budget for fiscal year 2004-05 (Special)
      2006
               Amends budget for fiscal year 2005-06 to provide appropriation of $50,000 from
4893  -        Infrastructure Reserve into CIP project number PG-06003, benches, signage,
               fencing, walkways, and landscaping- (Special)
      1/30/    Amends budget for fiscal year 2005-06 to provide additional appropriation from
4894  2006     water fund rate stabilization reserve of $350,000 into Phase I and Phase II water
               distribution system improvements projects (Special)
               Amends 2005-06 budget to accept grants of $1,384,542 from various sources and
4895  3/6/2006 provide additional appropriation to the CIP project number PE-04010(children's
               library improvements) (Special)
               Amends budget for fiscal year 2005-06 to transfer $250,000 from Commercial
4896  3/6/2006 Housing In-Lieu fund to Community Development Block Grant Fund for acquisition of
               housing units located at 2507-2533 Alma Street by the community working group
               (Special)
4897  3/13/    Amends budget for fiscal year 2005-06 to adjust budgeted revenues and
      2006     expenditures in accordance with recommendations in midyear report (Special)
4898  -        [Pending]
               Amends Zoning Map to change designation of portion of 2460 High Street
4899  5/3/2006 (designated surplus property) from PF (public facilities) to RMD (two unit multi-
               family residential residence district) (Rezone)
               Amends 18.08.040 (Zoning Map) by amending existing planned community zoning
4900  5/3/2006 designation of property known as 850 Webster Street to provide for utility
               facilities (Special)
4901  4/3/2006 Amends budget for fiscal year 2005-06 to provide appropriation of $500,000 into
               CIP project number EL-89028, electric customers connection (Special)
               Amends budget for fiscal year 2005-06 to accept grant in amount of $83,000 from
4902  4/3/2006 CALTRANS and to provide additional appropriation in planning and community
               environment department for renovation of University Avenue train depot bike
               station (Special)
               Amends budget for fiscal year 2005-06 to accept grant in amount of $229,725 from
4903  5/15/    State Bicycle Transportation Account Program, and provides additional
      2006     appropriation for CIP project number PE-86070, street maintenance for
               construction of bike lanes along Hanover Street and Porter Avenue (Special)
4904  7/6/2006 Adds Ch. 18.90, Creation of easements through execution and recordation of
               covenants (18.66)
4905  6/12/    Adopts budget for fiscal year 2006-07 (Special)
      2006
4906  7/13/    Amends 2.08.200, department of utilities (2.08)
      2006
4907  7/20/    Adds Ch. 21.50, Park land dedication or fees in lieu thereof; also amends
      2006     16.58.030, exemptions (16.58, 21.50)
4908  8/21/    Amends Ch. 12.16, Underground utility districts (12.16)
      2006
      8/10/    Adds 16.11.070, Fees and charges, and amends 16.11.020, Definitions, both
4909  2006     pertaining to storm water pollution prevention measures (Repealed by 5671)
               (16.11)
      7/10/    Amends budget for fiscal year 2006-07 to establish CIP project number PF-07011,
4910  2006     Roth Building maintenance and to provide appropriation in amount of $415,000 from
               general fund budget stabilization reserve (Special)
4911  8/24/    Adds Ch. 9.09, Public nuisance (9.09)
      2006
4912  9/7/2006 Amends contract with city and CALPERS (Not codified)
4913  10/11/   Repeals and replaces 2.12.090 pertaining to continuity of government in event of
      2006     disaster (2.12)
4914  10/11/   Adds Ch. 18.66, Pedestrian and transit oriented development combining district
      2006     (18.34)
      9/11/    Amends budget for fiscal year 2006-07 to provide additional appropriation to CIP
4915  2006     VR-01001, MSC fuel storage tank and fuel storage service island replacement of
               $943,003 (Special)
      9/18/    Amends budget for fiscal year 2006-07 to provide additional appropriation of
4916  2006     $200,000 to CIP SD-06103, to extend Gailen/Bibbits storm drain outfall to Adobe
               Pump Station (Special)
               Amends 18.08.040 (Zoning Map) to change classification of property known as 901
4917  11/11/   San Antonio Road: build/bridge project from GM to PC planned community, a
      2006     comprehensive plan amendment to change land use map from light industrial to
               mixed use, and below market rate housing plan (Not codified)
               Amends 18.08.040 (Zoning Map) to change classification of property known as 901
      11/11/   San Antonio Road: Taube-Koret Campus for Jewish Life Project from GM to PC
4918  2006     planned community, comprehensive plan amendment to change land use map from light
               industrial to mixed use, variance from height requirement, and below market rate
               housing plan (Not codified)
               Approves negative declaration and amends 18.08.040 (Zoning Map) to change
4919  11/11/   classification of property known as 850 Webster Street (Channing House) to allow
      2006     construction of health care building and underground garage, and approve variance
               for encroachments into special daylight plane along two property lines (Special)
      11/17/   Adds 22.08.400 to dedicate for park purposes 6.2 acre parcel of land at corner of
4920  2006     El Camino Real and Page Mill Road to be known as Stanford/Palo Alto Community
               Playing Fields for term of city's lease of such property (22.08)
4921  10/16/   Prohibits second dwelling units under different ownership from initial dwelling
      2006     unit on interim basis pursuant to Gov. Code 65858 (Repealed by 4939)
4922  11/17/   Amends budget for fiscal year 2006-07 to provide additional appropriation to CIP
      2006     PE-05002, Palo Alto Main Library space reconfiguration of $157,892 (Special)
               Adds Ch. 18.16, Neighborhood and Service Commercial Districts; also adds Ch.
      12/7/    18.18, Downtown Commercial District; also amends 16.20.120(a), Freestanding
4923  2006     Signs), and 18.94.070, Nonconforming Uses and Noncomplying Facilities; also
               repeals Chs. 18.41, 18.44, 18.45 and 18.49 (16.20, 18.16, 18.18, 18.70)
               (18.18.040 Repealed by 5459)
4924  12/21/   Amends Zoning Map to change zone designation for 1525 Arastradero Road from OS to
      2006     PF designation (Not codified)
4925  12/21/   Amends Ch. 18.16, Neighborhood, Community, and Service Commercial Districts; also
      2006     repeals Ch. 18.43 (18.16)
4926  11/20/   Amends budget for fiscal year 2006-07 to establish CIP PD-07001, swat van
      2006     replacement and to provide an appropriation in amount of $120,000 (Special)
4928  1/4/2007 Amends contract between city and CALPERS (Not codified)
               Amends budget for fiscal year 2006-07 to continue to provide incentives to city
4929  12/18/   utilities' customers to install photovoltaic systems and to provide an
      2006     appropriation of $750,000 from electric supply rate stabilization reserve (Not
               codified)
4930  2/16/    Amends 2.28.230, claims against city (2.28)
      2007
4931  1/22/    Closes budget for fiscal year 2005-06 (Special)
      2007
               Adds 16.28.321, Construction of bridges, culverts and storm drain outfalls; also
4932  3/8/2007 adds 16.28.322, Stream bank erosion repair; and amends 16.28.080, specific
               exemptions (16.28)
               Adds Ch. 18.23, Performance criteria for multiple family, commercial, industrial
4933  3/8/2007 and planned community districts; repeals Chs. 18.28 and 18.64, zoning; adds
               18.40.270, air quality (18.23, 18.40) (Ch. 18.23 Repealed by 5554)
4934  3/8/2007 Adds Ch. 18.40, General standards and exceptions; also adds Ch. 18.42, Standards
               for special uses; and repeals Ch. 18.88, zoning (18.40, partly repealed by 5340)
4935  3/23/    Adds Ch. 2.07, Post-Government Employment Regulations (2.07)
      2007
      4/15/    Authorizes city manager to purchase portion of the city's natural gas
4936  2007     requirements from certain prequalified natural gas suppliers under specified
               terms and conditions during calendar years 2006-through 2022 (Repealed by 5384)
4937  3/12/    Amends budget for fiscal year 2006-07 to adjust budgeted revenues and
      2007     expenditures in accordance with recommendations in midyear report (Special)
4938  5/4/2007 Amends 2.23.050, adding subject of recycled water to the purposes and duties of
               the utilities advisory commission (2.23)
               Amends 18.10.070, prohibiting second dwelling units, including airspace rights
4939  5/4/2007 thereto, under different ownership from initial dwelling unit in RMD and R-
               2 zoning districts; also repeals Ord. 4921 (18.10) (Repealed by 5412)
4940  5/19/    Amends zoning map to change zone designation for 4329 El Camino Real from RM-30
      2007     to service commercial zone (Not codified)
4941  5/19/    Amends zoning map to change zone designation for 3981 El Camino Real from RM-30
      2007     and RM-40 to service commercial zone (Not codified)
4942  5/19/    Amends zoning map to change zone designation for 725 San Antonio Avenue from RM-
      2007     20 to neighborhood commercial (CN) (Not codified)
      4/16/    Amends budget for fiscal year 2006-07 to establish CIP PL-07002, El Camino Real/
4943  2007     Stanford Avenue streetscape and intersection improvement project and to provide
               appropriation in amount of $155,000 (Not codified)
      4/16/    Amends budget for fiscal year 2006-07 to establish CIP WS-07001, recycled water
4944  2007     distribution system extension and to provide appropriation in amount of $250,000
               (Not codified)
               Adds Ch. 2.11, Video Service Providers - Applicable Requirements; adds 12.09.020,
               Maps and improvement plans; adds Ch. 12.13, State Video Service Franchisees; also
      5/24/    amends 2.10.060, 12.04.010, 12.04.030, 12.04.040, 12.04.041, 12.04.060,
4945  2007     12.08.010, 12.08.060, 12.09.010, 12.10.050, 12.10.060, 12.16.010, and 12.16.050;
               also provides for future repeal of Ch. 2.10; all pertaining to conformance with
               California Digital infrastructure and Video Competition Act of 2006 (2.10, 2.11,
               12.04, 12.08, 12.09, 12.10, 12.13, 12.16)
      5/21/    Amends budget for fiscal year 2006-07 to provide additional appropriation of
4946  2007     $121,000 from infrastructure reserve into CIP PL-02005, El Camino Real/Ventura
               intersection improvements (Not codified)
4947  6/7/2007 Approves and adopts plan for improvement to Heritage Park (Not codified)
4948  6/21/    Approves and adopts plans for improvements to Peers Park (Not codified)
      2007
4949  6/21/    Approves and adopts plans for improvements to Rinconada Park (Not codified)
      2007
4950  6/21/    Approves and adopts plans for improvements to Timothy Hopkins Creekside Park (Not
      2007     codified)
4951  6/21/    Approves and adopts plans for improvements to Eleanor Pardee Park (Not codified)
      2007
4952  6/21/    Approves and adopts plans for improvements to El Camino Park (Not codified)
      2007
               Authorizes city manager to purchase portion of city's electricity requirements
4953  7/5/2007 from certain prequalified electricity suppliers under specified terms and
               conditions during calendar years 2007-2022, inclusive (Not codified)
4954  6/18/    Adopts budget for fiscal year 2007-2008 and in-concept approval of budget for
      2007     fiscal year 2008-09 (Not codified)
4955  7/19/    Amends 9.48.025, pertaining to sitting or lying on University Avenue public
      2007     sidewalks prohibited (9.48)
4956  7/19/    Amends 18.08.040 (Zoning Map) to change classification of property known as 3401,
      2007     3415 and 3445 Alma Street from PC 1362 to PC 4956 (Rezone)
4957  6/18/    Amends budget for fiscal year 2006-07 to provide additional appropriation to CIP
      2007     WQ-04010, to replace existing reclaimed water pipe (Not codified)
4958  8/18/    Adds Ch. 16.59, Citywide Transportation Impact Fee (16.59)
      2007
               Amends 18.76.020, 18.77.020, 18.77.060 and 18.77.070, to conform code to the
4959  8/9/2007 California Digital Infrastructure and Video Competition Act of 2006; zoning
               (18.76, 18.77)
               Amends budget for fiscal year 2007-08 to accept donation from Friends of Heritage
4960  7/9/2007 Park, LLC and provide additional appropriation to CIP PG-07000, Heritage Park
               playground public/private partnership project (Not codified)
4961  8/27/    Approves and adopts plans for improvements to Don Jesus Ramos Park (Not codified)
      2007
4962  7/23/    Amends budget for fiscal year 2007-08 to provide additional appropriation of
      2007     $93,507 to CIP PE-04011, Cambridge Parking Structure improvements (Not codified)
               Amends budget for fiscal year 2007-08 to provide additional appropriation of
4963  8/6/2007 $2,934,577 to CIP SD-06102, San Francisquito Creek storm water pump station (Not
               codified)
               Adds Chs. 18.13, Multiple Family Residential Districts; 18.28, Special Purpose
               Districts; 18.52, Parking and Loading Requirements; 18.54, Parking Facility
               Design Standards; also adds 18.42.120, Resource conservation energy facilities;
               amends 18.04.010, 18.04.030, Ch. 18.08, 18.10.040, 18.10.090, 18.12.040,
               18.12.050, 18.18.070, 18.32.090, 18.48.040, 18.76.020, 18.98.060 [renumbered as
4964  10/11/   18.80.060], 18.98.080 [renumbered as 18.80.080; also repeals Chs. 18.22, 18.24,
      2007     18.26, 18.32, 18.71, 18.72, 18.83, and 18.87; also makes broader amendments by
               deleting metric references; redesignating the office of zoning administrator as
               director of planning and community environment; and effects reorganization and
               renumbering of other chapters of the zoning ordinance in line with Exhibit
               adopted as part of Ord. 4964 (18.04, 18.08, 18.10, 18.12, 18.13, 18.28, 18.32,
               18.42, 18.48, 18.52, 18.54, 18.76, 18.80)
      10/11/   Amends zoning map to change the zone designation for 4225 Middlefield Road, 4233
4965  2007     Middlefield Road, and 710 San Antonio Road from PC 1561 to CS with an automobile
               dealership combining district (ad) overlay (Rezone)
4966  10/11/   Amends 18.76.020, 18.77.020, 18.77.060 and 18.77.070 to provide additiional
      2007     review criteria addressing sustainability policy and greenbuilding (18.76, 18.77)
4967  10/11/   Approves and adopts park improvement plan for Herbert Hoover Park (Not codified)
      2007
4968  10/11/   Approves and adopts park improvement plan for John Boulware Park (Not codified)
      2007
      10/1/    Amends budget for fiscal year 2007-08 to provide additional appropriation of
4969  2007     $414,700 to CIP WQ-80021, plant equipment replacement, for regional water quality
               control plant (Special)
4970  11/15/   Amends zoning map to change zone designation for 395 Page Mill Road from general
      2007     manufacturing to research, office and limited manufacturing (ROLM) (Not codified)
               Amends budget for fiscal year 2007-08 to accept additional grant funding from
4971  10/22/   state 9-1-1 emergency communications office in amount of $54,000 and provide
      2007     additional appropriation to CIP TE-06002, 9-1-1 emergency phone system upgrade
               (Special)
4972  10/29/   Amends budget for fiscal year 2007-08 to provide additional appropriation of
      2007     $4,000,000 to CIP TE-07006, SAP continuous improvement project (Special)
      11/13/   Amends budget for fiscal year 2007- 08 establishing CIP AS-08000, acquisition of
4973  2007     Los Altos treatment plant site and to provide an initial appropriation of
               $2,670,918 (Special)
4974  11/19/   Amends budget for fiscal year 2007- 08 providing additional appropriation of
      2007     $436,000 to CIP PE-98020, public safety building (Special)
4975  11/26/   Repeals and replaces Ch. 15.04, California Fire Code; adds Ch. 15.05,
      2007     International Fire Code (15.04, 15.05) (Repealed by 5104)
4976  11/26/   Amends Ch. 16.04, California Building Code (16.04) (Repealed by 5099)
      2007
4977  11/26/   Adds Ch. 16.05, California Mechanical Code, (16.05) (Repealed by 5100)
      2007
4978  11/26/   Amends Ch. 16.08, California Plumbing Code, (16.08) (Repealed by 5102)
      2007
4979  11/26/   Amends Ch. 16.16, California Electrical Code (16.16) (Repealed by 5103)
      2007
4980  11/26/   Adds Ch. 16.17, California Energy Code (16.17) (Repealed by 5064)
      2007
4981  12/3/    Adds 9.04.040, certain social gatherings unlawful (9.04)
      2007
      12/3/    Amends budget for fiscal year 2007- 08 authorizing transfer of funds of
4982  2007     $30,000,000 currently set aside in the retiree health benefits internal service
               fund to Calpers to establish an irrevocable trust for retiree benefits (Special)
4983  11/6/    Amends 2.33.020, transient occupancy tax imposed (2.33)
      2007
               Amends budget for fiscal year 2007- 08 to authorize appropriation of funds from
4984  12/17/   budget stabilization reserve of $100,000 to complete cost-benefit analysis and
      2007     encourage public participation in the climate protection plan's proposed actions
               (Special)
      1/14/    Amends budget for fiscal year 2007- 08 providing additional appropriation of
4986  2008     $831,600 to CIP WQ-80021, plant equipment replacement, for regional water quality
               control plant (Special)
4987  1/22/    Closes the budget for fiscal year 2006-07 (Special)
      2008
4988  2/19/    Amends budget for fiscal year 2007- 08 providing additional appropriation of
      2008     $71,556 to CIP PE- 08002, Peers Park improvements (Special)
4989  2/4/2008 Approving and adopting a park improvement plan for Foothills Park (Not codified)
4990  2/4/2008 Amends 2.11.070, public, education and government access channel capacity and
               support (2.11)
4991  2/4/2008 Amends 9.04.010, streets, sidewalks, highways, alleys - consumption of alcoholic
               beverages prohibited (9.04)
      2/19/    Amends budget for fiscal year 2007- 08 to adjust budgeted revenues and
4992  2008     expenditures in accordance with recommendations in the midyear report and
               amendment to the municipal fee schedule (Special)
      3/10/    Rezoning land located at the southwest corner of Caltrans right- of-way at San
4993  2008     Antonio Avenue and U.S. 101 north of the terminus of Transport Road from PF to GM
               (Rezone)
4994  3/10/    Approving and adopting a park improvement plan for Alexander Peers Park (Not
      2008     codified)
4995  3/10/    Amends zoning map to change zone classification of property at 449-451 Addison
      2008     Avenue from R-2 to PC (Rezone)
               Calling special election and submitting a proposition incurring bonded debt for
4996  8/4/2008 the purpose of construction and completion of a new Mitchell Park Library and
               Community Center, renovation and expansion of Main Library, and renovations to
               Downtown Library to qualified voters (Not codified)
4997  8/4/2008 Amends budget for fiscal year 2008- 09 providing an additional appropriation of
               $80,000 to CIP VR-07800, scheduled vehicle and equipment replacements (Special)
4998  8/4/2008 Amends budget for fiscal year 2008- 09 providing additional appropriation of
               $3,436,713 to CIP PF-01002, civic center infrastructure improvements (Special)
               Amends budget for fiscal year 2008- 09 providing additional fiber optics funds
4999  8/4/2008 appropriation of $300,000 for legal and technical consultants to support the
               ultra-high-speed broadband system negotiations (Special)
5000  3/24/    Adds Ch. 18.14, below market rate housing program (18.14) (Repealed by 5408)
      2008
5001  4/14/    Amends budget for fiscal year 2007- 08 providing additional appropriation of
      2008     $40,137 to CIP OS- 07003, open space maintenance shop rehabilitation (Special)
5002  5/12/    Adds Ch. 16.12, recycled water (16.12)
      2008
5003  5/19/    Amends 12.16.020, establishing Underground Utility District No. 45 (12.16)
      2008
5004  6/2/2008 Amends budget for fiscal year 2007- 08 to provide additional appropriation of
               $30,000 to CIP WS-07001, recycled water distribution system extension (Special)
5005  6/2/2008 Amends 21.50.040, 21.50.050, 21.50.070, park land dedication requirement to five
               acres per 1,000 residents (21.50)
5006  6/2/2008 Adds Ch. 18.44, green building regulations (18.44) (Repealed by 5108)
5007  6/2/2008 Amends budget for fiscal year 2007- 2008 to reinstate the deputy city manager
               special projects classification (Special)
               Amends budget for fiscal year 2007- 08 providing additional appropriations of
5008  6/2/2008 $6,350,000 for electric fund supply costs, $1,500,000 for gas fund supply costs,
               and $700,000 for water fund supply costs (Special)
5009  6/9/2008 Adopting the budget for fiscal year 2008-09 (Special)
               Amends budget for fiscal year 2008- 2009 to add one assistant director public
5010  6/9/2008 works position and eliminate one deputy director, public works operation position
               (Special)
5011  7/7/2008 Amends zoning map, changing zone designation of property at 2995 Middlefield Road
               from PC to CN (Rezone)
5012  7/14/    Amends budget for fiscal year 2008- 09 to provide additional appropriation of
      2008     $3,436,981 to CIP PE-98020, public safety building (Special)
5013  9/8/2008 Amends budget for fiscal year 2008- 09 to provide additional appropriation of
               $751,325 to CIP VR-01001, MSC fuel storage tank replacement (Special)
5014  9/8/2008 Amends budget for fiscal year 2008- 09 to provide additional appropriation of
               $200,000 to CIP VR-08000, scheduled vehicle and equipment replacements (Special)
      10/6/    Amends 2.08.210 and 22.04.035, amending employee titles and names of divisions
5015  2008     and reflect titles of employees who are authorized to issue citations,
               respectively (2.08, 22.04)
5016  10/6/    Adds 22.04.342 and 22.04.343, prohibiting the consumption of alcoholic beverages
      2008     in Heritage Park and Eleanor Pardee Park (22.04)
5017  10/6/    Approving and adopting a park improvement plan for Byxbee Park (Not codified)
      2008
               Amends 2.18.030, 2.20.015, 2.21.020, 2.22.015, 2.23.020, 2.24.020, 2.25.020,
5018  10/6/    16.49.030, to reduce the publication of board and commission recruitment ads from
      2008     four advertisements to two advertisements in a two-week period (2.18, 2.20, 2.21,
               2.22, 2.23, 2.24, 2.25, 16.49) (Repealed by 5208)
5019  10/6/    Amends 2.31.010, to allow the donation of surplus property to nonprofit
      2008     organizations (2.31)
      10/6/    Amends budget for fiscal year 2008- 09 to transfer appropriation of $58,920 from
5020  2008     CIP PE-06006, Alma Street landscaping improvements to CIP PE-06005, University
               Avenue gateway landscaping improvements (Special)
5022  12/1/    Amends zoning map, changing zone designation of property at 420 Cambridge Avenue
      2008     from Community Commercial to PTOD (Rezone)
5023  12/1/    Amends 2.28.240, settlement of claims and actions, increase city attorney's
      2008     settlement authority from $10,000 to $35,000 (2.28)
      12/1/    Adds Ch. 16.18, local energy efficiency standards for certain buildings and
5024  2008     improvements covered by the 2005 California Energy Code (16.18) (Repealed by
               5326)
5025  12/8/    Amends budget for fiscal year 2009 to provide an additional appropriation of
      2008     $80,000 to CIP AS- 09000, City of Palo Alto Municipal Airport Transition Project.
5026  2/2/2009 Authorizing closing of the budget for the fiscal year ending June 30, 2008
               (Special)
5027  2/9/2009 Amends budget for fiscal year 2009 to provide additional appropriation of
               $1,453,560 to CIP TE-07006, SAP Continuous Improvement Project (Special)
               Amends budget for fiscal year 2009 to establish CIP PE-09005, Downtown Library
               Improvements, and to provide an appropriation of $411,056; establish CIP PE-
5028  3/2/2009 09006, Mitchell Park Library and Community Center New Construction, and provide
               appropriation of $3,390,309; establish CIP PE-09010, Library and Community Center
               Temporary Facilities and to provide appropriation of $79,525 (Special)
               Amends budget for fiscal year 2009 to transfer appropriation of $20,000 from CIP
5029  3/2/09   OS-00001 (Open Space Trails and Amenities) and $19,332 from CIP OS-09001 (Off
               Road Trails and Pathways) to CIP OS- 07003, Open Space Maintenance Shop
               Rehabilitation (Special)
5030  3/2/2009 Amends budget for fiscal year 2008- 09 to provide appropriation of $2,000,000 for
               acquisition of residential property (Special)
               Amends budget for fiscal year 2008- 09 to provide additional appropriation of
5031  3/2/2009 $300,000 from the Residential Housing Fund for the acquisition of 488 West
               Charleston Road and the development of the site into an affordable housing
               project (Special)
5032  3/30/    Amends Ch. 5.35, retail sales - requirement for paper checkout bags and limited
      2009     prohibition on single-use plastic checkout bags (5.35) (Superseded by 5194)
5033  3/30/    Amends 9.72.070, notice of tenant's rights (9.72)
      2009
      3/30/    Amends zoning map, changing zone designation of property located at 488 West
5034  2009     Charleston Road from PC Planned Community 2565 to PC Planned Community 5034
               (Rezone)
               Amends 18.16.060, hotel regulations; 18.18.060, hotel regulations; 18.30(D).010,
      4/27/    specific purposes, 18.30(D).020, applicability of regulations, 18.30(D).030,
5035  2009     zoning map designation, 18.30(D).040, site development regulations; 18.34.040,
               pedestrian and transit oriented development (PTOD) combining district regulations
               (18.16, 18.18, 18.30(D), 18.34)
               Amends budget for fiscal year 2009 to adjust budgeted revenues and expenditures
5036  4/6/2009 in accordance with the recommendations in the midyear report and amendment to the
               municipal fee schedule (Special)
      4/27/    Amends budget for fiscal year 2008- 09 to provide additional appropriation of
5037  2009     $50,000 within the water enterprise fund for water conservation programs
               (Special)
5038  5/11/    Amends 18.18.070, certification of FAR bonuses (18.18)
      2009
5039  5/11/    Amends Ch. 5.30, expanded polystyrene and non-recyclable food service containers
      2009     (5.30) (Section 5.30.040 repealed by 5473)
5040  6/1/2009 Amends Ch. 5.24, requirements to divert construction and demolition debris from
               landfill (5.24) (Repealed by 5108)
      6/15/    Amends budget for fiscal year 2008- 09 providing an additional appropriation of
5041  2009     $215,000 for the extension of Contract No. C06116197 with Advanced Data
               Processing West, Inc. for ambulance billing services (Special)
5042  6/15/    Adopting the budget for fiscal years 2010 and 2011 (Special)
      2009
5043  6/22/    Amends 16.28.080, specific exemptions (16.28)
      2009
               Amends budget for fiscal year 2010 to provide additional appropriation of
5044  - / - /  $262,017 to CIP WS-07003, WMR Project 21 and provide additional appropriation of
               $24,692 to CIP WS-080017, WMR Project 22 (Special)
5045  7/27/    Amends 2.40.040, contributions and contributors (2.40)
      2009
5046  7/27/    Approving development agreement between the Hewlett-Packard Company and the city
      2009     (Special)
      7/27/    Amends 2.23.010, utilities advisory commission membership, 2.23.030, terms of
5047  2009     utilities advisory commission, 2.23.060, utilities advisory commission meetings
               (2.23)
               Amends the budget for fiscal year 2010 to accept a donation from the Friends of
5048  8/3/2009 Lytton Plaza, LLC, and provides additional appropriations to the Capital
               Improvement Program (CIP) Project PE-08004, Lytton Plaza Renovation (Special)
               Amends the budget for fiscal year 2010 to provide additional appropriations for
5049  8/3/2009 retiree medical expenditures as updated with the retiree medical actuarial study
               completed June 2009 (Special)
5050  9/14/    Approves and adopts a plan for improvements to Lytton Plaza pursuant to Article
      2009     VIII of the Charter and 22.08.005 of the Municipal Code (Special)
               Amends 18.10.130, historical review and incentives, 18.10.060, parking,
5051  8/22/    18.12.060, parking, 18.12.140, historical review and incentives, 18.13.040(c),
      2009     single- family and two-family uses, 21.20.010, general provisions, 21.20.301,
               flag lots (18.10, 18.12, 18.13, 21.20)
5052  9/14/    Amends the budget for fiscal year 2010 to accept Federal American Recovery and
      2009     Reinvestment Act Stimulus funding (Special)
      9/14/    Amends the budget for fiscal year 2010 to provide an additional appropriation to
5053  2009     Capital Improvement Program (CIP) Project PE-09010, library and community center-
               temporary facilities (Special)
      9/21/    Amends the budget for fiscal year 2010 to provide an additional appropriation
5054  2009     within the Electric Fund for incentives to utility customers to install
               photovoltaic systems (Special)
      9/21/    Amends the budget for fiscal year 2010 to provide additional appropriations
5055  2009     within the Residential Parking Permit Program Fund for the implementation of the
               College Terrace Residential Parking Permit Program (RPPP) (Special)
               Amends zoning map, changing designation of property located at 4261 and 4273 El
5056  11/5/    Camino Real from RM-20 Low Density Multiple- Family Residential to Service
      2009     Commercial with Landscape and Site and Design Review Combining Districts (CS(L)
               (D)) (Rezone)
5057  11/5/    Approves and adopts a plan for improvements to Henry W. Seale Park pursuant to
      2009     Article VIII of the Charter and 22.08.005 of the Municipal Code (Special)
5058  11/5/    Approves and adopts a plan for improvement to John Lucas Greer Park pursuant
      2009     Article VIII of the Charter and 22.08.005 of the Municipal Code (Special)
5059  11/5/    Amends 18.04.03, definitions, 21.04.030, definitions, 21.20.240, widths (18.04,
      2009     21.04, 21.20)
5060  11/5/    Repeals Ch. 10.46, residential permit parking; adds new Ch. 10.46, College
      2009     Terrace Residential Parking Permit Program (RPPP) (10.46)
5061  11/5/    Extends automatically by one year the life of currently active specific permits
      2009     pursuant to Title 18 (Uncodified)
      11/5/    Amends 18.28.050 (site development standards), 18.28.060 (additional PF district
5062  2009     regulations), 18.28.070 (additional OS district regulations), 18.28.080
               (additional AC district regulations), 18.28.090 (parking and loading) (18.28)
      10/26/   Amends the budget for fiscal year 2010 to provide an additional appropriation to
5063  2009     Capital Improvement Program (CIP) TE-07006, SAP Continuous Improvement Project
               (Special)
5064  1/1/2010 Repeals existing Ch. 16.17 (California Energy Code) and adds new Ch. 16.17
               (California Energy Code) (Repealed by 5222)
               Amends 18.08.040 (the zoning map), 18.18.050 (land uses), 18.18.060 (restrictions
5065  1/7/2010 on office uses); repeals existing 18.30(C).040 (use exception) and adds new 18.30
               (C).040 (annual monitoring of ground floor retail use)
5066  1/7/2010 Approves and adopts plan for improvement to the Junior Museum and zoo bobcat
               ridge exhibit (Special)
      12/14/   Amends the budget for fiscal year 2010 to provide an additional appropriation
5067  2009     within the Electric Fund to expand commercial energy efficiency programs
               (Special)
      12/14/   Amends the budget for fiscal year 2010 to provide an additional appropriation to
5068  2009     Capital Improvement Program (CIP) Project PE-09010, library and community center
               temporary facilities (Special)
5069  2/11/    Amends zoning map to change classification of property known as 2180 El Camino
      2010     Real from CN to PC (Rezone)
               Amends Chapter 16.18 (Local Energy Efficiency Standards for Certain Buildings and
5070  1/1/2010 Improvements Covered by the California Energy Code, 2008 Edition) (16.18)
               (Repealed by 5326)
5071  1/25/    Amends budget for fiscal year 2010 to reinstate a $809,000 transfer from the
      2010     General Fund Budget Stabilization Reserve to the Technology Fund (Special)
5072  1/25/    Closes budget for the fiscal year ending June 30, 2009 (Special)
      2010
5073  4/8/2010 Amends 21.04.030, definition of private street (21.04)
5074  3/8/2010 Amends budget for fiscal year 2010 providing additional appropriations of $89,196
               within the General Fund for Santa Clara County Registrar of Voters (Special)
               Amends budget for fiscal year 2010 providing additional appropriation of $25,981
5075  4/5/2010 to Capital Improvement Program (CIP) PE-11011, Highway 101 Pedestrian/Bicycle
               Overpass/Underpass Project (Special)
               Amends the budget for fiscal year 2010 to adjust budgeted revenues and
5076  4/5/2010 expenditures in accordance with the recommendations in the midyear report
               (Special)
      4/12/    Amends the budget for fiscal year 2010 providing additional appropriation of
5077  2010     $117,000 to Capital Improvement Program (CIP) WS- 07001, Recycled Water
               Distribution System Extension (Special)
5078  4/19/    Amends 2.28.230, claims; 2.33.110, refunds; 2.34.220, refunds; 2.35.190, refunds
      2010     (2.28, 2.33, 2.34, 2.35)
5079  5/3/2010 Rezoning property located at 1700 Embarcadero Road from PC Planned Community 2378
               and PC Planned Community 2491 to CS and D (Rezone)
5080  5/17/    Approving and adopting a plan for improvements to the Nolte Property Addition to
      2010     Mitchell Park (Special)
5081  5/17/    Amends 2.30.360, exemptions from competitive solicitation requirements (2.30)
      2010
5082  6/7/2010 Authorizing an amendment to the contract with the Board of Administration of the
               California Public Employees' Retirement System (Not codified)
5083  6/7/2010 Approving and adopting a plan for a new greenhouse and shed located in the
               Baylands (Special)
5084  6/21/    Repeals and restates Ch. 16.09, Sewer Use Ordinance (Repealed by 5670) (16.09)
      2010
5085  6/28/    Adopts the budget for fiscal year 2011, and a revised Fee Schedule and Table of
      2010     Organization (Special)
5086  7/26/    Amends budget for fiscal year 2011 providing additional appropriation of $481,266
      2010     to Capital Improvement Program (CIP) Project WQ-10001 (Special)
5087  7/26/    Amends budget for fiscal year 2011 providing additional appropriation of $22,780
      2010     within the General Fund for Santa Clara County Registrar of Voters (Special)
               Amends budget for fiscal year 2011 providing appropriation of $97,134 within the
5088  8/2/2010 Residential Parking Permit Program Fund for the College Terrace Residential
               Parking Permit Program (RPPP) (Special)
5089  8/2/2010 Amends budget for fiscal year 2011 providing appropriation of $69,888 within the
               Special Revenue Parking District Fund (Special)
               Amends 2.16.060, manner of appointment; 2.18.030, manner of appointment;
               2.20.015, manner of appointment; 2.21.020, manner of appointment; 2.22.015,
5090  8/2/2010 manner of appointment; 2.23.020, manner of appointment; 2.24.020, manner of
               appointment; 2.25.020, manner of appointment; 16.49.030, historic resources board
               (2.16, 2.18, 2.20, 2.21, 2.22, 2.23, 2.24, 2.25, 16.49) (Repealed by 5208)
5091  8/2/2010 Amends budget for fiscal year 2011 providing appropriation of $125,000 from the
               General Fund Budget Stabilization Reserve for capital improvements (Special)
5092  9/13/    Amends budget for fiscal year 2011 providing appropriation of $30,000 to Capital
      2010     Improvement Program (CIP) Project PD-08000 (Special)
5093  9/13/    Amends budget for fiscal year 2011 providing appropriation of $275,000 within the
      2010     General Fund (Special)
5094  9/20/    Amends budget for fiscal year 2011 to adopt municipal fee schedule increases for
      2010     the Palo Alto Landfill (Special)
5095  10/18/   Amends 2.08.210, department of community services; amends 22.04.035, enforcement
      2010     (2.08, 22.04)
5096  11/1/    Amends 2.23.050, purpose and duties of utilities advisory commission (2.23)
      2010
5097  11/22/   Adopting a Refuse Enterprise Fund budget amendment to accept landfill operations
      2010     alternative No. 1 (Special)
      11/22/   Amends budget for fiscal year 2011 establishing CIP VR-11000 and transfer
5098  2010     remaining unused appropriation from CIP Projects VR-07800 and VR-08000 of
               $222,205 to VR-11000 (Special)
5099  11/22/   Amends Ch. 16.04 (California Building Code) (16.04) (Repealed by 5216)
      2010
5100  11/22/   Amends Ch. 16.05 (California Mechanical Code) (16.05) (Repealed by 5217)
      2010
5101  11/22/   Adds Ch. 16.06 (California Residential Code) (16.06) (Repealed by 5218)
      2010
5102  11/22/   Amends Ch. 16.08 (California Plumbing Code) (16.08) (Repealed by 5219)
      2010
5103  11/22/   Amends Ch. 16.16 (Electrical Code) (16.16) (Repealed by 5221)
      2010
5104  11/22/   Amends Ch. 15.04 (California Fire Code); amends Ch. 15.05 (International Fire
      2010     Code) (15.04, 15.05) (Repealed by 5223)
5105  12/6/    Amends Zoning Map to change zone designation for 305 Grant Avenue, 2640 and 2650
      2010     Birch Street and 306 and 320 Sheridan Avenue from RM-40 to PTOD (Not codified)
5106  12/6/    Amends budget to fund transition of airport control from the county to the city
      2010     and review of information requested by the Finance Committee (Special)
5107  12/13/   Adds Ch. 16.14 (California Green Building Standards Code) (16.14) (Repealed by
      2010     5220)
               Adds Ch. 5.24 (Construction and Demolition Debris Diversion Facilities); amends
               12.32.040, indoor and outdoor water efficiency; amends 16.11.030, permanent storm
               water pollution prevention measures required (Repealed by 5671); amends
5108  12/13/   16.12.015, compliance with state and local regulations; adds Ch. 18.44 (Green
      2010     Development Regulations); repeals Ch. 5.24 (Requirement to Divert Construction
               and Demolition Debris from Landfill); repeals Ch. 9.06 (Woodburning Fireplaces
               and Appliances) (5.24, 9.06, 12.32, 16.11, 16.12, 18.44) (Ch. 5.24 repealed by
               5472)
      12/13/   Amends budget for fiscal year 2011 accepting a donation of $275,000 from the Palo
5109  2010     Alto Library Foundation; establish CIP Project Number LB-11000; and providing
               appropriation of $275,000 to CIP Project LB-11000 (Special)
5110  1/10/    Amends budget for fiscal year 2011 to provide an additional appropriation of
      2011     $585,517 to CIP Project SD-11101 (Special)
5111  1/10/    Adopting a wastewater enterprise fund budget amendment for fiscal year 2011 to
      2011     transfer appropriation to CIP WC-08012 (Special)
               Amends 16.11.020, definitions for stormwater pollution prevention; amends
               16.11.030, permanent stormwater pollution prevention measures required; amends
5112  1/10/    16.11.031, hydromodification management measures required; adds 16.11.034,
      2011     limitations on use of infiltration devices; adds 16.11.036, required site design
               measures for small projects and detached single-family home projects; adds
               16.11.038, administrative guidelines (Repealed by 5671) (16.11)
5113  1/18/    Amends budget for fiscal year 2011 to provide an additional appropriation of
      2011     $57,761 to CIP Project PG-09002 (Special)
5114  2/7/2011 Authorizing closing of the budget for fiscal year ending 6/30/2010 (Special)
5115  5/2/2011 Amends budget for fiscal year 2011 to provide an additional appropriation of
               $135,618 to CIP Project VR-11000 (Special)
      3/21/    Amends Zoning Map to change the classification of properties known as 4035, 4037,
5116  2011     4039, 4041, 4043, 4045, and 4075 El Camino Way from RM- 15 and CN, to PC Planned
               Community (Not codified)
5117  3/21/    Amends 2.04.270, introducing ordinances and resolutions for passage and approval
      2011     (2.04)
5118  4/11/    Amends budget for fiscal year 2011 to adjust budgeted revenues and expenditures
      2011     in accordance with the recommendation in the midyear report (Special)
5119  4/11/    Amends budget for fiscal year 2011 to provide an additional appropriation of
      2011     $403,267 to CIP Project VR-11000 (Special)
5120  5/16/    Amends budget for fiscal year 2011 to provide an additional appropriation of
      2011     $2,021,068 to CIP Project PE-86070 (Special)
5121  6/20/    Adopting the budget for fiscal year 2012 (Special)
      2011
5122  7/11/    Amends budget for fiscal year 2012 to establish and provide an appropriation in
      2011     the amount of $360,000 to CIP Project PE-12011 (Special)
               Adding 8.10.95, tree removal in HD zone; amending 16.20.160, special purpose
5123  7/11/    signs; amending 18.08.010, designation of general districts; 18.08.040,
      2011     designation and establishment of district; and adding Ch. 18.36, Hospital HD
               district (8.10, 16.20, 18.08, 18.36)
      6/20/    Approving a development agreement between the City and Stanford Hospital and
5124  2011     Clinics; Lucile Salter Packard Children's Hospital at Stanford; and the Board of
               Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University (Special)
5125  7/25/    Amends budget for fiscal year 2012 to provide an additional appropriation of
      2011     $3,545,904 to CIP Project PF-07000 (Special)
5126  9/6/2011 Dissolving the Palo Alto redevelopment agency (Special)
               Amends Zoning Map to change the zone designation of 200 San Antonio Avenue from
5127  9/6/2011 PF Public Facility to the Rolm Research Office Limited Manufacturing Zone
               designation (Special)
5128  9/19/    Amends budget for fiscal year 2012 providing additional appropriation of $52,108
      2011     to Capital Improvement Program (CIP) Project VR-92006 (Special)
      9/19/    Amends budget for fiscal year 2012 to adjust budgeted revenues and expenditures
5129  2011     within the Refuse Fund including refuse rate changes and a short-term loan from
               the General Fund to the Refuse Fund (Special)
5130  10/3/    Amends budget for fiscal year 2012 providing additional appropriation of $204,500
      2011     to Capital Improvement Program (CIP) Project PE-00104 (Special)
5131  6/20/    Adds 2.08.240, department of information technology (2.08)
      2011
5132  11/7/    Amends budget for fiscal year 2012 providing additional appropriation of $65,479
      2011     to Capital Improvement Program (CIP) Project VR-11000 (Special)
5133  11/21/   Amends budget for fiscal year 2012 providing additional appropriation of $111,488
      2011     to Capital Improvement Program (CIP) Project VR-07002 (Special)
      12/5/    Amends budget for fiscal year 2012 providing additional appropriation of
5134  2011     $1,520,426 to fund the implementation of the Blueprint Process Plan for the
               Development Center (Special)
5134A 12/22/   Amends 18.28.040 regarding public/quasi-public facility uses (18.28)
      2011
      12/12/   Amends budget for fiscal year 2012 providing additional appropriation of $425,000
5135  2011     within the Electric Fund for Two City of Palo Alto Utilities Demand-Side
               Management Programs (Special)
5136  1/9/2012 Amends 5.20.270, recycling center (5.20)
               Amends budget for fiscal year 2012 accepting a donation of $1,900,000 from the
      11/19/   Palo Alto Library Foundation; accepting $15,000 from the Pacific Library
5137  2011     Partnership; providing appropriation of $1,400,000 to CIP Project Lb-11000; and
               providing appropriation of $515,000 to the Library Department in the General Fund
               (Special)
5138  1/9/2012 Amends budget for fiscal year 2012 providing additional appropriation of $200,000
               to establish the Utilities Emerging Technology Demonstration Program (Special)
5139  1/23/    Amends budget for fiscal year 2012 providing additional appropriation of $13,600
      2012     to Capital Improvement Program (CIP) Project PO-11000 (Special)
5140  2/6/2012 Approving and adopting a plan for improvements to Juana Briones Park (Special)
5141  1/30/    Authorizing closing of the budget for the fiscal year ending June 30, 2011
      2012     (Special)
5142  2/6/2012 Amends budget for fiscal year 2012 providing additional appropriation of $825,000
               to Capital Improvement Program (CIP) Project EL-11015 (Special)
               Amends budget for fiscal year 2012 eliminating and defunding Capital Improvement
5143  3/5/2012 Program PF-12005 and providing $189,000 to Capital Improvement Program PE-12017
               (Special)
5144  3/5/2012 Amends budget for fiscal year 2012 providing additional appropriation of $276,083
               to Capital Improvement Program VR-11000 (Special)
5145  3/5/2012 Amends budget for fiscal year 2012 providing additional appropriation of $100,000
               (Special)
5146  3/19/    Amends budget for fiscal year 2012 providing an appropriation of $900,000 to
      2012     Capital Improvement Program PE-86070 (Special)
      4/19/    Authorizing an amendment to the contract between the Board of Administration of
5147  2012     the California Public Employees' Retirement System to implement a second tier of
               retirement benefits for new fire employees (Special)
5148  4/19/    Amends 2.30.340, contracts for wholesale utility commodities and 2.30.360,
      2012     exemptions from competitive solicitation requirements (2.30)
5149  4/9/2012 Amending budget for fiscal year 2012 providing an appropriation of $179,000 to
               Capital Improvement Program PE-12011 (Special)
5150  5/10/    Amending zoning map to change the classification of 2080 Channing Avenue
      2012     (Edgewood Plaza) from PC-1643 to PC-5150 (Special)
      4/16/    Amending budget for fiscal year 2012 providing appropriation of $13,500 for
5151  2012     supplies and $57,000 for consulting services for the Office of Emergency
               Services, and $104,000 for Capital Improvement Program VR-11000 (Special)
5152  4/16/    Amending budget for fiscal year 2012 to adjust budgeted revenues and expenditures
      2012     in accordance with the recommendations in the midyear report (Special)
               Approving the third amendment to the development agreement between the Board of
5153  6/7/2012 Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University and the City of Palo Alto dated
               August 14, 1997 (Special)
               Amending the contract between the Board of Administration of the California
5154  6/7/2012 Public Employees' Retirement System to implement a second tier of retirement
               benefits for new fire employees (Special)
5155  4/23/    Amending the budget for fiscal year 2012 providing appropriation of $410,000 with
      2012     the Stanford Research Park/El Camino Fund (Special)
      5-14-    Amending the budget for fiscal year 2012 providing appropriation of $955,320 to
5156  2012     Capital Improvement Program Project Number WQ-80021 plant equipment replacement
               (Special)
      5-21-    Amending the budget for fiscal year 2012 providing appropriation of $249,918 to
5157  2012     Capital Improvement Program Project Number WQ-80021 plant equipment replacement
               (Special)
      6-11-    Amending zoning map to change the classification of 335 Alma Street from CD-N(P)
5158  2012     Downtown Neighborhood Commercial and 355 Alma Street from CD-C(P) Downtown
               Community Commercial to PC Planned Community Zone (PC-5158) (Special)
5159  6-18-    Adopting the budget for fiscal year 2013 (Special)
      2012
               Amending the budget for fiscal year 2013 providing appropriation of $174,157 for
5160  7-2-2012 implementation of an action plan and timeline for consideration of an energy/
               compost facility (Special)
5161  9-4-2012 Amending 4.54.010 - 4.54.210 to implement standardized qualification for massage
               establishments in the city of Palo Alto (4.54)
5162  9-4-2012 Approving and adopting a plan for improvements to Cogswell Plaza (Special)
5163  9-10-    Amending budget for fiscal year 2013 providing appropriation of $191,027 for
      2012     furnishing the second floor of the development center (Special)
5164  9-18-    Amending budget for fiscal year 2013 providing appropriation of $250,000 to
      2012     capital improvement program project number PE-86070, street maintenance (Special)
      9-24-    Amending budget for fiscal year 2013 providing appropriation of $136,000 for
5165  2012     consultant services for continued design concepts and analysis of 27 University
               Avenue (Special)
      10-15-   Amending budget for fiscal year 2013 providing appropriation of $545,338 for
5166  2012     capital improvement project PG-13003 golf course reconfiguration and Baylands
               Athletic Center improvements (Special)
5167  10-15-   Temporary moratorium on the use of exempt floor area parking as contained in
      2012     18.52.060 (Special)
      11-5-    Authorizing an amendment to the contract between the Board of Administration of
5168  2012     the California Public Employees Retirement System to implement a second tier of
               retirement benefits for new police employees (Special)
               Amending budget for fiscal year 2013 providing appropriation of $549,000 for
5169  11-5-    capital improvement project number PE-86070, street maintenance, for surface
      2012     transportation program resurfacing project: Lytton Avenue and Channing Avenue
               (Special)
5170  11-5-    Amending the budget for fiscal year 2013 providing appropriation of $1,000,000
      2012     for a loan commitment for the Stevenson House rehabilitation (Special)
      11-19-   Amending the budget for fiscal year 2013 providing appropriations of $400,000 and
5171  2012     $720,220 to be loaned to Palo Alto Housing Corporation of the acquisition of two
               parcels (Special)
5172  11-19-   Extending Ordinance 5167, temporary moratorium on the use of exempt floor area
      2012     parking as contained in 18.52.060 (Special)
      12-3-    Approving and adopting a park improvement plan for the San Francisquito Creek
5173  2012     Joint Powers Authority Flood Protection Project impacting Palo Alto Municipal
               Golf Course and John Fletcher Byxbee Recreation Area (Special)
5174  12-3-    Amending the budget for fiscal year 2013 providing appropriation of $180,000 for
      2012     project number FD-12000, ALS EKG monitor replacement (Special)
5175  12-3-    Amending 22.04.180, parks and recreation building use and regulations, pertaining
      2012     to amplified noise in Lytton Plaza (22.04)
5176  12-17-   Amending the budget for fiscal year 2013 providing appropriation of $9,291 for
      2012     installation of wi-fi in Cogswell Plaza Park (Special)
      12-17-   Amending the budget for fiscal year 2013 providing appropriation of $90,000 for
5177  2012     public opinion research related to potential infrastructure financing measure
               (Special)
5178  1-14-    Amending the budget for fiscal year 2013 to provide an additional appropriation
      2013     of $167,734 for new landfill gas flare (Special)
5179  1-14-    Amending the budget for fiscal year 2013 to provide an appropriation of $205,150
      2013     for hazardous waste station improvements (Special)
5180  1-14-    Amending 12.16.020 establishing Underground Utility District 47 (12.16)
      2013
      1-14-    Amending the zoning map to change the zone designation for approximately 0.6 acre
5181  2013     at 423-451 Page Mill Road from Single-Family Residential (R-1) to Service
               Commercial (Special)
5182  1-14-    Amending the budget for fiscal year 2013 to provide an additional appropriation
      2013     of $173,231 for the biosolids facility plan project (Special)
5183  1-14-    Amending the budget for fiscal year 2013 to provide an additional appropriation
      2013     of $182,902 for scheduled vehicle and equipment replacements (Special)
5184  2-4-2013 Authorizing closing of the budget for fiscal year 2013 (Special)
5185  2-11-    Amending the budget for fiscal year 2013 to provide an appropriation of $67,000
      2013     for Ventura Community Center and Park (Special)
      2-11-    Amending the budget for fiscal year 2013 to provide additional appropriation of
5186  2013     $95,000 for educational outreach related to potential infrastructure financing
               measure (Special)
5187  3-4-2013 Amending the budget for fiscal year 2013 to provide an appropriation of $468,283
               for scheduled vehicle and equipment replacements (Special)
               Amending the budget for fiscal year 2013 to provide additional appropriation of
5188  3-4-2013 $2,600,000 to amend and increase the existing loan to Palo Alto Housing
               Corporation for the acquisition of two parcels (Special)
5189  3-18-    Amending the budget for fiscal year 2013 to provide an appropriation of
      2013     $2,200,000 for infrastructure maintenance needs (Special)
5190  4-18-    Amending Ch. 2.24 to decrease the number of Library Advisory Commission members
      2013     from seven to five and provide for bi-monthly meetings (2.24) (Repealed by 5498)
      4-16-    Amending the budget for fiscal year 2013 to adjust budgeted revenues and
5191  2013     expenditures in accordance with the recommendations in the midyear report
               (Special)
               Amending the Community Services Department budget for fiscal year 2013 to provide
5192  4-8-2013 an appropriation of $72,029 for children s programs at the Palo Alto Art Center
               (Special)
               Amending the zoning map to add the Ground Floor Combining District to certain CD-
5193  6-6-2013 C(P) and CD-S(P) zoned properties on Emerson Street between Hamilton Avenue and
               Forest Avenue (Special)
5194  7-1-2013 Amending Ch. 5.35 regarding retail and food service establishment checkout bag
               requirements; supersedes Ord. 5032 (5.35) (Section 5.35.040 repealed by 5473)
      5-20-    Amending the budget for fiscal year 2013 to provide an appropriation of
5195  2013     $3,869,063 to capital improvement program project number PE-11000, Main Library
               new construction and improvements (Special)
               Amending the budget for fiscal year 2013 to provide an appropriation of $167,000
5196  6-3-2013 to capital improvement project number PE-12011, Newell Road/San Francisquito
               Creek Bridge replacement (Special)
5197  6-17-    Amending the budget for fiscal year 2014 to provide an appropriation of
      2013     $226,838.95 from the budget stabilization reserve for park maintenance (Special)
               Amending the zoning map to change the zone designation for approximately 1.57
5198  7-18-    acres at 50 El Camino Real, from Community Commercial with a Landscape Combining
      2013     District (CC(L)) to Public Facility with a Site and Design Combining District (PF
               (D)) (Special)
5199  6-13-    Adopting the budget for fiscal year 2014 (Special)
      2013
               Amending the zoning map to change the classification of property located at 567-
5200  7-29-    595 Maybell Avenue from R-2 Low Density Residential and RM-20 Multiple Family
      2013     Residential to PC Planned Community Zone No. 5200 for 12 single family units and
               a 60 unit multifamily affordable rental development for seniors overlay (Special)
5201  7-25-    Adopting a plan for improvements to Eleanor Pardee Park (Special)
      2013
5202  7-25-    Adopting a plan for improvements to El Palo Alto Park (Special)
      2013
5203  8-12-    Amending budget for the fiscal year 2014 to provide an appropriation of $111,091
      2013     in the Community Development Block Grant (Special)
5204  8-19-    Adding Chapter 2.06 restricting the use of the City Seal and other city logos
      2013     (2.06)
5205  8-19-    Adding Ch. 2.49 regarding authorizing electronic signatures on documents used and
      2013     accepted by the city (2.49)
5206  8-19-    Adding Ch. 9.06 prohibiting human habitation of vehicles (Repealed by Ord. 5286)
      2013
5207  9-9-2013 Adding 9.14.005 and 9.14.035, and amending 9.14.010 regarding smoking and tobacco
               regulations (9.14)
               Amending 2.16.010, 2.16.060, 2.20.020, 2.20.030, 2.21.010, 2.22.020, 2.23.030,
               2.24.030 and 2.25.030, deleting 2.18.030, 2.20.015, 2.20.040, 2.21.020, 2.22.015,
5208  9-9-2013 2.23.020, 2.24.020, 2.25.020, and 16.49.030, and adding 2.16.070, 2.21.025, and
               Ch. 2.27 regarding recruitment process for various city boards and commissions
               (2.16, 2.18, 2.20, 2.21, 2.22, 2.23, 2.24, 2.25, 2.27, 16.49) (5.24.030 repealed
               by 5498)
      9-30-    Amending Ch. 9.06 Public Peace, Morals and Safety to add 9.06.020 regarding use
5209  2013     of community facilities prohibited from 10:30 p.m. to sunrise (9.06) (Superseded
               by 5215)
5210  9-9-2013 Amending budget for the fiscal year 2014 to provide an appropriation of $585,000
               from the budget stabilization reserve for special election costs (Special)
5211  9-16-    Amending budget for the fiscal year 2014 to provide additional appropriation of
      2013     $16,940 for incident command training for fire department personnel (Special)
      9-23-    Amending budget for the fiscal year 2014 to increase the public safety computer
5212  2013     aided dispatch replacement capital improvement project in the amount of $100,000
               (Special)
5213  11-4-    Amending 18.52.060 regarding exemptions to parking and loading requirements
      2013     (18.52)
5214  11-4-    Amending 18.18.070, 18.18.080, 18.18.090, and 18.52.070 to eliminate certain
      2013     parking exemptions within the Downtown Area (18.18, 18.52)
5215  12-13-   Adding Ch. 9.64 regarding regulation of community facilities (9.64)
      2013
5216  11-18-   Repeals and replaces Ch. 16.04, California Building Code (16.04)
      2013
5217  11-18-   Repeals and replaces Ch. 16.05, California Mechanical Code (16.05)
      2013
5218  11-18-   Repeals and replaces Ch. 16.06, California Residential Code (16.06)
      2013
5219  11-18-   Repeals and replaces Ch. 16.08, California Plumbing Code (16.08)
      2013
5220  11-18-   Repeals and replaces Ch. 16.14, California Green Building Standards Code (16.14)
      2013     (Repealed by 5324)
5221  11-18-   Repeals and replaces Ch. 16.16, California Electrical Code (16.16)
      2013
5222  11-18-   Repeals and replaces Ch. 16.17, California Energy Code (16.17) (Repealed by 5326)
      2013
      11-18-   Repeals and replaces Title 15, Fire Prevention; adopts 2013 Edition of the
5223  2013     California Fire Code (15.04), and 2012 Edition of the International Fire Code
               (15.05)
5224  11-18-   Amends 18.08.040 (Zoning Map) to change the classification of property at 2080
      2013     Channing Avenue to PC Planned Community Zone (Rezone)
5225  11-18-   Amends budget for the fiscal year 2014 to provide an additional appropriation of
      2013     $125,000 for replenishment of City Council Contingency Fund (Special)
5226  12-2-    Adds Ch. 16.61 regarding public art for private developments (16.61)
      2013
      1-13-    Amends 16.04.090 regarding local amendments to California Building Code; adopts
5227  2014     Ch. 16.62 regarding expired permits for residential construction and demolition
               (16.04, 16.62)
5228  1-13-    Adds 16.14.370 regarding electric vehicle charging (16.14)
      2014
      1-27-    Amends budget for the fiscal year 2014 to provide an additional appropriation of
5229  2014     $98,050 from the budget stabilization reserve for a total compensation market
               study for the management and professional classifications (Special)
5230  1-27-    Amends 18.04.030, 18.16.060, and 18.20.030, and adds Ch. 18.46 to implement the
      2014     adopted 2007-2014 Housing Element (18.04, 18.16, 18.20, 18.46)
5231  1-27-    Adds Ch. 18.15 regarding Residential Density Bonus (18.15)
      2014
5232  2-24-    Approves and adopts a plain of improvements for te reconfiguration of the Palo
      2014     Alto Municipal Golf Course (Special)
               Amends budget for the fiscal year 2014 to provide additional appropriation of
5233  2-24-    $120,000 for the provision of a parking attendant program ($104,420) and
      2014     assistance to the city for technology solutions around parking management
               ($15,580); and an increase to the budgeted revenue estimate ($19,500) (Special)
      2-24-    Amends budget for the fiscal year 2014 to provide additional appropriation of
5234  2014     $5,067,906 in the California Avenue Transit Hub Corridor Streetscape Improvements
               Project for streetscape and utility improvements (Special)
               Amends budget for the fiscal year 2014 to provide additional appropriation of
5235  3-3-2014 $175,000 in the Residential Housing In-lieu Fee Fund for litigation services
               (Special)
5236  2-24-    Authorizes closing of the budget for fiscal year ending June 30, 2013 (Special)
      2014
5237  3-17-    Amends budget for the fiscal year 2014 to increase revenue estimates for Citizen
      2014     Options for Public Safety Funds by $105,890 (Special)
      3-17-    Amends budget for the fiscal year 2014 to provide an appropriation of $335,000 to
5238  2014     capital improvement program project PE-13011, the Charleston/Arastradero Corridor
               Project (Special)
      3-17-    Amends budget for the fiscal year 2014 to provide additional appropriation of
5239  2014     $200,000 in the General Fund for additional services associated with the
               Comprehensive Plan Amendment Project (Special)
               Amends budget for the fiscal year 2014 to provide an appropriation of $2,257,200
5240  4-7-2014 to capital improvement program project WQ-80021, Plant Equipment Replacement
               Project (Special)
5241  5-8-2014 Approving and adopting a plan for improvements to Scott Park (Special)
               Amends budget for the fiscal year 2014 to provide an appropriation of $880,271 to
5242  4-7-2014 capital improvement program project SD-10101, Southgate Neighborhood Storm Drain
               Improvements Project (Special)
      4-29-    Amends budget for the fiscal year 2014 to provide additional appropriation of
5243  2014     $100,000 in the General Fund for additional services associated with the golf
               course (Special)
               Amends budget for the fiscal year 2014 to adjust budgeted revenues and
5244  5-5-2014 expenditures in accordance with the recommendations in the midyear report
               (Special)
5245  5-19-    Amends budget for the fiscal year 2014 to increase the appropriation for the
      2014     Magical Bridge Playground Project (PE-12013) by $150,000 (Special)
               Amends budget for the fiscal year 2014 to accept a donation of $2,821,471 from
      5-19-    the Friends of the Magical Bridge, LLC and recognize a Transportation Development
5246  2014     Act grant from the Metropolitan Transportation Commission of $82,712; increases
               to projects PG-12006, Magical Bridge Playground of $1,874,183 and AC-86017, Art
               in Public Places of $30,000 (Special)
5247  5-19-    Amends budget for the fiscal year 2014 for increase of $80,000 to capital
      2014     improvements project LB-11000, Library Projects Capital Project (Special)
5248  6-19-    Adds 6.16.101 regarding veterinarian responsibilities (6.16)
      2014
5249  7-3-2014 Adds 2.40.065 regarding electronic filing of campaign statements (2.40)
5250  7-3-2014 Amends 2.04.010 regarding regular meeting time of council (2.04)
5251  9-4-2014 Adds 2.08.250 creating a Department of Development Services (2.08) (Repealed by
               5494)
5252  7-17-    Approving and adopting a plan for improvements to Mitchell Park (Special)
      2014
      6-16-    Amends budget for fiscal year 2014 to provide additional appropriation of
5253  2014     $200,000 in the Residential Housing In-Lieu Fee Fund for the HTSV Affordable
               Housing Grant Program (Special)
5254  6-16-    Amends budget for fiscal year 2014 to provide additional appropriation of
      2014     $1,607,109 in the First Floor Renovation Project (PE-12017) (Special)
5255  6-16-    Adopting the budget for fiscal year 2015 (Special)
      2014
5256  7-24-    Approving and adopting a plan for improvements to Hopkins Park (Special)
      2014
      6-23-    Amends budget for the fiscal year 2014 to provide for additional appropriation of
5257  2014     $75,000 in the Stanford Research Park Traffic Impact Fee Fund and $25,000 in the
               Citywide Traffic Impact Fee Fund (Special)
      6-23-    Amends General Fund budget for fiscal year 2015 in increase revenue estimates
5258  2014     from other agencies in the amount of $221,239 for the Palo Alto Shuttle Program
               (Special)
5259  7-24-    Amends 22.04.270 to prohibit feeding of wildlife and feral animals in city parks
      2014     (22.04)
5260  6-24-    Amends 2.08.190 regarding the Department of Public Works (2.08)
      2014
      6-23-    Amends budget for fiscal year 2015 to provide an additional appropriation of
5261  2014     $2,501,569 to Capital Improvement Program Project Number PG-13003, Golf Course
               Reconfiguration and Baylands Athletic Center Improvements Project (Special)
5262  6-23-    Amends the General Fund budget for fiscal year 2015 to increase golf course
      2014     revenue estimates by $324,800 (Special)
5263  9-4-2014 Amends 16.15.370, and adds 16.14.380 regarding electric vehicles (16.14)
               Amends budget for fiscal year 2015 in the Capital Improvement Fund; establishing
5264  8-4-2014 new capital project, Emergency Facility Improvements in the amount of $250,000
               (Special)
               Amends budget for fiscal year 2015 to reduce the Transportation Management
5265  8-11-    Association Non-Departmental Reserve by $150,000; reduce the General Fund budget
      2014     stabilization reserve by $30,000; increase the Planning and Community Environment
               Department appropriation by $180,000 (Special)
      8-18-    Amends budget for fiscal year 2015 in the General Fund, Electric Operating Fund,
5266  2014     Gas Operating Fund, Wastewater Collection Fund, Water Fund, Refuse Fund, Storm
               Drainage Fund; Wastewater Treatment Fund, and Vehicle Replacement Fund (Special)
5267  10-9-    Amends 12.04.020, 12.04.030, 12.04.040 and 12.20.010 regarding the Palo Alto
      2014     Airport (12.04, 12.20)
5268  10-9-    Adds 22.08.410 and Ch. 22.08 Exhibit A-28 in order to reserve Lee Property for a
      2014     park (22.08)
               Amends budget for fiscal year 2015 to provide additional appropriation of
5269  9-8-2014 $200,000 from the Residential Housing In-Lieu Fund for a loan to the Palo Alto
               Housing Corporation (Special)
5270  9-22-    Amends budget for fiscal year 2015 in the Airport Enterprise Fund, increasing the
      2014     allocation for contractual legal services in the amount of $200,000 (Special)
5271  9-22-    Amends the General Fund budget for fiscal year 2015 to increase golf course
      2014     revenue estimates by $708,495 (Special)
      9-22-    Amends budget for fiscal year 2015 in the General Fund, Refuse Fund, University
5272  2014     Avenue Parking Permit Fund, California Avenue Parking Permit Fund, and Vehicle
               Replacement Fund (Special)
5273  10-6-    Amends budget for fiscal year 2015 in the General Fund; estimate for rental
      2014     income revenue will be reduced by $23,400 (Special)
5274  11-6-    Amends 2.08.090 and 2.08.150 regarding fiscal procedures and repeals 2.08.145
      2014     regarding consultation with City Auditor (2.08)
5275  10-20-   Amends the General Fund budget for fiscal year 2015 to increase revenue estimates
      2014     from permits and fees in the amount of $250,000 (Special)
5276  11-20-   Amends 12.16.020 to establish Underground Utility District No. 46 (12.16)
      2014
      10-27-   Amends budget for fiscal year 2015 in the Airport Enterprise Fund, establishing
5277  2014     the Runway and Taxiway Rehabilitation Project (AP-15003) in the amount of
               $540,000 (Special)
      10-27-   Amends budget for fiscal year 2015 to provide additional appropriation of
5278  2014     $200,000 in the Residential Housing In-Lieu Fee Fund (Fund 233) for the HTSV
               Affordable Housing Grant Program (Special)
5279  12-4-    Adds Ch. 4.60 regarding business registration program (4.60)
      2014
5280  12-4-    Approving and adopting plans for sports-related improvements and associated
      2014     facilities located within El Camino Park (Special)
5281  12-4-    Amends 2.08.130 regarding the duties of the City Auditor (2.08)
      2014
5282  11-10-   Amends the budget for fiscal year 2015 to provide additional appropriation of
      2014     $80,280 in the General Benefits Fund for Trial Caltrain Go Pass Program (Special)
5283  10-6-    Amends the General Fund budget for fiscal year 2015 to increase revenue estimates
      2014     from permits and fees in the amount of $250,000 (Special)
5284  11-17-   Amends budget for fiscal year 2015 in the Capital Improvement Fund for the
      2014     traffic signal and its upgrade project in the amount of $915,603 (Special)
      10-20-   Amends the budget for the fiscal year 2015 in the Water Fund to provide
5285  2014     appropriation of $100,000 to execute two Water Conservation Pilot Programs
               (Special)
5286  1-1-2015 Repeals 9.06.010 regarding human habitation of vehicles (9.06)
      12-1-    Amends budget for fiscal year 2015 in the Capital Improvement Fund, increasing
5287  2014     the Rinconada Park Master Plan and Design Project (PE-12003) in the amount of
               $109,817 (Special)
      12-8-    Amends budget for fiscal year 2015 to provide additional appropriation of
5288  2014     $600,000 from the Residential Housing In-Lieu Fund for a loan to the Palo Alto
               Housing Corporation for property at 2811-2825 Alma Street (Special)
5289  12-8-    Amending the Table of Organization for fiscal year 2015 to reflect new and
      2014     amended classifications (Special)
5290  12-8-    Amends Ch 2.33 regarding transient occupancy tax (2.33)
      2014
5291  12-8-    Amends Ch. 2.35 regarding utility users tax (2.35)
      2014
5292  12-15-   Amends budget for fiscal year 2015 in the Capital Improvement Fund to increase
      2014     the El Camino Park Restoration Project (PE-13016) by $1,343,047 (Special)
5293  12-15-   Amends budget for fiscal year 2015 in the Technology Fund to provide
      2014     appropriation of $291,617 for Microsoft licenses (Special)
      1-15-    Adds Ch. 10.50 to establish residential preferential parking districts; add
5294  2015     10.04.086 and 10.08.015 and amends 10.60.010 regarding parking enforcement
               contractor (10.04, 10.08, 10.50)
      1-12-    Amends budget for fiscal year 2015 in the Electric Fund to provide an
5295  2015     appropriation of $500,000 to the Electric Operating Maintenance budget for
               electric overhead construction services (Special)
      1-12-    Amends budget for fiscal year 2015 in the Wastewater Treatment Fund, reducing the
5296  2015     Plant Equipment Replacements project (WQ-80021) and increasing the Biosolids
               Facility project (WQ-14001) by $1,942,651 (Special)
      1-12-    Amends budget for fiscal year 2014 to provide additional appropriation of
5297  2015     $150,000 in the Residential Housing In-Lieu Fee Fund for litigation services
               (Special)
5298  2-20-    Adopts a plan for improvements to Bowden Park (Special)
      2015
      1-26-    Amends budget for fiscal year 2015 to increase revenue estimates for citizen
5299  2015     options for public safety (COPS) funds in the supplemental law enforcement
               services (SLES) special revenue fund by $105,587 (Special)
5300  6-11-    Amends Ch. 9.14 regarding smoking and tobacco regulations (9.14) ( 9.14.080
      2015     repealed by 5418)
5301  3-5-2015 Adds 2.26.070 regarding public art for municipal projects (2.26)
      2-2-     Amends budget for fiscal year 2015 in the Fiber Optics Fund to provide
5302  201515   appropriation of $276,594 for a fiber-to-the premise master plan and a
               complementary wireless network plan (Special)
               Amends General Fund budget for fiscal year 2015 to increase golf course revenue
5303  2-9-2015 estimates by $106,000, provide an additional appropriation of $289,424 in the
               Community Services Department budget for golf course operations, and reduce the
               FY 2016 golf course operating loss reserve by $183,424 (Special)
5304  3-12-    Amends 2.04.350 and 2.04.360 regarding council salaries and expense allowances
      2015     (2.04)
      2-23-    Amends budget for fiscal year 2015 to provide additional appropriation of $30,000
5305  2015     in the University Avenue Parking Permit Fund for the continuing provision of a
               parking attendant program (Special)
               Amends budget for fiscal year 2015 to provide additional appropriation of
5306  3-2-2015 $157,525 to the Planning and Community Environment Department Fund to provide
               additional contract services for a fiscal impact analysis related to the
               comprehensive plan update (Special)
               Amends budget for fiscal year 2015 to provide additional appropriation of
5307  3-9-2015 $104,600 to transfer from the University Avenue Parking Permit Fund to the
               Capital Improvement Fund for the Parking Wayfinding project (PL- 15004) (Special)
               Amends budget for fiscal year 2015 in the General Fund, increasing the Public
5308  3-9-2015 Works Department budget by $160,490 to support contractual street tree pruning
               (Special)
               Amends budget for fiscal year 2015 to establish a new capital project in the
5309  3-9-2015 amount of $368,500 in the Capital Improvement Fund for a Residential Preferential
               Parking project (PL-15003) (Special)
5310  3-9-2015 Authorizes closing of the budget for the fiscal year ending June 30, 2014
               (Special)
5311  4-9-2015 Amends 2.16.070, 2.20.020, 2.21.025, 2.25.030 and 2.27.020 to change the start of
               terms on certain boards and commissions (2.16, 2.20, 2.21, 2.25, 2.27)
5312  3-9-2015 Amends the Table of Organization for fiscal year 2015 to incorporate technical
               corrections (Special)
      3-16-    Amends budget for fiscal year 2015 in the Water Fund to provide an appropriation
5313  2015     of $400,000 to amend the memo of understanding with Santa Clara Valley Water
               District to participate in water conservation programs (Special)
5314  3-23-    Amends budget for fiscal year 2015 to provide additional appropriation of
      2015     $387,000 in the Refuse Fund for the residential food scraps program (Special)
               Amends budget for fiscal year 2015 in the Capital Improvement Fund, increasing
5315  4-6-2015 the estimate for local revenue in Street Maintenance Project (PE-86070) in the
               amount of $40,000 for accessibility improvements to the Palo Alto Baylands Sail
               Station (Special)
               Amends budget for fiscal year 2015 to provide additional appropriation of $15,000
5316  4-6-2015 from the University Avenue Parking Permit Fund and an additional appropriation of
               $15,000 to the Planning and Community Services Department for on-call traffic
               data collection services (Special)
               Amends budget for fiscal year 2015 to provide additional appropriation of
5317  4-6-2015 $175,000 from the Stanford Medical Center Development Agreement Fund to the
               Community Services Department Project Safety Net Program to provide for
               additional contract services for the Track Watch program (Special)
      4-13-    Amends budget for fiscal year 2015 in the Capital Improvement Fund, increasing
5318  2015     the Newell Road/San Francisquito Creek Bridge Replacement project (PE-12011) in
               the amount of $668,000 (Special)
               Amends budget for fiscal year 2015 to provide additional appropriation of $72,043
      4-13-    from the Budget Stabilization Reserve in amounts set forth herein to Fund 239
5319  2015     Downtown Residential Parking Permit Program and the Planning and Community
               Environment Department to create a new public parking website and develop an
               online permit sales portal for the Downtown RPP District (Special)
5320  5-14-    Adds 16.58.080 and renames Ch. 16.58 regarding development impact fees (16.58)
      2015
5321  4-20-    Amends budget for fiscal year 2015 to adjust budgeted revenues and expenditures
      2015     in accordance with the recommendations in the midyear report (Special)
      4-20-    Amends budget for fiscal year 2015 to provide an additional appropriation of
5322  2015     $1,000,000 in the Residential Housing In-Lieu Fund for the Stevenson House
               Rehabilitation Project (Special)
               Amends budget for fiscal year 2015 to increase the Parking Guidance Systems,
5323  5-4-2015 Access Controls, and Revenue Collection Equipment project (PL-15002) by $171,760
               in the Capital Improvement Fund (Special)
5324  6-11-    Repeals and replaces Ch. 16.14, California Green Building Standards Code (16.14)
      2015
      5-11-    Adds Ch. 18.85, Interim Zoning Ordinances; temporary moratorium conversion of
5325  2015     ground floor retail and retail like uses to other uses (18.85) (Superseded by
               5407)
      6-11-    Repeals and replaces Ch. 16.17, California Energy Code; Repeals Ch. 16.18, Local
5326  2015     Energy Efficiency Standards for Certain Buildings and Improvements Covered by the
               California Energy Code (Repealed by 5345)
5327  5-18-    Amends budget for fiscal year 2015 to increase the Streetlight Conversion capital
      2015     improvement project (EL-10009) in the Electric Fund by $184,510 (Special)
5328  6-15-    Amends budget for fiscal year 2015 to increase revenue estimates for the grants
      2015     and contributions in the Community Services Department by $64,100 (Special)
5329  6-15-    Adopting the budget for fiscal year 2016 (Special)
      2015
      6-25-    Extending urgency interim Ord. 5325, codified in Ch. 18.85, adopting a temporary
5330  2015     moratorium on the conversion of ground floor retail and retail like uses to other
               uses citywide; Temporary - expires 4-30-2017 (18.85) (Superseded by 5407)
      6-22-    Amends budget for fiscal year 2015 in the Commercial Housing In-Lieu Fund to
5331  2015     recognize $73,000 in additional proceeds from the sale of property located at
               1259 Pine Street (Special)
5332  6-22-    Amends budget for fiscal year 2015 in the Technology Fund to increase the Radio
      2015     Infrastructure Replacement Project (Te- 0500) by $1,000,000 (Special)
               Amends budget for fiscal year 2015 in the Capital Improvement Fund and the
               General Fund to recognize $2,880,000 in transfer development rights revenue in
5333  6-29-    the Capital Improvement Fund, reduce the budget stabilization reserve in the
      2015     amount of $1,000,000 in the General Fund and transfer that amount to the Capital
               Improvement Fund, and establish a Roth Building Rehabilitation Reserve in the
               amount of $3,880,000 in the Capital Improvement Fund (Special)
5334  6-29-    Amends budget for fiscal year 2015 to increase the Water Regulation System
      2015     Improvements Project (WS-0700) by $786,375 (Special)
      6-29-    Amends budget for fiscal year 2016 for the Business Improvement District Fund to
5335  2015     reduce revenue estimates for assessments by $40,000 and reduce expenditures by
               $11,800 (Special)
5336  6-29-    Amends budget for fiscal year 2016 to provide a transfer from the General Fund in
      2015     the amount of $378,000 to the Downtown Residential Parking Permit Fund (Special)
      8-17-    Amends budget for fiscal year 2016 by transferring $29,432 from the General Fund
5337  2015     Budget Stabilization Reserve to the Planning and Community Environment Department
               for a seismic inventory study (Special)
               Amends budget for fiscal year 2016 to increase revenue estimates for grants in
5338  8-17-    the Planning and Community Environment Department by $37,000 with a corresponding
      2015     increase to the expenditure allocation for the Planning and Community Environment
               Department of $37,000 in the General Fund (Special)
               Amends budget for fiscal year 2016 to increase revenue estimates for increased
      9-17-    education and enforcement of overservice/overconsumption of alcohol from the
5339  2015     State of California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control in the General Fund
               by $41,053 with a corresponding increase to the overtime expenditure allocation
               for the Police Department of $41,053 in the General Fund (Special)
5340  9-24-    Repeals and replaces 18.42.110, Wireless Communication Facilities (18.42)
      2015
      8-24-    Amends budget for fiscal year 2016 to provide an additional appropriation of
5341  2015     $390,400 from the Stanford Medical Center Development Agreement Fund to the
               Community Services Department Project Safety Net Program (Special)
5342  10-1-    Approving and adopting a Plan of Improvement for two batting cages located at the
      2015     former PASCO Site at the Baylands Athletic Center (Special)
5343  10-1-    Approving and adopting a Plan for Improvements to Monroe Park (Special)
      2015
5344  10-1-    Approving and adopting a Plan of Improvement for Byxbee Park Hills (Special)
      2015
5345  10-1-    Repeals and replaces Ch. 16.17, California Energy Code (Repealed by 5383)
      2015
               Amends budget for fiscal year 2016 to provide an additional appropriation of
5346  9-15-    $482,612 from the General Fund Budget Stabilization Reserve to the Planning and
      2015     Community Environment Department for additional funding to support the
               Comprehensive Plan update (Special)
               Amends budget for fiscal year 2016 to increase revenue estimates for grants in
5347  9-15-    the Community Services Department by $43,125 with a corresponding increase to the
      2015     expenditure allocation for the Community Services Department of $43,125 in the
               General Fund (Special)
               Amends budget for fiscal year 2016 to increase the Embarcadero Road Improvements
5348  10-5-    Project (PL-15001) in the Capital Improvement Fund in the amount of $337,766, to
      2015     be offset by a reduction to the infrastructure reserve of $235,615 and by revenue
               from the Ellis Partners deposit account of $102,151 (Special)
5349  11-5-    Amends 2.04.160, regarding City Council minutes (2.04)
      2015
      10-19-   Amends budget for fiscal year 2016 for the Vehicle Replacement Fund to increase
5350  2015     the scheduled vehicle and equipment replacement - fiscal year 2015 project (VR-
               15000) by $146,394 (Special)
      10-19-   Amends budget for fiscal year 2016 for the Vehicle Replacement Fund to increase
5351  2015     the scheduled vehicle and equipment replacement - fiscal year 2015 project (VR-
               15000) by $500,471, offset by a transfer from the General Fund (Special)
               Amends budget for fiscal year 2016 in the Electric Fund to provide an
      10-19-   appropriation of $1,000,000 to the Electric Operating Maintenance Budget for the
5352  2015     amendment of a construction services contract to Pacheco Line Builders, Inc. for
               electric overhead construction services, offset by a reduction to the Electric
               Distribution Fund Operations Reserve (Special)
5353  11-19-   Adds Ch. 16.63, regarding small residential rooftop solar systems (16.63)
      2015
5355  11-19-   Adds Ch. 4.62, Citywide minimum wage (4.62)
      2015
5356  11-26-   Amends 18.18.070, 18.18.080, 18.18.090, 18.52.070, regarding parking exemptions
      2015     (18.18, 18.52)
5357  11-26-   Adds 18.85.210 through 18.85.270, regarding annual office limits, includes a
      2015     sunset clause (18.85) (Repealed by 5439)
      11-26-   Amends 18.04.030, 18.08.040, 18.30(A).040, 18.30(A).050, 18.30(A).060; adds 18.30
5358  2015     (A).070 and 18.76.015, regarding retail zoning regulations for the CC2 District
               (18.04, 18.08, 18.30(A), 18.76)
5354  11-19-   Amends 2.16.070, 2.18.040, 2.22.020, 2.23.030, 2.24.030 regarding term dates for
      2015     commissioners (2.16, 2.18, 2.22, 2.23, 2.24) (2.24.030 repealed by 5498)
5359  12-17-   Amends Ch. 18.79 regarding development project preliminary review procedures
      2015     (18.79)
5360  12-17-   Amends 2.28.080 regarding amendments after adoption of fiscal procedures (2.28)
      2015
5361  11-16-   Authorizing reappropriation of fiscal year 2015 funds to fiscal year 2016
      2015     (Special)
               Amends budget for fiscal year 2016 to provide an additional appropriation of
5362  11-16-   $328,715 from the Stanford Medical Center Development Agreement Fund to the
      2015     Community Services Department Project Safety Net Program to provide for track
               watch contract security services along the Caltrain Corridor (Special)
               Amends 18.08.040 (Zoning Map) to change the classification of properties on Ames
5363  12-31-   Ave., Holly Oak Dr., Cork Oak Way, and Middlefield Rd., a portion of that
      2015     property known as Los Arboles, Tract #2396, from R-1(7,000) to R-1(7,000)-S, and
               the properties at 767 and 771 Holly Oak Dr. from R-1 to R-1(s) (Rezone)
      11-30-   Amends budget for fiscal year 2016 in the Fiber Optic Fund to provide an
5364  2015     appropriation of $172,850 to the Fiber Optics Fund budget to fund a temporary
               project manager consultant (Special)
      12-7-    Amends budget for fiscal year 2016 to provide additional appropriation of
5365  2015     $203,561 from the Residential Housing In-Lieu Fund for a loan to the Palo Alto
               Housing Corporation (PAHC) for the Colorado Apartments rehabilitation (Special)
      12-14-   Amends General Fund budget for fiscal year 2015 to increase golf course revenue
5366  2015     estimates by $600,956 and provide an additional appropriation of $600,956 in the
               Community Services Department budget for golf course operations (Special)
5367  12-14-   Amends budget for fiscal year 2016 in the Airport Enterprise Fund for various
      2015     projects (Special)
               Amends budget for fiscal year 2016 to provide an additional appropriation of
5368  12-14-   $32,100 to the Office of Sustainability Department to provide additional contract
      2015     services in development of the Sustainability Climate Action Plan (S/CAP)
               (Special)
               Amends budget for fiscal year 2016 to provide a supplemental appropriation in the
               amount of $53,913 for the Infrastructure Management System (TE-13004) Project
5369  12-14-   offset with a reduction of $32,348 from the Capital Improvement Fund
      2015     infrastructure reserve and a $21,565 transfer from the General Fund budget
               stabilization reserve for a new project manager position in the Public Works
               Department (Special)
               Amends budget for fiscal year 2016 to provide an additional appropriation of
5370  1-11-    $145,000 from the budget stabilization reserve to the Development Services
      2016     Department to provide additional resources for the electrification feasibility
               study (Special)
5371  2-12-    Amends Ch. 5.30 regarding plastic foam and non-recyclable food service containers
      2016     and packaging items (5.30) (Section 5.30.040 repealed by 5473)
      2-12-    Amends 18.08.040 (Zoning Map) to change the classification of certain properties
5372  2016     on Greer Road, Amarillo Avenue, Metro Circle and Moffett Circle, a portion of
               that property known as Greer Park, Tract #796, from R-1 to R-1-S
               Amends 16.20.010, 16.20.070, 16.20.140, 16.20.180, 16.20.210, 16.20.240,
               16.20.270, Ch. 16.20 Tables 1 and 2, 16.24.010, 16.24.080, 16.57.010, 18.04.030,
               18.10.040, 18.10.060, 18.12.040, 18.12.050, 18.12.060, 18.12.070, 18.12.100,
               18.12.120, 18.13.010, 18.13.050, 18.14.030, 18.15.020, 18.15.030, 18.15.040,
      2-11-    18.15.050, 18.15.100, 18.16.050, 18.16.060, 18.18.060, 18.18.080, 18.18.120,
5373  2016     18.20.040, 18.23.050, 18.34.040, 18.40.030, 18.40.070, 18.52.060, 18.52.070,
               18.70.010, 18.70.080, 18.76.020, 18.77.060, 18.77.070, 18.77.075, adds 18.01.025,
               18.08.080, Ch. 18.31, regarding building and zoning regulations (16.20, 16.24,
               16.57, 18.04, 18.08, 18.10, 18.12, 18.13, 18.14, 18.15, 18.16, 18.18, 18.20,
               18.23, 18.31, 18.34, 18.40, 18.52, 18.70, 18.76, 18.77) (18.12.070 Repealed by
               5412; Ch. 18.14 Repealed by 5408; 18.23.050 Repealed by 5554)
5374  1-11-    5374   1-11-2016   Amends the Table of Organization for fiscal year 2016 to
      2016     incorporate classification title and salary change (Special)
5375  2-12-    Amends 2.07.010 regarding department heads (2.07)
      2016
5376  2-26-    Amends Ch. 9.14 regarding smoking and tobacco regulations (9.14) ( 9.14.080
      2016     repealed by 5418)
5377  2-26-    Amends Ch. 5.20 and 18.23.020 regarding collection, removal and disposal of
      2016     refuse (5.20, 18.23) (18.23.020 Repealed by 5554)
5378  2-1-2016 Authorizes closing of the budget for the fiscal year ending June 30, 2015
               (Special)
5379  3-3-2016 Amends 4.60.040 regarding exemptions from business registration (4.60)
5380  3-25-    Adds 10.50.085 and amends 10.50.090, regarding Residential Preferential Parking
      2016     program (10.50)
               Amends 17.16.010, 17.16.025, 17.20.020, 18.04.030, 18.20.030, 18.20.040,
5381  4-21-    18.20.050, 18.42.200, 18.70.020 - 18.70.100 regarding hazardous materials use,
      2016     storage, and handling in the Office, Research, and Manufacturing Zoning Districts
               (17.16, 17.20, 18.04, 18.20, 18.23, 18.70)
5382  4-21-    Amends 18.70.070 regarding nonconforming uses and noncomplying facilities (18.70)
      2016
5383  6-23-    Repeals and replaces Ch. 16.17, California Energy Code (16.17)(Ch. 16.17 repealed
      2016     by 5485)
               Repeals Ord. 4936, which authorized the City Manager to purchase a portion of the
5384  7-7-2016 city s Natural Gas Requirements from certain prequalified natural gas suppliers
               under specified terms and conditions during calendar years 2007 - 2022 (Special)
5385  7-7-2016 Amends 12.32.010 and 12.32.020 regarding water use restrictions (12.32)
5386  6-13-    Adopting the budget for fiscal year 2017 (Special)
      2016
5387  9-29-    Amends Ch. 2.30 regarding contracts and purchasing procedures (2.30)
      2016
5388  11-18-   Amends 4.62.030 regarding minimum wages (4.62)
      2016
5389  11-24-   Repeals and enacts a new Ch. 16.04 California Building Code and amends 16.62.030
      2016     penalty for expired permits (16.04, 16.62) (Ch. 16.04 repealed by 5477)
5390  11-24-   Repeals and enacts a new Ch. 16.05 California Mechanical Code (16.05) (Ch. 16.05
      2016     repealed by 5478)
5391  11-24-   Repeals and enacts a new Ch. 16.06 California Residential Code (16.06) (Ch. 16.06
      2016     repealed by 5479)
5392  11-24-   Repeals and enacts a new Ch. 16.08 California Plumbing Code (16.08) (Ch. 16.08
      2016     repealed by 5480)
5393  11-24-   Repeals and enacts a new Ch. 16.14 California Green Building Standards Code
      2016     (16.14) (Ch. 16.14 repealed by 5481)
5394  11-24-   Repeals and enacts a new Ch. 16.16 California Electrical Code (16.16) (Ch. 16.16
      2016     repealed by 5482)
5395  11-24-   Repeals and enacts a new Ch. 15.04 California Fire Code, repealing Ch. 15.05
      2016     International Fire Code (15.04, 15.05) (Ch. 15.04 repealed by 5483)
5396  11-24-   Adds Ch. 16.18 International Swimming Pool and Spa Code (16.18) (Ch. 16.18
      2016     repealed by 5484)
               Amends 16.36.060 regarding display of numbers required, 16.40.020 regarding
5397  11-24-   substandard residential building defined, 16.40.040 regarding dangerous buildings
      2016     declared, 16.40.060 regarding notice and order of building official (16.36,
               16.40)
5398  12-8-    Adds Ch. 10.51 Crescent Park no overnight parking program (10.51)
      2016
5399  12-15-   Adds Ch. 9.17 personal cultivation of marijuana (9.17) (Ch. 9.17 repealed by
      2016     5419)
               Amends 16.45.060, 16.45.070, 16.46.040, 16.46.060, 16.47.040, 16.47.050,
               16.57.030, 16.57.040, 16.57.070, 16.58.030, 16.58.040, 16.58.090, 16.59.050,
5400  1-27-    16.59.060, 16.59.090, 16.60.050, 16.60.060, 16.60.090, 16.61.090, 21.50.060,
      2017     21.50.070, adds Ch. 16.64, Development fee and in-lieu payment administration
               (16.45, 16.46, 16.47, 16.57, 16.58, 16.59, 16.60, 16.61, 16.64, 21.50)
               ( 16.47.040 and 16.47.050 repealed by 5408)
      Passed   Amending Resolution 9579 to update the fiscal year 2017 municipal fee schedule to
5401  11-28-   adjust the planning and community environment fees by fiscal year 2017
      2016     adjustments to salaries and benefits (Special)
5402  12-29-   Amends 4.39.080 regarding false alarm service charges and 4.39.090 regarding
      2016     revocation of alarm registration (4.39)
5403  1-12-    Amends 18.76.020 architectural review (18.76)
      2017
5404  3-10-    Update the fiscal year 2017 municipal fee schedule to adjust development services
      2017     department fees (Special)
5405  Passed   Amends 9.14.005, 9.14.010, 9.14.020, 9.14.030, 9.14.070 and adds 9.14.050,
      1-9-2017 9.14.055, 9.14.060, 9.14.065 regarding smoking and tobacco regulations (9.14)
               Repeals Ch. 10.70, trip reduction and travel demand, amends 18.04.030,
               definitions, amends 18.30.050, site development regulations, amends 18.30(F).050,
               site development regulations, adds 18.40.160, replacement project or
               discretionary review required, adds 18.40.170, deferral of director s action,
5406  4-20-    adds 18.42.140, housing inventory sites small lot consolidation, amends
      2017     18.52.030, transportation management plan, amends 18.52.040, off-street parking,
               loading, and bicycle facility requirements, amends 18.52.050, adjustments by the
               director, amends 18.52.080, modifications to off-street loading requirements,
               amends 18.54.020, off-street parking stalls (18.04, 18.30, 18.40, 18.42, 18.52,
               18.54)
               Amends 18.04.030, definitions, amends 18.13.030, land uses, amends 18.16.040,
               land uses, amends 18.18.050, land uses, amends 18.20.030, land uses, amends 18.30
               (A).040, permitted uses, adds 18.30(A).055, design standards, amends 18.30
5407  4-20-    (C).010, specific purpose, amends 18.30(C).020, permitted uses, amends 18.30
      2017     (C).030, conditional uses, adds 18.30(C).035, design standards, amends 18.30
               (C).040, annual monitoring of ground floor retail use, adds 18.40.180, retail
               preservation, repeals 18.85.010 18.85.060, retail preservation (18.04, 18.13,
               18.16, 18.18, 18.20, 18.30(A), 18.30(C), 18.40)
      5-18-    Repeals Ch. 16.47, Approval of projects with impacts on housing, adds Ch. 16.65,
5408  2017     Citywide affordable housing requirements, repeals Ch. 18.14, Below market rate
               housing program (16.65)
5409  6-16-    Establishing housing impact fees and housing in-lieu fees for residential,
      2017     nonresidential, and mixed use developments (Special)
5410  5-5-2017 Amends 16.28.030, 16.28.060, 16.28.070 and adds 16.28.155 regarding grading and
               erosion and sediment control (16.28)
5411  6-1-2017 Amends 2.11.070, Public, education and government access channel capacity and
               support (2.11)
               Amends 18.04.030, 18.10.010, 18.10.030, 18.10.040, 18.10.060, 18.10.070,
               18.10.120, 18.10.140, 18.10.150, 18.12.010, 18.12.030, 18.12.040, 18.12.060,
5412  6-8-2017 18.12.070, 18.12.090, 18.12.150, 18.28.040, 18.28.070, 18.52.040, 18.76.020, adds
               18.42.040, zoning (18.04, 18.10, 18.12, 18.28, 18.42, 18.52, 18.76) (Section
               18.42.040 repealed by 5507)
5413  7-20-    Adds 22.08.420, ITT Antenna Field addition to Baylands Nature Preserve (22.08)
      2017
5414  6-27-    Adopting the budget for fiscal year 2018 (Special)
      2017
5415  7-28-    Adds 16.14.440, expedited permitting process for electric vehicle charging
      2017     stations (16.14)
5416  9-28-    Amends contract between city and CALPERS (Not codified)
      2017
5417  10-19-   Extending interim Ordinance No. 5357 (Not codified)
      2017
      Passed   Adds Ch. 4.64, permits for retailers of tobacco products; repeals 9.14.080,
5418  10-2-    location of tobacco vending machines (4.64, 9.14)
      2017
5419  12-14-   Amends 18.04.030, definitions; adds 18.42.150, cannabis cultivation and
      2017     commercial activities; repeals Ch. 9.17 (9.17, 18.04, 18.42)
5420  1-12-    Updating the fiscal year 2018 municipal fee schedule to adjust development
      2018     services department fees (Not codified)
5421  12-28-   Amends 10.56.010 - 10.56.030 and adds 10.56.035, special speed zones (10.56)
      2017
5422  1-11-    Approving and adopting plans for park improvements to the Baylands related to the
      2018     101 Bicycle and Pedestrian Bridge (Not codified)
5423  2-22-    Amends 2.04.160, city council minutes (2.04)
      2018
5424  2-22-    Amends 2.11.070, public, education and government access channel capacity and
      2018     support (2.11)
               Amends 16.28.030, definitions; 16.28.060, permit required; 16.28.070, general
      2-22-    exemptions; 16.28.155, additional requirements for temporary construction-
5425  2018     related dewatering and adds 16.28.065, minimization of impacts required and
               16.28.156, additional requirements for temporary construction-related groundwater
               dewatering in groundwater plume areas (16.28)
5426  3-15-    Approving and adopting a plan for construction of a dog off-leash exercise area
      2018     at Peers Park (Not codified)
5427  3-15-    Amends 2.08.120, office and duties of the city attorney and 2.30.270, delegations
      2018     of authority to contract (2.08, 2.30)
5428  3-29-    Amends 10.56.035, special speed zones (10.56)
      2018
5429  3-29-    Amends 4.42.190, taximeters and 4.42.200, schedule of rates, display (4.42)
      2018
5430  3-29-    Amends 18.13.030, land uses and 18.42.040, accessory and junior accessory
      2018     dwelling units (18.13, 18.42) (Section 18.42.040 repealed by 5507)
5431  4-19-    Amends 2.22.030, officers, meetings and procedures; 2.22.050, jurisdiction;
      2018     2.25.050, purpose and duties (2.22, 2.25)
               Amends 2.20.030, officers; repeals 10.64.010, 10.64.060, 10.64.070; amends zoning
               sections 18.04.030, 18.10.090, 18.12.040, 18.12.090, 18.12.120, 18.15.020,
               18.15.030, 18.15.080, 18.15.090, 18.16.050, 18.28.070, 18.30(G).060, 18.42.110,
      5-10-    18.52.030, 18.52.050, 18.54.020, 18.76.020, 18.77.020, 18.77.060, 18.77.070,
5432  2018     18.77.080, 18.77.110, 18.80.060; adds zoning sections 18.40.190, 18.40.200,
               18.77.077; amends 21.12.090, action on tentative and preliminary parcel maps and
               21.32.010, application for exceptions (2.20, 10.64, 18.04, 18.10, 18.12, 18.15,
               18.16, 18.28, 18.30(G), 18.40, 18.42, 18.52, 18.54, 18.76, 18.77, 18.80, 21.12,
               21.32)
      5-10-    Adds 10.04.128, shared- use path; amends 10.64.130, riding bicycles on sidewalks
5433  2018     and in undercrossings; adds 10.64.220, speed limits on shared-use paths (10.04,
               10.64)
      5-17-    Adopting a park improvement plan for the Baylands Boardwalk at Lucy Evans
5434  2018     Baylands Nature Interpretive Center located within the Baylands Nature Preserve
               (Not codified)
5435  5-31-    Amends 4.64.100, permits for retailers of tobacco products (4.64)
      2018
5436  5-31-    Amending the fiscal year 2018 municipal fee schedule to amend the community
      2018     service division s golf fees (Not codified)
5437  5-31-    Amendment to the contract between the city and the board of administration of the
      2018     California public employees retirement system (Not codified)
5438  6-7-2018 Adding Ch. 18.30(J), affordable housing (AH) combining district regulations
               (18.30(J)) (Ch. 18.30(J) Repealed by 5554)
5439  7-1-2018 Adding 18.40.210, annual office limit and repealing Ch. 18.85, interim zoning
               ordinances (18.40, 18.85)
5440  7-5-2018 Amends 10.51.030, designation of Crescent Park no overnight parking area and adds
               10.51.065, modification or termination of restricted parking areas (10.51)
5441  7-5-2018 Amends Ch. 4.39, private intrusion and fire alarms (4.39)
5442  7-19-    Adopting the budget for fiscal year 2019 (Not codified)
      2018
5443  7-26-    Adds Ch. 18.30(K), workforce housing (WH) combining district regulations (18.30
      2018     (K))
5445  7-26-    Amends 18.28.050, 18.28.060, 18.28.090, special purposes (PF, OS and AC)
      2018     districts (18.28)
5446  7-30-    Adds 18.40.220, growth management (18.40)
      2018
5447  8-27-    Adds 9.68.035, relocation assistance for no-fault eviction (9.68)
      2018
5448  10-10-   Adds Ch. 10.62, idling of vehicles (10.62)
      2018
5449  10-10-   Amends contract between city and CALPERS (Not codified)
      2018
5450  11-1-    Adds 2.30.620 - 2.30.690, surveillance and privacy protections (2.30)
      2018
5451  11-1-    Amends 9.68.035, relocation assistance for no fault eviction (9.68)
      2018
5452  11-29-   Amends 4.62.030, minimum wage (4.62)
      2018
5453  12-6-    Amends 18.42.040, accessory and junior accessory dwelling units (18.42) (Section
      2018     18.42.040 repealed by 5507)
               Amends 4.42.010, definitions; amends 4.42.020, certificate of public convenience
               and necessity; amends 4.42.070, duties of certificate holder - annual renewal;
      1-10-    amends 4.42.080, liability insurance - indemnity; amends 4.42.085, testing of
5454  2019     drivers for controlled substances and alcohol; amends 4.42.090, vehicle permits;
               amends 4.42.130, driver s permit, form, display, use; amends 4.42.190, taxi
               meters; amends 4.42.210 interference with inspection - inspection of vehicles;
               repeals 4.42.160, vehicle color design (4.42)
5455  1-10-    Amends 2.04.190, standing committees - special committees; amends 12.10.060,
      2019     coordination with city (2.04, 12.10)
5456  1-17-    Amends 16.58.030, exemptions; amends 16.59.040, exemptions; amends 16.60.040,
      2019     exemptions (16.58, 16.59, 16.60)
      Passed
5457  11-6-    Amends 2.33.020, tax imposed (2.33)
      2018
5458  3-7-2019 Amending the zoning map of the city for 3703-3705 and 3707-3709 El Camino Real to
               add the AH Combining District to the existing CN District (Not codified)
5459  3-28-    Repeals 18.18.040, repeal of regulations (18.18)
      2019
               Amends 9.10.020, definitions; amends 10.44.015, definitions; 18.04.030,
               definitions; 18.08.010, designation of general districts; 18.08.030, references
               to districts; 18.13.010, purposes; 18.13.030, land uses; 18.13.040, development
               standards; 18.13.050, village residential development; 18.13.060, multiple family
               context-based design criteria; 18.13.070, grandfathered uses; 18.16.020,
               applicable regulations; 18.16.040, land uses; 18.16.060, development standards;
               18.18.020, applicable regulations; 18.18.060, development standards; 18.18.090,
5460  5-2-2019 parking and loading; 18.20.040, site development standards; 18.23.010, purpose
               and applicability; 18.30(J).090, development standards; 18.40.180, retail
               preservation; 18.52.040, off-street parking, loading, and bicycle facility
               requirements; 18.52.050, adjustments by the director; 18.52.070, parking
               regulations for CD assessment district; 18.52.080, adjustments to parking
               assessment area requirements by the director; 18.60.060, alternative standards
               overlay district two (AS2): housing at Upper California site; added 18.40.230,
               rooftop gardens (9.10, 10.44, 18.04, 18.08, 18.13, 18.16, 18.18, 18.20, 18.23,
               18.30(J), 18.40, 18.52, 18.60) (18.23.010 Repealed by 5554)
5461  5-23-    Amending the setback map of the city to eliminate the 50-foot special setback
      2019     along Hansen Way for 3200 El Camino Real (Not codified)
5462  5-23-    Amends 18.18.120, noncomplying (grandfathered) uses and facilities (18.18)
      2019
               Amends 16.59.020, 16.59.030, 16.59.040, 16.59.050, 16.59.060, 16.59.070,
5463  7-5-2019 16.59.090 and adds 16.59.045, citywide transportation impact fee ordinance
               (16.59)
5464  6-13-    Amends 18.18.060, development standards; 18.18.120, grandfathered uses and
      2019     facilities (18.18)
5465  6-13-    Amends 18.42.110, wireless communication facilities (18.42)
      2019
5466  7-4-2019 Adds 16.11.080, management of PCBs during building demolition (Repealed by 5671)
               (16.11)
5467  7-4-2019 Adds 12.20.030, statute of limitations for challenges to gas rates (12.20)
      7-11-    Amendment to the contract between the city and the Board of Administration of the
5468  2019     California Public Employee s Retirement System to add cost- sharing pursuant to
               Government Code Section 20516 (Not codified)
5469  7-18-    Approving and adopting a plan for pickleball courts at Mitchell Park (Not
      2019     codified)
5470  7-18-    Amending the zoning map for 2321 Wellesley Street to change the zoning from the
      2019     R-1 to the RMD zoning district (Not codified)
5471  6-17-    Adopting the budget for fiscal year 2020 (Not codified)
      2019
5472  7-25-    Repeals Ch. 5.24, construction and demolition debris diversion facilities and
      2019     adds new Ch. 5.24, deconstruction and construction materials management (5.24)
               Amends Ch. 5.30, disposable foodware items and other disposable products; amends
5473  7-25-    5.35.010, definitions; amends 5.35.020, types of checkout bags permitted at
      2019     retail service and food service establishments; adds 5.35.035, use of compostable
               produce bags at retail service establishments; repeals 5.35.035 (5.30, 5.35)
               Amending the zoning map for 1700 Embarcadero Road to change the zoning from CS(D)
5474  9-5-2019 to CS(D)(AD) and amending the zoning map for 1730 Embarcadero Road to change the
               zoning from PC-4846 to CS(D)(AD) (Not codified)
               Amends 5.20.010, definitions; amends 5.20.020, declaration of policy; amends
               5.20.030, discarding of refuse; amends 5.20.090, collection and ownership of
               recyclable materials; amends 5.20.100, collection and ownership of compostable
5475  9-5-2019 materials; amends 5.20.105, contamination of containers; amends 5.20.109,
               requirements for special events; amends 5.20.110, exclusions; amends 5.20.120,
               refuse containers; amends 5.20.130, maintenance and placement of containers
               (5.20)
5476  12-19-   Amends 21.20.301, flag lots (21.20)
      2019
      12-19-   Repeals Chapter 16.04 and adopts new Chapter 16.04, California Building Code,
5477  2019     California Historical Building Code, and California Existing Building Code, 2019
               Editions (16.04) (Ch. 16.04 repealed by 5508)
5478  12-19-   Repeals Chapter 16.05 and adopts a new chapter 16.05, California Mechanical Code,
      2019     2019 Edition (16.05) (Repealed by 5565)
5479  12-19-   Repeals Chapter 16.06 and adopts a new Chapter 16.06, California Residential
      2019     Code, 2019 Edition (16.06) (Ch. 16.06 repealed by 5509)
5480  12-19-   Repeals Chapter 16.08 and adopts a new Chapter 16.08, California Plumbing Code,
      2019     2019 Edition (16.08) (Repealed by 5567)
               Amends and restates Chapter 16.14, California Green Building Standards Code, 2019
5481  12-19-   Edition; amends 16.12.035, new construction; recycled water use for toilet and
      2019     urinal flushing and floor trap priming (16.12, 16.14) (Ch. 16.14 repealed by
               5510)
5482  12-19-   Repeals Chapter 16.16 and adopts new Chapter 16.16, California Electrical Code,
      2019     2019 Edition (16.16) (Repealed by 5568)
5483  12-19-   Repeals in its entirety Chapter 15.04 and enacts a new Chapter 15.04, California
      2019     Fire Code (2019 Edition) (15.04) (Repealed by 5563)
      12-19-   Repeals in its entirety Chapter 16.18 and adopts a new Chapter 16.18,
5484  2019     International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, With Local Amendments (16.18) (Repealed
               by 5569)
5485  1-2-2020 Repeals and restates Chapter 16.17, California Energy Code, 2019 Edition (16.17)
               (Repealed by 5571)
      12-2-    Urgency ordinance temporarily prohibiting evictions without just cause through
5486  2019     December 31, 2019, for residential real property built prior to January 1, 2005
               (Not codified)
5487  2-13-    Approving and adopting a plan for the renovation project at Rinconada Park (Not
      2020     codified)
5488  2-13-    Approving and adopting a plan for utilities improvements at Peers Park (Not
      2020     codified)
5489  1-13-    Amends 18.04.030, definitions; amends 18.42.040, accessory and junior accessory
      2020     dwelling units (18.04, 18.42) (Section 18.42.040 repealed by 5507)
5490  3-26-    Amending Title 18 to adopt temporary regulations relating to safe parking (18.12,
      2020     18.13, 18.16, 18.18, 18.20, 18.28, 18.36, 18.38, 18.42)
5491  4-16-    Amending sections 1.12.030, 1.12.050, 1.12.060, 1.12.070, 1.12.100,
      2020     administrative compliance orders (1.12)
5492  3-23-    Urgency ordinance relating to a temporary moratorium on residential evictions for
      2020     nonpayment of rent during the COVID-19 state of emergency (Not codified)
               Amends 18.01.080, violations - penalties; amends 18.01.085, enforcement -
5493  5-7-2020 criminal enforcement authority; amends 18.04.030, definitions; amends 18.40.170,
               deferral of Director s action; amends 18.77.060, standard staff review process
               (18.01, 18.04, 18.40, 18.77)
               Amends: 2.08.020, approval of City Manager s appointments; 2.08.110, office and
               duties of the city clerk; 2.08.120, office and duties of the city attorney;
               2.08.130, office and duties of the city auditor; 2.08.140, office and duties of
               the city manager; 2.08.150, department of administrative services; 2.08.160,
               department of human resources; 2.08.170, police department; 2.08.180, fire
               department; 2.08.185, office of emergency services; 2.08.190, department of
               public works; 2.08.200, department of utilities; 2.08.210, department of
               community services; 2.08.220, department of planning and development services;
               2.08.230, department of libraries; 2.08.240, department of information
               technology; 2.08.260, office of transportation; 2.20.050, duties and powers;
               2.21.040, duties of the architectural review board; 2.27.040, duties; 2.30.010,
               purpose; 2.30.020, scope; 2.30.040, centralized purchasing; 2.30.120, general
               services contract; 2.30.150, contracts for dark fiber optics licensing services;
               2.30.200, procurement officer contract award authority; 2.30.210, city manager
               contract award authority; 2.30.220, city attorney contract award authority;
               2.30.225, wholesale utility commodity transactions; 2.30.230, designated employee
               purchases of $10,000.00 or less; 2.30.240, designated employees use of petty
               cash, P-card or other credit card; 2.30.280, authority to modify and terminate
               contracts not approved or awarded by the council; 2.30.300, public works
               contracts; 2.30.310, contracts for goods; 2.30.320, general services contracts;
               2.30.330, professional services contracts; 2.30.340, contracts for wholesale
               utility commodities and services; 2.30.360, exemption from competitive
               solicitation requirements; 2.30.400, informal invitation for bids or request for
               proposals; 2.30.410, formal request for proposals; 2.30.420, formal invitation
               for bids - notice, submittal, opening; 2.30.430, combined request for proposals
               and invitation for bids; 2.30.440, determination of lowest responsive/responsible
               bidder; 2.30.485, delegation of awarding authority determinations; 2.30.490,
               design-build contract procurement procedures; 2.30.500, bid security, bonds and
               insurance; 2.30.610, preparation of bid or proposal documents; 2.30.630, council
               approval required for contracts, agreements, grant applications and donations
               involving surveillance technology; 2.30.640, council approval of surveillance use
               policy; 2.30.650, information required; 2.30.660, determination by council that
               benefits outweigh costs and concerns; 2.30.670, oversight following council
               approval; 2.30.680, definitions; 2.30.700, records, public inspection; 2.30.710,
               city manager reports; 2.30.800, rewards relating to arrest and conviction;
               2.30.900, standardization; 4.10.057, regulations for pushcart vendors; 8.10.020,
               definitions; 8.10.050, prohibited acts; 9.56.020, enforcement agency; 9.68.035,
5494  5-7-2020 relocation assistance for no-fault eviction; 9.70.020, definitions; 10.46.090,
               time limitations; 10.50.020, definitions; 10.50.050, initiation by neighborhood
               petition; 10.50.090, modification or termination of districts; 10.51.020,
               definitions; 10.51.065, modification or termination of restricted parking areas;
               12.12.020, commercial sidewalk encroachment permit criteria and review
               procedures; 12.13.010, definitions; 12.13.030, permit application procedures;
               16.20.020, design review required; 16.20.040, exception procedure; 16.20.070,
               inspection; 16.20.160, special purpose signs; 16.24.010, definitions; 16.45.070,
               penalties; 16.46.060, penalties; 16.49.040, designation of historic structures/
               sites; 16.49.050, exterior alteration of historic structures; 16.49.060,
               demolition of significant buildings in the downtown area; 16.59.050, timing of
               payment; 16.59.060, calculation of fee; 16.60.050, timing of payment; 16.60.060,
               calculation of fee; 16.61.070, process for planning and approval of on-site
               public art; 16.61.100, inspection and final approval; 16.64.030, deferred
               payment; 16.64.060, notice of protest rights; 16.65.120, enforcement; 18.04.030,
               definitions; 18.10.060, parking; 18.10.130, historical review and incentives;
               18.12.110, single family individual review; 18.12.140, historical review and
               incentives; 18.13.040, development standards; 18.13.050, village residential
               development; 18.15.070, child care facilities; 18.15.100, regulatory agreement;
               18.16.040, land uses; 18.16.050, office use restrictions; 18.16.060, development
               standards; 18.18.030, definitions; 18.18.060, development standards; 18.18.070,
               floor area bonuses; 18.18.080, transfer of development rights; 18.18.090, parking
               and loading; 18.23.010, purpose and applicability; 18.30(F).050, site development
               regulations; 18.30(G).070, action by council; 18.30(J).090, development
               standards; 18.34.060, review process; 18.36.050, development standards;
               18.36.070, tree preservation; 18.40.130, landscaping; 18.40.140, stream corridor
               protection; 18.42.050, temporary uses; 18.46.030, application requirements;
               18.46.040, review procedure; 18.46.060, decisions; 18.46.070, appeals; 18.52.020,
               definitions; 18.54.010, purposes; 18.54.020, vehicle parking facilities;
               18.54.040, landscaping of parking areas; 18.54.060, bicycle parking facilities;
               18.60.050, alternative standards overlay district one (AS1): housing and mixed
               use at El Camino Site; 18.60.060, alternative standards overlay district two
               (AS2): housing at Upper California Site; 18.70.070, nonconforming use - required
               termination; 18.70.080, noncomplying facility - enlargement; 18.76.020,
               architectural review; 18.77.077, over the counter project review process;
               18.79.030, applicability and initiation; 18.80.070, action by commission;
               19.10.020, initiation; 19.10.030, procedures; repeals 2.08.250 (18.23.010
               Repealed by 5554; 18.30(J).090 Repealed by 5554)
5495  5-7-2020 Temporary moratorium on residential evictions related to the COVID-19 state of
               emergency (Not codified)
               Extending the validity of planning entitlements and permits issued by the
5496  6-4-2020 Department of Planning and Development Services and extending the time for city
               review and action on development actions (Not codified)
               Amending 12.20.030, statute of limitations for challenges to gas rates, water
5497  7-2-2020 service rates, wastewater collection and disposal rates, refuse rates, storm
               water management fees and fiber licensing service rates (12.20)
      7-23-    Amends 2.08.230, department of libraries; amends 2.16.070, schedule of
5498  2020     appointments; adds 2.24.001, dissolution of the library advisory commission;
               repeals 2.24.010 - 2.24.060, library advisory commission (2.08, 2.16, 2.24)
5499  6-22-    Ordinance of the council of the city adopting the budget for fiscal year 2021
      2020     (Not codified)
               Interim ordinance of the council of the City of Palo Alto temporarily allowing
               expansion of outdoor dining, retail and other activities on public and private
5500  6-23-    property and relaxing regulations regarding onsite parking, on-sale of alcohol,
      2020     design/architectural review, permit fees, and alcohol consumption in public
               places, all to facilitate such outdoor use during the COVID-19 state of emergency
               (Not codified)
5501  7-23-    Amends 2.04.360, salary of council members (2.04)
      2020
5502  9-3-2020 Amends Ch. 4.64, permits for retailers of tobacco products (4.64)
               Amends 2.18.010, membership; amends 2.18.040, term of office; amends 2.22.010,
5503  9-3-2020 membership; amends 2.22.020, term of office; 2.22.030, officers, meetings and
               procedures (2.18, 2.22)
               Amends 18.18.090, parking and loading; amends 18.52.020, definitions; 18.52.030,
               basic parking regulations; amends 18.52.040, off-street parking, loading and
               bicycle facility requirements; adds 18.52.045, minor adjustments to existing
5504  9-24-    parking facilities; amends 18.52.050, adjustments by the director; amends
      2020     18.52.070, parking regulations for CD assessment district; amends 18.52.080,
               adjustments to parking assessment area requirements by the director; amends
               18.54.020, vehicle parking facilities; amends 18.54.070, parking tables and
               figures (18.18, 18.52, 18.54)
5505  11-5-    Amends 18.28.040, land uses; adds 18.42.170, PF district safe parking (18.18,
      2020     18.42)
5506  11-5-    Amends 18.18.090, parking and loading (18.18)
      2020
      11-26-   Amends 16.58.030, exemptions; amends 18.04.030, definitions; adds Chapter 18.09,
5507  2020     accessory dwelling units and junior accessory dwelling units; repeals 18.42.040,
               accessory and junior accessory dwelling units (16.58, 18.04, 18.09, 18.42)
      11-26-   Repeals Chapter 16.04 and adopts new Chapter 16.04, California Building Code,
5508  2020     California Historical Building Code, and California Existing Building Code, 2019
               Editions (16.04) (Repealed by 5564)
5509  11-26-   Repeals Chapter 16.06 and adopts a new Chapter 16.06, California Residential
      2020     Code, 2019 Edition (16.06) (Repealed by 5566)
               Amends and restates Chapter 16.14, California Green Building Standards Code, 2019
5510  11-26-   Edition; amends 16.12.035, new construction; recycled water use for toilet and
      2020     urinal flushing and floor trap priming (16.12, 16.14) (Ch. 16.14 repealed by
               5570)
5511  12-17-20 Amends 9.64.010, use of community facilities prohibited from 10:30 p.m. to
               sunrise; amends 22.04.150, Foothills Park (9.64, 22.04)
               Amends 18.04.030, definitions; amends 18.16.060, development standards; amends
5512  1-7-2021 18.40.180, retail preservation; amends 18.52.040, off-street parking, loading and
               bicycle facility requirements (18.04, 18.16, 18.40, 18.52)
5513  2-11-    Amends 18.52.070, parking regulations for CD assessment district (18.52)
      2021
5514  3-4-2021 Amends 22.04.150, Foothills Park (22.04)
5515  2-1-2021 Amends 22.04.150, Foothills Park (22.04)
5516  2-22-    Amends 22.04.150, Foothills Park (22.04)
      2021
               Amends 18.04.030, definitions; amends 18.16.040, land uses; amends 18.16.060,
      5-13-    development standards; amends 18.18.050, land uses; amends 18.18.060, development
5517  2021     standards; amends 18.30(A).040, permitted uses; amends 18.30(A).050, conditional
               uses; amends 18.30(C).020, permitted uses; amends 18.30(C).030, conditional uses
               (18.04, 18.16, 18.18, 18.30(A), 18.30(C))
               Amends 6.12.025, special impounding fees; amends 22.04.150, Foothills Nature
               Preserve; amends 22.08.090, Foothills Nature Preserve (formerly Foothills Park);
      4-15-    amends 22.08.100, Lee Property - addition to Foothills Nature Preserve; amends
5518  2021     22.08.110, Lee Property - addition to Foothills Nature Preserve; amends
               22.08.120, Lee Property - addition to Foothills Nature Preserve; 22.08.410, Lee
               Property - addition to Foothills Nature Preserve; amends exhibits A-9, A-9.1, A-
               9.2, A- 9.3, A-28 for Chapter 22.08 (6.12, 22.04, 22.08)
5519  5-6-2021 Amends 15.04.075, definitions added to Section 202 (15.04)
5520  5-20-    Approving and adopting a plan for facility improvements at Ramos Park (Not
      2021     codified)
5521  6-17-    Amends 21.50.070, calculation of fair market value (21.50)
      2021
5522  6-10-    Amends 22.04.150, Foothills Nature Preserve (22.04)
      2021
               Amends 18.15.020, definitions; 18.15.030, density bonuses; 18.15.050, development
5523  7-1-2021 concessions and incentives; 18.15.060, waiver/modification of development
               standards; 18.15.080, application requirements; 18.15.090, review procedures
               (18.15)
5524  7-1-2021 Amends 18.52.040, off- street parking, loading and bicycle facility requirements;
               18.52.045, adjustments to existing parking facilities (18.52)
               Amends 2.16.070, schedule of appointments; adds 2.16.080, term limits; amends
5529  1-1-2022 2.18.040, term of office; 2.20.020, term of office; 2.21.025, term of office;
               2.22.060, authority; 2.23.030, term of office; 2.25.030, term of office;
               2.27.020, term of office (2.16, 2.18, 2.20, 2.21, 2.22, 2.23, 2.25, 2.27)
5530  10-14-   Adding Ch. 9.07, safe storage of firearms (9.07)
      2021
               Amends 10.04.060, loading zone; amends 10.04.080, park; amends 10.04.100,
               passenger loading zone; adds 10.04.185, transportation network company; amends
               10.36.050, parallel parking; amends 10.40.020, signs or curb markings to indicate
               no stopping and parking regulations; amends 10.40.030, effect of permission to
               load or unload; amends 10.40.045, special parking permit for construction or
               maintenance work; amends 10.40.050, standing for loading or unloading only;
               amends 10.40.060, standing in passenger loading zone; amends 10.40.070, standing
5531  12-2-    in any alley; adds 10.40.110, transportation network company (TNC) vehicles;
      2021     amends 10.46.010, definitions; amends 10.46.060, issuance of residential parking
               permits; amends 10.46.070, guest permits; amends 10.46.080, parking permit fees;
               amends 10.50.020, definitions; amends 10.50.050, initiation by neighborhood
               petition; amends 10.50.070, administration of districts; amends 10.50.100,
               violations and penalties; adds 10.50.110, revocation of permit; amends 10.51.020,
               definitions; amends 10.51.040, inclusion of approved parking areas; amends
               10.51.060, administration of restricted parking area; amends 10.60.070, permit
               parking in city lots (10.04, 10.36, 10.40, 10.46, 10.50, 10.51, 10.60)
5532  12-2-    Amending the fiscal year 2021 municipal fee schedule to add Fire Department
      2021     ambulance subscription program fees (Not codified)
5534  12-9-    Approving and adopting a plan for facility improvement at John Boulware Park (Not
      2021     codified)
5535  10-18-   Amending the Fiscal Year 2022 municipal fee schedule to update the housing impact
      2021     fee for non-residential projects (Not codified)
               Amends 5.20.010, definitions; amends 5.20.020, declaration of policy; amends
               5.20.030, discarding of refuse; amends 5.20.090, collection and ownership of
               recyclable materials; amends 5.20.100, collection and ownership of compostable
      12-30-   materials; amends 5.20.105, contamination of containers; amends 5.20.108,
5536  2021     requirements for owners or managers of multifamily properties and commercial
               premises; amends 5.20.109, requirements for special events; amends 5.20.110,
               exclusions; adds 5.20.111, self haul; amends 5.20.120, refuse containers; amends
               5.20.130, maintenance and placement of containers; adds Ch. 5.40, edible food
               recovery requirements (5.20, 5.40)
5537  1-1-2022 Amending the Fiscal Year 2022 municipal fee schedule to add and amend parking
               permit fees for business district and residential parking permits (Not codified)
               Amends 18.10.020, applicable regulations; amends 18.10.030, land uses; amends
               18.10.040, development standards; amends 18.10.060, parking; amends 18.10.070,
               accessory and junior accessory dwelling units; amends 18.12.020, applicable
               regulations; amends 18.12.030, land uses; amends 18.12.040, site development
      12-6-    standards; amends 18.12.060, parking; amends 18.12.070, accessory and junior
5538  2021     accessory dwelling units; amends 18.40.160, replacement project or discretionary
               review required; adds 18.42.180, interim standards for two units on single family
               zoned lots pursuant to Senate Bill 9 (2021); amends 18.52.020, definitions;
               amends 18.52.040, off-street parking, loading and bicycle facility requirements;
               adds Ch. 21.10, parcel maps for urban lot splits in single-family zones (18.10,
               18.12, 18.40, 18.42, 18.52, 21.10)
5539  2-10-    Adding 16.14.440, expedited permitting process for electric vehicle charging
      2022     stations (16.14)
5540  2-10-    Approving and adopting a plan for facility improvements at Cameron Park (Not
      2022     codified)
      2-24-    Approving a plan for improvement to the Palo Alto flood basin tide gate structure
5541  2022     as part of the Palo Alto flood basin tide gate structure replacement project (Not
               codified)
               Amends 16.65.025, exemptions; amends 18.10.020, applicable regulations; amends
               18.10.030, land uses; amends 18.10.040, development standards; amends 18.10.060,
               parking; amends 18.10.070, accessory and junior accessory dwelling units; amends
               18.12.020, applicable regulations; amends 18.12.030, land uses; amends 18.12.040,
               site development standards; amends 18.12.060, parking; amends 18.12.070,
               accessory and junior accessory dwelling units; amends 18.13.040, development
               standards; adds 18.13.045, increased floor area for housing developments of 3-10
5542  2-24-    units; amends 18.16.060, development standards; adds 18.16.065, increased floor
      2022     area for housing developments of 3-10 units; amends 18.18.060, development
               standards; adds 18.18.065, increased floor area for housing developments of 3-10
               units; amends 18.40.160, replacement project or discretionary review required;
               amends 18.42.180, interim standards for two units on single family zoned lots
               pursuant to Senate Bill 9; amends 18.52.020, definitions; amends 18.52.040, off-
               street parking, loading and bicycle facility requirements; amends Ch. 21.10,
               parcel maps for urban lot splits in single- family zones (16.65, 18.10, 18.12,
               18.13, 18.16, 18.18, 18.40, 18.42, 18.52, 21.10)
5543  1-31-    Amends 9.68.035, relocation assistance for no-fault eviction (9.68)
      2022
5544  3-17-    Amends 9.68.035, relocation assistance for no-fault eviction (9.68)
      2022
5545  5-11-    Adds 22.08.430, addition to John Boulware Park (22.08)
      2022
               Amends 18.42.180, interim standards for two units on single family zoned lots
5546  5-12-    pursuant to Senate Bill 9; amends 21.10.030, applicability; amends 21.10.040,
      2022     general requirements; amends 21.10.050, application and review of an urban lot
               split (18.42, 21.10)
               Amends 5.30.010, definitions; amends 5.30.025, limitation on the use of
5547  6-2-2022 disposable foodware items and other disposable products; amends 5.30.030,
               exemptions (5.30)
               Amends 18.08.030, references to districts; amends 18.13.040, development
               standards; amends 18.16.060, development standards; amends 18.18.060, development
5548  6-9-2022 standards; amends 18.20.040, site development standards; amends 18.30(J).090,
               development standards; amends 18.30(K).070, development standards; amends
               18.38.150, special requirements (18.08, 18.13, 18.16, 18.18, 18.20, 18.30(J),
               18.30(K)) (18.30(J).090 Repealed by 5554)
5549  6-16-    Temporarily extending Ord. 5517 (Not codified)
      2022
5550  6-16-    Amends 22.04.150, Foothills Nature Preserve (22.04)
      2022
               Interim ordinance temporarily continuing the expansion of outdoor dining, retail
      6-23-    and other activities on public and private property and relaxing regulations
5551  2022     regarding onsite parking, on-sale of alcohol, design/architectural review, permit
               fees, and alcohol consumption in public places, all to facilitate such outdoor
               use (Not codified)
5552  7-21-    Amending 16.57.010, applicability; amending 18.52.070, parking regulations for CD
      2022     Assessment District (16.57, 18.52)
5553  7-21-    Adds Chapter 18.24, contextual design criteria and objective design standards
      2022     (18.24)
               Amends 18.04.030, definitions; amends 18.08.030, references to districts; amends
               18.13.040, development standards; amends 18.13.050, village residential
               development; adds 18.13.055, general standards, exceptions, and performance
               criteria; amends 18.13.060, multiple family context-based design criteria and
               objective design standards; amends 18.16.060, development standards; amends
               18.16.080, performance standards; amends 18.16.090, context-based design criteria
               and objective design standards; amends 18.18.060, development standards; amends
               18.18.070, floor area bonuses; amends 18.18.080, transfer of development rights;
               amends 18.18.100, general standards, exceptions, and performance standards;
               amends 18.18.110, context-based design criteria and objective design standards;
               amends 18.20.040, site development standards; amends 18.20.050, general
               standards, exceptions, and performance criteria; repeals Chapter 18.23,
               performance criteria for multiple family, commercial, manufacturing and planned
5554  7-21-    community districts; amends 18.30(K).070, development standards; adds Chapter
      2022     18.32, affordable housing incentive program; amends 18.34.040, pedestrian and
               transit oriented development (PTOD) combining district regulations; amends
               18.34.050, pedestrian and transit oriented development (PTOD) combining district
               context-based design criteria and objective design standards; amends 18.40.130,
               landscaping; adds 18.40.240, refuse disposal areas; adds 18.40.250, lighting;
               adds 18.42.040, late night uses and activities; adds 18.42.190, noise and
               vibration; adds 18.42.200, hazardous materials; amends 18.52.040, off-street
               parking, loading and bicycle facility requirements; amends 18.52.070, parking
               regulations for CD assessment district; adds 18.54.015, definitions; amends
               18.54.020, vehicle parking facilities; amends 18.54.050, miscellaneous design
               standards; amends 18.76.020, architectural review; adds 18.77.073, streamlined
               housing development project review process (18.04, 18.08, 18.13, 18.16, 18.18,
               18.20, 18.30(K), 18.32, 18.34, 18.40, 18.42, 18.52, 18.54, 18.76, 18.77) (Ch.
               18.32 repealed by 5650)
5555  7-21-    Amends 2.30.680, definitions (2.30)
      2022
5556  7-21-    Amends 18.04.030, definitions (18.04)
      2022
               Amends 2.25.050, purpose and duties; adds 8.04.005, purpose; amends 8.04.010,
               definitions; amends 8.04.015, authority of city; amends 8.04.020, permit required
               for certain work; amends 8.04.030, application for permit; amends 8.04.040,
               issuance of permit; amends 8.04.050, public nuisance; repeals 8.04.060, abatement
               of public nuisances; amends 8.04.070, enforcement; adds 8.08.005, purpose; amends
               8.08.010, weeds as public nuisance; amends 8.08.020, resolution declaring
               nuisance; amends 8.08.030, form and publication of notice; 8.08.040, hearing on
               notice; amends 8.08.050, order to abate nuisance; amends 8.08.060, account and
               report of cost; amends 8.08.070, notice of report; amends 8.08.080, hearing on
               cost assessment; amends 8.10.010, purpose; amends 8.10.020, definitions; amends
5557  7-21-    8.10.030, tree and landscape technical manual; amends 8.10.040, disclosure of
      2022     information regarding existing trees; amends 8.10.050, removal of protected
               trees; adds 8.10.055, tree replacement; amends 8.10.060, no limitation of
               authority under Titles 16 and 18; amends 8.10.070, care of protected trees;
               amends 8.10.080, development conditions; amends 8.10.090, designation of heritage
               trees; adds 8.10.092, tree removal in wildland-urban interface area; amends
               8.10.095, tree removal in hospital district zone; amends 8.10.100, enforcement;
               amends 8.10.110, remedies for violation; amends 8.10.140, applications, notice,
               and appeals; amends 9.56.030, nuisances described - authority to abate; amends
               18.09.040, units subject to local standards; amends 18.36.060, parking and
               loading; amends 18.36.070, tree preservation; amends 18.54.050, miscellaneous
               design standards (2.25, 8.04, 8.08, 8.10, 9.56, 18.09, 18.36, 18.54)
5558  6-20-    Adopting the budget for Fiscal Year 2023 (Not codified)
      2022
5559  6-21-    Adopting a requirement that firearms retail service uses obtain a conditional use
      2022     permit (Not codified)
5561  10-28-   Approving and adopting a plan for facility improvements at Mitchell Park (Not
      2022     codified)
5562  10-28-   Implementing AB 481 (2021) by approving a military equipment use policy (Not
      2022     codified)
5563  12-15-   Repealing Ch. 15.04 and amending Title 15 to adopt a new Ch. 15.04, the
      2022     California Fire Code (2022 Edition) (15.04)
      12-15-   Repealing Ch. 16.04 and adopting a new Ch. 16.04, California Building Code,
5564  2022     adding new Ch. 16.19, California Historical Building Code and California Existing
               Building Code, 2022 Editions (Repealed by 5674) (16.04, 16.19)
5565  12-15-   Repealing Ch. 16.05 and amending Title 16 to adopt a new Ch. 16.05, California
      2022     Mechanical Code, 2022 Edition (Repealed by 5675) (16.05)
               Repealing Ch. 16.06 and adopting a new Ch. 16.06, California Residential Code,
               2022 Edition (Repealed by 5676); amends 16.52.040, definitions; adds 16.52.075,
5566  12-15-   requirement to submit new technical data; amends 16.52.110, development permit
      2022     required; amends 16.52.130, standards of construction; amends 16.52.160,
               standards for manufactured homes; amends 16.52.180, coastal high hazard areas
               (16.06, 16.52)
5567  12-15-   Repealing Ch. 16.08 and amending Title 16 to adopt a new Ch. 16.08, California
      2022     Plumbing Code, 2022 Edition (Repealed by 5677) (16.08)
5568  12-15-   Repealing Ch. 16.16 and adopting a new Ch. 16.16, California Electrical Code,
      2022     2022 Edition (Repealed by 5679) (16.16)
5569  12-15-   Repealing Ch. 16.18 and adopting a new Ch. 16.18, International Swimming Pool and
      2022     Spa Code (Repealed by 5680) (16.18)
5570  12-15-   Repealing Ch. 16.14 and adopting a new Ch. 16.14, California Green Building Code,
      2022     2022 Edition (16.14) (Ch. 16.14 repealed by 5626)
5571  12-15-   Repealing Ch. 16.17 and adopting a new Ch. 16.17, California Energy Code, 2022
      2022     Edition (16.17) (Ch. 16.17 repealed by 5627)
               Interim ordinance temporarily continuing the expansion of outdoor dining, retail
      11-24-   and other activities on public and private property and relaxing regulations
5572  2022     regarding onsite parking, on-sale of alcohol, design/architectural review, permit
               fees, and alcohol consumption in public places, all to facilitate such outdoor
               use (Not codified)
5573  1-12-    Temporarily extending Ord. 5517 (Not codified)
      2023
               Amends Chapter 18.09, accessory dwelling units and junior accessory dwelling
5574  3-2-2023 units; amends 18.10.030, land uses; amends 18.12.030, land uses; amends
               18.13.030, land uses (18.09, 18.10, 18.12, 18.13)
5575  3-6-2023 Emergency ordinance prohibiting the carry of firearms in sensitive places (Not
               codified)
5576  3-13-    Amends 22.04.220 to prohibit the use of electric bicycles in the city s parks
      2023     except as permitted by regulation (22.04)
5577  3-13-    3-13-2023   Amending the Fiscal Year 2023 municipal fee schedule to add a new fee
      2023     for city s on-demand transit service (Not codified)
5578  4-20-    Adopts 9.08.030, prohibiting the carry of firearms in sensitive places (9.08)
      2023
5579  4-20-    Approving and adopting a plan for sewer line replacement at Greer Park (Not
      2023     codified)
5580  4-20-    Amends 16.52.130 to correct administrative errors (16.52)
      2023
5581  12-19-   Amends Title 2 to add Ch. 2.37, business tax (2.37)
      2022
5582  12-19-   Adopts 2.28.185, natural gas utility transfer (2.28)
      2022
5583  4-10-    Amends 2.22.010, membership (2.22)
      2023
               Interim ordinance temporarily continuing the expansion of outdoor dining, retail
      6-22-    and other activities on public and private property and relaxing regulations
5584  2023     regarding onsite parking, on-sale of alcohol, design/architectural review, permit
               fees, and alcohol consumption in public places, all to facilitate such outdoor
               use (Not codified)
               Amends 18.04.030, 18.09.030, 18.09.040, 18.09.050, 18.10.080, 18.10.090,
5585  7-6-2023 18.12.080, 18.12.090, 18.40.050, requirements relating to accessory dwelling
               units and junior accessory dwelling units (18.04, 18.09, 18.10, 18.12, 18.40)
5586  7-6-2023 Adds 18.42.210, conditional use permit for firearms dealers
               Amends 16.65.025, 18.10.020 to 18.10.070, 18.12.020, 18.12.040, 18.12.060,
      7-13-    18.12.070, 18.13.040, 18.13.045, 18.16.060, 18.16.065, 18.18.060, 18.18.065,
5587  2023     18.40.160, 18.42.80, 18.52.020, 18.52.040, 21.10.010 to 21.10.060, exemptions to
               affordable housing requirements and implementing recent state housing bills
               (16.65, 18.10, 18.12, 18.13, 18.16, 18.18, 18.40, 18.42, 18.52, 21.10)
5588  7-20-    Amends 2.04.010, regular council meeting time (2.04)
      2023
5589  7-20-    Amends Ch. 9.68, rental housing stabilization (9.68)
      2023
5590  6-19-    Adopting the budget for Fiscal Year 2024 (Not codified)
      2023
5591  8-7-2023 Amends 9.10.060, special provisions (9.10)
5592  8-21-    Amends 9.68.00, 9.68.040, rental housing stabilization (9.68)
      2023
5593  4-1-2024 Amending the Fiscal Year 2024 Municipal Fee Schedule to add fees related to
               parklets (Not codified)
               Adds Ch. 12.11, parklets; amends 16.20.100, prohibited locations; amends
               18.04.030, definitions; amends 18.16.060, site development standards; amends
5594  4-1-2024 18.18.060, site development standards; amends 18.42.090, alcoholic beverages;
               amends 18.52.040, off-street parking, loading and bicycle facility requirements;
               amends 18.76.010, conditional use permit; amends 18.76.020, architectural review
               (12.11, 16.20, 18.04, 18.16, 18.18, 18.42, 18.52, 18.76)
5595  11-2-23  Approving development agreement (Not codified)
5596  11-2-23  Rezoning property (Not codified)
5597  11-2-23  Rezoning property (Not codified)
5598  11-2-23  Rezoning property (Not codified)
5599  11-2-23  Rezoning property (Not codified)
5600  11-2-23  Rezoning property (Not codified)
               Amends 9.10.030, 18.04.030, 18.10.040, 18.12.040, 18.12.050, 18.12.120,
5601  12-7-23  18.13.040, 18.40.060, 18.40.260, 18.54.020, adopting electrification equipment
               requirements by 2022 Green Building Code (9.10, 18.04, 18.10, 18.12, 18.13,
               18.40, 18.54)
5602  12-28-23 Approving amendment to development agreement (Not codified)
5603  12-28-23 Temporarily continuing the expansion of outdoor dining (Not codified)
5604  12-28-23 Renewing the military equipment use policy (Not codified)
5605  1-18-24  Creates new Chapter 9.65, residential rental registry program, and amending
               9.72.050, property registration (9.65, 9.72)
5606  12-11-23 Authorizing the Director of Planning and Development Services to extend the
               validity of planning entitlements for housing development projects (Not codified)
               Amends 2.30.210, 2.37.070, 2.37.080, 2.37.150, 2.37.180, 2.37.190, contracts and
5607  1-18-24  purchasing procedures and correcting clerical errors and clarify procedures for
               administering the business tax (2.30, 2.37)
               Adopting Chapter 18.14 (housing incentives) and amending various chapters of
5608  1-18-24  Title 18 (zoning) to implement programs 1.1A and 1.1B of the City of Palo Alto
               2023-2031 Housing Element (18.12, 18.14, 18.16, 18.20, 18.28)
5609  2-16-24  Amends 18.42.160, safe parking (18.42)
               Amends Ch. 4.10, solicitors and peddlers; amends Title 4 to add Ch. 4.12,
5610  2-16-24  sidewalk vendors; amends Ch. 4.30, soliciting funds; amends Ch. 4.32, soliciting
               information for commercial purposes (4.10, 4.12, 4.30, 4.32)
5611  2-16-24  Temporarily extending validity of planning entitlements (Not codified)
               Adds 18.14.050, by right status of qualifying projects on specified housing
               opportunity sites; amends 18.76.020, architectural review, and adds 18.76.025,
5613  1-24-24  multi-family residential projects; amends 18.77.073, streamlined housing
               development project review process, and adds 18.77.074, ministerial and by right
               review process (18.14, 18.76, 18.77)
5614  3-7-24   Amends 2.18.010, membership (2.18)
               Adds 18.14.050, by right status of qualifying projects on specified housing
               opportunity sites; amends 18.76.020, architectural review; adds 18.76.025, multi-
5615  3-7-24   family residential projects exempt from architectural review; amends 18.77.073,
               streamlined housing development project review process; adds 18.77.074,
               ministerial and by right review process (18.14, 18.76, 18.77)
5616  3-7-24   Approving a plan for improvement to the Palo Alto Baylands as part of the
               Horizontal Levee Pilot Project (Not codified)
5620  4-4-24   Rezoning property (not codified)
5621  4-4-24   Rezoning property (not codified)
5617  4-18-24  Adds 22.08.440, Tower Well Park (22.08)
5618  5-1-24   Rezoning property (not codified)
5619  5-1-24   Amends 2.04.360, salary of council members (2.04)
               Amends 8.04.050, 8.10.020, 8.10.040, 8.10.050, 8.10.055, 8.10.070, 8.10.140,
5612  5-1-24   public trees, shrubs, hedges, and plants and tree and landscape preservation and
               management (8.04, 8.10)
5622  7-4-24   Rezoning property (not codified)
5623  7-4-24   Incorporating changes to Ch. 18.15, density bonus (18.15)
5624  7-4-24   Amending 2.27.010, 2.27.030, historic resources board, and organization (2.27)
5625  7-12-24  Fixing date of special election (not codified)
5626  7-18-24  Repealing Ch. 16.14 and adopting a new Ch. 16.14, California Green Building Code,
               2022 Edition (Repealed by 5678) (16.14)
5627  7-18-24  Repealing Ch. 16.17 and adopting a new Ch. 16.17, California Energy Code, 2022
               Edition (Repealed by 5665) (16.17)
5628  7-19-24  Temporarily extending Ord. 5517 (Not codified)
5629  6-17-24  Adopting the budget for fiscal year 2025 (Not codified)
5631  10-8-24  Amends 22.08.440, Fred Eyerly Tower Well Park (22.08)
5632  10-8-24  Amends 2.22.030, officers, meetings and procedures (2.22)
5633  11-21-24 Amends Ch. 4.64, permits for retailers of tobacco products (4.64)
               Amends 16.65.030, basic affordable housing requirement - residential ownership
               projects; amends 16.65.040, basic requirement - mixed use, nonresidential and
5634  11-21-24 residential rental projects; amends 18.14.020, housing element opportunity sites;
               amends 18.24.010, purpose and applicability; adds Ch. 18.29, North Ventura
               District Regulations; amends 18.70.040, nonconforming use - discontinuance
               (16.65, 18.14, 18.24, 18.29, 18.70)
5636  11-18-24 Amends the Fiscal Year 2025 Municipal Fee Schedule to amend existing fees for
               Palo Alto Link on-demand transit service (Not codified)
               Amends 18.04.030, definitions; 18.30(A).040, permitted uses; 18.30(A).050,
5637  11-18-24 conditional uses, 18.30(A).070, waivers and adjustments; 18.30(C).020, permitted
               uses 18.30(C).030, conditional uses; adds 18.30(C).050, waivers and adjustments
               (18.04, 18.30(A), 18.30(C))
5639  12-2-24  Amends the Fiscal Year 2025 Municipal Fee Schedule to transition certain
               development impact fees from per-unit to per-square foot fees (Not codified)
5640  11-5-24  Amends Exhibit A-19 of Chapter 22.08 to amend the area dedicated as El Camino
               Park to discontinue the park use of approximately 0.33 acres (22.08)
               Amends 16.64.030, deferred payment; 16.64.040, calculation of fee; 18.10.040,
               development standards; 18.12.040, site development standards; 18.12.110, single
               family individual review; 18.15.020, definitions; 18.15.030, density bonuses;
5641  12-16-24 18.15.050, development concessions and incentives; 18.42.180, standards for two
               units on single family zoned lots pursuant to Senate Bill 9; 21.10.020,
               definitions; 21.10.030, applicability; 21.10.040, general requirements;
               21.10.050, application and review of an urban lot split (16.64, 18.10, 18.12,
               18.15, 18.42, 21.10)
               Amends 18.04.030, definitions; 18.30(A).040, permitted uses; 18.30(A).050,
5642  1-16-25  conditional uses; 18.30(A).070, waivers and adjustments; 18.30(C).020, permitted
               uses; 18.30(C).030, conditional uses; 18.30(C).050, waivers and adjustments
               (18.04, 18.30(A), 18.30(C))
5643  2-13-25  Amends 2.16.070, schedule of appointments; 2.18.040, term of office; 2.22.020,
               term of office; 2.25.030, term of office (2.16, 2.18, 2.22, 2.25)
               Approving a plan for park improvements at the city s Baylands: authorizing the
5644  2-13-25  Santa Clara Valley Water District s Palo Alto Flood Basin Tide Gate Structure
               Phase 1: Seismic Retrofit and Rehabilitation Project (Not codified)
               Amends 16.64.030, deferred payment; 16.64.040, calculation of fee; 18.10.040,
               development standards; 18.12.040, site development standards; 18.12.110, single
               family individual review; 18.15.020, definitions; 18.15.030, density bonuses;
5645  2-13-25  18.15.050, development concessions and incentives; 18.42.180, standards for two
               units on single family zoned lots pursuant to Senate Bill 9; 21.10.020,
               definitions; 21.10.030, applicability; 21.10.040, general requirements;
               21.10.050, application and review of an urban lot split (16.64, 18.10, 18.12,
               18.15, 18.42, 21.10)
               Adds 18.14.060, by right housing projects; amends 18.20.030, land uses; amends
               18.20.040, site development standards; amends 18.28.020, definitions; amends
               18.28.040, land uses; amends 18.28.070, additional OS district regulations;
5646  3-13-25  amends 18.28.080, additional AC district design requirements; amends 18.40.160,
               replacement project or discretionary review required; amends 18.52.040, off-
               street parking, loading, and bicycle facility requirements; amends 18.77.070,
               architectural review process; amends 21.10.040, general requirements (18.14,
               18.20, 18.28, 18.40, 18.52, 18.77, 21.10)
               Changing the classification of property located at 3265 El Camino Real from
5647  3-27-25  Service Commercial (CS) Zone to Planned Community Zone (PC) for the construction
               of a 100 percent affordable housing project (Not codified)
5648  3-10-25  Amends 18.40.160, replacement project or discretionary review required (18.40)
               Amends 18.13.040, development standards; amends 18.14.030, housing incentive
               program; amends 18.14.040, affordable housing incentive program; amends
5650  5-8-25   18.16.060, development standards; amends 18.18.060, development standards; amends
               18.20.040, site development standards; repeals Ch. 18.32, affordable housing
               incentive program; amends 18.40.180, retail preservation (18.13, 18.14, 18.16,
               18.18, 18.20, 18.32, 18.40)
               Amends 18.14.060, by right affordable housing and supportive housing projects;
               amends 18.18.060, development standards; amends 18.30(F).040, permitted uses;
               adds 18.30(F).045, conditional uses; amends 18.42.040, late night uses and
               activities; adds 18.42.185, standards for up to ten units on lots subdivided
               pursuant to Senate Bill 684; amends 18.52.030, basic parking regulations; amends
5651  5-8-25   18.52.040, off-street parking, loading and bicycle facility requirements; amends
               18.52.045, adjustments to existing parking facilities; amends 18.52.050,
               adjustments by the director; amends 18.52.070, parking regulations for CD
               assessment district; amends 18.77.074, ministerial and by right review process;
               adds Ch. 21.11, streamlined subdivisions resulting in ten or fewer parcels;
               amends 21.12.090, action on tentative and preliminary parcel maps (18.14, 18.18,
               18.30(F), 18.42, 18.52, 18.77, 21.11, 21.12)
               Amends 2.32.040, purpose; amends 2.32.050, contract with state; amends 2.32.070,
5652  5-15-25  place of sale; amends 2.32.100, limitations on adoption of state law; amends
               2.32.140, application of provisions relating to exclusions and exemptions (2.32)
5653  6-5-25   Amends 2.04.190, standing committees - special meetings; amends 2.04.200,
               standing committee meetings (2.04)
5654  5-5-     Changing the classification of property located at 70 Encina Avenue from Service
      25    Commercial (CS) Zone to Planned Community (PC) Zone (Not codified)
5655  6-9-     Amends 18.42.110, wireless communication facilities (18.42)
      25   
               Adds 16.04.235, Cal. Building Code section 202 definitions; amends 16.49.050,
               exterior alteration of historic structures; 18.04.030, definitions; 18.09.010
               18.09.050, accessory dwelling units and junior accessory dwelling units;
5656  7-17-25  18.10.040, development standards; 18.10.150, grandfathered uses; 18.12.040,
               development standards; 18.28.040, land uses; 18.28.070, additional OS district
               regulations; repeals 18.28.100, grandfathered uses (16.04, 16.49, 18.04, 18.09,
               18.10, 18.12, 18.28)
5657  7-17-25  Amends 16.58.030, development impact fee exemptions; 18.14.020, housing element
               opportunity sites; 18.14.030, housing incentive program (16.58, 18.14)
5658  6-16-25  Adopting the budget for fiscal year 2026 (Not codified)
               Temporary emergency ordinance to implement SB 684 and SB 1123; adds 18.42.220,
5659  6-9-25   standards for up to ten units; amends 21.11.010 21.11.030 and replaces 21.11.040,
               21.11.050, regarding streamlined subdivisions resulting in ten or fewer parcels;
               Expires 6/9/2026 unless extended or superseded (18.42, 21.11)
5660  10-9-25  Adds 2.21.020, officers; amends 2.25.040, officers (2.21, 2.25)
5661  10-9-25  Adds Chapter 16.15, Electric Vehicle Charging Stations (16.15)
5662  10-9-25  Adopting 2025 Fire Hazard Severity Zone Map issued by the State Fire Marshal (Not
               codified)
5663  9-8-25   Amending the fiscal year 2026 Municipal Fee Schedule to amend and remove various
               fees (Not codified)
               Amends 16.04.190, Section 111.1 Use and occupancy; amends 16.04.235, Section 202
5664  9-8-25   Definitions, to add new local amendments and associated findings related to
               certificates of occupancy and definitions (Repealed by 5674) (16.04)
5665  9-8-25   Repeals and replaces Ch. 16.17, California Energy Code, California Code of
               Regulations, Title 24, Part 6 (16.17)
               Emergency ordinance amends 16.05.050, Section 102.8 Appendices (Repealed by
5666  9-8-25   5675); amends 16.14.070 Section 202 Definitions; amends 16.14.080, Section 301 -
               Voluntary Tiers Added (Repealed by 5678) (16.04, 16.14)
5667  9-29-25  Amending the fiscal year 2026 Municipal Fee Schedule to amend and remove various
               fees (Not codified)
               Amends 10.56.010, twenty-five miles per hour prima facie speed limit justified;
5668  10-30-25 amends 10.56.015, thirty miles per hour prima facie speed limit; amends
               10.56.020, thirty-five miles per hour prima facie speed limit; amends 10.56.025,
               forty miles per hour prima facie speed limit (10.56)
               Amends 16.64.060, notice of protest; amends 16.64.070, informal hearing and
5669  10-30-25 preparation of additional analysis; repeals and reserves 16.64.080; amends
               16.64.090, cost of protest (16.64)
5670  10-30-25 Repeals and replaces Ch. 16.09, Sewer Use Ordinance (16.09)
5671  10-30-25 Repeals and replaces Ch. 16.11, Stormwater Pollution Prevention (16.11)
5672  10-30-25 Adds Ch. 16.13, Requirements for Food Facilities Related to Water Pollution
               Prevention and Management of Fats, Oils, and Grease (16.13)
5673  10-30-25 Adds Ch. 16.66, Hauled Liquid Waste (16.66)
               Repeals and replaces Ch. 16.04, California Building Code, California Code of
               Regulations, Title 24, Part 2, Volumes 1 & 2; repeals and replaces Ch.19,
5674  11-20-25 California Historical Building Code, California Code of Regulations, Title 24,
               Part 8 and California Existing Building Code, California Code of Regulations,
               Title 24, Part 10 (16.04, 16.19)
5675  11-20-25 Repeals and replaces Ch. 16.05, California Mechanical Code, California Code of
               Regulations, Title 24, Part 4 (16.05)
5676  11-20-25 Repeals and replaces Ch. 16.06, 2025 California Residential Code, California Code
               of Regulations, Title 24, Part 2.5 (16.06)
5677  11-20-25 Repeals and replaces Ch. 16.08, California Plumbing Code, California Code of
               Regulations, Title 24, Part 5 (16.08)
5678  11-20-25 Repeals and replaces Ch. 16.14, California Green Building Standards Code,
               California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 11 (16.14)
5679  11-20-25 Repeals and replaces Ch. 16.16, California Electrical Code, California Code of
               Regulations, Title 24, Part 3 (16.16)
5680  11-20-25 Repeals and replaces Ch. 16.18, 2024 International Swimming Pool and Spa Code
               (ISPSC) (16.18)
               Amends 16.17.070, Section 110.10 Mandatory requirements for solar ready
               buildings; amends 16.17.080, Subchapter 3 Nonresidential hotel/motel occupancies,
5681  11-20-25 and covered processes - mandatory requirements; amends 16.17.090, Section 120.6
               (I) Electric readiness requirements for systems using gas or propane; amends
               16.17.150, Section 160.9 Mandatory requirements for electric ready buildings
               (16.17)
              
 
 
