CITY CODE
of
REDLANDS, CALIFORNIA
Code current through:
Ord. 2986, passed July 15, 2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
(800) 445-5588
 www.amlegal.com 
PREFACE
This City Code of the City of Redlands, as supplemented, contains ordinances up
to and including Ordinance 2986, passed July 15, 2025. Ordinances of the City
adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this City Code to the
extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the City
office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the Code has
been amended, superseded or repealed.
American Legal Publishing
Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING REVIEW FOR CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they are pending review by the
publisher, and they may not amend the code of ordinances. Additionally,
ordinances listed in this section may not show the original ordinances in their
entirety. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions
concerning any listed ordinances.
 
ORDINANCE NO. 2992
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF REDLANDS AMENDING TITLE 15, CHAPTER 15.32, OF THE
REDLANDS MUNICIPAL CODE RELATING TO FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION AND FLOODPLAIN
MANAGEMENT.
 
WHEREAS, California Government Code sections 65302, 65560, and 65800 conferred
upon local governments the authority to adopt regulations designed to promote
the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry, and the City
of Redlands has previously adopted floodplain management regulations; and
WHEREAS, on September 20, 2016, the City Council of the City of Redlands
adopted Ordinance No. 2837 updating Title 15, Chapter 15.32 (Flood Damage
Prevention), of the Redlands Municipal Code; and
WHEREAS, on September 1, 2020, the City Council of the City of Redlands adopted
Ordinance No. 2914 amending Title 15, Chapter 15.32 (Flood Damage Prevention),
of the Redlands Municipal Code; and
WHEREAS, the City of Redlands desires to update Title 15, Chapter 15.32 (Flood
Damage Prevention), of the Redlands Municipal Code to align with current
applicable State and/or Federal guidance and regulations; and
 
WHEREAS, the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968 was enacted by title XIII of
the Housing & Urban Development Act of 1968 (“Act”) to provide previously
unavailable flood insurance protection to property owners in flood-prone areas.
Under the Act and the regulations promulgated under the Act, specifically 44
CFR § 59.2, in order to qualify for the sale of federally-subsidized flood
insurance, the City must adopt and submit to the Federal
Insurance Administrator an ordinance adopting flood plain management
regulations that satisfy the requirements of 44 CFR Part 60 and that are
designed to reduce or avoid future flood, mudslide or flood-related
erosion damages and include enforcement provisions; and
 
WHEREAS, while the City of Redlands has adopted the most recent version of the
California Building Code and has an ordinance for flood plain management
regulations that previously satisfied the prerequisites for the National Flood
Insurance Program or the regulations set forth at 44 CFR Part 60, amendments to
the City’s ordinance are required to continue to satisfy the National Flood
Insurance Program or the regulations set forth at 44 CFR Part 60; and
 
WHEREAS, pursuant to 44 CFR § 59.24, a government entity that is
otherwise eligible for the sale of federal flood insurance shall be subject to
suspension from the National Flood Insurance Program for failing to submit
copies of adequate flood plain management regulations meeting the minimum
requirements of 4 CFR Part 60 and,
 
WHEREAS, the City Council finds that the impending loss of community
eligibility for discounted flood insurance under the National Flood Insurance
Program poses a current and immediate threat to the public health, safety, and
welfare presented by floods and related conditions during the upcoming rainy
season(s). In the absence of this ordinance's effectiveness, the City would be
unable to secure eligibility to purchase discounted federal flood insurance for
affected community members, as well as to protect the public health, safety,
and welfare from the potential adverse effects of lack of insurance coverage to
recover from a flood or flood-related disaster; and
 
WHEREAS, on October 21, 2025, the City Council held a regular public meeting at
which interested persons had an opportunity to testify in support of, or
opposition to, Ordinance No. 2992; and
 
WHEREAS, after closing public comment and deliberating upon the matter, the
City Council finds that approval of the proposed amendment to Title 15, Chapter
15.32 (Flood Damage Prevention), of the Redlands Municipal Code will be in the
best interests of the public health, safety, and general welfare.
NOW, THEREFORE, THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF REDLANDS DOES ORDAIN AS
FOLLOWS:
SECTION 1.   Section 15.32.020 of Chapter 15.32 of the Redlands Municipal Code,
entitled “Definitions,” is hereby amended to read as follows:
“15.32.020: DEFINITIONS:
The following words shall have the meanings ascribed to them:
 ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: A structure that is accessory to and incidental to that
of the dwelling(s) and that is located on the same structure.
ACCESSORY USE: A use which is incidental and subordinate to the principal use
of the parcel of land on which it is located.
   ALLUVIAL FAN: A geomorphologic feature characterized by a cone or fan shaped
deposit of boulders, gravel, and fine sediments that have been eroded from
mountain slopes, transported by flood flows, and then deposited on the valley
floors, and which is subject to flash flooding, high velocity flows, debris
flows, erosion, sediment movement and deposition, and channel migration.
   APEX: The point of highest elevation on an alluvial fan, which on
undisturbed fans is generally the point where the major stream that formed the
fan emerges from the mountain front.
   APPEAL: A request for a review of the chief building official's
interpretation of any provision of this chapter.
   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING: A designated AO or AH zone on the flood insurance
rate map (FIRM) where the base flood depths range from one to three feet (3'),
a clearly defined channel does not exist, the path of flooding is unpredictable
and indeterminate, and velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is
characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
  ATTENDANT UTILITIES AND EQUIPMENT: Utilities, mechanical. Electrical, fuel
gas, plumbing, HVAC, and related equipment, as well as services associated with
new construction and substantial improvements.
  BASE FLOOD: A flood which has a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year (also called the "100-year flood"). Base flood is
the term used throughout this chapter.
 BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE): Elevation of flooding, including wave height, have
a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
  BASEMENT: Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
   DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings, structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of
equipment or materials.
 DRY FLOODPROOFING: A combination of measures that results in a structure,
including the attendant utilities and equipment, being watertight with all
elements substantially impermeable and with structural components having the
capacity to resist flood loads.   
ENCROACHMENT: The advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill,
excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development into a floodplain
which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.
   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date
of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
   FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM): The official map on which the
federal emergency management agency or federal insurance administration has
delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the floodway.
   FLOOD, FLOODING, OR FLOODWATER:
A. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters, the
unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source,
and/or mudslides (i.e., mudflows); and
      B.   The condition resulting from flood related erosion.
   FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP: The official map on which the federal emergency
management agency or federal insurance administration has delineated the areas
of flood hazards.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM): The official map on which the federal
emergency management agency or federal insurance administration has delineated
both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk of premium zones
applicable to the community.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY: The official report provided by the federal insurance
administration that includes flood profiles, the flood insurance rate map, the
flood boundary and floodway map and the water surface elevation of the base
flood.
   FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR: The city's chief building official.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT: The operation of an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing,
where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including, but not limited
to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management
regulations and open space plans.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS: This chapter, subdivision regulations,
building codes, health regulations, ordinances (such as grading and erosion
control) and other applications of police power regulations which control
development in flood prone areas. This term describes federal, state or local
regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for preventing
and reducing flood loss and damage.
   FLOODPLAIN OR FLOOD PRONE AREA: Any land area susceptible to being inundated
by water from any source (see definition of Flood, Flooding, Or Floodwater).
   FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
   FLOODWAY: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot (1').
   FLOODWAY FRINGE: That area of the floodplain on either side of the
"regulatory floodway" where encroachment may be permitted.
   FRAUD AND VICTIMIZATION: As related to sections 15.32.180 and 15.32.190 of
this chapter, means that the variance granted must not cause fraud on or
victimization of the public. In examining this requirement, the city will
consider the fact that every newly constructed building adds to government
responsibilities and remains a part of the city for fifty (50) to one hundred
(100) years. Buildings that are permitted to be constructed below the base
flood elevation are subject during all those years to increased risk of damage
from floods, while future owners of the property and the city as a whole are
subject to all the costs, inconvenience, danger, and suffering that those
increased flood damages bring. In addition, future owners may purchase the
property, unaware that it is subject to potential flood damage, and can be
insured only at very high flood insurance rates.
   FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE: A use which cannot perform its intended purpose
unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water.
   GOVERNING BODY: The city council of the city of Redlands that is empowered
to adopt and implement regulations to provide for the public health, safety and
general welfare of its citizenry.
   HARDSHIP: As related to section 15.32.190 of this chapter, means the
exceptional hardship that would result from a failure to grant a requested
variance. The city council requires that the variance be exceptional, unusual,
and peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or financial hardship
alone is not exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical
handicaps, personal preferences, or the disapproval of one's neighbors likewise
cannot, as a rule, qualify as an exceptional hardship. All of these problems
can be resolved through other means without granting a variance, even if the
alternative is more expensive, or requires the property owner to build
elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use than originally intended.
   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE: The highest natural elevation of the ground surface
prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE: Any structure that is:
A.   Listed individually in the national register of historic places (a listing
maintained by the department of interior) or preliminarily determined by the
secretary of the interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on
the national register;
B.   Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as
contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district
or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a
registered historic district;
C.   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with
historic preservation programs which have been approved by the secretary of the
interior; or
D.   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by an
approved state program as determined by the secretary of the interior or
directly by the secretary of the interior in states without approved programs.
   LEVEE: A manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and
constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control
or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary
flooding.
   LEVEE SYSTEM: A flood protection system which consists of a levee, or
levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which
are constructed and operated in accord with sound engineering practices.
   LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including
basement (see definition of Basement), for:
A.   An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure below the lowest floor that is
usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area
other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor
provided it conforms to applicable nonelevation design requirements, but not
limited to:
          1.   The wet floodproofing standard in subsection 15.32.110C of this
chapter;
          2.   The anchoring standards in subsection 15.32.110A of this
chapter;
 3.   The construction materials and methods standards in subsection
15.32.110B of this chapter; and
          4.   The standards for utilities in section 15.32.120 of this
chapter.
B.   Residential structures, all subgrade enclosed areas are prohibited as they
are considered to be basements (see definition of Basement). This prohibition
includes below grade garages and storage areas.
   MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term
"manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle".
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
   MARKET VALUE: The cost to replace the structure in new condition and
adjusting that cost figure by the amount of depreciation which has accrued
since the structure was constructed. The cost of replacement of the structure
shall be based on a square foot cost factor determined by reference to a
building cost estimation guide recognized by the building construction
industry. The amount of depreciation shall be determined by taking into account
the age and physical deterioration of the structure and functional obsolescence
as approved by the floodplain administrator, but shall not include economic or
other forms of external obsolescence. Use of replacement costs or accrued
depreciation factors different from those contained in recognized building cost
estimation guides may be considered only if such factors are included in a
report prepared by an independent professional appraiser and supported by
written explanation of the differences.
   MEAN SEA LEVEL: For purposes of the national flood insurance program, the
national geodetic vertical datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base
flood elevation shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced.
   MINIMUM NECESSARY: To afford relief with a minimum of deviation from the
requirements of this chapter.
   MUDSLIDE (MUDFLOW) PRONE AREA: An area with land surfaces and slopes of
unconsolidated material where the history, geology, and climate indicate a
potential for mudflow.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION: For floodplain management purposes, means structures for
which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of
floodplain management regulations adopted by this community, and includes any
subsequent improvements to such structures.
   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective
date of floodplain management regulations adopted by this city.
   OBSTRUCTION: Any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment,
protection, excavation, channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building,
wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill structure, vegetation or other material
in, along, across or projection into any watercourse which may alter, impede,
retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the flow of water, or due to
its location, its propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of
water, or its likelihood of being carried downstream.
   PUBLIC SAFETY AND NUISANCE: As related to section 15.32.190 of this chapter,
means that the granting of a variance must not result in anything which is
injurious to safety or health of an entire community or neighborhood, or any
considerable number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or
use, in the customary manner, of any navigable lake or river, bay, stream,
canal, or basin.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicle which is:
      A.   Built on a single chassis;
B.   Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
C.   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck; and
D.   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
   REGULATORY FLOODWAY: Channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a
designated height.
   REMEDY A VIOLATION: To bring a structure or other development into
compliance with state and local floodplain management regulations, or, if that
is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that impacts
may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected development
from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of this chapter or
otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing state or federal
financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development.
   RIVERINE: Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including
tributaries), stream or brook.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA): An area in the floodplain subject to a one
percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any given year and is shown on an
FHBM or FIRM as zone A, AO, A1-30, AE, A99, or AH.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION: Includes substantial improvement, and other proposed
new development and means the date the building permit was issued; provided,
the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, placement or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180)
days of the permit date. The "actual start" means either the first placement of
permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or
footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work
beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of manufactured home on a
foundation. "Permanent construction" does not include land preparation, such as
clearing, grading and filling, the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor
does it include the excavation of basements, footings, piers or foundations or
the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the
property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as
dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial
improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any
wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not
that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
   STRUCTURE: A walled and roofed building that is principally above ground;
including a gas or liquid storage tank or a manufactured home.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal
or exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or
other proposed new development of a structure, the cost of which equals or
exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the
start of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which
have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either:
A.   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
or state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have
been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the
minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
B.   Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will
not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure.
   VARIANCE: A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which
permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this
chapter.
   VIOLATION: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with this chapter. A structure or other development without the
elevation certificate, other certification, or other evidence of compliance
required by this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.
   WATER SURFACE ELEVATION: The height, in relation to the national geodetic
vertical datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or the datum, where specified), of floods of
various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine
areas.
   WATERCOURSE: A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, arroyo, channel or other
topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically.
Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood
damage may occur.”
SECTION 2.    Section 15.32.040 of Chapter 15.32 of the Redlands Municipal
Code, entitled “Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard,” is hereby
amended to read as follows:
“15.32.040: ESTABLISHING THE AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD:
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the federal insurance
administration (FIA) of the federal emergency management agency (FEMA) in the
“Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for San Bernardino County, California and
Incorporated Areas” dated January 17, 1997, with accompanying flood insurance
rate maps (FIRMs) and flood boundary and floodway maps (FBFMs), dated January
3, 1979, and all subsequent amendments and/or revisions, are adopted by
reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. This flood insurance study
(FIS) and attendant mapping is the minimum area of applicability of this
chapter and may be supplemented by studies for other areas which allow
implementation of this chapter and which are recommended to the city council by
the chief building official. The study, FIRMs and FBFMs are on file at 35 Cajon
Street, Suite 20, department of building and safety.”
SECTION 3.    Section 15.32.080 of Chapter 15.32 of the Redlands Municipal
Code, entitled “Warning and Disclaimer of Liability,” is hereby amended to read
as follows:
“15.32.080: WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on occasions and flood heights
may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that
land outside the areas of special flood hazards, or uses permitted within such
areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not
create liability on the part of the city, any elected official, officer or
employee thereof, the state of California, or the federal insurance
administration, federal emergency management agency, for any flood damages that
result from reliance on this chapter or any rule or regulation made pursuant to
this chapter.
If any section, provision or portion of the ordinance is deemed
unconstitutional or invalid by a court, the remainder of the ordinance shall be
effective.”
SECTION 4.    Section 15.32.100 of Chapter 15.32 of the Redlands Municipal
Code, entitled “Chief Building Official; Duties and Responsibilities,” is
hereby amended to read as follows:
“15.32.100: CHIEF BUILDING OFFICIAL; DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
The chief building official, as the designated floodplain administrator, shall
administer, implement, and enforce this chapter by granting or denying
development permits in accordance with its provisions and the chief building
official duties and responsibilities shall include, but not be limited to:
      A.   Permit Review:
1.   Review all development permits to determine that the permit requirements
of this chapter have been satisfied;
            2.   Ensure that all other state and federal permits have been
obtained;
            3.   Determine that the site is reasonably safe from flooding; and
4.   The proposed development within zones A1-30 and AE without a designated
floodway does not adversely affect the carrying capacity of areas where base
flood elevations have been determined but a floodway has not been designated.
For purposes of this chapter, “adversely affects” means that the cumulative
effect of the proposed development when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development will increase the water surface elevation of the base
flood more than one foot (1’) at any point.
 
 
      B.   Review, Use And Development Of Other Base Flood Data:
1.   When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with
section 15.32.040 of this chapter, the chief building official shall obtain,
review and utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a
federal, state or other sources, or if no base flood elevation data is
available from a federal or state agency or other source, in order to
administer section 15.32.110 of this chapter. Any such information shall be
submitted to the city for adoption; or
2.   If no base flood elevation data is available from a federal or state
agency or other source, then a base flood elevation shall be obtained using one
of the two (2) methods from the FEMA publication "Managing Floodplain
Development In Approximate Zone A Areas-A Guide Of Obtaining And Developing
Base (100-Year) Flood Elevations" dated July 1995, in order to administer
section 15.32.110 of this chapter.
                  a.   Simplified method:
(1)   100-year or base flood discharge shall be obtained using the appropriate
regression equation found in a U.S. geological survey publication, or the
discharge-drainage area method; and
(2)   Base flood elevation shall be obtained using the Quick-2 computer program
developed by FEMA; or
                  b.   Detail method:
(1)   100-year or base flood discharge shall be obtained using the U.S. army
corps of engineers' HEC-HMS computer program; and
(2)   Base flood elevation shall be obtained using the U.S. army corps of
engineers' HEC-RAS computer program.
      C.   Notification Of Other Agencies:
            1.   In alteration or relocation of a watercourse:
a.   Notify adjacent communities and the California department of water
resources prior to alteration or relocation;
                  b.   Submit evidence of such notification to the FEMA; and
c.   Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated
portion of said watercourse is maintained.
            2.   Base Flood Elevation Changes Due To Physical Alterations:
a.   Within six (6) months of information becoming available or project
completion, whichever comes first, the floodplain administrator shall submit or
assure that the permit applicant submits technical or scientific data to FEMA
for a Letter of Map Revision (LOMR).
b.   All LOMR’s for flood control projects are approved prior to the issuance
of building permits. Building permits must not be issued based on Conditional
Letters of Map Revision (CLOMR’s). Approved CLOMR’s allow construction of the
proposed flood control project and land preparation as specified in the “start
of construction” definition.
Such submissions are necessary so that upon confirmation of those physical
changes affecting flooding conditions, risk premium rates and floodplain
management requirements are based on current data.
            3.   Changes In Corporate Boundaries:
a.   Notify FEMA in writing whenever the corporate boundaries have been
modified by annexation or other means and include a copy of a map of the
community clearly delineating the new corporate limits.
 
      D.   Documentation Of Floodplain Development: Obtain and maintain for
public inspection and make available as needed the following:
1.   Certification required by sections 15.32.110 and 15.32.140 of this chapter
(lowest floor elevations);
2.   Certification required by subsection 15.32.110C4 of this chapter
(elevation or floodproofing of nonresidential structures);
3.   Certification of elevation required by subsection 15.32.110C5 of this
chapter (wet floodproofing standards);
4.   Certification of elevation required by section 15.32.130, "Subdivision
Standards", of this chapter;
5.   Certification required by section 15.32.160 of this chapter (floodway
encroachments);
6.   Reports required by section 15.32.170 of this chapter (mudflow standards).
 
      E.   Map Determinations: Make interpretations, where needed, as to the
exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for
example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and
actual field conditions). Any person contesting the location of a boundary
shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as
provided in sections 15.32.180 and 15.32.190 of this chapter.
      F.   Remedial Action: Take action to remedy violations of this chapter.”
SECTION 5.   Section 15.32.110 of Chapter 15.32 of the Redlands Municipal Code,
entitled “Construction Standards,” is hereby amended to read as follows:
“15.32.110: CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are required:
      A.   Anchoring:
1.   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
2.   All manufactured homes shall meet the anchoring standards of section
15.32.140 of this chapter.
      B.   Construction Materials And Methods:
1.   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
with flood resistant materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage;
2.   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
using methods and practices that minimize flood damage;
3.   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment
and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent
water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of
flooding by elevating said equipment by at least one foot (1’) above the base
flood elevation; and
4.   If within zone AH or AO, adequate drainage paths around structures on
slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
      C.   Elevation And Floodproofing:
1.   Residential construction, new or substantial improvement of any structure
in zone AE, AH, or A1-30 shall have the lowest floor, including basement,
elevated two feet (2') above the base flood elevation. Upon the completion of
the structure the elevation of the lowest floor including basement shall be
certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor, or verified by the
chief building official to be properly elevated.
2.   Residential construction, new or substantial improvement, of any structure
in zone AO shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated above the
highest adjacent grade to a height exceeding the depth number specified in feet
on the FIRM by at least two feet (2'), or elevated at least four feet (4')
above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified. Upon the
completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor including
basement shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor,
or by the chief building official to be properly elevated.
3.   Residential construction, new or substantial improvement of any structure
in zone A shall have the lowest floor, including basement, be elevated at least
two feet (2') above the base flood elevation. Upon the completion of the
structure, the elevation of the lowest floor including basement shall be
certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor, or by the chief
building official to be properly elevated.
4.  Nonresidential construction, new or substantial improvement, in AO zones
shall either be elevated in conformance with subsection C1 or C2 of this
section or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be
floodproofed to at least two feet (2’) above the BFE so that below this level
the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage
of water, have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy, and be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect that the standards of this subsection are
satisfied. Such certifications shall be provided to the chief building
official.
5.   All new construction and substantial improvements, that fully enclose
areas below the lowest floor (excluding basements) that are usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage, and which are subject to
flooding, shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces
on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs
for meeting this requirement shall either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect and must meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria:
a.   Have a minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot (1')
above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other
coverings or devices; provided, that they permit the automatic entry and exit
of floodwaters; or
                  b.   Be certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect.
6.   Manufactured homes shall satisfy the standards in section 15.32.140 of
this chapter.”
SECTION 6.    Section 15.32.130 of Chapter 15.32 of the Redlands Municipal
Code, entitled “Subdivision Standards,” is hereby amended to read as follows:
“15.32.130: SUBDIVISION STANDARDS:
      A.   All preliminary subdivision proposals greater than 50 lots or 5
acres shall identify the special flood hazard area and the elevation of the
base flood.
      B.   All final subdivision plans shall provide the elevation of proposed
structures and pads. If the site is filled above the base flood elevation, the
lowest floor and pad elevation shall be certified by a registered professional
engineer or surveyor and provided to the chief building official.
      C.   All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage.
      D.   All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to
minimize flood damage by dry floodproofing and elevating equipment by at least
one foot (1’) above the base flood elevation.
      E.   All subdivisions shall provide adequate drainage to reduce exposure
to flood hazards.”
SECTION 7.    Section 15.32.140 of Chapter 15.32 of the Redlands Municipal
Code, entitled “Standards for Manufactured Homes,” is hereby amended to read as
follows:
“15.32.140: STANDARDS FOR MANUFACTURED HOMES:
      A.   All manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved
within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's flood insurance rate map, on
sites located: 1) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; 2) in a
new manufactured home park or subdivision; 3) in an expansion to an existing
manufactured home park or subdivision; 4) in an existing manufactured home park
or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage"
as the result of a flood, shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that
the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to at least two feet (2')
above the base flood elevation and be securely fastened to an adequately
anchored foundation system to resist flotation collapse and lateral movement.
      B.   All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on
sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within zones A1-30,
AH, and AE on the community's flood insurance rate map that are not subject to
the provisions of subsection A of this section will be fastened to an
adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and
lateral movement, and to be elevated so that either:
1.   The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at least two feet (2') above
the base flood elevation.”
SECTION 8.   Section 15.32.160 of Chapter 15.32 of the Redlands Municipal Code,
entitled “Floodways,” is hereby amended to read as follows:
“15.32.160: FLOODWAYS:
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 15.32.040
of this chapter are areas designated as regulatory floodways. Because the
regulatory floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of
floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential,
the following provisions shall apply:
      A.   Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements, and other development unless certification by a
registered professional engineer or architect is provided demonstrating that
encroachments shall not result in any increase in the base flood levels during
the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
      B.   If the above is satisfied, all new construction, substantial
improvements, and proposed development shall comply with all other applicable
flood hazard reduction provisions of this chapter.”
SECTION 9.   Environmental Determination. The City Council has reviewed the
matter and, based upon the facts and information contained in the staff report,
administrative record, and written and oral testimony, hereby finds that this
ordinance is not subject to the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA)
pursuant to Sections 15061(b)(3) and 15378(b)(5) of the State CEQA Guidelines,
in that it will not result in a direct or reasonably foreseeable indirect
physical change on the environment nor have a significant impact on the
environment.
   SECTION 10. Severability. If any section, subsection, subdivision, sentence,
clause, phrase, or portion of this Ordinance for any reason is held to be
invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining
portions of this Ordinance. The City Council hereby declares that it would have
adopted this Ordinance, and each section, subsection, subdivision, sentence,
clause, phrase, or portion thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or
more sections, subsections, subdivisions, sentences, clauses, phrases, or
portions thereof be declared invalid or unconstitutional.   
SECTION 11. The Mayor shall sign this ordinance and the City Clerk shall
certify to the adoption of this ordinance and shall cause it, or a summary of
it, to be published once in a newspaper of general circulation within the City,
and thereafter, this ordinance shall take effect as provided by law.
________________________
Marc Shaw, Mayor Pro Tem
 
ATTEST:
________________________
Jeanne Donaldson, City Clerk
I, Jeanne Donaldson, City Clerk, City of Redlands, hereby certify that the
foregoing Ordinance was duly adopted by the City Council at the regular meeting
thereof, held on the 4 th  day of November, 2025, by the following vote:
 
AYES: Councilmembers Tejeda, Davis; Mayor Pro Tem Shaw
NOES: None
ABSENT: Mayor Saucedo and Councilmember Barich
ABSTAIN: None
 
________________________
Jeanne Donaldson, City Clerk
 
 
 
 
 
 
ORDINANCE NO. 2994
 
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF REDLANDS AMMENDING CHAPTERS 15.04, 15.06, 15.08,
15.10, 15.12, 15.16, 15.18, 15.22 and 15.23 OF THE REDLANDS MUNICIPAL CODE
RELATING TO THE ADOPTION OF THE 2025 CALIFORNIA BUILDING CODE VOLUME 1 AND 2
(CALIFORNIA CODE OF REGULATIONS, TITLE 24, PART 2 INCLUDING APPENDICIES G, H,
I, J), 2025 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE (CALIFORNIA CODE OF REGULATIONS, TITLE
24, PART 2.5 INCLUDING APPENDICES BF, BO, BJ, AND CI), 2025 CALIFORNIA
ELECTRICAL CODE (CALIFORNIA CODE OF REGULATIONS, TITLE 24, PART 3), 2025
CALIFORNIA MECHANICAL CODE (CALIFORNIA CODE OF REGULATIONS, TITLE 24, PART 4),
2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE (CALIFORNIA CODE OF REGULATIONS, TITLE 24, PART
5), 2025 CALIFORNIA ENERGY CODE (CALIFORNIA CODE OF REGULATIONS, TITLE 24, PART
6), 2025 CALIFORNIA HISTORICAL BUILDING CODE (CALIFORNIA CODE OF REGULATIONS,
TITLE 24, PART 8), 2025 CALIFORNIA EXISTING BUILDING CODE (CALIFORNIA CODE OF
REGULATIONS TITLE 24, PART 10), 2025 CALIFORNIA GREEN BUILDING STANDARDS CODE
(CALIFORNIA CODE OF REGULATIONS TITLE 24, PART 11), BY REFERENCE, AND MAKING
AMENDMENTS THERETO.
 
 
WHEREAS, California Health and Safety Code Sections 17958.5, 17958.7 and
18941.5 empower the City to adopt by reference various uniform codes, including
the California Building Code and California Residential Code, 2025 editions,
published by the International Code Council; California Electrical Code, 2025
edition, published by the National Fire Protection Association; California
Plumbing Code, 2025 edition and California Mechanical Code, 2025 edition,
published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical
Officials, and the California Green Building Standards Code, 2025 edition,
published by the International Code Council, California Energy Code, 2025
edition, published by the International Code Council along with applicable
amendments, as published by the California Building Standards Commission,
California Historical Code and the Existing Building Code, 2025 edition,
published by the International Code Council along with applicable amendments,
as published by the California Building Standards Commission; and
 
WHEREAS, Health and Safety Code Section 17958.7 authorizes the City to make
amendments to said codes on the basis of local climatic, geological, or
topographical conditions existing in the City; and
 
WHEREAS, the City Council of the City of Redlands (the “City Council”) is
informed and finds that the area in which the City is located receives
relatively low amounts of precipitation, very low humidity levels, and
extremely high temperatures all of which are conducive to the spread of fire;
and
 
WHEREAS, the City Council is informed and finds that the area in which the City
is located is subjected to extremely strong winds, commonly referred to as
Santa Ana winds, which reach speeds of 80 miles per hour in the City, result in
extensive damage, and are also conducive to the spread of fire; and
 
WHEREAS, the City Council is informed and finds that within the City there are
four earthquake faults (Redlands Heights, Banning, Crafton, and the Redlands
Faults), and three other faults (Loma Linda, San Jacinto, and the San Andreas
Faults) are immediately adjacent to the City, creating the potential for
catastrophic damage and fire hazards; and
 
WHEREAS, the City Council has determined that because the City is subject to
the above referenced climatic, geological, and topographical conditions that
amendments to the California Building Standards Codes are necessary to protect
life and property;
 
THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF REDLANDS DOES ORDAIN AS FOLLOW:
 
Section 1.   That existing Chapters 15.04, 15.06, 15.08, 15.10, 15.12, 15.16,
15.18, 15.22, 15.23 of Title 15 of the Redlands Municipal Code are hereby
amended to read as described in Exhibit “A” to this ordinance.
 
Section 2.   That the City Council hereby finds and determines that the
adoption of this ordinance is exempt from review under the California
Environmental Quality Act (“CEQA”) pursuant to section 15061(b)(3) of the State
Guidelines implementing CEQA.
 
Section 3.   That the City Clerk is hereby directed to publish notice in
accordance with Government Code Section 6066 of a public hearing to be held on
December 2, 2025 at 6:00pm, or as soon thereafter as the matter may be heard in
the Redlands City Council Chambers located at 35 Cajon Street, Redlands,
California regarding the City Council’s proposed adoption of this ordinance.
 
Section 4.   In the event that any provision of this ordinance, or any part
hereof, or any application hereof to any person or circumstances, is for any
reason held to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid or ineffective by a
court of competent jurisdiction on its face or as applied, such holding shall
not affect the validity of the remaining provisions of this ordinance, or any
part hereof, or any application hereof to any person or circumstance or of said
provision as applied to any other person or circumstance. It is hereby declared
to be the legislative intent of the City that this ordinance would have been
adopted had such unconstitutional, invalid, or ineffective provision not been
included herein.
 
Section 5.    The Mayor shall sign this ordinance and the City Clerk shall
certify to the adoption of this ordinance and shall cause it, or a summary of
it, to be published once in the a newspaper of general circulation within the
City and thereafter this ordinance shall take effect as provided by law.
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________
Mario Saucedo, Mayor
 
Attest:
 
_______________________
Jeanne Donaldson, City Clerk
 
 
I, Jeanne Donaldson, City Clerk of the City of Redlands, hereby certify that
the foregoing ordinance was duly adopted by the City Council at a regular
meeting thereof held on the 2 nd day of December, 2025, by the following vote:
 
AYES: Councilmembers Barich, Tejeda, Davis, Shaw; Mayor Saucedo
NOES: None
ABSTAIN: None
ABSENT: None
 
____________________________
Jeanne Donaldson, City Clerk
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Exhibit “A”
 
CHAPTER 15.04
 
CALIFORNIA BUILDING CODE (CBC)
 
SECTIONS:
 
15.04.010:   DOCUMENTS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE; COPIES ON FILE
15.04.020:   SCOPE AND ADMINISTRATION
15.04.030:   FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS
15.04.040:   MINIMUM ROOF COVERING CLASSIFICATIONS
15.04.050:   AWNINGS
15.04.060:   TEMPORARY USE OF STREETS AND ALLEYS
15.04.070:   GRADING
15.04.080:   VIOLATION; PENALTY
    
15.04.010:   DOCUMENTS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE--COPIES ON FILE:
 
That certain document on file in the office of the City Clerk of the City
marked and designated as the 2025 California Building Code, Volumes 1 and 2,
including Chapters 1, as amended, and Appendix G, H, I and J, as amended, is
adopted as the building code of the City and all of the regulations,
provisions, conditions and terms of such code and amendments are referred to
and are adopted and made part of this chapter.
 
15.04.020    SCOPE AND ADMINISTRATION:
 
The following sections and subsections of the California Building Code, Chapter
1, Division II, Sections 105 through 113.4 are added and/or amended as follows:
 
A.    CBC Chapter 1, Division II, Section [A]105.2, of the California Building
Code entitled “Work exempt from permit” is hereby amended by amending items 2
and 4, and adding a new item 14, to read as follows:
 
2.   Wood, chain-link, plastic, vinyl, metal, or similar fences not over 6 feet
in height or masonry, concrete fence not over 3 feet in height measured from
the lowest adjacent grade to top of the wall and does not serve as a swimming
pool enclosure as required by section 15.06.080 of the Redlands Municipal Code.
 
4.   Retaining walls that are not over 3 feet in height measured from the top
of footing unless supporting a surcharge or impounding class I, II or III-
A liquids.
 
14.   Flagpole not more than 30 feet in height measured from the lowest
adjacent grade the top of the pole on a residential zoned lot.
 
B. CBC Chapter 1, Division II, Section 105.3.1 entitled “Action on
Application”, is
hereby amended by the addition of two (2) exceptions to read as follows:
 
Exception 1: A permit shall not be issued for work on property within an area
which may be unsafe or for which no public access for such work is provided,
or, because of the hazards, there is no way in which the work can be done so
that it will be safe;
 
Exception 2: A permit shall be withheld or denied if the chief building
official finds there are existing violations of the provisions of RMC Title 15
or any other provisions found in the Redlands municipal code, on site.
                
C.   CBC Chapter 1, Division II, Section 105.6, entitled "Suspension or
Revocation",
is hereby amended by the addition of the following two (2) paragraphs to read
as follows:
 
The chief building official may, in writing, suspend or revoke a permit issued
under the provisions of this code if dust is generated in excess of local,
state, or federal standards, or conditions of project approvals.
 
Failure to keep the site clear of debris or properly contain asbestos
containing materials may cause the permit to be suspended or revoked and the
site to be declared a public nuisance and abated as provided for by law.
 
D.    CBC Chapter 1, Division II, Section 107.6, entitled "Demolition and/or
Remodeling Permits", is hereby added to read as follows:
 
The chief building official may require that a detailed schedule be provided to
ensure demolition or remodeling work progresses expeditiously and debris is
hauled from the site as generated.
 
E.   CBC Chapter 1, Division II Section [A] 109.4 of the California Building
Code is amended by the addition of the following sentence:
                      
Prior to the issuance of a permit for the performed work an investigation
permit shall be issued, and an inspection performed.
 
F.   CBC Chapter 1, Division II Section [A] 109.4 of the California Building
Code
   amended by adding the following paragraph to the end of the section.
     Investigation fee. An investigation fee, in addition to the permit fee,
shall be
   collected whether or not a permit is then or subsequently issued. The
minimum
   investigation fee shall be equal to the minimum fee as defined in Section
109.2.
   The payment of such investigation fee shall not exempt any person from
   compliance with all other provisions of this code nor from any penalty
prescribed
   by law.
 
G.      CBC Chapter 1, Division II Section [A] 109.6 of the California Building
Code is deleted in this entirety and hereby amended by adding the following
section:
 
              Fee Refunds. The Chief Building Official may authorize refunding
of any fee paid hereunder which was erroneously paid or collected.
 
The Chief Building Official may authorize refunding of not more than 80 percent
of the permit fee paid when no inspections have been performed under a permit
issued in accordance with this code.
 
The Chief Building Official may authorize refunding of not more than 80 percent
of the plan review fee when an application for a permit for which a plan review
fee has been paid is withdrawn or canceled before any plan review is performed.
 
The Chief Building Official shall not authorize refunding of any fee paid
except on written application filed by the original permittee not later than
180 calendar days after the date of fee payment.
 
H.    CBC Chapter 1, Division II Section [A] 109.7 entitled “Re-Inspections” is
hereby added to read as follows:
 
A fee may be assessed in the following scenarios at the fully burdened hourly
inspection rate as adopted by fee resolution and shall be paid prior to the re-
inspection of the work being scheduled.
 
1.   Re-inspection performed for work that previously received corrections and
those corrections were not addressed.
2.   Building permit is not posted or otherwise available on the work site
3.   City approved plans are not available for scheduled inspection
4.   Failure to provide inspector access to the work performed on the date for
which the inspection was scheduled.
5.   Deviation from the City approved plans
 
In instances where re-inspection fees have been assessed, no additional
inspection of the work will be performed until the required fees have been
paid.
 
   I.    CBC Chapter 1, Division II, Section [A] 111.3 entitled “Temporary
Occupancy”, is hereby deleted in its entirety and rewritten to read as follows:
 
If the chief building official finds that no substantial hazard will result
from occupancy of any building or portions thereof before the same is
completed, the chief building official may issue a Temporary Certificate of
Occupancy (TCO) for the use of a portion or portions of a building or
structure, provided an administrative fee, as established by resolution of the
city council, is paid for that temporary certificate of occupancy. Prior to the
expiration of the TCO, an inspection shall be performed, and Permanent
Certificate of Occupancy issued or the building vacated until all outstanding
conditions of approval are completed.
 
J.   CBC Chapter 1, Division II, Section [A] 111.5, entitled “Certificate of
occupancy a requirement for issuing a city business license”, is hereby added
to read as follows:
 
   No license to conduct a business, occupation or profession in a particular
building or structure in the city of Redlands shall be issued by the finance
director of said city until the building official has issued an appropriate
certificate of occupancy for the business occupancy classification has been
issued as required by this code.
 
K.    CBC Chapter 1, Division II Section [A] 113.1, entitled “General”, is
hereby amended to read as follows:
 
General. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or
determination made by the Chief Building Official relative to the application
and interpretation of this code, the Planning Commission shall serve as the
board of appeals. The Chief Building Official, Director of Development Services
and the Fire Marshall of the City shall serve in an advisory capacity when
requested to do so. Commission members shall disqualify themselves and shall
not participate in any decision in which they have a conflict of interest.
 
L. CBC Chapter 1, Division II Section [A] 113.5 of Chapter 1, Division II
entitled “Procedures”, is hereby added to read as follows:
 
Procedures. An application for an appeal shall be based on a claim that the
true intent of this code or other rules legally adopted thereunder have been
incorrectly interpreted, the provisions do not fully apply or an equally good
or better form of construction is proposed. After notice to such parties as the
board may direct, a hearing shall be held and the board may affirm or deny the
decision of the chief building official. The board's determination shall be in
writing to the chief building official with a copy to the appellant. If the
appellant disagrees with the decision of the board, he may appeal the decision
to the city council. Such appeal shall be filed with the city clerk within
fifteen (15) days of the decision by the board.
 
15.04.030 FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS: 
 
CBC Chapter 9, Division II, Section 901.2 of the California Building Code is
hereby amended by the addition of a sentence to read as follows:
 
See Redlands Municipal Code, Title 15, and Chapter 15.20: Fire Code, for
additions and amendments to this chapter.
 
15.04.040 MINIMUM ROOF COVERING CLASSIFICATIONS:
 
CBC Chapter 15, Division II, Table 1505.1 of the California Building Code is
hereby amended to read as follows:
Table 1505.1
 
Minimum Roof Covering Classification for different types of construction for
new buildings, re-roofs or additions.
 
 
IA IB IIA IIB IIIA IIIB IV VA VB
A  A  A   A   A    A    B* B* B*
*See Section 1505.1.1 for Class A Roof Coverings in Moderate, High, and Very
High Fire Hazard Severity Zones.
 
 
15.04.050   AWNINGS:
 
CBC Chapter 31, division II, sections 3105.4, 3105.4.1, 3105.4.2, 3105.4.3, and
3105.4.4 are hereby added to read as follows:
 
3105.4 General. This section shall apply to awnings projecting over public and/
or private property.
 
3105.4.1 Definitions. For the purpose of the section:
 
Ladder access area is the air space required for a ladder to rest upon the
ground, street, or sidewalk and be supported by a building windowsill,
permanent appendage, and parapet or roof eave at an angle of 75 degrees from
the horizontal.
 
Collapsible is the property of an awning which will enable it to be readily
collapsible, retractable or capable of being folded against the face of the
supporting building without the use of a tool, special effort or special
knowledge.
 
3105.4.2 Construction. Awnings shall have non-combustible frames but may have
fabric coverings that meet fire resistance criteria as outlined in CBC §3105.3.
Every awning with non-combustible coverings and every fabric covered awning
which projects into the ladder access area, as defined above, shall be
collapsible.
 
Exception: A fixed awning not more than ten (10) feet in length may be erected
over a doorway to the building.
 
3105.4.3 Projection. Awnings may extend over public or private property not
more than seven (7) feet from the face of the supporting building, but no
portion shall extend nearer than two (2) feet to the face of the nearest curb
or edge of the traffic way measured horizontally. In no case shall the awning
extend over public property greater than two-thirds of the distance from the
property line to the nearest curb in front of the building nor shall any
portion of the awning be closer to the side or rear property lines than would
be permitted by the current edition of the California building code for
projections.
 
3105.4.4 All portions of an awning shall be at least eight (8) feet above any
public or private walkway.
 
Exception: Any valance attached to an awning shall not project above the roof
of the awning at the point of attachment and shall not extend more than twelve
(12) inches below the roof of the awning at the point of attachment, but in no
case shall any portion of a valance be less than seven (7) feet in height above
a public or private way.
 
 
15.04.060    TEMPORARY USE OF STREETS AND ALLEYS.
 
CBC Chapter 33, Division II, Section 3308.3 of the California Building Code is
hereby added to read as follows:
 
Public streets and alleys shall not be utilized by persons doing construction
or demolition work until proper clearance has been obtained from the City
Engineer. Whenever requested, plot plans and construction details shall be
submitted to the City Engineer for review. The City Engineer may approve,
modify or deny a request to utilize public streets by persons during
construction and/or demolition and his decision shall be based on findings
relative to hazards to life and limb, traffic safety and/or to excessive
traffic or pedestrian congestion. Where damage to public property could result,
proper bonds and insurance as specified by the City Engineer may be required.
Failure to obtain proper clearance for use of public property may result in a
finding that the materials constitute a public nuisance and a hazard to persons
or property and are subject to abatement and/or removal as provided by law.
 
15.04.070       GRADING.
 
The following sections and subsections of the California Building Code Appendix
J Sections J101 through J113are hereby added and/or amended to read as follows:
 
A. CBC Appendix J, Section J101.1 entitled “Scope” is hereby amended to read as
follows:
 
The provisions of this chapter apply to grading, excavation and earthwork
construction, including fills and embankments. Where conflicts occur between
the technical requirements of this chapter and the geotechnical report, the
geotechnical report shall govern. In addition, the designs of the work as
described above need to meet the recognized and accepted civil and geotechnical
engineering practices and principles.
 
B.   CBC Appendix J, Section J101.3 entitled “Enforcement Authority” is hereby
added to read as follows:
 
   The City Engineer shall have the authority for the enforcement of CBC
Appendix J and any amendments thereto. The words “Chief Building Official” as
hereinafter used shall mean City Engineer.
 
C.   CBC Appendix J, Section J101.4 entitled “Hazardous Conditions” is hereby
added as follows:
 
   Whenever the Chief Building Official determines that any existing excavation
or embankment or fill on private property has become a hazard to life and limb,
or endangers property, or adversely affects the safety, use or stability of a
public way or drainage channel, the owner of the property upon which the
excavation or fill is located, or other person or agent in control of said
property, upon receipt of notice in writing from the Chief Building Official,
shall within the period specified therein repair or eliminate such excavation
or embankment to eliminate the hazard and to be in conformance with the
requirements of this code.
   
D.   CBC Appendix J, Section J103.2 of the California Building Code is hereby
amended to read as follows:
 
   J103.2 Exemptions:
   A grading permit shall not be required for the following:
 
   1.    Grading in an isolated, self-contained area provided there is no
danger to the public and that such grading will not adversely affect adjoining
property. A determination of exemption per this section shall be made by the
City Engineer.
 
   2.    An excavation below finished grade for basements and footings of a
building, retaining wall or other structure authorized by a valid building
permit. This shall not exempt any fill made with the material from such
excavation or exempt any excavation having an unsupported height greater than 5
feet (1524mm) after the completion of such structure.
 
   3.   Cemetery graves.
 
   4.   Refuse disposal sites controlled by other regulations.
 
   5.   Excavations for wells or trenches for utilities.
 
   6.   Mining, quarrying, excavating, processing or stockpiling rock, sand,
gravel, aggregate or clay controlled by other regulations, provided such
operations do not affect the lateral support or increase the stresses in or
pressure upon any adjacent or contiguous property.
 
   7.   Exploratory excavations performed under the direction of soil engineers
or engineering geologists.
 
   8.   A fill less than 1 foot (305mm) in depth and placed on natural terrain
with a slope flatter than 1 unit vertical in 5 units horizontal (20% slope), or
a cut less than 3 feet (914mm) in depth, not intended to support structures, or
does not exceed 50 cubic yards (38.3m) on any one lot and does not obstruct a
drainage course.
 
   9.   Grading by public agencies or their agents, in connection with
construction or maintenance of roads or facilities for the generation, storage,
or transmission of water including flood waters or water for the purpose of
producing electrical energy.
 
   10. Grading performed by disking or plowing for agricultural purposes in
connection with the preparation of soil for crop or animal use.
 
   Exemption from the permit requirements of this Appendix shall not be deemed
to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of
the provisions of this chapter or any other laws or ordinances of the City.
 
E.   CBC Appendix J, Section J104.5 entitled “As Built Plans” is hereby added
to read as follows:
 
   The permittee shall provide a copy of as-built plans to the City for a
permanent record at the end of the approved grading work.
 
F.   CBC Appendix J, Section J105.1 of the California Building Code is hereby
amended to read as follows:
 
   Inspections shall be governed by Section 110, Chapter 1, Division II of this
code and requirements established, by approved policies and procedures of the
Engineering Division. An engineer shall provide grading inspections and
certifications for the work.
 
G.   CBC Appendix J, Section J109.4 of the California Building Code is hereby
amended to have the following sentences added at the end of the section:
 
   For Single Family Lot Drainage
 
   1.   Whenever possible, drainage from single family lots shall flow directly
to a street.
 
   2.   If it should be determined necessary to allow offside drainage to flow
through a single-family lot (to preserve down lot views, aesthetics, accept
flow from offsite property, etc.), the following shall apply:
 
         a.   Drainage from only one lot shall flow through only one other lot.
 
         b.   A drainage easement shall be provided/obtained over the lot
accepting the drainage.
 
         c.   The drainage shall be contained within either a concrete/rock
lined swale or a reinforced concrete pipe.
 
         d.   The drainage facility shall be designed with excess capacity to
account for the probable lack of necessary maintenance. Therefore, it shall be
designed to convey two times the runoff from a 100-year storm with the minimum
diameter for a pipe being 12 inches.
 
H.   CBC Appendix J Section J110.3 entitled “Temporary erosion control during
construction”, is hereby added to read as follows:
 
   The permittee shall put into effect and maintain all precautionary measures
necessary to protect adjacent watercourses and public or private property from
damage by erosion, flooding, and deposition of mud or debris origination from
the site during the grading operation regardless of lot size.
 
I.   CBC Appendix J Section J112 entitled “Protection of adjacent property” is
hereby added to read as follows:
 
   During grading operations, the permittee shall be responsible for the
prevention of damage to adjacent property and no person shall excavate on land
sufficiently close to the property line to endanger any adjoining public
street, sidewalk, alley, or other public or private property without supporting
and protecting such property from settling, cracking, or other damage which
might result.
 
J.   CBC Appendix J Section J113 entitled “Dust control” is hereby added to
read as follows:
 
   The owner of the site or the project contractor shall put into effect and
maintain all precautionary measures necessary to prevent dust blowing from the
site to adjacent properties. Prior to the permit issuance, dust control sign
and required contact information as required by the department’s policy shall
be installed at the site.
   
15.04.070:   VIOLATION; PENALTY:
 
It is unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, partnership, or entity to do
or permit the following: erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move,
improve, remove, convert, demolish, equip, use or maintain any residential
building in violation of this chapter. Such person who violates any of the
provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. Such person shall be
deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof
during which any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is
committed, continued or permitted. Upon conviction, such person may be
punishable by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by
imprisonment in the county jail for a period not exceeding six (6) months, or
by both such fine and imprisonment.
 
CHAPTER 15.06
 
RESIDENTIAL BUILDING CODE
SECTIONS:
 
15.06.010:   DOCUMENT ADOPTED BY REFERENCE; COPIES ON FILE
15.06.020:   Work exempt from permit
15.06.030:   Temporary Occupancy
15.06.040:   Board of Appeals
15.06.050:   Geotechnical Evaluation
15.06.060:   Minimum Roof Classification
15.06.070:   Swimming Pool Safety
15.06.080:   Violation; Penalty
 
15.06.010:   DOCUMENTS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE; COPIES ON FILE.
 
That certain document on file in the office of the City Clerk of the City
marked and designated as the 2025 California Residential Code including
Chapters 1, 4, and 9 (as amended), and AppendicesBF, BO, BJ, and CI (as
amended) are adopted as the residential code of the City and all of the
regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of such code and amendments are
referred to and are adopted and made part of this chapter.
 
15.06.020:   WORK EXEMPT FROM PERMIT:
 
CRC chapter 1, division II, section R105.2 (2) and (3) is hereby deleted and
rewritten to read as follows:
 
2. Wood, chain-link, plastic, vinyl, metal, or similar fences not over 6 feet
in height
3. Retaining walls that are not over 3 feet in height measured from the top of
footing unless supporting a surcharge or impounding class I, II or III-
A liquids.
 
15.06.030:   TEMPORARY OCCUPANCY:
 
CRC chapter 1, division II, section R110.4 is hereby deleted in its entirety
and rewritten to read as follows:
 
   See Redlands Municipal Code, Title 15, Chapter 15.04.020(H) for additions
and amendments to this section.
 
 
15.06.040: BOARD OF APPEALS:
 
CRC chapter 1, division II, section R112 is hereby deleted in its entirety and
rewritten to read as follows:
See Redlands Municipal Code, Title 15, Chapter 15.04.020(K)(L) for additions
and amendments to this section
 
 
15.06.050      GEOTECHNICAL EVALUATION
 
CRC Chapter 4 Division II Section R401.4.1 of the California Residential Code
is hereby amended by adding a sentence at the end of the section to read as
follows:
 
A geotechnical or soil report is required for the new construction or when the
aggregate size of additions to the original structure exceed 50%.
 
 
15.06.060      MINIMUM ROOF COVERING CLASSIFICATION
 
A.   CRC chapter 9, subsection 902.1.1 shall be amended in part in terms of
being retitled as follows:
 
Roof Coverings within the fire hazard areas as designated by the City of
Redlands Fire Chief on the Fire Hazard Map.
 
B.   CRC chapter 9, division II, section R902.1.2 of the California residential
code is hereby amended to read as follows:
 
The entire roof covering of every existing structure where more than 50 percent
of the total roof area is replaced within any one-year period, the entire roof
covering of every new structure, and any roof covering applied in the
alteration, repair or replacement of the roof of every existing structure,
shall be fire-retardant roof covering that is at least Class B.
 
   C.   The remainder of the subsection shall remain unchanged.
 
15.06.070      SWIMMING POOL SAFETY
 
A.   CRC appendixCI, section 115922 (a) is hereby amended to read as follows:
 
Except as provided in Section 115925, when a building permit is issued for the
construction of a new pool and/or spa or the remodeling of an existing pool
and/or spa at a private single-family home, the respective swimming pool and/or
spa shall be equipped with item #1 and at least one addition of the following
seven drowning prevention features:
 
B.   CRC appendixCI, section 115922 (a) (1) is hereby amended to read as
follows:
 
An enclosure that meets the requirements of Section 115923 and isolates the
swimming pool or spa from the private single-family home. Any walls of the
residential structure or accessory structures used to complete the isolation
enclosure must have its door openings equipped with protection as required in
115922 (a) (4) or (5). Any such door protection device provided for this
purpose may not be used to comply with the second drowning prevention feature
requirement.
               
15.06.080 VIOLATION; PENALTY
 
It is unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, partnership, or entity to do
or permit the following: erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move,
improve, remove, convert, demolish, equip, use or maintain any plumbing in
violation of this chapter. Every person who violates any of the provisions of
this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. Such person shall be deemed guilty of
a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is committed, continued or
permitted. Upon conviction such person may be punishable by a fine not
exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by imprisonment in the county
jail for a period not exceeding six (6) months, or by both such fine and
imprisonment.
 
CHAPTER 15.08
 
CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE
 
SECTIONS:
 
15.08.010:   DOCUMENT ADOPTED BY REFERENCE; COPIES ON FILE
15.08.020:   BOARD OF APPEALS
15.08.030   BUILDING SEWERS
15.08.040   PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS
15.08.050:   VIOLATION; PEANALTY
 
15.08.010   DOCUMENT ADOPTED BY REFERENCE; COPIES ON FILE.
 
That certain document on file in the office of the City Clerk of the City
marked and designated as the California Plumbing Code, 2025 Edition, including
Chapter 1, Division II (as amended) with Appendices, is adopted as the Plumbing
Code of the City and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms
of the California Plumbing Code are referred to and are adopted and made part
of this chapter.
 
 
15.08.020      BOARD OF APPEALS. 
 
CPC Chapter 1, Division II, Section 107, is hereby deleted in its entirety and
rewritten to read as follows:
 
The Board of Appeals and the procedures concerning its operation as described
in Title 15, Chapter 15.04 of the Redlands Municipal Code, shall also apply to
all appeals resulting from the administration of the California Plumbing Code.
 
15.08.030       BUILDING SEWERS
 
CPC Chapter 7, Division II, Section 713.4 is deleted in its entirety and
rewritten as follows:
 
      713.4 Public Sewer Availability.
 
The public sewer shall be considered as not being available where such public
sewer is more than two hundred (200) feet for the first dwelling unit and an
additional one hundred (100) feet for each subsequent dwelling unit from the
nearest point of the property that is served by such public sewer. A property
owner, or his authorized representative, may request in writing a waiver based
upon technical infeasibility due to site constraints. This request shall be
reviewed by the Chief Building Official and a determination given in writing.
 
15.08.040: PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS:
 
CPC chapter 1, division II, chapter 7 section 721.2.1 are hereby added to read
as follows:
 
   721.2.1 Location of private sewage disposal systems.
 
All components of an onsite wastewater treatment system shall be located in the
front yard area as defined in Redlands Municipal Code.
 
Exception: If site constraints exist that prevent the placement of the onsite
wastewater treatment system in the front yard an alternate location providing
vehicle access for the future replacement and servicing shall be provided. If
vehicle access is not provided as a result of structures or topography, then
both the primary and 100% expansion effluent dispersal fields shall be
installed.
 
   
15.08.040   VIOLATION; PENALTY.
 
It is unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, partnership, or entity to do
or permit the following: erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move,
improve, remove, convert, demolish, equip, use or maintain any plumbing in
violation of this chapter. Every person who violates any of the provisions of
this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. Such person shall be deemed guilty of
a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is committed, continued or
permitted. Upon conviction such person may be punishable by a fine not
exceeding one thousand dollars, or by imprisonment in the county jail for a
period not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
 
CHAPTER 15.10
 
CALIFORNIA ELECTRICAL CODE
 
SECTIONS:
 
15.10.010:   DOCUMENT ADOPTED BY REFERENCE; COPIES ON FILE
15.10.020:   APPEALS BOARD
15.10.040:   ELECTRIC FENCES
15.10.040:   USED MATERIAL
15.10.050:   TRAILERS, MOBILHOMES, COMMERCIAL COACHES AND HOUSE CARS:
15.10.060:   VIOLATION–PENALTY
 
 
15.10.010   DOCUMENT ADOPTED BY REFERENCE; COPIES ON FILE.
 
That certain document on file in the office of the City Clerk of the City
marked and designated as the California Electrical Code, 2025 Edition and
Annexes thereto, is adopted as the Electrical Code of the City and all
regulations, provisions, conditions, and terms of such electrical code and
amendments are referred to and adopted and made a part of this chapter.
 
15.10.020    BOARD OF APPEALS. 
 
CEC Article 89, Section 89.108.8 shall be deleted in its entirety and shall be
rewritten to read as follows:
 
Appeals and the procedures concerning its operation as described in Title 15,
Chapter 15.04 of the Redlands Municipal Code, shall also apply to all appeals
resulting from the administration of the California Electric Code.
   
15.10.030 ELECTRIC FENCES:
 
CEC article 90, section 90.10 is hereby added to read as follows:
 
   It is unlawful to install an electric fence within the city of Redlands.
Prohibited electric fences include, but are not limited to, those energized by
battery, generator or electrical utility. Electrified security fences that are
not in a residential zone and meet the requirements of California Civil Code §
835 are permitted. A building permit is required for an electrified security
fence.
 
 
15.10.040   USED MATERIAL:
 
CEC Article 90, Section 90.10 is hereby added to read as follows:
 
   Previously used electrical material shall not be reused without prior
written approval of the Chief Building Official.
 
15.10.050    TRAILERS, MOBILEHOMES, COMMERCIAL COACHES AND HOUSECARS:
 
CEC Article 90, Section 90.11 is hereby added to read as follows:
 
   Trailers, mobile homes, and commercial coaches being utilized for
construction projects as defined in title 8, chapter 8.20 of the Redlands
Municipal Code which connect to temporary power shall comply with the city's
adopted electrical code. Trailers, mobile homes, commercial coaches, and house
cars connected to an electrical source shall obtain an electrical permit prior
to the placement and inspections.
 
15.10.060   VIOLATION; PENALTY
 
It is unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, partnership, or entity to do
or permit the following: erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move,
improve, remove, convert, demolish, equip, use or maintain any electrical
system in violation of this chapter. Every person who violates any of the
provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. Such person shall be
deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof
during which any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is
committed, continued or permitted. Upon conviction such person may be
punishable by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars, or by imprisonment in
the county jail for a period not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and
imprisonment.
 
CHAPTER 15.12
 
CALIFORNIA MECHANICAL CODE
 
SECTIONS:
 
15.12.010:   DOCUMENT ADOPTED BY REFERENCE; COPIES ON FILE
15.12.020:   BOARD OF APPEALS
15.12.030   VIOLATION; PENALTY
 
15.12.010   DOCUMENT ADOPTED BY REFERENCE; COPIES ON FILE.
 
That certain document on file in the office of the City Clerk of the City
marked and designated as the California Mechanical Code, 2025 Edition,
including Chapter 1, Division II (as amended) with Appendices, is adopted as
the mechanical code of the City and all of the regulations, provisions,
conditions and terms of the California Mechanical Code are referred to and are
adopted and made part of this chapter.
 
15.12.020     BOARD OF APPEALS. 
 
CMC Chapter 1, Division II, Section 107.1 of the California Mechanical Code is
hereby deleted in its entirety and rewritten to read as follows:
            
The Board of Appeals and the procedures concerning its operation as described
in Title 15, Chapter 15.04 of the Redlands Municipal Code, shall also apply to
all appeals resulting from the administration of the California Mechanical
Code.
      
15.12.030   VIOLATION; PENALTY.
 
It is unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, partnership, or entity to do
or permit the following: erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move,
improve, remove, convert, demolish, equip, use or maintain any plumbing in
violation of this chapter. Every person who violates any of the provisions of
this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. Such person shall be deemed guilty of
a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is committed, continued or
permitted. Upon conviction such person may be punishable by a fine not
exceeding one thousand dollars, or by imprisonment in the county jail for a
period not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
Chapter 15.16
 
CALIFORNIA GREEN BUILDING STANDARDS CODE
 
SECTIONS:
 
15.16.010:   DOCUMENT ADOPTED BY REFERENCE - COPIES ON FILE
15.16.020:   VIOLATION; PENALTY
 
15.16.010    DOCUMENT ADOPTED BY REFERENCE - COPIES ON FILE.
 
That certain document on file in the office of the City Clerk of the City
marked and designated as the California Green Building Standards, 2025 Edition,
is adopted as the Green Building Code of the City and all of the mandatory
regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of such code and amendments are
referred to and are adopted and made part of this Chapter.
 
15.16.020   VIOLATION; PENALTY.
 
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to violate or allow
violations of any mandatory requirement of this chapter. Every person who
violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. Such
person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or
portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter is committed, continued or permitted. Upon conviction, such person may
be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars, or by imprisonment in
the county jail for a period not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and
imprisonment.
 
Chapter 15.18
 
CALIFORNIA ENERGY CODE
 
SECTIONS:
 
15.18.010:   DOCUMENT ADOPTED BY REFERENCE; COPIES ON FILE
15.18.020:   VIOLATION AND PENALTY
15.18.010   DOCUMENT ADOPTED BY REFERENCE - COPIES ON FILE.
That certain document on file in the office of the city clerk of the city
marked and designated as the California Energy Code, 2025 edition, is adopted
as the Energy Code of the City and all of the mandatory regulations,
provisions, conditions and terms of such code and amendments are referred to
and are adopted and made part of this chapter.
 
http://sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/
index.php?book_id=550&chapter_id=91365#s1031164
15.18.020   VIOLATION; PENALTY.

It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to violate or allow
violations of any mandatory requirement of this chapter. Every person who
violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. Such
person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or
portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter is committed, continued or permitted. Upon conviction, such person may
be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars, or by imprisonment in
the county jail for a period not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and
imprisonment.
 
 
Chapter 15.22
 
CALIFORNIA HISTORICAL BUILDING CODE
SECTIONS:
 
15.22.010:   DOCUMENT ADOPTED BY REFERENCE - COPIES ON FILE
15.22.020:   VIOLATION; PENALTY
 
15.22.010    DOCUMENT ADOPTED BY REFERENCE - COPIES ON FILE.
 
That certain document on file in the office of the City Clerk of the City
marked and designated as the California Historical Building Code, 2025 Edition,
is adopted as the Historical Building Code of the City and all of the mandatory
regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of such code and amendments are
referred to and are adopted and made part of this Chapter.
 
15.22.020   VIOLATION; PENALTY.
 
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to violate or allow
violations of any mandatory requirement of this chapter. Every person who
violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. Such
person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or
portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter is committed, continued or permitted. Upon conviction, such person may
be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars, or by imprisonment in
the county jail for a period not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and
imprisonment.
 
 
Chapter 15.23
 
CALIFORNIA EXISTING BUILDING CODE
SECTIONS:
 
15.23.010:   DOCUMENT ADOPTED BY REFERENCE - COPIES ON FILE
15.23.020:   VIOLATION; PENALTY
 
15.23.010    DOCUMENT ADOPTED BY REFERENCE - COPIES ON FILE.
 
That certain document on file in the office of the City Clerk of the City
marked and designated as the California Existing Building Code, 2025 Edition,
is adopted as the Existing Building Code of the City and all of the mandatory
regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of such code and amendments are
referred to and are adopted and made part of this Chapter.
 
15.23.020   VIOLATION; PENALTY.
 
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to violate or allow
violations of any mandatory requirement of this chapter. Every person who
violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. Such
person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or
portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter is committed, continued or permitted. Upon conviction, such person may
be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars, or by imprisonment in
the county jail for a period not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and
imprisonment.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ORDINANCE NO. 2995
 
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF REDLANDS AMENDING CHAPTERS 2.18, 2.32, 2.38, 2.48,
2.50, 2.64, AND 2.66 OF THE REDLANDS MUNICIPAL CODE TO ESTABLISH QUARTERLY
MEETINGS, AND REDUCE THE MEMBERSHIP OF, THE CITY OF REDLANDS’ AIRPORT ADVISORY
BOARD, PARKS AND RECREATION ADVISORY COMMISSION, MUNICIPAL UTILITIES/ PUBLIC
WORKS COMMISSION, TRAFFIC AND PARKING COMMISSION, CULTURAL ARTS COMMISSION,
CITRUS COMMISSION AND HUMAN RELATIONS COMMISSION
 
   WHEREAS, community members who volunteer to serve on the City of Redlands’
boards, committees and commission are vital to the City Council’s work,
providing valuable insights and recommendations for the betterment of the City;
and
 
   WHEREAS, City boards, committees and commissions also provide a crucial
avenue for community members to engage in the civic process; and
 
   WHEREAS, the City Council finds that updates to the membership, appointment
and terms of certain City boards, committees and commissions will promote
efficiency and expand participation of the City’s student population; and
 
   WHEREAS, the proposed ordinance would maintain the current members and
reduction of membership would occur gradually through term expiration or
attrition.
      
   NOW, THEREFORE, THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF REDLANDS DOES ORDAIN AS
FOLLOWS:
 
   Section 1. Section 2.18.020 of the Redlands Municipal Code relating to the
membership of the Airport Advisory Board is hereby amended to read as follows:
 
   “2.18.020: MEMBERSHIP; QUALIFICATIONS:
 
The Airport Advisory Board shall consist of five (5) members appointed by the
Mayor with the approval of the City Council.”
 
   Section 2.  Section 2.18.30 of the Redlands Municipal Code relating to
membership, appointment and terms of the Airport Advisory Board is hereby
amended to read as follows:
 
“2.18.030: MEMBERSHIP; APOINTMENT AND TERMS:
 
The Airport Advisory Board shall consist of five (5) members appointed by the
Mayor with the approval of the City Council. Each member shall serve a
staggered four (4) year term and shall serve until his or her successor is
appointed. No person shall serve more than two (2) consecutive full terms
unless appointed to an additional term by a four-fifths (4/5) vote of the City
Council. Vacancies on the board shall be filled by appointment by the Mayor
with the approval of the City Council for the unexpired portion of the term.
Appointments made to fill an unexpired term will constitute a full term if more
than one-half (1/2) of a term remains. For example, if a term is four (4) years
and an appointment for an unexpired term is for more than two (2) years, this
appointment constitutes a full term. The members of the board shall serve
without compensation, shall each be a resident of the City, and neither a
member of any other standing commission, board or committee of the City nor an
employee thereof. The City Council may remove any member of the board at any
time, without cause, by a majority vote. Four (4) members of the board shall
constitute a quorum.”
 
Section 3. Section 2.18.40 of the Redlands Municipal Code relating to
organization of the Airport Advisory Board is hereby amended to read as
follows:
 
“2.18.040: ORGANIZATION AND MEETINGS:
 
The board shall, during the month of July of each year, select from among its
members a Chairman to serve for one (1) year. The board shall determine the
order of business for the conduct of its meetings, which shall be on call of
the Chairman or three (3) members of the board. Three (3) members of the board
shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.
 
The board shall meet quarterly in the months established by separate resolution
of the City Council, which resolution may be amended from time to time.”
 
Section 4. Section 2.32.020 of the Redlands Municipal Code relating to the
membership of the Parks and Recreation Advisory Commission is hereby amended to
read as follows:
 
“2.32.020: MEMBERSHIP:
 
The Parks and Recreation Advisory Commission shall consist of five (5) members.
Four (4) members shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the City
Council. The fifth member shall be a City Council appointed student member who
shall be a full voting member from the sophomore or junior class of a Redlands
Unified School District high school for a term of one year, beginning January 1
and ending December 31. Each member shall serve for a four (4) year term until
his or her successor is appointed. No person shall serve more than two (2)
consecutive full terms unless appointed to an additional term by a four-fifths
(4/5) vote of the City Council. Vacancies on the commission shall be filled by
appointment by the Mayor with the approval of the City Council for the
unexpired portion of the term. Appointments made to fill an unexpired term will
constitute a full term if more than one-half (1/2) of a term remains. For
example, if a term is four (4) years and an appointment for an unexpired term
is for more than two (2) years, this appointment constitutes a full term. The
members of the commission shall serve without compensation, shall each be a
resident of the City, with the exception of the student member, and neither a
member of any other standing commission, board or committee of the City, nor an
employee thereof. The City Council may remove any member of the commission at
any time, without cause, by a majority vote. Three (3) members of the
commission shall constitute a quorum.”
 
Section 5. Section 2.32.40 of the Redlands Municipal Code relating to
organization of the Parks and Recreation Advisory Commission is hereby amended
to read as follows:
 
“2.32.040: ORGANIZATION AND MEETINGS:
 
The Commissioners shall, upon their appointment, organize and elect a Chairman
for the term of one year, and such other officers as the Commissioners may deem
advisable, and shall make such rules and regulations as are necessary to
fulfill the obligations and duties of the commission.
 
The commission shall meet quarterly in the months established by separate
resolution of the City Council, which resolution may be amended from time to
time.”
 
 Section 6. Section 2.38.010 of the Redlands Municipal Code relating to the
membership of the Municipal Utilities/Public Works Commission is hereby amended
to read as follows:
 
“2.38.010: MEMBERSHIP:
 
The Municipal Utilities/Public Works Commission shall consist of five (5)
members appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the City Council. Each
member shall serve for a four (4) year term until his or her successor is
appointed. No person shall serve more than two (2) consecutive full terms
unless appointed to an additional term by a four-fifths (4/5) vote of the City
Council. Vacancies on the commission shall be filled by appointment by the
Mayor with the approval of the City Council for the unexpired portion of the
term. Appointments made to fill an unexpired term will constitute a full term
if more than one-half (1/2) of a term remains. For example, if a term is four
(4) years and an appointment for an unexpired term is for more than two (2)
years, this appointment constitutes a full term. The members of the commission
shall serve without compensation, shall each be a resident of the City, and
neither a member of any other standing commission, board or committee of the
City nor an employee thereof. The City Council may remove any member of the
commission at any time, without cause, by a majority vote. Three (3) members of
the commission shall constitute a quorum.”
 
Section 7. Section 2.38.020 of the Redlands Municipal relating to the
organization and meetings of the Municipal Utilities/Public Works Commission is
hereby amended to read as follows:
 
“2.38.020: ORGANIZATION AND MEETINGS:
 
    A.   The commission shall elect a Chairman and Vice Chairman for a term of
one (1) year.
 
B.   A regular time and place of meetings shall be established and adhered to
in the manner of holding public meetings of legislative bodies in the State.
Except as otherwise provided by law, all meetings shall be open to the public.
Meetings shall be held quarterly in the months established by resolution of the
City Council, which resolution may be amended from time to time.
      
C.   The Municipal Utilities Director shall act as Secretary to the commission
and shall provide staff support as necessary. The commission is encouraged to
appoint ad hoc committees to study specific problems particularly when the
resolution of any problem requires special skills not possessed by commission
members.” 
 
Section 8. Section 2.48.020 of the Redlands Municipal Code relating to the
membership of the Traffic & Parking Commission is hereby amended to read as
follows:
 
“2.48.020: MEMBERSHIP:
 
The Traffic and Parking Commission shall consist of five (5) members. Four (4)
of its members shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the City
Council. Each member shall serve for a four (4) year staggered term and until
his or her successor is appointed. No person shall serve more than two (2)
consecutive terms unless appointed to an additional term by a four-fifths (4/5)
vote of the City Council. Vacancies on the commission shall be filled by
appointment by the Mayor with the approval of the City Council for the
unexpired portion of the term. Appointments made to fill an unexpired term will
constitute a full term if more than one-half (1/2) of a term remains. For
example, if a term is four (4) years and an appointment for an unexpired term
is for two (2) years or more, this appointment constitutes a full term. The
members of the commission shall serve without compensation, shall each be a
resident of the City, with the exception of the student member, and neither a
member of any other standing committee, board or commission of the City nor an
employee thereof. The Council may remove any member of the commission at any
time, without cause, by a majority vote. Three (3) members of the commission
shall constitute a quorum.
 
The City Council shall also appoint one (1) student member as a full voting
member of the commission from a sophomore or junior class of a Redlands high
school for a term of one (1) year, beginning January 1 and ending December 31.
 
The Sergeant of the Traffic Division of the Redlands Police Department and a
representative of the Municipal Utilities and Engineering Department shall be
ex officio advisory members of the commission.”
 
Section 9. Section 2.48.030 of the Redlands Municipal Code relating to the
organization and meetings of the Traffic & Parking Commission is hereby amended
to read as follows:
 
“2.48.030: ORGANIZATION AND MEETINGS:
 
The commission shall meet quarterly in the months established by separate
resolution of the City Council, which resolution may be amended from time to
time; and elect a Chairman for one (1) year and other officers as it may deem
advisable. The commission shall make necessary rules and regulations as are
necessary to fulfill its obligations and duties.
 
Section 10. Section 2.50.030 of the Redlands Municipal Code relating to the
membership of the Cultural Arts Commission is hereby amended to read as
follows:
 
“2.50.030: MEMBERSHIP:
 
The Cultural Arts Commission shall consist of five (5) members appointed by the
Mayor with the approval of the City Council. Each member shall serve for a four
(4) year term and until his or her successor is appointed. No person shall
serve more than two (2) consecutive full terms unless appointed to an
additional term by a four-fifths (4/5) vote of the City Council. Vacancies on
the commission shall be filled by appointment by the Mayor with the approval of
the City Council for the unexpired portion of the term. Appointments made to
fill an unexpired term will constitute a full term if more than one-half (1/2)
of a term remains. For example, if a term is four (4) years and an appointment
for an unexpired term is for more than two (2) years, this appointment
constitutes a full term. The members of the commission shall serve without
compensation, shall each be a resident of the City, and neither a member of any
other standing commission, board or committee of the City nor an employee
thereof. The Council may remove any member of the commission at any time,
without cause, by a majority vote. Three (3) members of the commission shall
constitute a quorum.”
   
Section 11. Section 2.50.040 of the Redlands Municipal Code relating to the
organization of the Cultural Arts Commission is hereby amended to read as
follows:
 
   “2.50.040: ORGANIZATION AND MEETINGS:
 
The commission shall annually elect a Chairperson for the term of one (1) year
and other such officers as deemed advisable. The commission shall keep records
of all of its proceedings and actions and shall meet quarterly in the months
established by separate resolution of the City Council, which may be amended
from time to time. The Facilities and Community Services Director, or his/her
designated appointee, shall serve as staff to the Cultural Arts Commission.”
 
Section 12. Section 2.64.020 of the Redlands Municipal Code relating to the
membership of the Citrus Preservation Commission is hereby amended to read as
follows:
 
“2.64.020: MEMBERSHIP:
 
“The citrus preservation commission shall consist of five (5) members appointed
by the mayor with the approval of the city council. Each member shall serve a
staggered four (4) year term and shall serve until his or her successor is
appointed. Vacancies on the commission shall be filled by appointment by the
mayor with the approval of the city council of the unexpired portion of the
term. The members of the commission shall serve without compensation, and shall
be neither a member of any other standing commission, board or committee of the
city nor an employee thereof. The city council may remove any member of the
commission at any time, without cause, by a majority vote of the members of the
city council. Three (3) members of the commission shall constitute a quorum.”
 
Section 13. Section 2.64.040 of the Redlands Municipal Code relating to the
organization of the Citrus Preservation Commission is hereby amended to read as
follows:
 
“2.64.040: ORGANIZATION AND MEETINGS:
 
The commissioners shall, upon their appointment, organize and elect a chairman
for the term of one year, and such other officers as the commissioners may deem
advisable, and shall make such rules and regulations, and establish such
subcommittees as are reasonable or necessary to fulfill the obligations and
duties of the commission.
 
The commission shall meet quarterly in the months established by separate
resolution of the City Council, which may be amended from time to time. There
shall be a member of city staff, appointed by the city manager, who shall serve
as an ex officio member of the commission, attend all meetings of the
commission and shall act as a staff liaison for the city manager and the city
council.”
 
Section 14. Section 2.66.020 of the Redlands Municipal Code relating to the
membership of the Human Relations Commission is hereby amended to read as
follows:
 
“2.66.020: MEMBERSHIP:
 
The human relations commission shall consist of seven (7) members who shall
each, with the exception of the student members, serve for a four (4) year term
and until his or her successor is appointed. Five (5) members shall each be
selected from one (1) council district, and be appointed by the Council Member
of that corresponding district. Vacancies on the commission shall be filled by
appointment as set forth above and the term of a commissioner appointed to fill
a vacancy shall be for a four (4) year period. No person shall serve more than
two (2) consecutive terms unless appointed to an additional term by a four-
fifths ( 4/5)  vote of the city council. The commission members shall serve
without compensation, shall each be a resident of the city, with the exception
of the student members, and shall be neither a member of any other standing
commission, board or committee of the city nor an employee thereof. Two
commission members appointed by the city council shall be from the sophomore or
junior class of a Redlands high school or college student. The student member's
term shall be for one year, beginning January 1 and ending December 31. The
student members shall be considered two of the seven (7) members of the
commission with full voting powers. Four (4) members of the commission shall
constitute a quorum.”
 
Section 15. Section 2.66.040 of the Redlands Municipal Code relating to the
organization of the Human Relations Commission is hereby amended to read as
follows:
 
“2.66.040: ORGANIZATION AND MEETINGS:
 
The commission shall annually elect a chairperson and a vice chairperson and
there is no prohibition to the number of terms a member may serve in either
capacity. The commission shall keep records of all of its proceedings and
actions and shall meet quarterly in the months established by separate
resolution of the City Council, which may be amended from time to time.”
 
Section 16. The City Council hereby determines that the adoption of this
ordinance is exempt from review under the California Environmental Quality Act
(“CEQA”) because, pursuant to section 15061(b)(3) of the State Guidelines
implementing CEQA, it can be seen with certainty by this City Council that
there is no possibility that the adoption of this ordinance will directly or
indirectly have a significant effect on the environment.
  
Section 17. If any section, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance or
the application thereof to any entity, person or circumstance is held for any reason to be invalid or
unconstitutional, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect other
provisions or applications of this ordinance which can be given effect without
the invalid provisions or
application, and to this end the provisions of this ordinance are severable. The City Council of the
City of Redlands hereby declares that it would have adopted this ordinance and
each section,
sentence, clause or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more section, subsections,
sentences, clauses or phrases be declared invalid or unconstitutional.
Section 18. The Mayor shall sign this ordinance, and the City Clerk shall
certify to the adoption of this ordinance and shall cause it, or a summary of
it, to be published once in a newspaper of general circulation within the City,
and thereafter, this ordinance shall take effect as provided by law.
 
 
 
_________________________________
Mario Saucedo, Mayor
 
ATTEST:
 
 
____________________________________
Jeanne Donaldson, City Clerk
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I, Jeanne Donaldson, City Clerk, City of Redlands, hereby certify that the
foregoing Ordinance was duly adopted by the City Council at the regular meeting
thereof, held on the __ day of December 2025, by the following vote:
 
AYES:
 
NOES:
 
ABSENT:
                     __________________________________
                     Jeanne Donaldson, City Clerk
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ORDINANCE NO. 2996
 
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF REDLANDS ADDING CHAPTER 2.30 OF THE REDLANDS
MUNICIPAL CODE TO ESTABLISH A STREET TREE COMMISSION.
 
   THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF REDLANDS DOES ORDAIN AS FOLLOWS:
 
   Section 1. Chapter 2.30 of the Redlands Municipal Code, entitled “Street
Tree Commission,” is hereby added to read as follows:
 
“Chapter 2.30
Street Tree Commission
2.30.010: EXISTENCE
There is a Street Tree Commission established to make recommendations and
advise the City Council regarding street trees.
 
2.30.020: MEMBERSHIP
The Street Tree Commission shall consist of five (5) members appointed by the
Mayor with the approval of the City Council. Each member shall serve for a
staggered four (4) year term until his or her successor is appointed. No person
shall serve more than two (2) consecutive full terms unless appointed to an
additional term by a four-fifths (4/5) vote of the City Council. Vacancies on
the Commission shall be filled by appointment by the Mayor with the approval of
the City Council for the unexpired portion of the term. Appointments made to
fill an unexpired term will constitute a full term if more than one-half (1/2)
of a term remains. For example, if a term is four (4) years and an appointment
for an unexpired term is for more than two (2) years, this appointment
constitutes a full term. The members of the Commission shall serve without
compensation, shall each be a resident of the City, and neither a member of any
other standing commission, board or committee of the City, nor an employee
thereof. The City Council may remove any member of the Commission at any time,
without cause, by a majority vote. Three (3) members of the Commission shall
constitute a quorum.
2.30.030: MEMBERS; FORFEITURE OF OFFICE BY ABSENCE:
   Any Commission member who is absent from any three consecutive regular
meetings of the Commission, unless excused from such attendance by consent of
the Commission, expressed by action of record in its minutes, shall
automatically forfeit his or her office as a member of the Commission. The
vacancy so created shall be filled by appointment by the City Council for the
unexpired portion of the term.
 
 
 
2.30.040: ORGANIZATION AND MEETINGS:
The Commission members, shall, upon their appointment, organize and elect a
chairman for the term of one year, and such other officers as the Commission
members may deem advisable, and shall make such rules and regulations as are
necessary to fulfill the obligations and duties of the Commission.
 
The Commission shall meet quarterly in the months established by resolution of
the City Council, which may be amended from time to time.
 
2.32.050: DUTIES
   The Street Tree Commission shall be advisory to the City Council and shall
recommend to the City Council policies for the planting, care and removal of
trees and shrubs in all parkways in the City. The Commission shall have regular
meeting dates and shall keep records of all its acts and proceedings.
 
Section 2. The Mayor shall sign this ordinance and the City Clerk shall certify
to the adoption of this ordinance and shall cause it, or a summary of it, to be
published once in the Redlands Daily Facts, a newspaper of general circulation
within the City, and thereafter, this ordinance shall take effect as provided
by law.
 
 
 
_________________________________
Mario Saucedo, Mayor
 
ATTEST:
 
 
____________________________________
Jeanne Donaldson, City Clerk
 
I, Jeanne Donaldson, City Clerk, City of Redlands, hereby certify that the
foregoing Ordinance was duly adopted by the City Council at the regular meeting
thereof, held on the ___day of December, 2025, by the following vote:
 
AYES:
 
NOES:
 
ABSENT:
                     __________________________________
                     Jeanne Donaldson, City Clerk
 
 
 
 
 
 
ORDINANCE NO. 2997
 
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF REDLANDS AMENDING CHAPTER 15.20 OF THE REDLANDS
MUNICIPAL CODE AND ADOPTING BY REFERENCE THE  2025 EDITION
OF THE CALIFORNIA FIRE CODE (CALIFORNIA CODE OF REGULATIONS, TITLE 24, PART 9)
WITH NECESSARY LOCAL AMENDMENTS
 
WHEREAS, Health and Safety Code Section 17958 and Government Code Section 50022
empower the City to adopt by reference the California Building Standards Code,
including the California Fire Code; and
 
WHEREAS, Health and Safety Code Section 17958.5 authorizes the City to make
amendments  to  the  California  Fire  Code  on  the  basis  of  local
 climatic,  geological  or topographical conditions; and
 
WHEREAS, Health and Safety Code Section 17958.7 requires that before making any
modifications or changes pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 17958.5,
the City Council of the City shall
make an express finding of local necessity that such modifications or changes
are needed; and
 
WHEREAS, the City Council of the City of Redlands (“City Council”) is informed
and finds that these climatic, geological and
topographical conditions include, but are not limited to, the following
conditions;
 
1.   The City receives relatively low amounts of precipitation, and experiences very
low relative humidity levels and extremely high temperatures. These climatic
conditions are conductive to the spread of
fire. For example, the following data was taken from
the recorded temperatures and measured rainfall at the San
Bernardino County Flood Control District Office, located at 825 East 3rd 
Street, San Bernardino:
2022: Maximum temperature greater than 100°F recorded during the months of
July, August and September. Total recorded annual rainfall of 2.92.00 inches,
with 0.64 inches of rain measured in the months of July, August, September and
October.
 
2023: Maximum temperature greater than 100°F recorded during the months of
July, August and September. Total recorded annual rainfall of 16.4972 inches,
with 1.23 inches total of rain measured in the months of July, August and
October.
 
2024: Maximum temperature greater than 100°F recorded during the months of
July, August and September. Total recorded annual rainfall of 14.60 inches,
with 0.72 inches total of rain measured in the months of July, August and
October.
 
2.   The City is subject to extremely strong winds, commonly referred to as “Santa
Ana Winds,” which can reach speeds of more than 40 miles per hour. Extensive
damage often occurs during such winds including downed trees, power lines,
utility poles and utility service lines. These adverse conditions cause:
 
A.    Fires.
B.    Impairment of emergency apparatus access.
C.    Delays in response times of emergency apparatus; and
D.    The depletion of apparatus readily available for fire suppression
activities.
 
Specific amendments to the California Fire Code contained in this Ordinance
pursuant to this express finding of local necessity are made to sections:
101.1, 103.1, 104.8, 104.10, 104.12, 105.5.60 108.2, 108.6, 108.7, 109.5,
112.1, 113.4, 113.4.1, 113.5, 114.4, 308.1.8, 324, 403.9.3.4, 503.1.1, 503.2.3,
503.2.4, 503.2.7, 503.4, 505.1, 505.1.1, 507.5.1, 507.5.7, 507.5.8, 509.3, 511,
903.2.1.1, 903.2.1.2, 903.2.1.3, 903.2.1.4, 903.2.1.5, 903.2.2, 903.2.3,
903.2.4, 903.2.7, 903.2.8, 903.2.9, 903.2.9.1, 903.2.9.2, 903.2.11.1,
903.2.11.3, 903.2.18, 903.3.1.3, 903.3.5.3, 903.6.1, 903.6.2, 903.6.3, 903.7,
905.4, 907.11, 910.2, 914.12, 1103.2, 1207.7.5, 1208, 5601.9, 5601.10, 5601.11,
5602.2, 5602.3, 5602.4, 5602.5, 5602.6, Appendix B, Appendix BB, Appendix C,
Appendix CC, Appendix D, and Appendix P.   
 
3.   Within the City there are four earthquake faults:
 
A.    Redlands Heights
B.    Banning
C.    Crafton
D.    The Redlands Fault
 
Numerous other faults lie in close proximity, including the San Andreas Fault.
In the event of a severe earthquake, these faults present the potential for
catastrophic damage, including extensive damage to buildings, fire damage to
major infrastructure including water and
sewer distribution lines, roadways, bridges across a
major storm drain and railroad right-of-way and other impairments to the
movement of emergency apparatus.
 
Specific amendments to the California Fire Code contained in this Ordinance
pursuant to this express finding of local necessity are made to sections:
101.1, 103.1, 104.8, 104.10, 104.12, 105.5.60 108.2, 108.6, 108.7, 109.5,
112.1, 113.4, 113.4.1, 113.5, 114.4, 308.1.8, 324, 403.9.3.4, 503.1.1, 503.2.3,
503.2.4, 503.2.7, 503.4, 505.1, 505.1.1, 507.5.1, 507.5.7, 507.5.8, 509.3, 511,
903.2.1.1, 903.2.1.2, 903.2.1.3, 903.2.1.4, 903.2.1.5, 903.2.2, 903.2.3,
903.2.4, 903.2.7, 903.2.8, 903.2.9, 903.2.9.1, 903.2.9.2, 903.2.11.1,
903.2.11.3, 903.2.18, 903.3.1.3, 903.3.5.3, 903.6.1, 903.6.2, 903.6.3, 903.7,
905.4, 907.11, 910.2, 914.12, 1103.2, 1207.7.5, 1208, 5601.9, 5601.10, 5601.11,
5602.2, 5602.3, 5602.4, 5602.5, 5602.6, Appendix B, Appendix BB, Appendix C,
Appendix CC, Appendix D, and Appendix P.   
 
4.   Within the City development has occurred, and continues to occur, which has
resulted in severe traffic congestion during peak hours, weekends and holidays,
particularly on the following streets and highways:
 Citrus Avenue, Cajon Street, Orange Street, Lugonia Avenue, Colton Avenue,
Tennessee Street, San Timoteo Canyon, Interstate 10
Freeway, and Alabama Street; thus decreasing response
time. This development includes high-rise structures,
institutional, commercial, industrial and residential structures. Development
has occurred within the portion of the City known as Sunset Hills, where
roadways have been built in areas of
severe topographical conditions including street and driveway grades in excess of
12%. Such traffic congestion and severe roadway conditions extend the time for
emergency vehicles to reach the scene of fires and other emergencies.
 
Specific amendments to the California Fire Code contained in this Ordinance
pursuant to this express finding of local necessity are made to sections:
101.1, 103.1, 104.8, 104.10, 104.12, 105.5.60 108.2, 108.6, 108.7, 109.5,
112.1, 113.4, 113.4.1, 113.5, 114.4, 308.1.8, 324, 403.9.3.4, 503.1.1, 503.2.3,
503.2.4, 503.2.7, 503.4, 505.1, 505.1.1, 507.5.1, 507.5.7, 507.5.8, 509.3, 511,
903.2.1.1, 903.2.1.2, 903.2.1.3, 903.2.1.4, 903.2.1.5, 903.2.2, 903.2.3,
903.2.4, 903.2.7, 903.2.8, 903.2.9, 903.2.9.1, 903.2.9.2, 903.2.11.1,
903.2.11.3, 903.2.18, 903.3.1.3, 903.3.5.3, 903.6.1, 903.6.2, 903.6.3, 903.7,
905.4, 907.11, 910.2, 914.12, 1103.2, 1207.7.5, 1208, 5601.9, 5601.10, 5601.11,
5602.2, 5602.3, 5602.4, 5602.5, 5602.6, Appendix B, Appendix BB, Appendix C,
Appendix CC, Appendix D, and Appendix P.   
 
WHEREAS, this City Council is informed and finds that because the City is subject to
the above referenced climatic, geological and topographical
conditions, that amendments to the California Fire Code, 2025
Edition, are necessary to protect life and property, and that such
amendments address the following issues: (1) high fire hazard areas; (2) water
supplies; (3) fire extinguishing systems and sprinkler systems, and (4) the
storage, handling and use of flammable and combustible liquids and hazardous
materials; and
 
WHEREAS, this City Council does hereby determine that the modifications to the
2025 California Fire Code, as outlined in this Ordinance, are necessary due to
local climatic, geographical and topographical conditions;
 
NOW, THEREFORE, THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF REDLANDS DOES ORDAIN AS
FOLLOWS:
Section 1.
Chapter 15.20 of the Redlands Municipal Code, titled, “Fire Code,” is hereby
deleted in its entirety and rewritten to read as follows:
 
 
“Chapter 15.20
FIRE CODE”
15.20.010: FINDINGS AND ADOPTION OF THE CALIFORNIA FIRE CODE:
15.20.020: DEFINITIONS:
15.20.030: ESTABLISHMENT OF LIMITS REQUIRED BY THE CALIFORNIA FIRE CODE:
15.20.040: TITLE:
15.20.050: CODE COMPLIANCE AGENCY AND AUTHORITY HAVING JURISDICTION:
15.20.060: LIABILITY:
15.20.070: FIRE INVESTIGATIONS:
15.20.072: OPERATING GUIDELINES
15.20.074: REQUIRED OPERATIONAL PERMITS
15.20.090: PERMIT FEES:
15.20.100: FEES NOT REFUNDABLE:
15.20.110: REQUIRED OPERATIONAL PERMITS:
15.20.120: INSPECTION FEES:
15.20.130: ELECTRONIC RECORD KEEPING
15.20.140: BOARD OF APPEALS
15.20.150: VIOLATION PENALTIES
15.20.160: ABATEMENT OF VIOLATION:
15.20.162: VIOLATION PENALTY
15.20.170: FAILURE TO COMPLY:
15.20.180: RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES:
15.30.182: OUTDOOR FIRES -  WHERE PROHIBITED:
15.20.184: RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITY EVACUATION PLANS
15.20.186: FIRE APPARATUS ACCESS ROADS FOR BUILDINGS AND FACILITIES
15.20.190: SURFACE AND TURNING RADIUS:
15.20.200: GRADE:
15.20.210: OBSTRUCTION OF FIRE APPARATUS ACCESS ROADS:
15.20.220: PREMISES IDENTIFICATION:
15.20.230: ROOFTOP ADDRESSES:
15.20.240: FIRE HYDRANTS AND MAINS:
15.20.250: PRIVATE FIRE HYDRANT IDENTIFICATION:
15.20.260: PRIVATE FIRE HYDRANT MARKERS:
15.20.270: ACCESS TO EQUIPMENT:
15.20.280: SMOKE OR FOG EMITTING SYSTEMS:
15.20.290: GROUP A-1:
15.20.300: GROUP A-2:
15.20.310: GROUP A-3:
15.20.320: GROUP A-4:
15.20.330: GROUP A-5:
15.20.340: GROUP B:
15.20.350: GROUP E:
15.20.360: GROUP F:
15.20.370: GROUP M:
15.20.380: GROUP R:
15.20.390: GROUP S:
15.20.400: REPAIR GARAGES:
15.20.410: BULK STORAGE OF TIRES:
15.20.430: STORIES WITHOUT OPENINGS
15.20.440: SECTION 903.2.11.3 AMENDED
15.20.450: GROUP U OCCUPANCY
15.20.460: NFPA 13D SPRINKLER SYSTEMS
15.20.470: WATER SUPPLY FOR AREAS WITHOUT CITY WATER SERVICE
15.20.480: AREA INCREASE OR RECONSTRUCTION
15.20.490: CHANGE IN USE
15.20.500: ADAPTIVE REUSE
15.20.512: PRIVATE FIRE PROTECTION WATER SUPPLY POINTS OF CONNECTION
15.20.510: SECTION 905.4 AMENDED
15.20.514: REQUIREMENTS FOR DEDICATED FUNCTION FIRE ALARM SYSTEMS
15.20.520:SMOKE AND HEAT VENTS, MECHANICAL SMOKE EXHAUST SYSTEMS AND DRAFT
CURTAINS
15.20.540: REQUIREMENTS FOR GROUP F, M, S-1 OR S-2 DISTRIBUTION WAREHOUSES
GREATER THAN 50,000 SQUARE FEET IN FLOOR AREA
15.20.550: EMERGENCY RESPONDER RADIO COVERAGE IN EXISTING BUILDINGS
15.20.552: FIRE PROTECTION FEATURES FOR INSTALLATION OF ESS SYSTEMS – SAFETY
EVALUATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS
15.20.554: FIRE PROTECTION EVALUATION WHEN INSIDE OR ADJACENT TO NEW BUILDINGS:
ELECTRIC AND OR ALTERNATIVE FUELED VEHICLES
15.20.560: FIREWORKS PROHIBITION
15.20.570: APPLICATION OF STATE LAW
15.20.580: LIABILITY FOR RESPONSE COSTS
15.20.590: FIREWORKS DEFINED
15.20.600: MINOR CHARGE
15.20.610: PROPERTY
15.20.620: RESPONSE COSTS
15.20.630: RESPONSIBLE GUARDIAN
15.20.640: APPENDIX B
15.20.650: APPENDIX BB
15.20.660: APPENDIX C
15.20.670: APPENDIX CC
15.20.680: APPENDIX D
15.20.690: APPENDIX P
15.20.700: DESIGNATED LOCAL RESPONSIBILITY FIRE HAZARD SEVERITY ZONE
 
15.20.010: FINDINGS AND ADOPTION OF THE CALIFORNIA FIRE CODE:
 
A.    Findings: The City Council of the City of Redlands hereby finds and
determines:
1.    That the International Code Council is a private organization which has
been in existence for a period of at least three (3) years.
2.    That the International Fire Code, 2024 edition, published by said
organization, is a nationally recognized compilation of proposed rules,
regulations, and standards of said organization.
3.    That the international fire code has been printed and published as a code
in book form within the meaning of section 50022.2 et seq., of the California
Government Code.
4.    That the California fire code, also known as the California code of
regulations, title 24, part 9, a portion of the "California building standards
code" as defined in the "California building standards law" commencing with
section 18901 of the Health And Safety Code, is assigned to the California
building standards commission, which by law is responsible for approving all
building standards within the state of California. The 2025 edition of the
California fire code incorporates by reference the 2024 edition of the
international fire code, with necessary California amendments.
5.    That a copy of the 2025 California fire code, certified by the city clerk
of the city of Redlands to be a true copy, has been filed for use and
examination by the public in the fire prevention office of the Redlands fire
department and the office of the city clerk.
6.    The sections of said California fire code may be referred to by the
number used in said published compilation, preceded by the words "California
fire code section" or "fire code section", and may also be referred to by
additional reference to this municipal code and sections therein pertaining to
said California fire code.
7.    That the additional requirements and standards established herein are
needed to properly protect the health, safety, and welfare of the existing and
future residents and workers within the city of Redlands. Said requirements and
standards are reasonably necessary because of local climatic, geological, and
topographical conditions, and comply with existing state laws and regulations.
8.    The city council finds and determines that the local variances from the
California fire code - building standards, California code of regulations,
title 24, part 9, contained in the city fire code, are reasonably necessary
because of local climatic, topographic and geographical considerations.
B.    Adoption Of The California Fire Code: The city council of the city of
Redlands hereby adopts by reference, the 2025 California fire code, and
appendices B, BB, C, CC, and D, including fees and penalties, as compiled and
adopted by the California building standards commission; along with certain
amendments, additions, deletions and exceptions based upon the city council's
findings that the same are necessary based upon local climatic, geologic and
topographical conditions. The provisions of the California fire code,
California fire code appendix chapters, and the California fire code appendices
shall be applicable in all areas within the city of Redlands. The city council
of the city of Redlands hereby adopts and amends the 2025 edition of the
California fire code, as compiled and published by the California building
standards commission.
15.20.020: DEFINITIONS:
 
A.    Wherever the word "jurisdiction" is used in the fire code, it shall mean
the city of Redlands.
 
B.    Wherever the term "fire chief" is used in the fire code, it shall mean
the fire chief of the city of Redlands, or his or her authorized
representative.
 
C.    Wherever the term "fire department" is used in the fire code, it shall
mean the fire department of the city of Redlands.
 
D.    An employee of the city of Redlands fire department, when enforcing the
California fire code, this municipal code and other laws, rules and regulations
relating to fire and life safety, fire prevention and fire investigation, shall
be deemed a "peace officer" as those words are used in section 830.31 of the
California Penal Code.
 
E.    Whenever the term "fire code official" is used in the fire code, it shall
mean the supervisor of the fire prevention bureau and shall serve as the fire
code official under the direction of the fire chief, or the fire chief's
authorized representative. The community risk reduction division of the fire
department shall be responsible for fire prevention department duties within
the city of Redlands.
 
15.20.030: ESTABLISHMENT OF LIMITS REQUIRED BY THE CALIFORNIA FIRE CODE:
 
A.    Storage of Flammable Cryogenic Fluids: Pursuant to section 5806.2 of the
California fire code, flammable cryogenic fluids shall not be permitted to be
stored, dispensed, or used unless, in the opinion of the fire code official,
such storage will not create an unacceptable threat to the occupants and
property owners.
 
B.    Storage of Explosives and Blasting Agents: Pursuant to section 5601.1 of
the California fire code, the storage of explosives and blasting agents is
prohibited in all areas unless authorized by the fire code official, or the
listed exceptions of this code section.
C.    Storage Of Class I And II Liquids: Pursuant to sections 5704.2.9.5.2 and
5706.2.4.4 of the California fire code, the storage of class I and class II
liquids in outside aboveground unprotected tanks is prohibited in all areas of
the city unless the fire code official determines, with specific documented
findings, that such an installation will not create a hazard to life or
property in the area.
 
D.    Storage Of Liquefied Petroleum Gases: Pursuant to section 6104.2 of the
California fire code, the aggregate capacity of any one installation for the
bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gases shall not exceed two thousand (2,000)
water gallons (7571 liters) in commercial, residential and other areas where,
in the opinion of the fire code official, the location of bulk storage of
liquefied petroleum gases would create a threat to life and property.
 
15.20.040: TITLE:
 
Section 101.1 of chapter 1, division II of the California fire code is hereby
amended to read as follows:
 
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the fire code of the city of
Redlands, hereinafter referred to for purposes of this chapter 15.20 as "this
code."
 
15.20.050: CODE COMPLIANCE AGENCY AND AUTHORITY HAVING JURISDICTION:
 
Section 103.1 of chapter 1, division II of the California fire code is hereby
amended to read as follows:
103.1 Identification of Authority Having Jurisdiction. The fire department of
the city of Redlands is hereby identified as the authority having jurisdiction
and the official in charge thereof shall be known as the fire code official.
The function of the Authority Having Jurisdiction shall be the implementation,
administration, and enforcement of the provisions of this code.
 
15.20.060: LIABILITY:
 
Section 104.8 of chapter 1, division II of the California fire code is hereby
added to read as follows:
 
104.8.2 Cost Recovery. Fire suppression, investigation and rescue or emergency
medical costs are recoverable in accordance with Health and Safety Code
sections 13009 and 13009.1. Any person who negligently or intentionally, or in
violation of law, causes an emergency response, including but not limited to, a
traffic accident or spill of toxic or flammable fluids or chemicals, is liable
for the costs of securing such emergency, including those costs set out in
Health And Safety Code section 13009 et seq. and Government Code section 53150
et seq. Any expense incurred by the city for securing such an emergency
situation shall constitute a debt of such person and shall be collectible by
the city in the same manner as in the case of an obligation under contract,
expressed or implied.
 
A false fire alarm response fee may be imposed and paid after two (2) false
fire alarms have been received from any one residential or commercial source,
or from any one alarm system, within any consecutive three hundred sixty five
(365) day period. The false alarm response fee shall be established by
resolution of the city council.
 
104.8.3 Expense for Securing an Emergency. The expense of securing any
emergency or hazard which is the result of a violation of this code or any
other code, ordinance or state law, or any damages caused by malicious mischief
requiring any corrective or preventive actions conducted by the city may be a
charge against the persons or entity whose such emergency or action may
constitute a debt of such persons or entity as provided below.
1. The fire chief, or duly authorized representative, may impose the reasonable
cost of fire prevention, fire suppression, and protection of the public from
other safety hazards when a fire or hazardous condition results from any of the
following activities or conditions:
 
A.    Manufacture, transportation, storage, handling, or spilling of hazardous
chemicals, flammable or combustible liquids, explosives, or blasting agents;
 
B.    Failure to correct a hazardous condition for which a "notice of
violation," or equivalent notice, has been previously given by the chief, or
duly authorized representative;
 
C.    Use of welding equipment, cutting torch, tar pot, or other open flame
device;
 
D.    Permitting or causing the accumulation of hazardous or flammable
materials;
 
E.    Setting of a fire or allowing a fire to be set in violation of any code,
ordinance, law or regulation;
 
F.    Creating, allowing, or maintaining a fire hazard.
 
15.20.070: FIRE INVESTIGATIONS:
 
Section 104.10 of chapter 1, division II of the California fire code is hereby
amended to read as follows:
 
104.10 Fire Investigations. The fire code official and the fire department
shall investigate the cause, origin and circumstances of any fire, explosion
and other hazardous condition. Information that could be related to trade
secrets or processes shall not be made part of the public record except as
required by law.
 
The fire chief or duly authorized representative, is authorized to investigate
the cause, origin and circumstances of unauthorized releases of hazardous
materials. The Redlands police department and allied law enforcement agencies
are authorized to assist the fire department in its investigations when
requested to do so.
 
15.20.072: OPERATING GUIDELINES:
Section 104.12 of the California fire code is hereby added to read as follows:
104.12 Operating Guidelines. The Redlands Fire Prevention Standard Operating
Guidelines are created and adopted to serve as instructions and interpretations
of the adopted Fire Code. The Redlands Fire Department Fire Prevention Standard
Operating Guidelines shall be a published documents, amended from time to time
to provide current instruction and interpretation.
15.20.074: REQUIRED OPERATIONAL PERMITS:
 
Section 105.5.60 of chapter 1, division II of the California fire code is
hereby added to read as follows:
 
105.5.60 – Temporary Haunted Houses, Ghost Walks, and Similar Amusement uses.
An operational permit is required in accordance with Appendix P for temporary
haunted houses, ghost walks, and similar amusement uses.
 
15.20.090: PERMIT FEES:
 
Section 108.2 of chapter 1, division II of the California fire code is hereby
added to read as follows:
 
108.2 Permit Fees. Permit fees as established by city council resolution shall
be collected by the finance department. Proof of receipt shall accompany all
applications for permit prior to any inspection and approval by the city.
 
15.20.100: FEES NONREFUNDABLE:
 
Section 108.6 of chapter 1, division II of the California fire code is hereby
added to read as follows:
 
108.6 Fees Not Refundable. Permit fees shall not be refundable for any reason
after initiation of plan review or inspection procedures.
 
15.20.120: INSPECTION FEES:
 
Section 108.7 of chapter 1, division II of the California fire code is hereby
added to read as follows:
 
108.7 Inspection Fees. The fire code official is authorized to impose and
collect appropriate fees for inspections established by resolution of the city
council.
 
 
15.20.130: ELECTRONIC RECORD KEEPING:
 
Section 109.5 of chapter 1, division II of California Fire Code is hereby added
to read as follows:
 
109.5. Electronic Record Keeping. The Fire Code Official is authorized to
require electronic format submittals for fire protection systems maintenance
records.
 
15.20.140: BOARD OF APPEALS:
 
Section 112.1 of chapter 1, division II of the California fire code is hereby
amended to read as follows:
 
112.1 Board of Appeals. The city planning commission shall serve as the board
of appeals. The chief building official, director of development services and
the fire chief of the city, or their respective designees, shall serve in an
advisory capacity when requested to do so. Board members shall disqualify
themselves and shall not participate in any decision in which they have a
conflict of interest.
 
15.20.150: VIOLATION PENALTIES:
 
Section 113.4 of chapter 1, division II of the California fire code is hereby
amended to read as follows:
 
113.4 Administrative Citation Process Violation Penalties. Persons who shall
violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the
requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter, repair or do work in
violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the fire code
official, or of a permit or certificate used under provisions of this code,
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) a day or by imprisonment not exceeding six months, or both such
fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has
been served shall be deemed a separate offense. The city may also prosecute or
enforce violations of this chapter as a criminal offense in accordance with
this section.
 
15.20.160: ABATEMENT OF VIOLATION:
 
Section 113.4.1 of chapter 1, division II of the California fire code is hereby
amended to read as follows:
 
113.4.1 Abatement of Violation. In addition to the imposition of the penalties
herein described, the fire code official is authorized to institute an
appropriate action to prevent unlawful construction or to restrain, correct or
abate a violation; or to prevent illegal occupancy of a structure or premises;
or to stop an illegal act, conduct of business or occupancy of a structure on
or about any premises. The expense of such action may be made a lien upon the
property upon which such condition exists.
 
 
15.20.162: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
 
Section 113.5 of chapter 1, division II of the California fire code is hereby
amended to read as follows:
 
A.    It is unlawful to violate or fail to comply with any of the provisions of
the California fire code, or to fail to comply with any order made pursuant
thereto. It is also unlawful to build in violation of any detailed statement of
plans or specifications submitted and approved under the California fire code,
or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has
been taken.
 
15.20.170: FAILURE TO COMPLY:
 
Section 114.4 of chapter 1, division II of the California fire code is hereby
amended to read as follows:
 
114.4 Failure To Comply. Any person who shall continue any work after having
been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed
to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to
violation penalties pursuant to section 113.4.
 
15.20.180: RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES:
 
Section 308.1.8 of the California fire code is hereby amended to read as
follows:
 
308.1.8 Religious or Other Assembly Ceremonies. Candles held in persons' hands
(or on a non-stable device) are especially dangerous and shall not be
permitted. Battery operated simulated candles are available and may be used. No
permit is required for battery-operated candles or other electric candles.
15.20.182: OUTDOOR FIRES - WHERE PROHIBITED:
Section 324 of the California fire code is hereby added to read as follows:
Section 324: Outdoor Fires - Where Prohibited. The outdoor fires shall not be
conducted where conditions could cause the spread of fire, unless all of the
following safety requirements and conditions are met:
1. Location: Outdoor fires shall only be conducted at inhabited premises,
contained within a permanent barbeque, portable barbeque, outdoor fireplace, or
grill, and located a minimum of 30 feet from any combustible material or
nonfire-resistant vegetation.
2. No Hazardous Weather Conditions: Outdoor fires shall not be conducted during
hazardous atmospheric or weather conditions in Redlands including, but not
limited to: High winds and  sustained gusts exceeding 15 miles per hour,
relative humidity less than 20 percent, Red Flag Warnings issued by the
National Weather Service, and No-Burn Alerts issued by South Coast Air Quality
Management District.
 
3. Spark Arrestor/Screen Covering Required: Outdoor open flame appliances and
devices shall be provided with a spark arrestor or screen covering. Outdoor
fireplaces, barbeques, and grills shall be maintained in good repair and in
safe condition at all times
 
4. Supervision & Means of Extinguishment: Outdoor fires shall be constantly
attended by a person 21 years or older until the fire is extinguished. Not
fewer than one currently serviced portable fire extinguisher with a minimum 4:
A-40:BC (4 Gallon) rating, shall be available for immediate utilization.

5. Deliberate or Negligent Burning Prohibited: It shall be unlawful to
deliberately or through negligence set fire to or cause the burning of
combustible material in such a manner as to endanger the safety of persons or
property. Reckless behavior involving outdoor fires is subject to an order
issued by the fire department to immediately extinguish the fire.
15.20.184: RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITY EVACUATION PLANS:
Section 403.9.3.4 of the California fire code is hereby added to read as
follows:
 
403.9.3.4. Residential Care Facility Evacuation Plans. Residential care
facilities shall review the Emergency and Disaster Plan as required by
California Health and Safety Code Section 1569.695 and California Code of
Regulations, Title 22, Section 87212, with the fire department to verify the
plan accounts for an acceptable level of emergency communication monitoring and
facility self-reliance for vehicle-based evacuations of residents.
 
15.20.186: FIRE APPARATUS ACCESS ROADS FOR BUILDINGS AND FACILITIES:
 
Section 503.1.1 Exception 1.3 of the California fire code is hereby deleted.   
 
15.20.190: SURFACE AND TURNING RADIUS:
 
Section 503.2.3 of the California fire code is hereby amended to read as
follows:
 
503.2.3 Surface §503.2.3 Fire apparatus access roads for purposes of rapid and
reliable fire apparatus access shall be designed and maintained to support the
imposed load of fire apparatus weighing at least 75,000 pounds. Fire apparatus
access roads shall be surfaced with an approved concrete or asphalt covering so
as to provide all-weather driving capabilities. Turf block, Ritter Rings, Turf
Paver and other similar products shall not be used for fire department access
surfacing. Where rural road grades do not exceed 8%, the fire code official may
approve access roads of approved native materials or gravel when compacted to
ninety-five percent (95%).
 
TURNING RADIUS:
 
Section 503.2.4 of the California fire code is hereby amended to read as
follows:
 
503.2.4 Turning radius. The required turning radius of a fire apparatus access
road shall be an inner radius of twenty (20) feet and outer radius of forty
(40) feet.
 
15.20.200: GRADE:
 
Section 503.2.7 of the California fire code is hereby amended to read as
follows:
 
503.2.7 Grade. The grade of the fire apparatus access road shall be a maximum
of twelve percent (12%), unless otherwise approved by the fire code official
for short distances when appropriate mitigation measures are utilized.
 
15.20.210: OBSTRUCTION OF FIRE APPARATUS ACCESS ROADS:
 
Section 503.4 of the California fire code is hereby amended to read as follows:
 
503.4 Obstruction of Fire Apparatus Access Roads. Fire apparatus access roads
shall not be obstructed in any manner, including the parking of vehicles. The
minimum widths and clearances established in section 503.2.1 shall be
maintained at all times. Any obstruction or impedance to reasonable access may
be removed at the order of the fire code official or the fire department, with
the expense of such removal to be borne by the owner of the roadway, or in the
case of an obstructing vehicle or object, by the owner of said vehicle or
object.
 
15.20.220: PREMISES IDENTIFICATION:
 
Section 505.1 of the California fire code is hereby amended to read as follows:
 
505.1 Premises Identification. New and existing buildings shall have approved
address numbers, building numbers or approved building identification that is
plainly legible and visible from the street or road fronting the property.
These numbers shall contrast with their background. Address numbers shall be
Arabic numerals or alphabet letters. Numbers shall be affixed on a structure in
a location with a clear, unobstructed view from the street. All numbers shall
be electrically illuminated during the hours of darkness.
 
Numbers shall be a minimum of 4 inches high with a minimum stroke width of 0.5
inch for single-family residences.
 
All multi-family, multi-retail and multi-commercial occupancies shall:
 
Have a minimum of 6 inch high numbers, with a minimum one inch (1") stroke.
 
Identify individual units with numbers a minimum of four (4) inches, affixed to
the unit's front door entrance or frame. All buildings with a rear door access
shall identify that unit with the proper numbers affixed to the door or frame.
All light and heavy industrial occupancies shall have a minimum of ten (10)
inch high numbers, with a minimum one-and-one-half inch (1 1 /2") stroke. All
complexes that are three (3) stories or greater in height and/or have two (2)
or more building units shall have a minimum of ten (10) inch high numbers, with
a one-and-one-half inch (1 1 /2") stroke.
 
Buildings with a total floor area of 100,000 square feet (9290 m 2 ) or greater
shall have minimum 12 inch (305 mm) high numbers, with a minimum stroke width
of 1 1 /2 inches (38 mm).
 
All buildings with two (2) or more units shall identify utility meters
according to the unit being serviced.
 
Buildings set-back from the street by 200' or more, shall have additional
address number of a minimum of 4" located at the property entrance.
 
15.20.230: ROOFTOP ADDRESSES:
 
   Section 505.1.1 of the California fire code is hereby added to read as
follows:
 
505.1.1 Rooftop Addressing. Buildings exceeding a total square footage of
50,000 square feet shall have rooftop numbers placed parallel to the addressed
street for purposes of being visible from the air. The numbers shall be block
lettered and shall be a minimum of four (4) feet in height and eighteen (18)
inches in width. When more than one street address is assigned to a building,
the beginning and ending address numbers are to be placed at opposite ends of
the building, indicating the approximate location of the addressed portion of
the building.
 
15.20.240: FIRE HYDRANTS AND MAINS:
 
Section 507.5.1 of the California fire code is hereby amended to read as
follows:
 
507.5.1 Where Required. Where a portion of the facility or building hereafter
constructed or moved into or within the jurisdiction is more than 300 feet (91
m) from a hydrant on a fire apparatus access road, as measured by an approved
route around the exterior of the facility or building, on-site fire hydrants
and mains shall be provided where required by the fire code official.
 
Exceptions:
 
1.    For group R-3 and group U occupancies, the distance requirement shall be
600 feet (183 m). This distance may be further modified by the fire code
official for such occupancies when buildings are equipped throughout with an
approved fire sprinkler system installed in accordance with section 903.3.1.3.
 
2.    Deleted.
 
15.20.250: PRIVATE FIRE HYDRANT IDENTIFICATION:
Section 507.5.7: California fire code is hereby added to read as follows:
 
507.5.7 Private fire hydrants shall be painted OSHA Safety red or equivalent.
 
15.20.260: PRIVATE FIRE HYDRANT MARKERS:
 
      Section 507.5.8: of the California Fire Code is hereby added to read as
follows:
 
507.5.8 Blue reflective pavement markers shall be placed within six (6) inches
of the edge of the center lane line on the side of the nearest hydrant.
 
15.20.270: ACCESS TO EQUIPMENT:
 
Section 509.3 of the California fire code is hereby added to read as follows:
 
509.3 Access to Equipment in Multi-Unit Buildings. When automatic fire
sprinkler systems or fire alarm systems are installed in buildings constructed
for multiple tenants and these systems protect multiple tenant spaces, the main
controls and control appurtenances, such as risers, fire alarm control panels,
and valves for such systems, shall be located in an attached or included room
or an approved weather-resistant enclosure with at least one exterior access
door of not less than 3'-0" by 6'-8".
 
15.20.280: SMOKE OR FOG EMITTING SYSTEMS:
 
Section 511 of the California fire code is hereby added to read as follows:
 
511 Smoke Or Fog Emitting Systems. No alarm system shall be installed in a
building or portion of a building which as a part of its operation discharges
any gas, vapor, liquid, or other product when the primary intent of the system
discharge is to obscure the vision of any person, cause disorientation, or
incapacitate any person within the building or portion thereof. Nothing in this
section is intended to preclude the connection of an alarm system to any fire
suppression system.
 
15.20.290: GROUP A-1:
 
Section 903.2.1.1 of the California fire code is hereby amended to read as
follows:
 
903.2.1.1 Group A-1. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for group
A-1 occupancies.
 
15.20.300: GROUP A-2:
 
Section 903.2.1.2 of the California fire code is hereby amended to read as
follows:
 
903.2.1.2 Group A-2. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for group
A-2 occupancies.
15.20.310: GROUP A-3:
 
Section 903.2.1.3 of the California fire code is hereby amended to read as
follows:
 
903.2.1.3 Group A-3. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for group
A-3 occupancies.
 
15.20.320: GROUP A-4:
 
Section 903.2.1.4 of the California fire code is hereby amended to read as
follows:
 
903.2.1.4 Group A-4. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for group
A-4 occupancies.
 
15.20.330: GROUP A-5:
 
Section 903.2.1.5 of the California fire code is hereby amended to read as
follows:
 
903.2.1.5 Group A-5. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for group
A-5 occupancies in the following areas: concession stands, retail areas, press
boxes, and other accessory use areas in excess of 200 square feet (19 m 2 ).
 
15.20.340: GROUP B:
 
Section 903.2..2 of the California fire code is hereby added to read as
follows:
 
903.2..2 Group B. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout
all buildings containing group B occupancies where the fire area exceeds 200
square feet
(19 m 2 ).
 
15.20.350: GROUP E:
 
Section 903.2.3 of the California fire code is hereby amended to read as
follows:
 
903.2.3 Group E. Except as provided for in sections 903.2.19 for a new public
school campus and 903.2.20 (modernization project), an automatic sprinkler
system shall be provided for group E occupancies as follows:
 
1.    Throughout all group E fire areas greater than 200 square feet (19 m 2 )
in area.
 
2.    Throughout every portion of educational buildings below the level of exit
discharge.
 
3.    In rooms or areas with special hazards such as laboratories, vocational
shops and other such areas where hazardous materials in exempt amounts are used
or stored.
 
15.20.360: GROUP F:
 
Section 903.2.4 of the California fire code is hereby amended to read as
follows:
 
903.2.4 Group F. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all
buildings containing group F occupancy where the fire area exceeds 200 square
feet (19 m 2 ).
 
15.20.370: GROUP M:
Section 903.2.7 of the California fire code is hereby amended to read as
follows:
 
903.2.7 Group M. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout
buildings containing a group M occupancy where the fire area exceeds 200 square
feet (19 m 2 ).
 
15.20.380: GROUP R:
 
Section 903.2.8 of the California fire code is hereby amended to read as
follows:
903.2.8 Group R. An automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with
section 903.3 shall be provided throughout all buildings with a group R fire
area.
 
Exceptions:
 
1.    Existing Group R-3 occupancies converted to Group R-3.1 occupancies not
housing bedridden clients, not housing non-ambulatory clients above the first
floor, and not housing clients above the second floor.
 
2.    Existing Group R-3 occupancies converted to Group R-3.1 occupancies
housing only one bedridden client and complying with Section 435.8.3.3 of the
California Building Code.
 
3.    Pursuant to Health and Safety Code, Section 13113, occupancies housing
ambulatory children only, none of whom are mentally ill children or children
with intellectual disabilities, and the buildings or portions thereof in which
such children are housed are not more than two stories in height, and buildings
or portions thereof housing such children have an automatic fire alarm system
activated by approved smoke detectors.
 
4.    Pursuant to Health and Safety Code, Section 13143.6, occupancies licensed
for protective social care which house ambulatory clients only, none of whom is
a child (under the age of 18 years), or who is elderly (65 years of age or
over).
 
15.20.390: GROUP S:
 
Section 903.2.9 of the California fire code is hereby amended to read as
follows:
 
903.2.9 Group S. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all
buildings containing a group S occupancy where the fire area exceeds 200 square
feet (19 m 2 ).
 
15.20.400: REPAIR GARAGES:
 
Section 903.2.9.1 of the California fire code is hereby amended to read as
follows:
 
903.2.9.1 Repair Garages. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided
throughout all buildings used as repair garages in accordance with the
California building code.
 
15.20.410: BULK STORAGE OF TIRES:
 
Section 903.2.9.2 of the California fire code is hereby amended to read as
follows:
 
903.2.9.2 Bulk Storage of Tires. New construction or change in occupancy of
buildings and structures where the area for the storage of tires exceeds 200
square feet (19 m 2 ) shall be equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler
system in accordance with section 903.3.1.1.
 
15.20.430: STORIES WITHOUT OPENINGS:
 
Section 903.2.11.1 of the California fire code is hereby amended to read as
follows:
 
903.2.11.1 Stories without Openings. An automatic sprinkler system shall be
installed throughout all stories, including basements, of all buildings where
the floor area exceeds 200 square feet (19 m 2 ) and where there is not
provided at least one of the following types of exterior wall openings:
 
1.    Openings below grade that lead directly to ground level by an exterior
stairway complying with section 1011 or an outside ramp complying with section
1012. Openings shall be located in each 50 linear feet (15 240 mm), or fraction
thereof, of exterior wall in the story on at least one side.
 
2.    Openings entirely above the adjoining ground level totaling at least 20
square feet (1.86 m 2 ) in each 50 linear feet (15 240 mm), or fraction
thereof, of exterior wall in the story on at least one side.
 
15.20.440: SECTION 903.2.11.3 AMENDED:
 
Section 903.2.11.3 of the California fire code is hereby amended by the
deletion of the exception.
 
15.20.450: GROUP U OCCUPANCY:
 
Section 903.2.18 of the California fire code is hereby amended to read as
follows:
 
903.2.18 Group U Occupancy. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided
throughout buildings containing a group U occupancy where the fire area exceeds
200 square feet (19 m 2 ).
Exceptions:
1.    When a group U occupancy is not located within fifty (50) feet from an
adjacent building, structure, and/or property line.
 
15.20.460: NFPA 13D SPRINKLER SYSTEMS:
 
Section 903.3.1.3 of the California fire code is hereby amended to read as
follows:
 
903.3.1.3 NFPA 13D Sprinkler Systems. Automatic sprinkler systems installed in
one- and two-family dwellings shall be installed throughout in accordance with
NFPA 13D, including attached garages.
 
15.20.470: WATER SUPPLY FOR AREAS WITHOUT CITY WATER SERVICE:
 
Section 903.3.5.3 of the California fire code is hereby added to read as
follows:
 
903.3.5.3 Water Supply For Areas Without City Water Service. In areas without
city water service, buildings where the fire area exceeds 200 square feet (19 m
2 ) shall be provided with an approved automatic sprinkler system. Group R-
3 occupancies shall be provided with on-site water storage for a minimum 10-
minute sprinkler demand. When approved by the fire code official, on-site water
storage for other than group R occupancies may be reduced to that required for
an approved 30-minute sprinkler demand. These flows and duration do not
consider the needs required to provide domestic service. All sprinkler systems
shall be suitably freeze-protected for climatic conditions when necessary.
 
15.20.480: AREA INCREASE OR RECONSTRUCTION:
 
Section 903.6.1 of the California fire code is hereby amended by adding the
following:
 
903.6.1 Area Increase or Reconstruction. Every existing building or structure
relocated or moved onto a property, every building or structure which as a
result of fire, earthquake, or other disaster requires demolition and
reconstruction, or every existing building or structure that is receiving or
has received an addition(s) in which fifty percent (50%) of the original area
is exceeded, or every existing building or structure that undergoes an
Alteration Level 3 as defined by the California Existing Building Code shall
have an approved automatic sprinkler system installed throughout therein.
 
15.20.490: CHANGE IN USE:
 
Section 903.6.2 of the California fire code is hereby amended by adding the
following:
 
903.6.2 Change in Use. Changes made in the character or use of an occupancy
shall be approved by the building official and the chief. When there is a
change of use or occupancy of a building which exceeds 5,000 square feet in
floor area which would place the building in a different division of the same
group of occupancy or in a different group of occupancies, the occupancy shall
be provided with an approved automatic sprinkler system throughout, unless the
proposed use is less hazardous based on fire or life safety risk, than the
existing use.
 
15.20.500: ADAPTIVE REUSE:
 
Section 903.6.3 of the California fire code is hereby amended by adding the
following:
 
903.6.3 Adaptive Reuse. Every existing group R occupancy that is changed to a
commercial use shall have an approved automatic sprinkler system installed
throughout.
 
15.20.502: SECTION 903.7 PRIVATE FIRE PROTECTION WATER SUPPLY POINTS OF
CONNECTION:
 
Section 903.7 of the California fire code is hereby amended by adding to read
as follows:
 
903.7 Private Fire Protection Water Supply Points Of Connection. Any
development within the City of Redlands that consists of more than a single
structure on a commercially developed site; multiple floor commercial
structures; multi-family commercial residences or fire flow requirements in
excess of 2000 gallons per minute will require a two point of connection full
looped fire supply to the development. All required onsite fire hydrants will
be supplied from this looped system and will be private to the development.
When there are practical difficulties involved in carrying out the provisions
of this ordinance the fire code official is authorized to grant modifications
for individual cases on application in writing by the owner or a duly
authorized representative. The code official shall first find that a special
reason makes enforcement of the strict letter of the ordinance impractical and
any modification or change does not lessen any fire protection requirements. If
so changes or modifications may be approved by the fire code official or fire
chief
 
15.20.510: SECTION 905.4 LOCATION OF CLASS I STANDPIPE HOSE CONNECTIONS:
 
Section 905.4 of the California fire code is hereby amended by adding location
number 7 to read as follows:
 
7. When required by other provisions of this code, 2 1 /2 inch hose
connections, meeting the requirements of this section and fire department
standards, shall be located at every other exterior fire department access door
as defined by section 2306.6.1, and arranged so that every portion of the
building and its contents can be reached with 150 feet of hose and stream.
 
 
15.20.512: SECTION 907.11 REQUIREMENTS FOR DEDICATED FUNCTION FIRE ALARM
SYSTEMS:
 
Section 907.11 of the California fire code is hereby amended by adding to read
as follows:
 
907.11 Requirements For Dedicated Function Fire Alarm Systems. One interior
audible and visual notification device to alert occupants shall be provided
from the dedicated function fire alarm systems. Multi-tenant buildings that
each have their own exterior access (i.e. strip mall) do not need to be
equipped with an interior notification device. A single manual fire alarm box
shall be located next to the sprinkler riser, fire alarm control unit, or fire
alarm annunciator. A fire department key box shall be provided adjacent to the
exterior entry point to the area of the fire alarm control unit.
 
15.20.520: SMOKE AND HEAT VENTS, MECHANICAL SMOKE EXHAUST SYSTEMS AND DRAFT
CURTAINS:
 
Section 910.2 of the California fire code is hereby amended to read as follows:
 
910.2 Where Required. Where required by this code or otherwise installed, smoke
and heat vents or mechanical smoke exhaust systems and draft curtains shall
conform to the requirements of this section.
 
Exceptions:
 
1.    Frozen food warehouses used solely for storage of class I and II
commodities where protected by an approved automatic sprinkler system.
 
2.    Deleted.
 
3.    Deleted.
 
15.20.540: REQUIREMENTS FOR GROUP F, M, S-1 OR S-2 DISTRIBUTION WAREHOUSES
GREATER THAN 50,000 SQUARE FEET IN FLOOR AREA:
 
Section 914.12 of the California fire code is hereby added to read as follows:
 
914.12 Special Requirements For Group F, M, S-1 Or S-2 Distribution Warehouses
Greater Than 50,000 Square Feet in Floor Area. Buildings classified primarily
as group M, group S-1 or S-2, with no more than 10% of the building square
footage occupied with accessory uses, in which the primary use is wholesale or
retail sales of bulk products or packaged materials, or for the storage of
commodities for distribution, shall be in accordance with this section.
 
914.12.1 Fire Command Center. A fire command center for fire department
operations shall be provided. The location and accessibility of the fire
control room shall be approved by the fire code official. The fire control room
shall be separated from the remainder of the building by walls and ceilings not
less than one-hour fire partitions. The room shall be a minimum of 200 square
feet (19 m 2 ) in area, with a minimum dimension of 10 feet (3048 mm). The room
shall contain the following as a minimum:
 
1.    The fire alarm control unit and associated equipment.
2.    Annunciator panel displaying status of sprinkler control valves and
waterflow detectors.
 
3.    Main controls and indicators for mechanical smoke exhaust systems.
 
4.    Graphic with schematic indicating building floor plans, means of egress,
fire protection systems, firefighting equipment and access.
 
5.    Other firefighting equipment and system controls as required by the fire
code official.
 
6.    Emergency lighting powered by the standby electrical system.
 
914.12.2 Mechanical Smoke Exhaust. A mechanical smoke exhaust system conforming
to the requirements of section 910.4 shall be provided. The system may be
combined with environmental or other ventilation air systems when approved by
the fire code official. Manual override controls of mechanical smoke exhaust
systems shall be designed for fire department use only.
914.12.3 Standpipe Systems. A class I standpipe system shall be provided, with
hose connections located at fire department access doors as required by section
905.4. The system may be interconnected with the building automatic sprinkler
systems, and may be supplied by adjacent systems or by a separate riser.
Standpipe systems shall conform to the requirements of NFPA 14.
914.12.4 Fire Department Graphic. A printed graphic with schematic diagrams of
the building automatic sprinkler systems, fire alarm systems, means of egress,
standpipe systems, smoke exhaust systems, access doors, and any other equipment
as required by the fire code official shall be superimposed over a building
floor plan or site plan and mounted on the wall in a highly visible location in
the fire control room. The graphic shall be durable and waterproofed.
914.12.5 Standby Power. A standby power generator conforming to the California
electrical code shall be provided on the premises, in a protected location. The
generator shall have a rated capacity necessary to supply the load of all fire
protection features listed below at the same time:
 
1.    Emergency lighting and exit signs necessary for egress.
 
2.    Lighting for the fire control room.
 
3.    Signal and communication systems as applicable.
 
4.    Electrically powered fire pumps required to maintain pressure.
 
5.    Mechanical smoke exhaust systems as required by section 914.12.2.
 
In addition, a fuel supply sufficient for not less than two hours of operation
shall be required on the premises. All electrically connected systems shall be
transferred within 60 seconds after losing primary power.
 
914.12.6 Enhanced Communications. When required by the fire code official,
enhanced communication equipment, such as bi-directional amplifiers, shall be
provided in the building for dedicated use by the fire department. When such
equipment is required to be installed, it shall be provided with a standby
power supply.
 
914.12.7 Other Requirements. All fire protection systems shall comply with fire
department standards regarding installation, signage and labeling, maintenance,
and other requirements as specified by the fire code official.
 
15.20.550: EMERGENCY RESPONDER RADIO COVERAGE IN EXISTING BUILDINGS:
 
Section 1103.2 of the California Fire Code is hereby amended to read as
follows:
 
1103.2 Criteria 2: Within one (1) year of completion date. All plans and
permits shall be submitted for review within six (6) months of completion date.
 
15.20.552: FIRE PROTECTION FEATURES FOR INSTALLATION OF ESS SYSTEMS – SAFETY
EVALUATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS:
 
Section 1207.7.5 of the California fire code is hereby added to read as
follows:
 
1207.7.5 Fire Protection Features For Indoor Installation Of ESS Systems –
Safety Evaluations And Requirements. The fire code official is authorized to
require safety evaluations of ESS systems installations for corresponding
building features including but not limited to: passive fire resistance
features, protected openings, locations and clearances for equipment, and
active fire protection systems. The evaluation shall be reviewed for
concurrence by the City. Recommendations from the evaluations shall be
incorporated in the building construction documents.
 
15.20.554: VEHICLE SAFETY EVALUATION WHEN INSIDE OR ADJACENT TO NEW BUILDINGS:
ELECTRIC AND OR ALTERNATIVE FUELED VEHICLES:
 
Section 1208 of the California fire code is hereby added to read as follows:
 
1208 Vehicle Safety Evaluation When Inside Or Adjacent To New Buildings:
Electric And Or Alternative Fueled Vehicles. New Buildings with electric and or
alternative fueled vehicle safety evaluation. When new buildings include
parking or charging of electric and alternative fueled vehicles inside or
within 25 feet adjacent, the fire code official is authorized to require a
safety evaluation be conducted by a qualified professional to determine the
acceptable level of life safety protections for the building. The evaluation
shall include the following aspects and be reviewed for concurrence by the
City. Recommendations from the evaluations shall be incorporated in the
building construction documents.
 
The evaluation shall include:
1. Anticipated smoke production and associated removal strategies to provide
occupants sufficient tenable conditions to evacuate the building.
2. Anticipated heat release & associated passive fire protection strategies to
provide sufficient structural stability for occupants to evacuate the building
and emergency response personnel to contain the fire to the fire area of
origin.
 
3. Active fire suppression systems to provide sufficient structural stability
for occupants to evacuate the building and emergency response personnel to
contain the fire to the fire area of origin.
 
4. Anticipated amount of water needed for fire suppression systems and fire
department operations. Strategies to collect water discharge from the site to
mitigate adverse impacts to public infrastructure and the environment.
 
15.20.560: FIREWORKS PROHIBITION:
 
Section 5601.9 of the California Fire Code is hereby added to read as follows:
 
Except as otherwise provided in this Code, no person shall have in his or her
possession, or keep, store, use, shoot, discharge, set off, ignite, explode,
manufacture, sell, offer to sell, give, transport, or improperly dispose of any
fireworks or dangerous or safe and sane fireworks.
 
A.    Except where otherwise expressly provided in this Code or under a permit
issued by the California State Fire Marshal or the Fire Chief, it shall be
unlawful for any person to possess, offer for sale, or store any fireworks.
 
B.    Except where otherwise expressly provided in this Code, it shall be
unlawful for any property owner or tenant to allow or permit the possession,
sale, use or discharge of fireworks at or on their property when the property
owner or tenant knows or should know of the possession, sale, use or discharge
of fireworks at or on such property.
 
C.    The Fire Chief and his or her authorized representatives shall have the
authority to seize, take, and remove any fireworks, dangerous fireworks, and
safe and sane fireworks. The Fire Chief and his authorized representatives may
charge any person whose fireworks are seized pursuant to this section.
 
D.    Every person who causes, aids, abets or conceals a violation of the
California Fire Code is guilty of violating the California Fire Code. Each such
person, corporation or firm shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor of a
separate offense for each day or portion thereof during which any violation of
any provision of the California Fire Code is committed, continued, permitted or
maintained by such person, firm or corporation.
 
15.20.570: APPLICATION OF STATE LAW:
 
Section 5601.10 of the California Fire Code is hereby added to read as follows:
 
Nothing in this section 15.20.520 shall limit any of the penalties provided in
the California Health and Safety Code or the California Penal Code with regard
to the offer for sale, exposing for sale, sale at retail, use or discharge of
any fireworks.
 
15.20.580: LIABILITY FOR RESPONSE COSTS:
 
Section 5601.11 of the California Fire Code is hereby added to read as follows:
 
A.    Any person who violates this section 15.20.560 shall be liable for
response costs incurred in responding to the unpermitted use, discharge or
storage of fireworks.
 
B.    If a person who violated this section 15.20.560 is a minor charge, the
responsible guardian of the minor charge and the minor charge shall be jointly
and severally liable for the response costs incurred pursuant to this section
15.20.580.
 
C.    To incur liability for response costs imposed by this section 15.20.580,
a person who violates this section 15.20.560 need not be present at the event
that causes the response giving rise to the imposition of response costs.
 
D.    Response costs imposed by this section 15.20.580 are in addition to any
other costs that may be recovered under this Code or State law.
 
15.20.590: FIREWORKS DEFINED:
 
Section 5602.2 of the California Fire Code is hereby added to read as follows:
 
"Fireworks" means any device containing chemical elements and chemical
compounds capable of burning independently of the oxygen of the atmosphere and
producing audible, visual, mechanical, or thermal effect which are useful as
pyrotechnic devices or for entertainment. The term "Fireworks" includes, but is
not limited to, devices designated by the manufacturer as Fireworks,
firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, roman candles, rockets, sparklers,
chasers, fountains, smoke sparks, aerial bombs, and Fireworks kits. "Fireworks"
includes both "dangerous Fireworks" and "safe and sane" Fireworks as defined in
the California Health and Safety Code.
 
15.20.6000: MINOR CHARGE:
 
Section 5602.3 of the California Fire Code is hereby added to read as follows:
 
"Minor charge" is a person under the age of eighteen (18) years for whom a
responsible guardian has the legal care, custody or control.
15.20.610: PROPERTY:
 
Section 5602.4 of the California Fire Code is hereby added to read as follows:
 
"Property" shall mean any private property; including but not limited to, a
residence, yard, or field, whether or not occupied as a dwelling, and whether
owned, leased, rented or used with or without compensation.
 
15.20.620: RESPONSE COSTS:
 
Section 5602.5 of the California Fire Code is hereby added to read as follows:
 
"Response costs" means those reasonable and necessary costs directly incurred
by City public safety or other personnel for a response to an unpermitted
discharge or illegal storage of fireworks, and include the cost of providing
law enforcement, firefighting, or other services arising from the unpermitted
discharge or illegal storage, maintaining or handling of fireworks, including
but not limited to:
 
A.    Salaries and benefits of public safety or other personnel for the amount
of time spent responding to, remaining at, or otherwise dealing with the
unpermitted discharge or illegal storage of fireworks, and the administrative
costs attributable to any response;
 
B.    The cost of any medical treatment to or for any public safety personnel
injured responding to, remaining at, or leaving the scene of the unpermitted
discharge or illegal storage of fireworks;
 
C.    The cost of repairing or replacing any public safety equipment or
property damage, and the cost of use of any such equipment, in responding to,
remaining at, or leaving the scene of any unpermitted discharge or illegal
storage of fireworks; and
 
D.    The disposal cost of confiscated fireworks.
 
15.20.630: RESPONSIBLE GUARDIAN:
 
Section 5602.6, of the California Fire Code is hereby added to read as follows:
 
"Responsible guardian" means a parent, guardian or other person having the
legal care, custody, or control of his or her minor charge.
 
15.20.640: APPENDIX B:
 
Section B105.2 of appendix B of the California fire code is hereby amended by
amending the exception to read as follows:
 
Exception: A reduction in required fire-flow of up to 50 percent (50%), as
approved, is allowed when the building is provided with an approved automatic
sprinkler system installed in accordance with section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2.
The resulting fire-flow shall not be less than 1,500 gallons per minute (5678
l/min) for the prescribed duration as specified in table B105.1(2).
 
15.20.650: APPENDIX BB:
 
Section BB105.1 of appendix BB of the California fire code is hereby amended by
amending the exception to read as follows:
 
Exception: A reduction in required fire-flow of up to 50 percent (50%), is
allowed when the building is provided with an approved automatic sprinkler
system. When a reduction in fire flow is used, fire flow shall not be less than
1500 gpm.
 
15.20.660: APPENDIX C:
 
Appendix C is hereby adopted in its entirety without amendments or deletions.
 
15.20.670: APPENDIX CC:
 
Appendix CC is hereby adopted in its entirety without amendments or deletions.
 
15.20.680: APPENDIX D:
 
Appendix D is hereby adopted in its entirety with the following additions and
amendments:
 
Section D101.2 of appendix D of the California fire code is hereby added to
read as follows:
 
D101.2 Construction Documents. Construction documents for proposed fire
apparatus access location of fire lanes, security gates across fire apparatus
access and construction documents and hydraulic calculations for fire hydrant
systems shall be submitted to the fire department for review and approval prior
to construction.
 
Section D101.3 of appendix D of the California fire code is hereby added to
read as follows:
 
D101.3 Timing of Installation. When fire apparatus access roads or a water
supply for fire protection is required to be installed, such protection shall
be installed and made serviceable prior to and during the time of construction
except when approved alternative methods of protection are provided. Temporary
street signs shall be installed at each street intersection when construction
of new roadways allows passage by vehicles.
 
Section D102.1 of appendix D of the California fire code is hereby amended to
read as follows:
D102.1 Access and Loading. Approved fire apparatus access roads shall be
provided for every facility, building or portion of a building thereafter
constructed or moved into or within the jurisdiction. The fire apparatus access
road shall comply with the requirements of this section and shall extend to
within 150 feet of all portions of the facility and all portions of the
exterior wall for the first story of the building as measured by an approved
route around the exterior of the building or facility.
 
Section D103.3 of appendix D of the California fire code is hereby amended to
read as follows:
 
D103.3 Turning Radius. 503.2.4 Turning radius. The required turning radius of a
fire apparatus access road shall be an inner radius of nineteen (20) feet and
outer radius of forty (40) feet.
 
Section D103.4 of appendix D of the California fire code is hereby amended to
read as follows:
 
D103.4 Dead Ends. Dead-end fire apparatus access roads in excess of 150 feet in
length shall be provided with an approved area for turning around fire
apparatus. City of Redlands Municipal Utilities and Engineering Department
Standard Specifications and Detail Drawings for Design and Construction of
Public Improvements, or California Fire Code Figure D103.1 shall be utilized
for turn around area design.
 
Section D103.7 of appendix D of the California fire code is hereby added to
read as follows:
 
D103.7 Surface. Fire apparatus access roads shall be designed and maintained to
support the imposed loads of fire apparatus weighing at least 75,000 pounds.
The roadway shall be surfaced so as to provide all weather driving
capabilities.
 
Section D103.8 of appendix D of the California fire code is hereby added to
read as follows:
 
D103.8 Authority. The fire code official shall have the authority to require an
increase in the minimum access width where they are inadequate for fire or
rescue operations.
 
Section D103.9 of appendix D of the California fire code is hereby added to
read as follows:
 
D103.9 Bygone Roadways. Where fire department access is unduly difficult
utilizing bygone roadways, and where modifications would significantly impact
the historical significance of the area, the fire chief may authorize
alternative means and methods in order to maintain fire department access.
Methods may include but are not limited to the posting of signs and notices of
parking requirements in order to maintain access.
 
15.20.690: APPENDIX P:
 
Section P101.2 of the California fire code is hereby amended to read as
follows:
P101.2 Permits. An operational permit shall be required for haunted houses,
ghost walks or similar uses in accordance with Appendix P101.2. Permit
applications and documents shall be submitted within three (3) weeks of
occupancy date. Additional permits shall be obtained from local building
department as required for any structural, electrical, or other modifications.
 
Section P103.2 of the California fire code is hereby amended to read as
follows:
 
P103.2 Tents or membrane structures. Tents and membrane structures may be used
when in compliance with all applicable requirements of this regulation, chapter
31 of this code, and when the total floor area of the tent is less than 1,000
square feet and the travel distance to an exit from any location is less than
fifty (50) feet.
 
Section P103.7 of the California fire code is hereby amended to read as follows
 
P103.7 Exception 2: Existing unsprinklered assembly spaces, such as gymnasiums,
when used for assembly purposes such as grad night.
 
Section P103.7.1. of the California fire code is hereby amended to read as
follows:
 
P103.7.1.1 Obstructions. Fire sprinkler systems and piping, when provided,
shall not be obstructed, altered, or used to support any decorations.
 
Section P103.7.2. of the California fire code is hereby amended to read as
follows:
 
P103.7.2.1 Obstructions. Automatic smoke detection systems or devices, when
present, shall not be obstructed, altered, or turned off.
 
Section P103.7.4 of the California fire code is hereby added to read as
follows:
 
P103.7.4 Add Exception. When the total floor area of the tent is less than
1,000 square feet and the travel distance to an exit from any location is less
than fifty (50) feet, manually activated devices suitable for sounding an alarm
or another approved method of alerting staff shall be provided as approved by
the fire code official.
 
Section P103.9.1 of the California fire code is hereby amended to read as
follows:
 
P103.9.1 Flame retardant. All decorative materials shall be both inherently
flame retardant, labeled as such, or be treated with a listed flame-retardant
material registered with the California State Fire Marshal. If the material is
treated by the user, a container and receipt will serve as proof.
 
Section P103.12 of the California fire code is hereby amended to read as
follows:
 
P103.12 Inspections. A fire and life safety inspection shall be conducted by
the fire department prior to the start of the event. Final building department
inspection and sign-off shall be made in conjunction with the fire department.
15.20.700: DESIGNATED LOCAL RESPONSIBILITY FIRE HAZARD SEVERITY ZONE:
Section 15.20.700 of Chapter 15.20 is hereby added to read as follows:
The local responsibility fire hazard severity zone for City of Redlands is
designated with geographical boundaries found in the map adopted with ordinance
number 2986.
B.    Except as otherwise specified in this chapter, all violations of the
California fire code or its appendices, or the amendments thereto contained in
this chapter, are misdemeanors and are punishable as provided in title 1,
chapter 1.20 of this code.
 
C.    Every person who causes, aids, abets or conceals a violation of the
California fire code is guilty of violating the California fire code. Each such
person, corporation or firm shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for
each day or portion thereof during which any violation of any provisions of the
California fire code is committed, continued, permitted or maintained by such
person, firm or corporation.”
 
Section 2.   If any subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this Ordinance
is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a decision of any
court of competent jurisdiction or preempted by State or Federal legislation,
such decision or legislation shall not affect the validity of the remaining
portions of this Ordinance. The City Council declares that it would have passed
this Ordinance and each and every subsection, sentence, clause or phrase not
declared invalid or unconstitutional without regard to any such decision or
preemptive legislation.
 
Section 3.   The provisions of this Ordinance shall be in force on and after
the date upon which this Ordinance becomes effective; provided, however, that
where complete plans for buildings have been filed and are pending for building
permits prior to the effective date of this Ordinance, permits may be issued in
compliance with the governing laws at the time of review and approval of such
plans, and the applicant may proceed with construction, provided physical
construction is commenced within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of
issuance of the permit and continued to completion.
 
Section 4.   Unless superseded and
expressly repealed, references in City forms, documents and regulations to
Chapter 15.20 of the Redlands Municipal Code and to the former edition of the
California Fire Code shall be construed to apply to the corresponding
provisions of Chapter 15.20 of the Redlands Municipal Code and the 2025 edition
of the California Fire Code as adopted and established by this Ordinance.
 
Section 5.   The City Council hereby determines that the adoption of this
Ordinance is exempt from review under the California Environmental Quality Act
(“CEQA”) pursuant to State CEQA Guidelines Section 15061(b)(3) for the reason
that it can be seen with certainty there is no possibility that the adoption of
this Ordinance will have a significant effect on the environment.
 
Section 6.   The City Clerk is hereby directed to publish notice in a newspaper
of general circulation within the City, in accordance with Government Code
section 6066, of the scheduling of a public hearing to consider adoption of
this Ordinance on December 2, 2025. The notice shall state the time and place
of the hearing, and shall also state that copies of the California Fire Code,
2025 edition, and the proposed amendments thereto, are on file with the office
of the City Clerk and open to public inspection. The notice shall also contain
a description which the City Council deems sufficient to serve notice to the
interested persons of the purpose of this Ordinance and the subject matter
hereof. The City Council further delegates the determination of such
sufficiency to the City Manager.
 
Section 7.   The Mayor shall sign this Ordinance and the City Clerk shall
certify to the adoption of this Ordinance and shall cause it, or a summary of
it, to be published once in a newspaper of general circulation within the
City, and thereafter, this Ordinance shall take effect as provided by law.
 
 
 
 
 
                     ____________________________
                     Mario Saucedo, Mayor
 
 
ATTEST:
 
 
_______________________________
Jeanne Donaldson, City Clerk
I, Jeanne Donaldson, City Clerk, City of Redlands, hereby certify that the
foregoing Ordinance was duly adopted by the City Council at the regular meeting
thereof, held on the 16 th day of December, 2025, by the following vote:
 
 
AYES: Councilmembers Barich, Tejeda, Davis, Shaw; Mayor Saucedo    
NOES:       None
ABSENT:    None
ABSTAINED: None
 
 
                        ______________________________
Jeanne Donaldson, City Clerk
 
 
 
 
 
 
ORDINANCE NO. 2998
 
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF REDLANDS AMENDING CHAPTER 15.30 OF THE REDLANDS
MUNICIPAL CODE AND ADOPTING BY REFERENCE THE 2025 EDITION OF THE CALIFORNIA
WILDLAND-URBAN INTERFACE CODE (CALIFORNIA CODE OF REGULATIONS, TITLE 24, PART
7) WITH NECESSARY LOCAL AMENDMENTS
 
WHEREAS, Health and Safety Code Section 17958 and Government Code Section 50022
empower the City to adopt by reference the California Building Standards Code,
including the California Wildland-Urban Interface Code; and
 
WHEREAS, Health and Safety Code Section 17958.5 authorizes the City to make
amendments to the California Wildland-Urban Interface Code on the basis of
local climatic, geological or topographical conditions; and
 
WHEREAS, Health and Safety Code Section 17958.7 requires that before making any
modifications or changes pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 17958.5,
the City Council of the City shall make an express finding of local necessity
that such modifications or changes are needed; and
 
WHEREAS, the City Council of the City of Redlands (“City Council”) is informed
and finds that these climatic, geological and topographical conditions include,
but are not limited to, the following conditions;
 
1.   The City receives relatively low amounts of precipitation, and experiences
very low relative humidity levels and extremely high temperatures. These
climatic conditions are conductive to the spread of fire. For example, the
following data was taken from the recorded temperatures and measured rainfall
at the San Bernardino County Flood Control District Office, located at 825 East
3rd Street, San Bernardino:
 
2022: Maximum temperature greater than 100°F recorded during the months of
July, August and September. Total recorded annual rainfall of 2.92.00 inches,
with 0.64 inches of rain measured in the months of July, August, September and
October.
 
2023: Maximum temperature greater than 100°F recorded during the months of
July, August and September. Total recorded annual rainfall of 16.4972 inches,
with 1.23 inches total of rain measured in the months of July, August and
October.
 
2024: Maximum temperature greater than 100°F recorded during the months of
July, August and September. Total recorded annual rainfall of 14.60 inches,
with 0.72 inches total of rain measured in the months of July, August and
October.
 
2.   The City is subject to extremely strong winds, commonly referred to as
“Santa Ana Winds,” which can reach speeds of more than 40 miles per hour.
Extensive damage often occurs during such winds including downed trees, power
lines, utility poles and utility service lines. These adverse conditions cause:
 
A.   Fires.
B.   Impairment of emergency apparatus access.
C.   Delays in response times of emergency apparatus; and
D.   The depletion of apparatus readily available for fire suppression
activities.
 
Specific amendments to the California Wildland-Urban Interface Code contained
in this Ordinance pursuant to this express finding of local necessity are made
to sections: 101.1, 103.2, 104.12, 108.2, 108.6, 108.7, 109.3.7, 114.5, 202,
302.3, 603.5, 604.6, A103.1, A104.7.4.
3.   Within the City there are four earthquake faults:
 
A.   Redlands Heights
B.   Banning
C.   Crafton
D.   The Redlands Fault
 
Numerous other faults lie in close proximity, including the San Andreas Fault.
In the event of a severe earthquake, these faults present the potential for
catastrophic damage, including extensive damage to buildings, fire damage to
major infrastructure including water and sewer distribution lines, roadways,
bridges across a major storm drain and railroad right-of-way, and other
impairments to the movement of emergency apparatus.
 
Specific amendments to the California Wildland-Urban Interface Code contained
in this Ordinance pursuant to this express finding of local necessity are made
to sections: 101.1, 103.2, 104.12, 108.2, 108.6, 108.7, 109.3.7, 114.5, 202,
302.3, 603.5, 604.6, A103.1, A104.7.4.
 
4.   Within the City development has occurred, and continues to occur, which
has resulted in severe traffic congestion during peak hours, weekends and
holidays, particularly on the following streets and highways: Citrus Avenue,
Cajon Street, Orange Street, Lugonia Avenue, Colton Avenue, Tennessee Street,
San Timoteo Canyon, Interstate 10 Freeway, and Alabama Street; thus decreasing
response time. This development includes high-rise structures, institutional,
commercial, industrial and residential structures. Development has occurred
within the portion of the City known as Sunset Hills, where roadways have been
built in areas of severe topographical conditions including street and driveway
grades in excess of 12%. Such traffic congestion and severe roadway conditions
extend the time for emergency vehicles to reach the scene of fires and other
emergencies.
 
Specific amendments to the California Wildland-Urban Interface Code contained
in this Ordinance pursuant to this express finding of local necessity are made
to sections: 101.1, 103.2, 104.12, 108.2, 108.6, 108.7, 109.3.7, 114.5, 202,
302.3, 603.5, 604.6, A103.1, A104.7.4.
WHEREAS, this City Council is informed and finds that because the City is
subject to the above referenced climatic, geological and topographical
conditions, that amendments to the California Wildland-Urban Interface Code,
2025 Edition, are necessary to protect life and property, and that such
amendments address the following issues: (1) high fire hazard areas; (2) water
supplies; (3) fire extinguishing systems and sprinkler systems, (4) fire safety
practices.
 
WHEREAS, this City Council does hereby determine that the modifications to the
2025 California Wildland-Urban Interface Code, as outlined in this Ordinance,
are necessary due to local climatic, geographical and topographical conditions;
 
NOW, THEREFORE, THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF REDLANDS DOES ORDAIN AS
FOLLOWS:
Section 1.   Chapter 15.30 of the Redlands Municipal Code, titled, “Wildland-
Urban
Interface Code,” is hereby deleted in its entirety and rewritten to read as
follows:
“CHAPTER 15.30
WILDLAND-URBAN INTERFACE CODE
SECTION:
15.30.010: Findings And Adoption
15.30.020: Definitions
15.30.030: Title
15.30.040: Code Compliance Agency And Authority Having Jurisdiction
15.30.050: Operating Guidelines
15.30.060: Permit Fees
15.30.070: Fees Not Refundable
15.30.080: Inspection Fees
15.30.090: Violation Penalties
15.30.100: Board of Appeals
15.30.110: Fuel Modification Zone Definition
15.30.120: Designated Local Responsibility Fire Hazard Severity Zone
15.30.130: Preliminary Fire Protection Plan
15.30.140: Vegetation Maintenance
15.20.150: Defensible Space
15.20.160: Restricted Entry To Public Lands
15.30.170: Outdoor Fires - Where Prohibited
15.30.180: Firearm Shooting Prohibited In Wildland-Urban Interface Areas
15.30.010: FINDINGS AND ADOPTION OF THE CALIFORNIA WILDLAND-URBAN INTERFACE
CODE:
A.    Findings: The City Council of the City of Redlands hereby finds and
determines:
1.    That the International Code Council is a private organization which has
been in existence for a period of at least three (3) years.
2.    That the international wildland-urban interface code, 2024 edition,
published by said organization, is a nationally recognized compilation of
proposed rules, regulations, and standards of said organization.
3.    That the international wildland-urban interface code has been printed and
published as a code in book form within the meaning of section 50022.2 et seq.,
of the California Government Code.
4.    That the California wildland-urban interface code, also known as the
California code of regulations, title 24, part 7, a portion of the "California
building standards code" as defined in the "California building standards law"
commencing with section 18901 of the Health And Safety Code, is assigned to the
California building standards commission, which by law is responsible for
approving all building standards within the state of California. The 2025
edition of the California wildland-urban interface code incorporates by
reference the 2024 edition of the international wildland-urban interface code,
with necessary California amendments.
5.    That a copy of the 2025 California wildland-urban interface code,
certified by the city clerk of the city of Redlands to be a true copy, has been
filed for use and examination by the public in the fire prevention office of
the Redlands fire department and the office of the city clerk.
B. Adoption Of The California Wildland-Urban Interface Code: The city council
of the city of Redlands hereby adopts by reference, the 2025 California
wildland-urban interface code, and appendices A, B, and I, including fees and
penalties, as compiled and adopted by the California building standards
commission; along with certain amendments, additions, deletions and exceptions
based upon the city council's findings that the same are necessary based upon
local climatic, geologic and topographical conditions. The provisions of the
California wildland-urban interface code, California wildland-urban interface
code appendix chapters, and the California wildland-urban interface code
appendices shall be applicable in all areas within the city of Redlands. The
city council of the city of Redlands hereby adopts and amends the 2025 edition
of the California wildland-urban interface code, as compiled and published by
the California building standards commission.
15.30.020: DEFINITIONS:
   A.   Wherever the word "jurisdiction" is used in said wildland-urban
interface code, it shall mean the city of Redlands.
   B.   Wherever the term "code official" is used in said wildland-urban
interface code, it shall mean the fire code official or building official for
the city.
   C.   Wherever the term "fire department" is used in said wildland-urban
interface code, it shall mean the fire department of the city.
   D.   An employee of the city, when enforcing the California wildland-urban
interface code, this municipal code and other laws, rules and regulations
relating to fire and life safety, fire prevention and fire investigation, shall
be deemed a "peace officer" as those words are used in section 830.31 of the
California Penal Code.
15.30.030: TITLE:
Section 101.1 of the California wildland-urban interface code is hereby amended
to read as follows:
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the wildland-urban interface
code of the city of Redlands, hereinafter referred to as "this code."
15.30.040: CODE COMPLIANCE AGENCY AND AUTHORITY HAVING JURISDICTION:
 
Section 103.1 of the California wildland-urban interface code is hereby amended
to read as follows:
 
103.2 Code Compliance Agency and Authority Having Jurisdiction. The fire
department and development services departments of the city of Redlands are
hereby identified as the dual authorities having jurisdiction. The officials in
charge thereof shall be known as the fire code official and building official.
The function of the Authorities Having Jurisdiction shall be the
implementation, administration, and enforcement of the provisions of this code.
 
15.30.050: OPERATING GUIDELINES:
 
Section 104.12 of the California wildland-urban interface code is hereby added
to read as follows:
 
104.12 Operating Guidelines. The Redlands Fire Prevention Standard Operating
Guidelines are created and adopted to serve as instructions and interpretations
of the adopted Wildland-Urban Interface Code. The Redlands Fire Department Fire
Prevention Standard Operating Guidelines shall be a published documents,
amended from time to time to provide current instruction and interpretation.
 
15.30.060: PERMIT FEES:
Section 108.2 of the California wildland-urban interface code is hereby added
to read as follows:
108.2 Schedule and Payment of Permit Fees. Permit fees as established by
resolution of the city council shall be collected by the management services /
finance department. Proof of receipt shall accompany all applications for
permit applications prior to inspection and approval by the code official.
15.30.070: FEES NOT REFUNDABLE:
Section 108.6 of the California wildland-urban interface code is hereby added
to read as follows:
108.6 Fees Not Refundable. Permit fees shall not be refundable for any reason
after initiation of inspection procedures.
15.30.080: INSPECTION FEES:
Section 108.7 of the California wildland-urban interface code is hereby added
to read as follows:
108.7 Inspection Fees. The code official is authorized to collect appropriate
fees for inspections as established by resolution of the city council of the
city.
15.30.090: VIOLATION PENALTIES:
Section 109.3.7 of the California wildland-urban interface code is hereby
amended to read as follows:
Section 109.3.7 Violation Penalties. Persons who shall violate a provision of
this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who
shall erect, install, alter, repair or do work in violation of the approved
construction documents or directive of the code official, or of a permit or
certificate used under provisions of this code, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) a day or
by imprisonment not exceeding six months, or both such fine and imprisonment.
Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be
deemed a separate offense. The city may also prosecute or enforce violations of
this chapter as a criminal offense in accordance with this section.
15.30.100: BOARD OF APPEALS:
 
Section 114.5 of the California wildland-urban interface code is hereby added
to read as follows:
 
Section 114.5 Board of Appeals. The city planning commission shall serve as the
board of appeals. The chief building official, director of development services
and the fire chief of the city, or their respective designees, shall serve in
an advisory capacity when requested to do so. Board members shall disqualify
themselves and shall not participate in any decision in which they have a
conflict of interest.
15.30.110: FUEL MODIFICATION ZONE DEFINITION:
Section 202, definition of "fuel modification zone", of the California
wildland-urban interface code is hereby added to read as follows:
FUEL MODIFICATION ZONE. A strip of land where combustible vegetation has been
thinned, modified, or both, and partially or totally replaced with approved
drought- tolerant, fire-resistant, and/or irrigated plants to provide an
acceptable level of risk from vegetation fires. Fuel modification reduces
radiant and convective heat, thereby reducing the amount of heat exposure on
the roadway or structure and providing fire suppression forces a safer area in
which to take action.
15.30.120: DESIGNATED LOCAL RESPONSIBILITY FIRE HAZARD SEVERITY ZONE:
Section 302.3 of the California wildland urban-interface code is hereby added
to read as follows:
The local responsibility fire hazard severity zone for City of Redlands is
designated with geographical boundaries found in the map adopted with ordinance
number 2986.
15.30.130: PRELIMINARY FIRE PROTECTION PLAN:
Section 602.3.1 of the California wildland urban-interface code is hereby
amended to read as follows:
4. The preliminary fire protection plan shall address water supply, access,
building ignition and fire resistance, fire protection systems and equipment,
defensible space and vegetation management.
5. The preliminary fire protection plan shall be consistent with the
requirements of California wildland-urban interface code and the Redlands
municipal code.
15.30.140: VEGETATION MAINTENANCE:
Section 603.5 of the California wildland urban-interface code is hereby added
to read as follows:
 
603.5.1 Vegetation Maintenance. Persons owning, leasing, controlling, operating
or maintaining buildings or structures in, upon or adjoining hazardous fire
areas, and persons owning, leasing or controlling land adjacent to such
buildings or structures, shall at all times:
 
Maintain an effective fuel modification zone by removing, clearing, or
modifying away combustible vegetation and other flammable materials from areas
within 100 feet from such buildings or structures. (See exception 3 for fire-
resistive construction and other features for approval and/or a reduction of
the fuel modification zone.) The fuel modification zone may be replanted with
either approved irrigated, fire-resistant planting material or approved non-
irrigated, drought-tolerant, fire-resistant plant material. Use of plants,
trees, and/or shrubs on the Redlands fire department wildland urban interface
high fire severity area undesirable list, must be specifically approved by the
fire code official. Use of any of the plantings on the list is subject to
periodic, ongoing inspections by the fire department to ensure proper
maintenance. Inspections may incur fees payable by the property owner. Failure
to maintain the plants and trees on this list in accordance with plan approval
could result in the plants, trees, and/or shrubs being ordered to be removed at
the expense of the property owner. Replanting of the fuel modification zone may
be required for erosion control.
Exceptions:
1.   Single specimens of trees, ornamental shrubbery or similar plants used as
ground covers, provided that they do not form a means of rapidly transmitting
fire from the native growth to any structure.
2.   Grass and other vegetation located more than 30 feet from buildings or
structures and less than 18 inches (457 mm) in height above the ground need not
be removed where necessary to stabilize the soil and prevent erosion.
3.   With the approval of the fire code official, the width of the fuel
modification zone may be reduced where fire-resistive structures or other
features are constructed. However, in no case shall the fuel modification zone
be reduced to less than 30 feet.
 
Remove portions of trees, which extend within 10 feet of the outlet of a
chimney,
 
Maintain trees adjacent to or overhanging a building free of deadwood, and
 
Maintain the roof of a structure free of leaves, needles or other dead
vegetative growth.
 
If the owner fails to correct such conditions, the fire code official is
authorized to cause the same to be done and make the expense of such correction
a lien upon the property where such condition exists.
 
15.20.150: DEFENSIBLE SPACE:
 
Section 604.6 of the California wildland urban-interface code is hereby added
to read as follows:
 
604.6 Defensible Space Zones. All existing habitable buildings and structures
withing the High and Very High Fire Hazard Severity Zone (VHFHSZ) shall
maintain defensible space in accordance with sections 604.6.1, 604.6.2, and
604.6.3. The fire code official may require additional fuel modification
measures to be taken by the property owner when extreme hazardous vegetation
conditions are present.
 
604.6.1 Zone Zero (0-5 feet) – Ember Resistant. Zone zero zones shall be
maintained in accordance with sections 604.6.1.1 through 604.6.1.9.
 
604.6.1.1 Vegetation. Vegetation shall be in accordance with the following:
1.   Ornamental and native shrubs shall be thinned, relocated, or removed to
provide no more than fifty (50) percent density and/or coverage and shall be
positioned to limit plan continuity and inhibit fire progression.
2.   Remove all dead, dying, or diseased vegetation, including where applicable
on portions of live vegetation and dead, dying, or diseased grass, plants,
shrubs, branches, leaves, and weeds.
3.   Maintain grasses to a maximum height of four (4) inches.
4.   Maintain large shrubs and hedges exceeding six (6) feet in height such
that limbs are not within 4 feet of the ground or one-third of its height,
whichever is less.
5.   Vines are to be limited on the structure.
6.   Vegetation under windows shall be kept to below eighteen (18) inches.
7.   Consideration shall be given to properties with more fire-resistive
construction, lower flammability plant species, and frequent irrigation.
604.6.1.2 Tree Maintenance. Tree maintenance shall be in accordance with the
following:
1.   Trees shall be maintained (i.e., cleaned, thinned, raised) to reduce the
spread of fire.
2.   Tree branches shall have six (6) feet of clearance above roofs,
combustible fences, combustible structures, and the ground. Additional
clearance equal to three (3) times the height of the shrub is needed if shrubs
are located under tree branches.
3.   Dead, dying, or diseased trees shall be removed. An evaluation by a
licensed arborist with recommendations on removal of dying or diseased trees
may be required by the fire code official.
604.6.1.3 Balconies, Overhangs, and Porches. The underside of balconies,
overhangs, and porches shall be kept clear of combustible vegetation.
 
604.6.1.4 Organic Wood Chips and Mulch. Organic mulch and wood chip application
is prohibited. Non-combustible materials such as concrete, gravel, decomposed
granite, or other approved materials shall be used within this zone.
 
604.6.1.5 Firewood. Firewood shall not be stored within this zone.
 
604.6.1.6 Chimneys. All chimneys shall have a spark arrestor and all branches
shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet from chimneys, stovepipe outlet, and heater
outlets.
 
604.6.1.7 Propane Tanks. Dead, dying, or diseased vegetation shall be removed
from within ten (10) feet of propane tanks.
 
604.6.1.8 Roofs and Gutters. Maintain the roof and gutters to be free of
leaves, needles, or other vegetation.
 
604.6.1.9 Firefighter Access. Remove hazardous items that would hinder existing
firefighter access to all sides of the structure.
 
604.6.2 Zone One (5-30 feet) – Lean, Clean, and Green Zone. Zone one zones
shall be maintained in accordance with sections 604.6.2.1 through 604.6.2.5
 
604.6.2.1 Vegetation. Vegetation shall be in accordance with the following:
 
1.   Ornamental and native shrubs shall be thinned, relocated, or removed to
provide no more than fifty (50) percent density and/or coverage and shall be
positioned to limit plan continuity and inhibit fire progression.
2.   Remove all dead, dying, or diseased vegetation, including where applicable
on portions of live vegetation and dead, dying, or diseased grass, plants,
shrubs, branches, leaves, and weeds.
3.   Maintain grasses to a maximum height of four (4) inches.
4.   Maintain large shrubs and hedges exceeding six (6) feet in height such
that limbs are not within 4 feet of the ground or one-third of its height,
whichever is less.
5.   Consideration shall be given to properties with more fire-resistive
construction, lower flammability plant species, and frequent irrigation.
604.6.2.2 Tree Maintenance. Tree maintenance shall be in accordance with the
following:
1.   Trees shall be maintained (i.e., cleaned, thinned, raised) to reduce the
spread of fire.
2.   Tree branches shall have six (6) feet of clearance above roofs,
combustible fences, combustible structures, and the ground. Additional
clearance equal to three (3) times the height of the shrub is needed if shrubs
are located under tree branches.
3.   Dead, dying, or diseased trees shall be removed. An evaluation by a
licensed arborist with recommendations on removal of dying or diseased trees
may be required by the fire code official.
604.6.2.3 Organic Wood Chips and Mulch. Organic mulch and wood chips shall be
kept at a depth of three (3) inches.
 
604.6.2.4 Propane Tanks. Dead, dying, or diseased vegetation shall be removed
from within ten (10) feet of propane tanks.
 
604.6.2.5 Firefighter Access. Remove hazardous items that would hinder existing
firefighter access to all sides of the structure.
 
604.6.3 Zone Two (30-100 feet) – Fuel Reduction Zone. Zone one zones shall be
maintained in accordance with sections 604.6.3.1 through 604.6.3.5.
 
604.6.3.1 Vegetation. Vegetation shall be in accordance with the following:
1.   Ornamental and native shrubs shall be thinned, relocated, or removed to
provide no more than sixty (60) percent density and/or coverage and shall be
positioned to limit plan continuity and inhibit fire progression.
2.   Remove all dead, dying, or diseased vegetation, including where applicable
on portions of live vegetation and dead, dying, or diseased grass, plants,
shrubs, branches, leaves, and weeds.
3.   Maintain grasses to a maximum height of eighteen (18) inches.
4.   Maintain large shrubs and hedges exceeding six (6) feet in height such
that limbs are not within four (4) feet of the ground or one-third of its
height, whichever is less.
5.   Consideration shall be given to properties with more fire-resistive
construction, lower flammability plant species, and frequent irrigation.
604.6.3.2 Tree Maintenance. Tree maintenance shall be in accordance with the
following:
1.   Trees shall be maintained (i.e., cleaned, thinned, raised) to reduce the
spread of fire.
2.   Tree branches shall have six (6) feet of clearance above roofs,
combustible fences, combustible structures, and the ground. Additional
clearance equal to three (3) times the height of the shrub is needed if shrubs
are located under tree branches.
3.   Dead, dying, or diseased trees shall be removed. An evaluation by a
licensed arborist with recommendations on removal of dying or diseased trees
may be required by the fire code official.
4.   All exposed wood piles shall have a minimum of ten (10) feet of clearance
down to bare mineral soil in all direction.
604.6.3.3 Organic Wood Chips and Mulch. Organic mulch and wood chips shall be
kept at a depth of three (3) inches.
 
604.6.3.4 Propane Tanks. Dead, dying, or diseased vegetation shall be removed
from within ten (10) feet of propane tanks.
 
604.6.3.5 Firefighter Access. Remove hazardous items that would hinder existing
firefighter access to all sides of the structure.
15.30.160: RESTRICTED ENTRY TO PUBLIC LANDS:
Section A103.1 of the California wildland-urban interface code is hereby
amended to read as follows:
A103.1: Restricted Entry To Public Lands. An employee of the jurisdiction, when
enforcing the California wildland-urban interface code, this municipal code and
other laws, rules and regulations relating to fire and life safety, fire
prevention and fire investigation is authorized to determine and publicly
announce when wildland-urban interface areas shall be closed to entry and when
such areas shall again be open to entry. Entry and occupation of the wildland-
urban interface areas during the closure timeframe shall be prohibited.
Criteria resulting in the closure of entry may occur during hazardous
atmospheric or weather conditions in Redlands including, but not limited to:
Extended drought or below average precipitation, high winds and sustained gusts
exceeding 15 miles per hour, relative humidity less than 20 percent, Red Flag
Warnings issued by the National Weather Service, or No-Burn Alerts issued by
South Coast Air Quality Management District.
15.30.170: OUTDOOR FIRES - WHERE PROHIBITED:
Section A104.7.4 of the California wildland-urban interface code is hereby
added to read as follows:
A104.7.4: Outdoor Fires - Where Prohibited. The outdoor fires shall not be
conducted where conditions could cause the spread of fire unless all of the
following safety requirements and conditions are met:
1. Location: Outdoor fires shall only be conducted at inhabited premises,
contained within a permanent barbeque, portable barbeque, outdoor fireplace, or
grill, and located a minimum of 30 feet from any combustible material or
nonfire-resistant vegetation.
2. No Hazardous Weather Conditions: Outdoor fires shall not be conducted during
hazardous atmospheric or weather conditions in Redlands including, but not
limited to: High winds and sustained gusts exceeding 15 miles per hour,
relative humidity less than 20 percent, Red Flag Warnings issued by the
National Weather Service, and No-Burn Alerts issued by South Coast Air Quality
Management District.
 
3. Spark Arrestor/Screen Covering Required: Outdoor open flame appliances and
devices shall be provided with a spark arrestor or screen covering. Outdoor
fireplaces, barbeques, and grills shall be maintained in good repair and in
safe condition at all times
 
4. Supervision & Means of Extinguishment: Outdoor fires shall be constantly
attended by a person 21 years or older until the fire is extinguished. Not
fewer than one currently serviced portable fire extinguisher with a minimum 4:
A-40:BC (4 Gallon) rating, shall be available for immediate utilization.
5. Deliberate or Negligent Burning Prohibited: It shall be unlawful to
deliberately or through negligence set fire to or cause the burning of
combustible material in such a manner as to endanger the safety of persons or
property. Reckless behavior involving outdoor fires is subject to an order
issued by the fire department to immediately extinguish the fire.
15.30.180: FIREARM SHOOTING PROHIBITED IN WILDLAND-URBAN INTERFACE AREAS:
Section A104.11 of the California wildland-urban interface code is hereby added
as follows:
RMC 15.30.180: Firearm Shooting Prohibited In Wildland-Urban Interface Areas.
See Redlands Municipal Code, Title 9, and Chapter 9.20: Weapons, making it
unlawful to fire any gun within the corporate limits of the city.”
Section 2.   If any subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this Ordinance
is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a decision of any
court of competent jurisdiction or preempted by State or Federal legislation,
such decision or legislation shall not affect the validity of the remaining
portions of this Ordinance. The City Council declares that it would have passed
this Ordinance and each and every subsection, sentence, clause or phrase not
declared invalid or unconstitutional without regard to any such decision or
preemptive legislation.
 
Section 3.   The provisions of this Ordinance shall be in force on and after
the date upon which this Ordinance becomes effective; provided, however, that
where complete plans for buildings have been filed and are pending for building
permits prior to the effective date of this Ordinance, permits may be issued in
compliance with the governing laws at the time of review and approval of such
plans, and the applicant may proceed with construction, provided physical
construction is commenced within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of
issuance of the permit and continued to completion.
 
Section 4.   Unless superseded and
expressly repealed, references in City forms, documents and regulations to
Chapter 15.30 of the Redlands Municipal Code and to the former edition of the
California Wildland-Urban Interface Code shall be construed to apply to the
corresponding provisions of Chapter 15.30 of the Redlands Municipal Code and
the 2025 edition of the California Wildland-Urban Interface Code as adopted and
established by this Ordinance.
 
Section 5.   The City Council hereby determines that the adoption of this
Ordinance is exempt from review under the California Environmental Quality Act
(“CEQA”) pursuant to State CEQA Guidelines Section 15061(b)(3) for the reason
that it can be seen with certainty there is no possibility that the adoption of
this Ordinance will have a significant effect on the environment.
 
Section 6.   The City Clerk is hereby directed to publish notice in a newspaper
of general circulation within the City, in accordance with Government Code
section 6066, of the scheduling of a public hearing to consider adoption of
this Ordinance on December 2, 2025. The notice shall state the time and place
of the hearing, and shall also state that copies of the California Wildland-
Urban Code, 2025 edition, and the proposed amendments thereto, are on file with
the office of the City Clerk and open to public inspection. The notice shall
also contain a description which the City Council deems sufficient to
serve notice to the interested persons of the purpose of this Ordinance and the
subject matter hereof. The City Council further delegates the determination of
such sufficiency to the City Manager.
 
Section 7.   The Mayor shall sign this Ordinance and the City Clerk shall
certify to the adoption of this Ordinance and shall cause it, or a summary of
it, to be published once in a newspaper of general circulation within the
City, and thereafter, this Ordinance shall take effect as provided by law.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                  ____________________________
                     Mario Saucedo, Mayor
 
 
ATTEST:
 
 
__________________________________________________________
Jeanne Donaldson, City Clerk
I, Jeanne Donaldson, City Clerk, City of Redlands, hereby certify that the
foregoing Ordinance was duly adopted by the City Council at the regular meeting
thereof, held on the 16 th day of December, 2025, by the following vote:
 
 
AYES:     Councilmembers Barich, Tejeda, Davis, Shaw: Mayor Saucedo
NOES:       None
ABSENT:    None
ABSTAINED: None
 
 
                  
___________________________
Jeanne Donaldson, City Clerk
 
 
 
TITLE 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 1.01
CODE ADOPTION
SECTION:
1.01.010: Adoption Authority
1.01.020: Title; Citation; Reference
1.01.030: Codification Authority
1.01.040: Ordinances Passed Prior To Adoption Of The Code
1.01.050: Reference Applies To All Amendments
1.01.060: Title, Chapter And Section Headings
1.01.070: Reference To Specific Ordinances
1.01.080: Effect Of Code On Past Actions And Obligations
1.01.090: Effective Date
1.01.100: Constitutionality
1.01.010: ADOPTION AUTHORITY:
Pursuant to the provisions of sections 50022.1 through 50022.8 and 50022.10 of
the California Government Code, the city council of the city of Redlands,
California, adopts and incorporates by reference in the ordinance codified in
this chapter the Redlands municipal code, as published by Book Publishing
Company, together with the secondary codes adopted by reference therein,
excepting such portions of those secondary codes as are deleted or modified by
the provisions of this code. (Ord. 2012 § 1, 1987)
1.01.020: TITLE; CITATION; REFERENCE:
This code shall be known as the REDLANDS MUNICIPAL CODE, and it shall be
sufficient to refer to this code as such in any prosecution for the violation
of any of its provisions and in any proceeding at law or equity. It shall be
sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, amending, correcting or
repealing all or any part of this code as an addition to, amendment to,
correction or repeal of this code. Further reference may be made to the titles,
chapters, sections and subsections of this code and such references shall apply
to those numbered titles, chapters, sections or subsections as they appear in
the code. (Ord. 2012 § 2, 1987)
1.01.030: CODIFICATION AUTHORITY:
This code consists of the regulatory and penal ordinances and certain of the
administrative ordinances of the city of Redlands, California, codified
pursuant to the provisions of sections 50022.1 through 50022.8 and 50022.10 of
the California Government code. To the extent consistent with the provisions of
this code, all ordinances not codified in this code shall continue in full
force and effect, except as otherwise expressly provided in this or any other
ordinance of the city of Redlands, California. (Ord. 2012 § 3, 1987)
1.01.040: ORDINANCES PASSED PRIOR TO ADOPTION OF THE CODE:
The last ordinance included in this code was ordinance 1973, adopted November
18, 1986. The following ordinances, adopted subsequent to ordinance 1973, but
prior to adoption of this code, are incorporated as a part of this code:
ordinances 1974, 1975, 1976, 1977, 1979, 1981, 1982, 1983, 1984, 1985, 1987,
1990, 1991, 1992, 1995, 1998, 1999, 2002, 2003, 2006 and 2007. (Ord. 2012 § 4,
1987)
1.01.050: REFERENCE APPLIES TO ALL AMENDMENTS:
Whenever any reference is made to this code as the "Redlands municipal code",
or to any portion hereof, or to any ordinance of the city of Redlands,
California, the reference shall apply to all amendments, corrections and
additions heretofore, now or hereafter made. (Ord. 2012 § 5, 1987)
1.01.060: TITLE, CHAPTER AND SECTION HEADINGS:
Title, chapter and section headings contained in this code shall not be deemed
to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent
of the provisions of any title, chapter or section hereof. (Ord. 2012 § 6,
1987)
1.01.070: REFERENCE TO SPECIFIC ORDINANCES:
The provisions of this code shall not in any manner affect matters of record
which refer to, or are otherwise connected with ordinances which are
specifically designated by number or otherwise and which are included within
the code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to the corresponding
provisions contained within this code. (Ord. 2012 § 7, 1987)
1.01.080: EFFECT OF CODE ON PAST ACTIONS AND OBLIGATIONS:
Neither the adoption of this code nor the repeal or amendment hereby of any
ordinance or part or portion of any ordinance of the city of Redlands,
California, shall in any manner affect the prosecution for violations of
ordinances, which violations were committed prior to the effective date of the
ordinance codified in this chapter, nor be construed as a waiver of any
license, fee or penalty at such effective date due and unpaid under such
ordinances, nor be construed as affecting any of the provisions of such
ordinances relating to the collection of any such license, fee or penalty, or
the penal validity of any bond or cash deposit in lieu thereof required to be
posted, filed or deposited pursuant to any ordinance, and all rights and
obligations thereunder shall continue in full force and effect. The adoption of
this code shall not affect any other pending actions or proceedings. (Ord. 2012
§ 8, 1987)
1.01.090: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This code shall become effective on the effective date of the ordinance
codified in this chapter. (Ord. 2012 § 9, 1987)
1.01.100: CONSTITUTIONALITY:
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is for any
reason to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the
validity of the remaining portions of this code. The city council declares that
it would have adopted this code, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause
and phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections,
subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases had been declared invalid or
unconstitutional, and if for any reason of this code should be declared invalid
or unconstitutional, then the original ordinance or ordinances shall be in full
force and effect. (Ord. 2012 § 10, 1987)
CHAPTER 1.04
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
1.04.010: No Mandatory Duty
1.04.010: NO MANDATORY DUTY:
This code shall not be construed to impose on the city, its elected officials,
officers, employees or agents any greater liability than that required by law.
The use of the word "shall" in this code is not intended to impose upon the
city, its elected officials, officers, employees or agents a mandatory duty of
care toward persons or property in the city so as to provide a basis for civil
liability for damages. This code specifically preserves all immunities provided
under the law to a public entity, its elected officials, officers, employees
and agents. (Ord. 2438 § 1, 2000)
CHAPTER 1.06
NOTICES AND APPEALS
SECTION:
1.06.010: Time And Manner Of Giving Notice When Not Specified
1.06.020: Method Of Serving Notice When Not Specified
1.06.030: Time Extension When Service Is By Mail
1.06.040: Computation Of Time
1.06.050: Appeal Procedure When Not Specified
1.06.060: Time Period For Appeal When Not Specified
1.06.070: Notice And Hearing
1.06.075: Withdrawal Of Appeals
1.06.080: Final Decision
1.06.010: TIME AND MANNER OF GIVING NOTICE WHEN NOT SPECIFIED:
When this code requires the giving of notice, and the manner of giving the
notice is not specified, the notice shall be in writing. If a right may be
exercised, or an act is to be done, and the notice of it is required to be
given but the time within which the notice must be given is not specified by
this code, the notice shall be given at least ten (10) days before the time the
right must be exercised or the act is to be done. (Ord. 2438 § 2, 2000)
1.06.020: METHOD OF SERVING NOTICE WHEN NOT SPECIFIED:
When in this code notice is required to be given and the manner of giving
notice is not otherwise specified, the notice shall be served either personally
or by first class mail in a sealed envelope with postage prepaid, addressed to
the person at his last known mailing address and deposited in a facility
maintained by the United States postal service. (Ord. 2438 § 2, 2000)
1.06.030: TIME EXTENSION WHEN SERVICE IS BY MAIL:
In the case of service by mail, service is complete at the time the notice is
deposited in the United States mail. However, if within a given number of days
after service, a right may be exercised or an act is to be done by the person
to whom the notice is given, the time within which the right may be exercised
or the act done is extended by five (5) days if the place of address is within
the state, ten (10) days if the place of address is outside the state of
California but within the United States, and twenty (20) days if the place is
outside the United States. (Ord. 2438 § 2, 2000)
1.06.040: COMPUTATION OF TIME:
The time in which action provided in this code is to be done is computed by
excluding the first calendar day and including the last, unless the last day is
a holiday, and then it is also excluded. (Ord. 2438 § 2, 2000)
1.06.050: APPEAL PROCEDURE WHEN NOT SPECIFIED:
A person aggrieved by an administrative action taken by an officer or employee
under this code may appeal from the action to the city council, unless the
procedure for appeal is otherwise specifically provided. The time and manner of
appeal is prescribed by section
1.06.070 of this chapter. (Ord. 2438 § 2, 2000)
1.06.060: TIME PERIOD FOR APPEAL WHEN NOT SPECIFIED:
When this code provides that a decision or order may be appealed and the
procedure for taking the appeal is not specifically provided for, the person in
appeal shall file a written notice of appeal with the city council within ten
(10) days of the action appealed from. (Ord. 2438 § 2, 2000)
1.06.070: NOTICE AND HEARING:
Upon receiving the notice of appeal, the city council shall set the matter for
hearing and shall give the person appealing written notice of the time and
place of hearing at least ten (10) days before the hearing. (Ord. 2438 § 2,
2000)
1.06.075: WITHDRAWAL OF APPEALS:
No appeal may be withdrawn without the prior consent of the city of Redlands.
(Ord. 2718 § 1, 2009)
1.06.080: FINAL DECISION:
The decision of the city council is final on the date of the ruling by the city
council. (Ord. 2438 § 2, 2000)
CHAPTER 1.08
CUSTODY AND USE OF THE OFFICIAL CITY SEAL,
CITY LOGOS, BADGES AND PATCHES
SECTION:
1.08.010: Definitions
1.08.020: Use Of Official City Seal, City Logos, Badges, And/Or Patches
1.08.030: Prohibited Uses Of City Seal, City Logos, Badges, And/Or Patches
1.08.040: Penalties
1.08.010: DEFINITIONS:
The following words shall have the meanings set forth below when used in this
Chapter:
   A.   "Official City Seal" means the official City Seal of the City of
Redlands as adopted by City Council Ordinance No. 2718. The official seal of
the City of Redlands shall be in the form of a die approximately two inches
("2") in diameter. The form of the die shall be two (2) circles, one inside the
other. Within the smaller circle shall be imprinted the words "Incorporated
1888", and within the larger circle and outside the limits of the inner circle
shall be imprinted the words "City of Redlands California” depicted below:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6bf866ad80925317f7b0510a75f8f7309a69c8b4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8876.png]
 
   B.   "City Logo" shall be the following image adopted as the official logo
of the City of Redlands by action of the City Council on June 7, 2022:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6bf866ad80925317f7b0510a75f8f7309a69c8b4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8878.png]
 
   C.   "Redlands Police Logo" shall be the following image adopted as the
official logo of the Redlands Police Department:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6bf866ad80925317f7b0510a75f8f7309a69c8b4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8880.png]
 
   D.   "Redlands Police Badge" shall be the following image adopted as the
official badge of the Redlands Police Department:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6bf866ad80925317f7b0510a75f8f7309a69c8b4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8882.png]
 
   E.   "Redlands Police Patch" shall be the following image adopted as the
official patch of the Redlands Police Department:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6bf866ad80925317f7b0510a75f8f7309a69c8b4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8884.png]
 
   F.   "Redlands Recreation & Senior Services Logo" shall be the following
image adopted as the official logo of Redlands Recreation and Senior Services:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6bf866ad80925317f7b0510a75f8f7309a69c8b4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8886.png]
 
   G.   "Official City Seal, City Logos, Badges and/or Patches" shall mean
collectively the Official City Seal, the City Logo, the Redlands Police Logo,
the Redlands Police Badge, the Redlands Police Patch, and the Redlands
Recreation and Senior Services Logo, unless expressly stated otherwise. (Ord.
2940, 2022)
1.08.020: USE OF OFFICIAL CITY SEAL, CITY LOGOS, BADGES, AND/OR PATCHES:
   A.   The City Clerk or designee, acting as the custodian of the Official
City Seal as defined herein is authorized to use or affix the Official City
Seal, as appropriate, to all certificates and documents as may be required by
law, by this Municipal Code, or by City ordinance or resolution, to
authenticate official City documents or to indicate institutional sanction for
official, legal and ceremonial purposes.
   B.   The Official City Seal, City Logos, Badges and/or Patches shall only be
used for purposes directly connected with the official business of the City of
Redlands, its City Council, City boards, commissions, committees, City
officers, employees or departments, or for other city-related purposes upon
written authorization of the City Clerk or designee for use of the Official
City Seal and the City Manager or designee for use of the City Logos, Badges
and/or Patches.
   C.   The members of the City Council and City boards, commissions and
committees, and any City officer or employee may use stationery, business
cards, and other materials and articles printed by the City with the Official
City Seal, City Logos, Badges and/or Patches only while acting within the scope
of their office or employment.
   D.   The Director of Facilities and Community Services shall designate the
vehicles, equipment or other items of property belonging to the City to be
affixed with the image of the City Logos, Badges and/or Patches, as
appropriate.
   E.   The City Council retains the right to create variations of the Official
City Seal and any City Logos, Badges and/or Patches and to adopt and establish
other official City seals and logos, badges and patches. Such variations may
include, but are not limited to, centennial or other seals or logos which mark
anniversaries, events, and/or any other City occasion the City Council wishes
to commemorate. The Official City Seal, City Logos, City Badges and/or Patches
may only be altered pursuant to ordinance or resolution of the City Council.
(Ord. 2940, 2022)
1.08.030: PROHIBITED USES OF CITY SEAL, CITY LOGOS, BADGES, AND/OR PATCHES:
   A.   Except as otherwise provided for herein, it is unlawful for any person
or entity to make use of the Official City Seal, City Logos, Badges and/or
Patches or any portion, facsimile, mock-up, derivative or reproduction thereof,
or make or use any design, symbol, emblem, insignia or similar device that is
an imitation of said Official City Seal, City Logos, Badges and/or Patches or
that may be mistaken therefor, that is designed, intended or likely to confuse
or mislead the public, for private or commercial purposes or for any purpose
other than the official business of the City.
No person, firm, association, or corporation shall use the Official City Seal
and the City Logos, Badges and/or Patches or any facsimile thereof for purposes
of supporting or opposing the nomination or election to any City or other
public office of any person, or for purposes of supporting or opposing any
ballot measure, nor include such Official City Seal or any City Logos, Badges
and/or Patches on any writing distributed for purposes of influencing the
action of the electorate, or any part thereof, in any election. This section
shall not be applicable to official writings issued by the City or the City
Council as a whole pursuant to law. (Ord. 2940, 2022)
1.08.040: PENALTIES:
Unauthorized use of the Official City Seal, City Logos, Badges and/or Patches
for malicious, deceptive, fraudulent, or other unauthorized purposes in
violation of this Chapter is declared to be a public nuisance and the City can
abate or enjoin such use pursuant to the Redlands Municipal Code. Violation of
this Chapter shall be an infraction or misdemeanor, as determined by the City
Attorney. Nothing herein prevents the City from using any other available civil
and/or criminal remedies allowed by law to protect the Official City Seal, City
Logos, City Badge and/or Patch from improper or illegal use. (Ord. 2940, 2022)
CHAPTER 1.12
PRECINCTS
SECTION:
1.12.010: Established
1.12.010: ESTABLISHED:
The election precincts of the city, for any purpose for which an election may
be held by the city, are fixed and established to include the same territory
with like numbers as, and in all respects to correspond with, the election
precincts established from time to time in the city by the board of supervisors
of the county for state and county elections to be held therein. (Prior code §
10201)
CHAPTER 1.16
JAIL AND PRISONERS
SECTION:
1.16.010: Authority To Require Work
1.16.020: County Jail Sentencing
1.16.010: AUTHORITY TO REQUIRE WORK:
Persons confined in the city jail of the city under judgment of imprisonment
rendered in a criminal action or proceeding for violation of any ordinance may
be required by an order of the council or the mayor to perform labor on the
streets or other public property or works within the city. (Prior code § 40301)
1.16.020: COUNTY JAIL SENTENCING:
Any person sentenced to imprisonment or sentenced to pay a fine in default
thereof to be imprisoned, for the violation of any ordinance of the city now in
force or that may be hereafter adopted, may be imprisoned in the county jail of
San Bernardino County by judgment so pronounced by the recorder or judge
pronouncing sentence. (Prior code § 40401)
CHAPTER 1.20
GENERAL PENALTY
SECTION:
1.20.010: Violations; Misdemeanor
1.20.020: General Penalties
1.20.010: VIOLATIONS; MISDEMEANOR:
Unless a different penalty is prescribed for violation of a specific provision
of this code, every act prohibited or declared unlawful and every failure to
perform an act made mandatory by this code is punishable as a misdemeanor.
Every person who causes, aids, abets or conceals a violation of this code is
guilty of violating this code. Each person, firm or corporation shall be deemed
guilty of a separate offense for each day or portion thereof during which any
violation of any provision of this code is committed, continued or permitted by
such person, firm or corporation and shall be punishable therefor as provided
in this section and section
1.20.020 of this chapter. (Ord. 1940 § 1, 1986: prior code § 10301)
1.20.020: GENERAL PENALTIES:
Except in cases where a different punishment is specifically prescribed
elsewhere in this code, every misdemeanor offense is punishable by imprisonment
in the city jail or in the San Bernardino County jail not exceeding six (6)
months, or by fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by both;
provided, that where the city attorney determines that such action would be in
the interests of justice, the city attorney may specify in the accusatory
pleadings that the offense shall be an infraction.
Except as otherwise prescribed elsewhere in this code, every offense
specifically declared to be an infraction is punishable by a fine not exceeding
one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first violation, a fine not exceeding two
hundred dollars ($200.00) for a second violation of the same provision within
one year, and a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each
additional violation of the same provision within one year. An infraction is
not punishable by imprisonment. A person charged with an infraction shall not
be entitled to a trial by jury and shall not be entitled to have the public
defender or other counsel appointed at public expense to represent him unless
he is arrested and not released on his written promise to appear, his own
recognizance, or a deposit of bail. (Ord. 1940 § 1, 1986: prior code § 10302)
CHAPTER 1.22
ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS
SECTION:
1.22.010: Purpose And Intent
1.22.020: Definitions
1.22.030: Authority To Issue Citations
1.22.040: Procedure; Content Of Citation
1.22.050: Notice Requirements
1.22.060: Fines
1.22.070: Satisfaction Of Administrative Citation
1.22.080: Appeal
1.22.090: Advance Deposit Hardship Waiver
1.22.100: Administrative Hearing Officer
1.22.110: Hearing Procedure
1.22.120: Order
1.22.130: Review
1.22.140: Collection Of Fines
1.22.150: Remedies Not Exclusive
1.22.160: Transfer Of Ownership
1.22.010: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
   A.   The city council finds that the enforcement of this code throughout the
city is vital to the protection of the public's health, safety and quality of
life, and that there is a need for an alternative method of code enforcement in
addition to all other remedies, criminal or civil, which may be pursued by the
city to address code violations.
   B.   The city council hereby establishes an administrative citation program
pursuant to Government Code section 53069.4.
   C.   This chapter does not supersede any other provision of this code that
pertains to alternative remedies available to the city.
   D.   The use of the administrative citation program shall be at the city's
sole discretion. (Ord. 2792, 2013)
1.22.020: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
   ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS: All costs incurred by the city from the first
discovery of a violation through the appeal process, if any, including, but not
limited to, city staff time inspecting the property, the cost of preparing and
sending notices, preparing for and attending hearings, the fees paid to the
administrative hearing officer, and any attorney fees, including costs incurred
by the city attorney's office and any outside counsel hired to advise staff or
the administrative hearing officer.
   ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING OFFICER: Any person retained pursuant to the process
in section
1.22.100 of this chapter.
   CITY AGREEMENT: Includes, but is not limited to, a development agreement,
disposition and development agreement, street maintenance agreement, easement,
lease, license or other real property use or maintenance agreement, and any
agreement to implement an ordinance, plan, permit, entitlement or review
approved by the city.
   CODE: The Redlands municipal code, as amended.
   ENFORCEMENT OFFICER: Any city employee or agent of the city with the
authority to enforce any provision of this code including, but not limited to,
the city attorney, development services director, animal control officer, code
enforcement officer, city license inspector, NPDES inspector, any fire official
or police officer, and any of their respective designees.
   ENVIRONMENTAL REVIEW: Includes, but is not limited to, an environment impact
report, mitigated negative declaration, negative declaration, determination of
exemption, and any mitigation and monitoring reporting program.
   PERMIT OR ENTITLEMENT: Includes, but is not limited to, a development review
(site plan) permit, conditional use permit, sign permit, variance, specific
plan, parcel map, subdivision map, building or grading permit, encroachment or
right of way permit, stormwater permit, and any other permit or entitlement
required by, or issued pursuant to, this code.
   PERSON: Any individual, group of individuals or entity.
   RESPONSIBLE PARTY: Any person or persons in charge or in control of
property, or the person or persons responsible for the event, incident or
violation, and shall include, but not be limited to, any of the following:
   A.   The owners of the property where the violation exists;
   B.   The person or persons using the property when the violation exists;
   C.   The person or persons in charge of the property where the violation
exists;
   D.   The parents or guardians of any minor that meets the criteria of
subsection A, B or C of this definition;
   E.   If the person is an entity, the manager of the property, the entity
itself, or the person in control or charge of the property. (Ord. 2792, 2013)
1.22.030: AUTHORITY TO ISSUE CITATIONS:
   A.   Any person who violates any provision of this code, any condition of
approval of a permit or entitlement, any condition or provision of any
environmental review, or any term or condition of any city agreement may be
issued an administrative citation by an enforcement officer as provided in this
chapter. A violation of this code includes, but is not limited to, all
violations of this code, and the failure to comply with any condition imposed
on any permit or entitlement, condition of environmental review, or city
agreement issued or approved pursuant to this code. Prior to issuing an
administrative citation, if the violation pertains to building, plumbing,
electrical, or other similar structural or zoning issues that do not create an
immediate danger to health and safety, then the responsible person shall be
issued a warning only on the first violation. The warning will advise the
responsible person of the nature of the violation and the date upon which the
violation shall be corrected. The responsible person will be given fifteen (15)
calendar days to correct the violation. The enforcement officer may, but is not
required to, extend the time specified for correction of the violation if, in
the enforcement officer's sole and reasonable discretion, it is determined that
the responsible person is making substantial progress in attempting to fully
correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within that time
period specified by the enforcement officer, an administrative citation with a
fine shall be issued.
   B.   A continuing violation of any provision of this code, condition of a
permit or entitlement, condition or provision of environmental review, or term
or condition of any city agreement constitutes a separate and distinct
violation each and every day that the violation exists.
   C.   Each code provision, condition of a permit or entitlement, condition or
provision of environmental review, or term or condition of any city agreement
violated is subject to the fine schedule in section
1.22.060 of this chapter and shall be payable directly to the city of Redlands.
   D.   If more than one responsible party exists, the enforcement officer may
issue an administrative citation to any, all, or any combination of,
responsible parties. (Ord. 2792, 2013)
1.22.040: PROCEDURE; CONTENT OF CITATION:
   A.   Upon discovery and personally observing a violation of this code,
condition of approval of a permit or entitlement, condition of environmental
review, or city agreement, an enforcement officer may issue an administrative
citation to any responsible party.
   B.   Each administrative citation shall contain the following information:
      1.   Date and approximate time the violation was observed;
      2.   Address, or for property without an address, the assessor's parcel
number of the property where the violation occurred;
      3.   The Code provision, condition of approval of a permit or
entitlement, condition of environmental review, or City agreement violated, and
a description of the violations, including the approximate location of any
property violations;
      4.   The amount of the fine per violation;
      5.   How to pay the fine, including when and where to pay the fine;
      6.   A description of the appeals process including the time in which a
citation must be contested, and the location to obtain an appeal form;
      7.   If the violation is continuing, the citation may include an order to
correct the violation and the time frame given to correct the violation. The
lack of an order to correct violations shall not affect the validity of the
administrative citation or subsequent proceedings. If a correction order is
given, the notice shall state that correction does not relieve the responsible
party's obligation to pay the fine imposed;
      8.   An explanation of the consequences of new violations; and
      9.   The name and signature of the Citing Enforcement Officer. (Ord.
2792, 2013)
1.22.050: NOTICE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   All administrative citations shall be served by complying with the
following:
      1.   Personal Service: The Enforcement Officer shall attempt to locate
and personally serve the responsible party and obtain the signature of the
responsible party on the administrative citation. If the responsible party
refuses or fails to sign the administrative citation, the refusal to sign shall
not affect the validity of the administrative citation or of subsequent
proceedings.
      2.   Certified And First Class Mail: If the responsible party cannot be
contacted and personally served after reasonable efforts to do so have failed,
service may be effected by certified mail, return receipt requested.
Simultaneously, the citation may be sent by first class mail. If the certified
mail is returned without a signature, then service shall be deemed effective
pursuant to first class mail, provided the citation sent by first class mail is
not returned by the United States Postal Service. Service by mail shall extend
the time to do any act required on the administrative citation, including
paying the fine and filing the appeal, by five (5) days from the date the
citation is mailed.
      3.   Posting: If the Enforcement Officer does not succeed in personally
serving the responsible person, or by effecting service by certified or first
class mail, the Enforcement Officer shall post the administrative citation on
any real property within the City in which the City has knowledge that the
responsible party has a legal interest and such posting shall be deemed
effected service.
   B.   The failure of any person with an interest to receive actual notice
served in accordance with this section shall not affect the validity of any
proceedings taken pursuant to this chapter.
   C.   Upon complying with the service procedures set forth in this section,
the Enforcement Officer shall complete a declaration of service. (Ord. 2792,
2013)
1.22.060: FINES:
Fines shall be assessed in the amounts specified by resolution or ordinance of
the City Council or, where no amount is specified, in the following amounts:
   A.   Any violation of this Code that is punishable as an infraction shall be
subject to a fine in the following amounts:
      1.   A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) per Code
provision, condition of approval of permit or entitlement, condition of
environmental review, or City agreement violated for the first administrative
citation;
      2.   A fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) per Code
provision, condition of approval of permit or entitlement, condition of
environmental review, or City agreement violated for a second administrative
citation for violation of the same Code provision issued within a twelve (12)
month period; and
      3.   A fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) per Code
provision, condition of approval of permit or entitlement, condition of
environmental review, or City agreement violated in any subsequent
administrative citation issued for violation of the same Code provision within
a twelve (12) month period.
   B.   Any violation of this Code, condition of approval of permit or
entitlement, condition of environmental review, or City agreement that is
punishable as a misdemeanor shall be subject to a fine not to exceed one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per Code provision violated.
   C.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, a violation of any
City Building and Safety Code determined to be an infraction is punishable by
the following:
      1.   A fine not exceeding one hundred thirty dollars ($130.00) for a
first violation;
      2.   A fine not exceeding seven hundred dollars ($700.00) for a second
violation within a twelve (12) month period of the first violation; and
      3.   a. A fine of one thousand three hundred dollars ($1,300.00) for a
third violation within twelve (12) months of the first violation; and
         b.   A fine not exceeding two thousand five hundred dollars
($2,500.00) for each additional violation of the same Code provision within
twenty four (24) months of the first violation if the property is a commercial
property that has an existing building at the time of the violation and the
violation is due to failure by the owner to remove visible refuse or failure to
prohibit unauthorized use of the property.
   D.   Any person or entity subject to a fine pursuant to subsections A2 and
A3, and C2 and C3 of this section may seek a hardship waiver to reduce the
amount of such fine by filing an appeal of the administrative citation in
accordance with section
1.22.080 of this chapter and the amount of the fine imposed thereby, and by
submitting concurrently with such appeal the information required by subsection
1.22.090D of this chapter and written documentation showing that the
responsible party for the violation has made a bona fide effort to comply after
the first violation, and that payment of the full amount of the fine would
impose an undue financial burden on the responsible party. Notwithstanding the
provisions of section
1.22.080 of this chapter relating to appeals of administrative citations, no
advance deposit shall be required for such appeal if only a reduction in the
amount of the fine is being sought, and the underlying violation of the
administrative citation is not being contested. (Ord. 2887, 2019)
1.22.070: SATISFACTION OF ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION:
   A.   Upon receipt of an administrative citation, the responsible person must
abate the Code violations described in the citation and pay the required fines
to the City within fifteen (15) days of issuance (subject to subsection
1.22.050A2 of this chapter), or pay the fine and file an appeal pursuant to
section
1.22.080 of this chapter.
   B.   Any person who fails to pay the fine when due shall also be liable for
payment of a late payment charge of twenty five percent (25%) of the fine. In
addition, delinquent fines shall accrue interest at the rate of ten percent
(10%) per month, excluding penalties, from the due date.
   C.   Any fine paid shall be refunded if the person charged was not
responsible for the violation or there was no violation.
   D.   The City Manager or the City Attorney may suspend the fine when the
violation has been corrected or the person cited is not responsible.
   E.   Payment of a fine shall not excuse or discharge any failure to correct
a violation nor shall it bar further enforcement action by the City. (Ord.
2792, 2013)
1.22.080: APPEAL:
   A.   Any recipient of an administrative citation may contest the citation.
      1.   Time To File Request For Hearing: A recipient must file a request
for hearing form with the City Clerk within fifteen (15) days of the date of
the citation. If the citation is simultaneously mailed, the date to file the
request is extended five (5) days from the date the citation was last mailed.
      2.   Advance Deposit Required: On or before the date that the request for
hearing form is filed, the amount of the fine must be paid to the City or a
hardship waiver application approved.
   B.   The City Attorney may review the citation prior to the hearing and may
dismiss or approve the citation. If the City Attorney dismisses the citation,
the applicant shall be notified that the citation has been dismissed and that
there is no need for a hearing.
   C.   The person requesting the hearing shall be notified by regular mail of
the time and place set for the appeal no less than ten (10) days prior to the
date of the hearing.
   D.   No less than ten (10) days prior to the hearing, the administrative
citation recipient shall be served by regular mail a notice stating the time,
date, and location of the hearing, a copy of the Enforcement Officer's report,
and all documents submitted to the Administrative Hearing Officer. (Ord. 2792,
2013)
1.22.090: ADVANCE DEPOSIT HARDSHIP WAIVER:
   A.   Any person who intends to request a review of the administrative
citation to contest that there was a violation of the Code or that he or she is
the responsible party, and who is financially unable to make the advance
deposit of the fine as required in section
1.22.080 of this chapter, may file a request for an advance deposit hardship
waiver.
   B.   The request shall be filed with the City's Finance Department on an
advance deposit hardship waiver application form, available from the Finance
Department, within fifteen (15) days of the date of the administrative
citation.
   C.   The requirement of depositing the full amount of the fine as described
in section
1.22.080 of this chapter shall be stayed unless or until the Finance Director,
or designee, makes a determination not to issue the advance deposit hardship
waiver.
   D.   The Finance Director, or designee, may waive the requirement of an
advance deposit required by subsection
 1.22.080A of this chapter and issue the advance deposit hardship waiver only
if the cited party submits to the Finance Director, or designee, a sworn
statement, together with any supporting documents or materials, demonstrating
to the satisfaction of the Finance Director the person's actual financial
inability to deposit with the city the full amount of the fine in advance of
the hearing.
   E.   If the finance director, or designee, declines to issue an advance
deposit hardship waiver, the person shall remit the deposit to the city within
ten (10) days of the date of that decision or thirty (30) days from the date of
the administrative citation, whichever is later.
   F.   The finance director, or designee, shall issue a written determination
listing the reasons for his or her determination to issue or not issue the
advance deposit hardship waiver. The written determination of the finance
director shall be final and shall be served upon the person who applied for the
advance deposit hardship waiver. (Ord. 2792, 2013)
1.22.100: ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING OFFICER:
   A.   The city may contract with the office of administrative hearings to
provide administrative law judges, contract annually for an individual
administrative hearing officer, engage the services of a volunteer
administrative hearing officer, or the city manager may appoint a fair and
impartial city department director as a hearing officer or a fair and impartial
member of the public determined to be competent and qualified to hear the
matter in the discretion of the city manager. Except for volunteer
administrative hearing officers and department directors, no individual
administrative hearing officer shall be retained for more than a one year term.
   B.   The administrative hearing officer shall have all powers necessary to
conduct fair and impartial hearings, including, but not limited to:
      1.   Hold conferences for settlement or simplification of issues;
      2.   Administer oaths and affirmations;
      3.   Hear testimony;
      4.   Rule upon motions, objections and the admissibility of evidence;
      5.   Preserve and authenticate the record of the hearing and all exhibits
and evidence introduced at the hearing;
      6.   Regulate the course of the hearing in accordance with this chapter
and other applicable law;
      7.   Issue a final order which includes findings of fact and conclusions
of law;
      8.   Impose penalties and fines;
      9.   Issue orders to correct violations; and
      10.   Maintain continuing jurisdiction for purpose of granting
continuances, ensuring compliance with an order, modifying an order or granting
a new hearing.
   C.   The employment, performance evaluation, compensation and benefits of
the administrative hearing officer, if any, shall not be directly or indirectly
conditioned upon the amount of the administrative citation fines upheld by the
administrative hearing officer. (Ord. 2792, 2013)
1.22.110: HEARING PROCEDURE:
   A.   Hearing Set: Upon receipt of a timely and complete appeal filed
pursuant to section
1.22.080 of this chapter, the city clerk shall set a hearing before the
administrative hearing officer. The hearing shall be set no less than fifteen
(15), but no more than sixty (60), days from the date the appeal is filed. If a
hearing cannot be set within this time period, the citation shall be dismissed.
   B.   Testimony And Evidence; Administrative Hearing Officer's Powers:
      1.   Formal rules of evidence shall not apply. The administrative hearing
officer may decide upon the trustworthiness of all evidence.
      2.   Hearsay evidence may be admitted and relied upon, at the discretion
of the administrative hearing officer.
      3.   Relevant documents may be received into evidence without formal
proof of authenticity. The administrative hearing officer shall determine the
weight, if any, to be afforded documents received into evidence.
   C.   Record Of Proceedings: The city may record the proceedings. Either
party, at its own expense, may provide a certified court reporter to take and
transcribe the proceedings.
   D.   Postponement: For good cause shown, a postponement may be granted by
the administrative hearing officer.
   E.   Testimony; Evidence: The party contesting the administrative citation
shall be given the opportunity to testify and to present evidence concerning
the administrative citation.
   F.   Prima Facie Evidence; Rebuttal: The administrative citation and any
additional documents submitted by the enforcement officer shall constitute
prima facie evidence of the respective facts contained in those documents. The
party contesting the administrative citation may rebut the presumption with
relevant evidence.
   G.   Additional Information: Prior to rendering a decision, the
administrative hearing officer may seek additional information from any party.
   H.   Failure To Appear: Any person filing an appeal who does not appear at
the hearing, after notice of the date and time of the hearing, shall be deemed
to have waived the right to a hearing. In such a case, the administrative
hearing officer may issue an order based solely on submitted written materials.
   I.   Rules; Procedures: The administrative hearing officer may adopt rules
and procedures to govern hearings. These rules and procedures shall be kept by
the city clerk and made available at the hearings. (Ord. 2792, 2013)
1.22.120: ORDER:
   A.   After considering all of the testimony and evidence submitted at the
hearing, the administrative hearing officer may announce the decision orally,
but in any event shall issue a written order to uphold, modify, condition or
cancel the administrative citation. If the hearing officer determines that
first amendment rights are involved, the decision shall be read orally at the
conclusion of the hearing. The administrative hearing officer shall list the
reasons supporting the decision. The decision of the administrative hearing
officer shall be final.
   B.   The administrative hearing officer shall issue the written order within
ten (10) working days after the hearing. Any party may submit a proposed order
for the administrative hearing officer's consideration. The order shall be
served by regular mail, and shall be effective from the date it is mailed.
   C.   If the citation is upheld in full, the city shall retain the fine
deposit. If the citation is dismissed, or if the amount of the fine is reduced,
the city shall refund the appropriate amount within thirty (30) days of the
order.
   D.   The administrative hearing officer shall not have the power to reduce
the fine. The administrative hearing officer may impose conditions and
deadlines to correct violations, and require the payment of any outstanding
fines, costs and penalties, within a period not to exceed thirty (30) days.
   E.   The administrative hearing officer may assess administrative costs
incurred by the city in addition to fines imposed, including hearing costs.
   F.   Any person who violates any provision of the order shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor or infraction, as determined by, and in the prosecutorial
discretion of, the city attorney.
   G.   At any time prior to or during the hearing, the city attorney may
exercise prosecutorial discretion to reach a plan agreement or compromise with
the responsible party or to dismiss any action.
   H.   If the violation is corrected in a reasonable time after the date of
the administrative citation or the decision of the administrative hearing
officer, as applicable, the city manager or his or her designee shall have the
discretion to revise any cumulative fines to a total of not less than one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) upon good cause shown by the responsible person.
The determination of the city manager, or designee, shall be final and not
subject to appeal or judicial review. Fines shall not otherwise be reduced.
(Ord. 2799, 2013: Ord. 2792, 2013)
1.22.130: REVIEW:
Any person aggrieved by the order of the administrative hearing officer may
obtain review with the San Bernardino superior court in accordance with the
time lines and provisions set forth in Government Code section 53069.4.
Judicial review shall not be available without first participating in all
hearing procedures as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 2792, 2013)
1.22.140: COLLECTION OF FINES:
   A.   Interest: The city may collect any past due administrative citation
fine at the rate of interest of ten percent (10%) per month, and costs of
collection by all available legal means.
   B.   Liens:
      1.   The fines levied by administrative citation, or by administrative
hearing order, constitute a special assessment against each lot or parcel of
land upon which the violation existed, and as thus made and confirmed shall
also become the personal obligation of each lot or parcel of land.
      2.   Prior to recording any lien against any parcel, the city manager
shall prepare a report detailing the address, parcel number, and owner's name
and address, the amount of the fines, the date of the administrative hearing
order or administrative citation and the violations.
      3.   A bill for the costs shall be mailed to the property owner of record
at the address shown on the current assessment roll and any other address shown
in city records, with a notice of time and date on which the city council will
hold a hearing to hear and decide any objection to the assessment. Notice shall
be given at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing and shall specify that
objections may be presented at the hearing or filed in writing five (5) days in
advance of the hearing.
      4.   The city manager's report shall be forwarded to the city council,
which shall hear and pass upon the report, together with any objections or
protests which may be raised by any property liable to be assessed for the cost
of an administrative citation or hearing order fine, and any other person. The
city council may make such correction, revision or modification in the report
as it may deem just. The report, as amended, shall be confirmed by resolution.
      5.   Immediately upon confirmation of the assessment, the city clerk
shall cause to be filed in the office of the county recorder of San Bernardino
County a notice of lien stating that it is recorded pursuant to this section.
The lien shall also include the parcel's address, legal description, assessor's
parcel number, the owner's name and address, the date of the administrative
citation or administrative hearing order, the amount of fine assessed, and the
rate of interest. The form of the lien shall be approved by the city attorney.
      6.   The county auditor shall enter each assessment on the county tax
roll upon the parcel of land. The assessment may be collected at the same time
and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected, and shall be
subject to the same penalties and procedure and sale in case of delinquency as
is provided for ordinary municipal taxes. All laws applicable to the levy,
collection and enforcement of municipal taxes shall be applicable to the
special assessment. (Ord. 2799, 2013: Ord. 2792, 2013)
1.22.150: REMEDIES NOT EXCLUSIVE:
The procedures established in this chapter shall be in addition to criminal,
civil or other remedies which may be simultaneously pursued. The use of this
chapter shall be at the city's sole discretion. (Ord. 2792, 2013)
1.22.160: TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP:
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dwelling unit or structure who has
received a citation to sell, transfer, mortgage, lease or otherwise dispose of
such dwelling or structure to another unless the provisions of the citation
have been complied with, or until such owner shall first furnish the grantee,
transferee, mortgagee or lessee with a true copy of the citation, and shall
furnish to the enforcement officer a signed and notarized statement from the
grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee acknowledging the receipt of such
citation, and fully accepting the responsibility without condition for making
the corrections or repairs required by such citation or stating that the
grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee intends to timely challenge the
citation as provided for in this chapter. The transfer of ownership in
violation of this section shall not abrogate any sale, transfer, mortgage,
lease or other disposition of property. (Ord. 2792, 2013)
CHAPTER 1.24
CITATION AUTHORITY
SECTION:
1.24.010: Definitions
1.24.020: Citation Authority
1.24.010: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions apply to this chapter:
   CITATION: Any documentation provided to a party regarding a "notice to
appear" and/or "promise to appear" for a violation of any law and as described
in this code or state law.
   ENFORCEMENT OFFICER: Any city employee with authority to enforce any
provision of this code, including, but not limited to, the city attorney,
community development director, code enforcement officer, national pollution
discharge elimination system inspector, animal control officer and any fire
official or police officer. (Ord. 2531 § 1, 2003)
1.24.020: CITATION AUTHORITY:
   A.   An enforcement officer who has the training prescribed by the
commission on peace officers standards pursuant to section 832 of the
California Penal Code, and who has the discretionary duty to enforce the
provisions of this code and California law, is hereby authorized by the city
council, pursuant to sections 832, 836.5 and 19.7 of the California Penal Code
and subject to the provisions thereof, to arrest a person without warrant
whenever the enforcement officer has reasonable cause to believe that the
person to be arrested has either violated either the provisions of this code
and state law, in the enforcement officer's presence or fails to correct a
violation of this code and therefore has committed a misdemeanor or an
infraction which the enforcement officer has the discretionary duty to enforce.
   B.   An enforcement officer who is trained pursuant to Penal Code section
832 is further authorized by the city council to issue a citation, "notice to
appear" and/or "promise to appear", and to release such person on his or her
own written promise to appear in court, pursuant to sections 853.5 and 853.6 of
the California Penal Code. Under no circumstance may the enforcement officer
take the person to be arrested into custody, unless the enforcement officer is
a Redlands police officer. In the event the person to be arrested demands to be
taken before the magistrate or refuses to provide his or her promise to appear
in court, and the enforcement officer is not a Redlands police officer, the
enforcement officer must either summon a Redlands police officer, explain the
situation and request that the Redlands police officer arrest the person and
take the person into custody, or seek the assistance of the city attorney, and
request that a misdemeanor or an infraction complaint be prepared and filed
against that person.
   C.   In addition to the mandatory course of training prescribed by the
commission on peace officers standards pursuant to section 832 of the
California Penal Code, the chief of police for the city of Redlands may
establish and cause to be administered a special enforcement training program
designed to instruct enforcement officers who are not Redlands police officers,
regarding how provisions of this section are to be enforced, the evidentiary
prerequisites to proper prosecution for violations thereof, the appropriate
procedure for making arrests or otherwise prudently exercising such arrests and
citation authority and limitations attendant thereto.
   D.   An enforcement officer who is trained pursuant to Penal Code section
832 shall be appropriately instructed to file executed citations within the
city attorney's office or the appropriate department for which the enforcement
officer is assigned. Such citations shall be filed with the appropriate court.
(Ord. 2531 § 1, 2003)
TITLE 2
ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL
CHAPTER 2.02
CITY COUNCIL
SECTION:
2.02.010: Time And Place Of Meetings
2.02.020: Selection Of Mayor And Mayor Pro Tempore; Terms Of Office
2.02.030: Compensation; Schedule
2.02.040: Compensation; Determination Of Population
2.02.050: Compensation; Increase Procedure
2.02.010: TIME AND PLACE OF MEETINGS:
The time for holding the regular meetings of the city council shall be the
first and third Tuesday of each month at five o'clock (5:00) P.M. in the
council chambers, Civic Center, 35 Cajon Street, Suite 2, Redlands, California.
If any such regular meeting falls on a legal holiday, the meeting shall be held
on the next city business day. (Ord. 2953, 2023: Ord. 2746, 2011)
2.02.020: SELECTION OF MAYOR AND MAYOR PRO TEMPORE; TERMS OF OFFICE:
The city council shall choose one of its members as mayor, and one of its
members as mayor pro tempore pursuant to a process set forth in a separate
resolution of the city council, which resolution may be amended from time to
time. (Ord. 2953, 2023: Ord. 2720 § 1, 2009)
2.02.030: COMPENSATION; SCHEDULE:
Members of the city council shall be compensated according to the following
schedule:
   A.   When the population of Redlands is up to and including thirty five
thousand (35,000) in population, three hundred dollars ($300.00) per month;
   B.   When the population of Redlands is over thirty five thousand (35,000)
up to and including fifty thousand (50,000) in population, four hundred dollars
($400.00) per month;
   C.   When the population of Redlands is over fifty thousand (50,000) up to
and including seventy five thousand (75,000) in population, five hundred
dollars ($500.00) per month;
   D.   When the population of Redlands is over seventy five thousand (75,000)
up to and including one hundred fifty thousand (150,000) in population, six
hundred dollars ($600.00) per month. (Ord. 2953, 2023: Ord. 1903 § 1, 1986:
prior code § 11301)
2.02.040: COMPENSATION; DETERMINATION OF POPULATION:
For the purposes of sections
2.02.030 through
2.02.050 of this chapter, the population of the city shall be determined either
by the last preceding federal census, or by any subsequent census, or by an
estimate validated by the state of California department of finance. (Ord.
2953, 2023: Ord. 1903 § 1, 1986: prior code § 11302)
2.02.050: COMPENSATION; INCREASE PROCEDURE:
   A.   The compensation of city council members may be increased beyond the
amount provided in section
2.02.030 of this chapter by an ordinance, or by an amendment to an ordinance,
but the amount of the increase may not exceed an amount equal to five percent
(5%) for each calendar year from the operative date of the last adjustment of
the salary in effect when the ordinance, or ordinance amendment, is enacted. No
salary ordinance shall be enacted or amended which provides for automatic
future increases in salary.
   B.   Pursuant to City of Redlands Ordinance No. 2886 adopted in accordance
with this section
2.02.030, and notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the
compensation of city council members shall be fourteen hundred dollars
($1,400.00) per month, commencing with the first full City pay period after
January 1, 2023. (Ord. 2953, 2023: Ord. 2886, 2-15-2022)
CHAPTER 2.03
ELECTION OF CITY COUNCIL MEMBERS BY DISTRICTS
SECTION:
2.03.010: Manner Of Election
2.03.020: Eligibility Of Members
2.03.030: Establishment Of City Council Electoral Districts
2.03.040: Election Schedule
2.03.050: Implementation
2.03.010: MANNER OF ELECTION:
   A.   Pursuant to California Government Code section 34886, members of the
City Council of the City of Redlands shall be elected by- districts in five (5)
single-member districts.
   B.   Beginning with the general Municipal election in November 2018, members
of the City Council shall be elected in the electoral districts established by
section 2.03.030 of this chapter and subsequently reapportioned as provided by
State law. Elections shall take place "by-districts" as that term is defined in
California Government Code section 34871, meaning one (1) member of the City
Council shall be elected from each district, by the voters of that district
alone. Each member of the City Council shall serve a four-year term until his
or her successor is qualified. (Ord. 2848, 2017)
2.03.020: ELIGIBILITY OF MEMBERS:
   A.   Except as provided in subsection B of this section, the City Council
member elected to represent a district must reside in that district and be a
registered voter in that district, and any candidate for City Council must live
in, and be a registered voter in, the district in which he or she seeks
election at the time nomination papers are issued, pursuant to California
Government Code section 34882 and California Elections Code section 10227.
Termination of residency in a district by a City Council member shall create an
immediate vacancy for that Council district unless a substitute residence
within the district is established within thirty (30) days after the
termination of residency.
   B.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the members of the
City Council in office at the time this chapter takes effect shall continue in
office until the expiration of the full term to which he or she was elected and
until his or her successor is qualified. A vacancy prior to the expiration of
such full term shall be filled from the City on an at-large basis and in
accordance with law. At the end of the term of each City Council member, that
member's successor shall be elected on a by- district basis in the districts
established in section
2.03.030 of this chapter and as provided in section
2.03.010 of this chapter. (Ord. 2848, 2017)
2.03.030: ESTABLISHMENT OF CITY COUNCIL ELECTORAL DISTRICTS:
   A.   Members of the City Council shall be elected on a by-district basis
from the five Council districts as hereby established in the City of Redlands.
The boundaries and identifying number of each district shall be as described on
the Council district map attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter as
Exhibit "A" and incorporated herein by this reference.
   B.   The Council districts specified in subsection A of this section shall
continue in effect until they are amended or repealed in accordance with law.
Exhibit A
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6bf866ad80925317f7b0510a75f8f7309a69c8b4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8766.png]
(Ord. 2848, 2017; amd. Ord. 2931, 3-15-2022)
2.03.040: ELECTION SCHEDULE:
Council members shall be elected in Council Districts 1, 3, and 5 beginning at
the general Municipal election in November 2018, and every four (4) years
thereafter. City Council members shall be elected from Council Districts 2 and
4 beginning at the general Municipal election in November 2020, and every four
(4) years thereafter. (Ord. 2848, 2017)
2.03.050: IMPLEMENTATION:
   A.   A map showing the districts described in this chapter is attached
hereto as Exhibit A on file in the City and incorporated by this reference. To
the extent there is a conflict between the descriptions contained in this
chapter and the map incorporated herein, the map shall prevail.
   B.   If necessary to facilitate the implementation of this chapter, the
Redlands City Clerk is authorized to make technical adjustments to the district
boundaries that do not substantively affect the populations in the districts,
the eligibility of candidates, or the residence of elected officials within any
district. The City Clerk shall consult with the City Manager and City Attorney
concerning any technical adjustments deemed necessary and shall advise the City
Council in writing of any such adjustments required in the implementation of
the districts. (Ord. 2848, 2017)
CHAPTER 2.04
CITY MANAGER
SECTION:
2.04.010: Office Established; Appointment; Tenure
2.04.020: Absence
2.04.030: Orders And Directions From Council
2.04.040: Administrative Head; Responsibility
2.04.050: Employment Agreement And Compensation
2.04.060: Powers
2.04.010: OFFICE ESTABLISHED; APPOINTMENT; TENURE:
Pursuant to Government Code section 34851 et seq., the Office of City Manager
is created and established. The City Manager shall be appointed by the City
Council solely on the basis of his executive and administrative qualifications
and ability, and shall hold office at and during the pleasure of the City
Council. (Ord. 2893, 2019)
2.04.020: ABSENCE:
In case of the absence or disability of the City Manager, the City Council may
designate a duly qualified person to perform the duties of the City Manager.
(Ord. 2893, 2019)
2.04.030: ORDERS AND DIRECTIONS FROM COUNCIL:
The individual City Council members shall deal with the administrative services
of the City only through the City Manager, except for the purpose of inquiry to
subordinate employees; and the individual City Council members shall not give
orders to any subordinate of the City Manager. (Ord. 2893, 2019)
2.04.040: ADMINISTRATIVE HEAD; RESPONSIBILITY:
The City Manager shall be the administrative head of the City government under
the direction and control of the City Council, and shall be responsible for the
efficient administration of all the affairs of the City which are under his
control, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. (Ord. 2893, 2019)
2.04.050: EMPLOYMENT AGREEMENT AND COMPENSATION:
The City Manager shall be employed pursuant to written agreement, approved by
the City Council, which shall provide for the City Manager's compensation,
contain the provisions required by Government Code sections 53243 et seq., and
53260 et seq., as such provisions may be amended from time to time, and specify
such other duties and responsibilities of the City Manager in addition to those
specified by this chapter. (Ord. 2893, 2019)
2.04.060: POWERS:
In addition to his general powers as administrative head, and not as a
limitation thereon, it shall be his duty and he shall have the power:
   A.   Enforcement Of Laws, Agreements: To see that all laws and ordinances of
the City are duly enforced, and that all franchises, permits and privileges
granted by the City are faithfully observed;
   B.   Departments: To control, order and give directions to all heads of
departments, subordinate officers and their respective staffs, except elective
officers and their respective staffs, and to conduct studies and effect such
administrative reorganization of offices, positions or units under his
direction as may be indicated in the interest of efficient, effective and
economical conduct of the City's business;
   C.   Appointments; Removals: To appoint and dismiss all subordinate
appointive officers and employees, except the City Attorney; provided, however,
that the City Manager shall consult with the City Council prior to, and as a
condition of, the appointment of any department director. If the Offices of
City Clerk and City Treasurer are made appointive, appointments to such offices
shall be made by the City Council unless the City Council vests such appointing
authority in the City Manager by ordinance;
   D.   Council Meetings: To attend all meetings of the City Council unless
excused therefrom by the City Council;
   E.   Ordinances: To recommend to the City Council for adoption such measures
and ordinances as the City Manager deems necessary or expedient;
   F.   Financial Advice: To keep the City Council at all times fully advised
as to the financial conditions and needs of the City;
   G.   Budget: To prepare and submit to the City Council the annual budget;
   H.   Purchases: To purchase or cause to be purchased all supplies for all of
the departments or divisions of the City;
   I.   Investigations: To make investigation into the affairs of the City, and
any department or division thereof, and any contract, or the proper performance
of any obligations of the City;
   J.   Complaints: To investigate all complaints in relation to matters
concerning the administration of the City government and in regard to the
service maintained by public utilities in the City, and to see that all
franchises, permits and privileges granted by the City are faithfully performed
and observed;
   K.   Property: To exercise general supervision over all public buildings,
public parks and other public property which are under the control and
jurisdiction of the City Council;
   L.   Supervision: To supervise in general the operation of all departments
of the City;
   M.   Other Duties: To perform such other duties and exercise such other
powers as may be delegated to him from time to time by ordinance or resolution
of the City Council;
   N.   Departmental Cooperation: It shall be the duty of all subordinate
officers to assist the City Manager in administering the affairs of the City
efficiently, economically and harmoniously. (Ord. 2893, 2019)
CHAPTER 2.06
CITY CLERK
SECTION:
2.06.010: Clerk To Furnish Names Of Property Owners
2.06.020: Duties Of The City Clerk
2.06.010: CLERK TO FURNISH NAMES OF PROPERTY OWNERS:
The city clerk shall furnish to the street superintendent and the city engineer
the names of property owners whenever needed or required by them in the
performance of any city work. (Prior code § 12301)
2.06.020: DUTIES OF THE CITY CLERK:
   A.   Perform the state statutory duties of the city clerk's office;
   B.   Supervise and coordinate the programs and activities of the city
clerk's office;
   C.   Maintain this code; attest, publish, catalog and file city ordinances
and resolutions;
   D.   Attend, record, prepare and maintain the city council, redevelopment
agency board and city created joint power authorities' proceedings;
   E.   Safeguard all vital, permanent and historic records of the city;
   F.   Supervise and manage the citywide records management program and
document imaging system;
   G.   Provide information and support to the city council and the
redevelopment agency board, city created joint power authorities, city
departments and the public;
   H.   Coordinate municipal elections;
   I.   Maintain custody of the city seal;
   J.   Provide legal notification of public hearings to the public;
   K.   Serve as administrator of ticket/pass distribution policy; and
   L.   Oversee, coordinate and process the city's conflict of interest codes,
ethics certification requirements, and political reform act filings and
statements. (Ord. 2723 § 1, 2009)
CHAPTER 2.08
DIRECTOR OF FINANCE
SECTION:
2.08.010: Office Established
2.08.020: Duties
2.08.030: Transfer Of Duties From Clerk
2.08.040: Acting Director Of Finance
2.08.050: Creation Of Department
2.08.010: OFFICE ESTABLISHED:
The office of finance director of the city is hereby established. The finance
director shall be appointed by the city manager. (Ord. 2718 § 6, 2009)
2.08.020: DUTIES:
The duties of the director of finance shall be as follows:
   A.   To direct and maintain the accounting and auditing activities for the
city government and each of its offices, departments, and agencies;
   B.   To plan and supervise the city's accounting systems;
   C.   To supervise and be responsible for the disbursement of all public
monies and have control over all expenditures to ensure that budget
appropriations are not exceeded;
   D.   To prepare annually for the city manager a proposed budget of the city
for the ensuing fiscal year;
   E.   To require reports of the receipts and disbursements from each
receiving and expending agency of the city government to be made daily or at
such intervals as he may require;
   F.   To submit to the city manager a monthly statement of all receipts and
disbursements in sufficient detail to show the exact financial condition of the
city; and submit to the city manager, as of the end of each fiscal year, a
complete financial statement and report of the preceding year;
   G.   To supervise the keeping of current inventories of all property of the
city;
   H.   To estimate, plan and program the city's financial activities;
   I.   To procure materials, supplies and services for the city;
   J.   To perform such other duties as imposed by ordinance or resolution of
the city council, or as the city manager may direct;
   K.   To administer the cemetery endowment fund, created from contributions
to be held in trust and income used for the perpetual care of designated plots
in the city of Redlands hillside cemetery and mausoleum. (Prior code §§
12402–12413)
2.08.030: TRANSFER OF DUTIES FROM CLERK:
The duties imposed upon the city clerk by article 1 of chapter 2, part 3,
division 3, title IV of the Government Code of the state of California are
transferred to the director of finance in accordance with section 37209 of the
Government Code. In addition, the finance and accounting duties imposed upon
the city clerk by sections 40802 through 40805 of the Government Code of the
state of California are transferred to the director of finance. (Prior code §
12414)
2.08.040: ACTING DIRECTOR OF FINANCE:
In the case of the absence or disability of the director of finance, the city
manager shall designate a person to perform the duties and exercise the powers
of the director of finance. (Prior code § 12415)
2.08.050: CREATION OF DEPARTMENT:
A finance department is created which shall be under the direction and control
of the director of finance, subject to the general administrative direction of
the city manager. The director of finance, subject to the approval of the city
manager, shall organize and maintain such divisions in such departments as, in
his judgment, the operation may require, and shall be responsible for the
general supervision and control of all divisions of the department. (Prior code
§ 12416)
CHAPTER 2.10
BONDS FOR OFFICERS
SECTION:
2.10.010: Designated
2.10.020: Master Official Bond/Insurance Policy
2.10.010: DESIGNATED:
The city clerk and city treasurer shall each, before commencing the duties of
their respective offices, execute a bond in favor of the city, conditioned for
the faithful performance of their respective duties, in the following penal
sums:
   A.   The city clerk, in the penal sum of five hundred thousand dollars
($500,000.00).
   B.   The city treasurer, in the penal sum of one million dollars
($1,000,000.00).
The city shall be responsible for the costs of the bonds. (Ord. 2438 § 5, 2000:
prior code §§ 12201–12206)
2.10.020: MASTER OFFICIAL BOND/INSURANCE POLICY:
In lieu of the individual official bonds required by section
2.10.010 of this chapter, use of a master official bond or a commercial
government crime insurance policy or employee dishonesty policy to provide
coverage for the city clerk and city treasurer shall be permitted. The form of
such master official bond or insurance policy shall meet the following minimum
standards:
   A.   The master official bond or insurance policy shall be in an amount of
not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00).
   B.   The master official bond or insurance policy shall be issued by an
insurance company authorized to do business in California.
   C.   The master official bond or insurance policy shall be issued by a
company with an A.M. Best's rating of no less than A-:VII.
   D.   The master official bond or insurance policy shall encompass claims,
among others, for forgery or alteration, theft, disappearance or destruction,
robbery and safe burglary, public employee dishonesty, computer fraud, and fund
transfer fraud.
   E.   The master official bond or insurance policy may be issued on an annual
or longer basis. (Ord. 2833, 2016)
CHAPTER 2.12
COMPENSATION FOR OFFICERS
SECTION:
2.12.010: Compensation
2.12.010: COMPENSATION:
The compensation of all city officers shall be fixed by the city council by
resolution or by ordinance. (Prior code § 12101)
CHAPTER 2.14
POLICE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
Article I. General Provisions
2.14.010: Rules For Government
Article II. Police Reserve Force
2.14.020: Establishment, Composition, Appointment And Compensation
2.14.030: Chief Of Police; Powers And Duties
2.14.040: Membership Qualifications
2.14.050: Powers And Duties
2.14.060: Identification; Surrender Of Equipment
2.14.070: Membership Termination
2.14.080: Uniforms And Equipment
2.14.090: Injury On Duty
Article III. Military Equipment Use Policy
2.14.100: Military Equipment Use Policy
ARTICLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS
2.14.010: RULES FOR GOVERNMENT:
The chief of police shall establish rules and regulations for the government of
the police department of the city. Such rules and regulations shall be reviewed
annually by the chief of police, with the city attorneys' office's assistance,
for compliance with applicable law. The chief of police, when establishing such
rules and regulations, may utilize a service or agency that provides model
rules and regulations for California police departments. (Ord. 2718 § 7, 2009)
ARTICLE II. POLICE RESERVE FORCE
2.14.020: ESTABLISHMENT, COMPOSITION, APPOINTMENT AND COMPENSATION:
A police reserve force is established in the city as a voluntary organization,
and which is excluded from the civil service or personnel system of the city;
the members of which may receive compensation in the form of a stipend as
established by resolution of the city council. The chief of police of the city
is hereby empowered to deputize and appoint persons as reserve city police
officers pursuant to Penal Code section 832.6. Those persons appointed by the
chief of police who are qualified as "designated" level 1 reserve officers
shall have the full powers and duties of a peace officer as provided in Penal
Code section 830.1; the authority of "nondesignated" level 1 reserve officers
shall extend only for the duration of assignment to specific police functions,
as determined by the chief of police. All appointments of persons to the police
reserve force shall be made without regard to race, sex, creed, religion or
political affiliation. (Ord. 2783, 2012)
2.14.030: CHIEF OF POLICE; POWERS AND DUTIES:
Subject to the rules of this article and the rules and regulations of the
state, regional and local disaster councils, the chief of police shall have
complete authority and control over the members of the police reserve force. He
may appoint as members of the reserve any persons whom he deems to be qualified
and he may reject any application for membership. He shall provide for the
training of members to meet minimum standards set by the state. (Ord. 1630 § 2,
1977)
2.14.040: MEMBERSHIP QUALIFICATIONS:
No person shall become a member of the police reserve force until he is able to
meet the requirements prescribed by the chief of police. When so qualified and
selected, he shall then be sworn in by the chief of police as a member of the
reserve, and be registered as a disaster service worker on forms prescribed by
the county civil defense director and shall take the oath prescribed therefor.
(Ord. 1630 § 3, 1977)
2.14.050: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The duties of the police reserve force, subject at all times to the direction,
supervision and control of the chief of police, shall be to assist the regular
members of the police department in the enforcement of law and the maintenance
of peace and order whenever and wherever such services are required. The chief
of police, by order, may establish rules and regulations to govern the reserve,
including the fixing of specific duties of its members and providing for the
maintenance of discipline. He may change such orders from time to time as he
deems necessary. A member of the reserve, when on duty as assigned by the chief
of police, shall have the authority given to the regular officers of the police
department to direct traffic and have the same power of arrest granted a
regular officer, subject to any limitation which the chief may impose. (Ord.
1630 § 4, 1977)
2.14.060: IDENTIFICATION; SURRENDER OF EQUIPMENT:
An identification card shall be issued to each member of the police reserve
force who shall carry the card at all times while on duty. Each member shall
surrender all city property issued to him as a member of the police reserve
force upon his resignation or termination of membership. Such property shall
include, but not be limited to, the identification card above mentioned. (Ord.
1630 § 5, 1977)
2.14.070: MEMBERSHIP TERMINATION:
Membership of any member of the police reserve force may be terminated by the
chief of police at any time, and such member may resign from the reserve upon
notification in writing to the chief of police not less than two (2) weeks
prior to the effective date of such resignation. (Ord. 1630 § 6, 1977)
2.14.080: UNIFORMS AND EQUIPMENT:
The necessary uniforms and equipment for the police reserve force members and
the proper care and use of such uniforms and equipment shall be prescribed by
the chief of police. (Ord. 1630 § 7, 1977)
2.14.090: INJURY ON DUTY:
Police reserve force members shall be entitled to such compensation for injury
sustained while acting under the direction of the chief of police during a
regular assigned tour of duty as is allowed by the provision of division four
of the Labor Code of the state of California regarding disaster service
workers. (Ord. 1630 § 8, 1977)
ARTICLE III. MILITARY EQUIPMENT USE POLICY
2.14.100: MILITARY EQUIPMENT USE POLICY:
   A.   The City Council hereby adopts Policy No. 706 of the Redlands Police
Department’s Policy Manual as the City’s Military Equipment Policy, which shall
govern the use of military equipment by the Redlands Police Department. Policy
No. 706 is attached to City of Redlands Ordinance No. 2932 as Exhibit “A.”
   B.   The Policy shall be made publicly available on the Police Department’s
website for as long as the military equipment is available for use, or as
otherwise determined by the City Council.
   C.   The Police Department shall submit an annual military equipment use
report to the City Council containing the information required by Government
Code section 7072, and the City Council shall thereafter determine whether each
type of military equipment identified therein complies with the standards for
approval set forth in Government Code Section 7071(d).
   D.   The City Council shall, on an annual basis and at a regular meeting
thereof, review Ordinance No. 2932 and vote on whether to renew pursuant to
Government Code Section 7071(e)(2).
   E.   The definitions set forth in Government Code section 7070 shall apply
to this Article and Ordinance No. 2932. Any provision of state law referred to
herein shall mean and include any amended or successor provision thereof. (Ord.
2932, 2022)
CHAPTER 2.15
EXECUTION OF DOCUMENTS
SECTION:
2.15.010: Execution Of Documents Enumerated
2.15.020: City Attorney Support Services
2.15.030: Liability Waiver And Hold Harmless Agreement
2.15.040: Execution Of Aircraft Tie Down Permits
2.15.010: EXECUTION OF DOCUMENTS ENUMERATED:
   A.   All demands drawn on the city treasurer, all written contracts and
conveyances made or entered into by the city, and all instruments requiring the
city seal may be signed by the mayor, the mayor pro tem, or any member of the
city council in such order of availability.
   B.   Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, to facilitate the daily
operations of the city, the city council may, from time to time, by resolution
or minute action, authorize the city manager, or the city manager's authorized
designee, to execute contracts and other written instruments and authorizations
on behalf of the city. (Ord. 2797, 2014)
2.15.020: CITY ATTORNEY SUPPORT SERVICES:
The city attorney, with the consent of the city manager, may enter into
professional services contracts for the retention of special legal counsel to
the city, consultants having expertise in the subject matter of the litigation,
expert witnesses, appraisers and other persons with specialized knowledge
without the prior approval of the city council. Such contracts shall be
executed by the mayor, the mayor pro tem, or any member of the city council in
such order of availability as provided for in section
2.15.010 of this chapter. To the extent the contracts are disclosable public
records under the California public records act contained in Government Code
section 6250 et seq., such contracts shall be filed with and maintained in the
office of the city clerk. (Ord. 2797, 2014)
2.15.030: LIABILITY WAIVER AND HOLD HARMLESS AGREEMENT:
To facilitate the daily operations of the city, the city manager is hereby
authorized to execute, and enter into in behalf of the city, waivers of
liability and "hold harmless" agreements without the prior approval of the city
council. Such agreements shall be subject to the review and approval of the
city attorney prior to their execution by the city manager. (Ord. 2797, 2014)
2.15.040: EXECUTION OF AIRCRAFT TIE DOWN PERMITS:
To facilitate the daily operations of the Redlands Municipal Airport, the city
manager, or his or her designee, is authorized to enter into, and execute in
behalf of the city, aircraft tie down permits for the Redlands Municipal
Airport, without the prior approval of the city council. Such permits shall be
subject to the review and approval of the city attorney prior to their
execution by the city manager. (Ord. 2797, 2014)
CHAPTER 2.16
CITY PURCHASING AND DISPOSITION OF SURPLUS PERSONAL PROPERTY
SECTION:
2.16.010: Definitions
2.16.020: Purchasing System
2.16.030: Purchasing Agent
2.16.040: Powers And Duties
2.16.050: Purchasing Standards And Ethics
2.16.060: Conflict Of Interest
2.16.070: Gratuities
2.16.080: Purchase Requisition
2.16.090: Purchase Order
2.16.100: Encumbrance Of Funds
2.16.110: Competitive Procurement
2.16.120: Formal Procurement
2.16.130: Emergency Procurement For Nonpublic Project
2.16.140: Public Project Construction Work
2.16.150: Nonpublic Project Improvement Work
2.16.160: Bidding Requirements For Supplies, Materials, Equipment And
Specialized Goods
2.16.170: "Best Value" For Specialized Goods, Nonprofessional Services, And
Nonpublic Project Improvement Work
2.16.180: Professional Services
2.16.190: Nonprofessional Services
2.16.200: Change Orders
2.16.210: Cooperative Purchasing
2.16.220: Business Preferences
2.16.230: Authorization To Execute Contracts
2.16.240: Standardization Of Equipment/Supplies
2.16.250: Insurance Requirements
2.16.260: External Restrictions
2.16.270: Resale Items
2.16.280: Competitive Procurement Exceptions
2.16.290: Designation Of Surplus Personal Property
2.16.300: Sale In Open Market Of Surplus Personal Property
2.16.310: Sale By Bid Or Auction Of Surplus Personal Property
2.16.320: Trade In Surplus Personal Property
2.16.330: Disposal Of Unserviceable Junk Or Scrap Personal Property
2.16.340: Disposal Of Surplus Personal Property To Public Agencies And
Nonprofit Organizations
2.16.350: Disposal Of Unclaimed Property
2.16.360: Disposal Of Bicycles
2.16.010: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings indicated:
   ANNUAL BLANKET PURCHASE ORDER: A City issued document to a vendor allowing
for the repetitive purchases of goods or services by authorized personnel for a
specified time not to exceed twelve (12) months. An annual blanket purchase
order shall be initiated by a department, using competitive procurement
whenever practicable, for a specific amount of consideration that is drawn on
throughout the specified time frame for payment of invoices related to such
purchase order.
   BID SECURITY: A guarantee, in the form of a bond, cash deposit, or other
security acceptable to the City, that the successful bidder will execute a
contract as bid, or will forfeit such security.
   BIDDER'S LIST: A list maintained by the Purchasing Office setting out names
and addresses of suppliers of various goods and services from which bids,
proposals, and quotations may be solicited.
   CHANGE ORDER: A City issued document used to modify a purchase order to add,
delete or revise the quantity or services being provided.
   CITY MANAGER: The City Manager for the City, or his or her designee.
   COMPETITIVE PROCUREMENT: A process whereby bids, through formal, informal,
or open market procurement, are solicited from bidders in accordance with
applicable law under the direction of the Purchasing Agent.
   CONFLICT OF INTEREST: A situation where the personal interests of a
contractor, public official or employee are, or appear to be, in conflict with
the best interests of the City, as determined in accordance with the laws of
the State.
   CONSTRUCTION: The process of building, altering, repairing, improving or
demolishing any structure or building, or other improvement of any kind to any
public real property. Construction does not include routine operation or
maintenance of existing structures, buildings or real property by the City's
own forces. "Construction" shall also include "public project" as defined in
Public Contract Code section 20161 and section
2.16.140 of this chapter.
   CONTRACT: Any type of legally recognized agreement to provide goods,
services or construction.
   COOPERATIVE PURCHASING: A purchasing method whereby the procurement
requirements of two (2) or more governmental entities and/or public agencies
are combined to obtain the benefit of volume procurement or reduction of
administrative expenses.
   DISBURSEMENT VOUCHER: A payment request form used in lieu of a purchase
order for certain limited types of payments such as:
   A.   Refunds.
   B.   Employee/retiree reimbursements and stipends.
   C.   Insurance premiums.
   D.   Advertising (e.g., public notices, bid notices, job announcements).
   E.   Petty cash/bank account reimbursement.
   F.   Subscriptions, memberships, dues.
   G.   Registration for training and meetings; some related travel.
   H.   Federal and State mandated fees.
   I.   PERS payments.
   J.   Legal fees.
   K.   Other fees including permit, recording, fingerprinting and fiscal
agent/bank.
   L.   Debt service payments.
   M.   Credit card payments.
   N.   Postage/mailing/meter/refills.
   O.   Utility charges.
   P.   Water stock payments.
   Q.   Other limited payments as approved by the Finance Director or City
Manager.
   ELECTRONIC BIDDING SYSTEM: Is the City's electronic e-procurement system
which ensures that bids and proposals remain unopened and cannot be viewed by
the public or City staff until the bid closing date and time.
   EQUIPMENT: Personal property of a durable nature which retains its identity
throughout its useful life.
   FORMAL BID: A bid which shall be: a) solicited through published notice in a
newspaper of general circulation in the City or the City's electronic bidding
system at least ten (10) calendar days in advance of the bid opening date; b)
submitted in a sealed envelope or electronically through the electronic bidding
system, in conformance with a City prescribed format and procedure; c) publicly
opened, read and recorded at the Office of the City Clerk at a City specified
date and time; and d) accepted by award made by the City Council.
   FORMAL PROCUREMENT: Procurement by written notice inviting bids and formal
bid.
   FORMAL REQUEST FOR PROPOSAL (RFP): A comprehensive written document that
defines the objectives and needs of the City and requests potential vendors to
propose the best method for meeting such objectives and needs. Formal RFPs must
require paper or electronic sealed proposal, with cost proposals submitted in a
separate, sealed envelope, or in a separate sealed cost electronic-file in
accordance with section
2.16.170 of this chapter. Formal RFPs shall be evaluated and ranked by a
Selection Committee of at least three (3) persons.
   GOODS: Supplies, materials, equipment and other commodities included within
the definition of "goods" in section 2105 of the California Commercial Code.
   GRATUITY: A gift or favor, entertainment, loan or anything of monetary value
from anyone who has or is seeking to obtain City business or conducts
activities that may be affected by the performance or nonperformance of the
employee's official duties.
   INFORMAL BID OR QUOTATION: An unsealed competitive offer conveyed by letter,
facsimile or other written means and under conditions different from those
required for formal bidding; informal bids should only be solicited by City
personnel authorized to do so, and for each solicitation of an informal bid,
the authorized personnel shall obtain informal bids from at least three (3)
different prospective bidders, if practicable. Informal bids for public
projects shall be publicly opened, read and recorded at the Office of the City
Clerk.
   INFORMAL REQUEST FOR PROPOSAL (RFP): A comprehensive written document that
defines the objectives and needs of the City and requests potential vendors to
propose the best method for meeting such objectives and needs. An informal RFP
should have the same level of detail as a formal RFP. Informal RFPs may require
unsealed proposals and may be submitted by letter, facsimile, e-mail or other
written means. Informal RFPs may be evaluated and ranked by City staff peer
review or by a Selection Committee.
   NEGOTIATION: Contracting through the use of either competitive or other than
competitive proposals and discussions. Any contract/purchase order awarded
without using formal bidding procedures is a negotiated contract/purchase
order. Further, negotiation is a procedure that includes the receipt of
proposals, which permits bargaining and usually affords an opportunity to
revise their offers before award of a contract/purchase order. Bargaining in
the sense of discussion, persuasion, alteration of initial assumptions of
positions, and give and take may apply to price, schedule, technical
requirements, type of contract/purchase order or other terms of a proposed
contract/purchase order.
   PROCURE OR PROCUREMENT: Buying, purchasing, renting, leasing or otherwise
acquiring or obtaining goods, services or construction.
   PROFESSIONAL SERVICES: All services performed by persons in a professional
occupation including, but not limited to, consulting and the performance of
services for accounting, attorneys, auditors, architects, computer and
communications software, support, and related hardware, engineers,
environmental, financial, personnel, planning, and other individuals or
organizations exercising professional discretion and independent judgment based
on specialized knowledge, expertise or training.
   PURCHASE ORDER: A City issued document which authorizes the delivery of
goods, the rendering of services, or the performance of construction at a
stated price and which encumbers City funds for the payment thereof. A purchase
order is a contract as defined in this chapter.
   PURCHASE REQUISITION: A written request in the form as the City may from
time to time determine, submitted by a City department to the Purchasing Office
for procurement of goods, services or construction.
   PURCHASING OFFICE: The City department, designated by the City Manager, for
the administration of this chapter.
   RECYCLED GOODS: Finished manufactured products containing recycled materials
in the production thereof.
   SERVICE (CONTRACTUAL): A contract that directly engages the time and effort
of a contractor whose primary purpose is to perform an identifiable task rather
than to furnish an end item of supply. It can also cover services performed by
either professional or nonprofessional personnel, whether on an individual or
organizational basis. Examples of contractual service or services contracts
are: a) maintenance, overhaul, repair, rehabilitation, salvage, modernization
or modification of supplies, systems, equipment; b) facilities maintenance; c)
janitorial services; d) transportation and related services; e) accounting and
auditing; and f) architecture and engineering.
   SINGLE SOURCE PURCHASE: A purchase where it can be substantiated that a
commodity or service can be obtained from one vendor, contractor or
professional service provider which often is the "single" representative of the
manufacturer or principal company. "Single source" purchases frequently involve
a vendor, contractor or professional consultant whose product or service is
discernibly distinguishable from all others in the market and singularly meets
all significant elements of the City's requirement. In this context, "single"
means "the one among others".
   SMALL PURCHASE: A onetime, noncompetitive purchase of goods or services,
which totals seven thousand dollars ($7,000.00) or less. Each City department
may issue a "short form" purchase order for unanticipated and non-repetitive
purchases, which cumulatively do not exceed forty thousand dollars ($40,000.00)
per vendor, per fiscal year. Purchases shall not be split, staged or separated
into smaller units of work for the purpose of evading the competitive bidding
procedures or any other requirement of this chapter.
   SOLE SOURCE PURCHASE: A purchase where it can be substantiated that a
requirement involves commodity or service provided by only one vendor,
contractor or professional service provider which has exclusive rights (e.g.,
rights to data, patent or copyright, proprietary interests or secret processes)
to the manufacturing of the product or service. "Sole source" requirements must
withstand the questions of: a) is the commodity or service the only of its kind
which can fully satisfy the requirement, and b) the commodity or service is
available from one, and only one, source. In this context, "sole" means "the
only one".
   STANDARDIZATION: The process of examining characteristics and needs per
items of similar end usage and developing a single specification that will
satisfy the need for most or all purchases for that purpose.
   SURPLUS PROPERTY: Inventory not needed by the City at the present time or in
the foreseeable future, such as obsolete supplies, equipment, and scrap
materials that have little or no useful life. For purposes of this chapter, the
term "property" does not include real property. (Ord. 2984, 2025: Ord. 2891,
2019)
2.16.020: PURCHASING SYSTEM:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish procedures for the purchase of
goods, services and construction at the lowest possible cost commensurate with
the quality needed; to exercise financial control over purchases; to define
authority for the purchasing function; and to assure the quality of such
purchases. Therefore, a centralized purchasing system is hereby adopted and
vested with the authority for the purchase of all goods, services and
construction, except as otherwise required by Federal or State law. In
addition, this chapter and the purchasing system it establishes is designed to
provide appropriate procedures to implement the City's participation in the
Uniform Public Construction Cost Accounting Act pursuant to Public Contract
Code section 22000 et seq. (Ord. 2891, 2019)
2.16.030: PURCHASING AGENT:
The position of Purchasing Agent of the City is hereby established and shall be
incorporated with the duties of the City department director responsible for
oversight of the Purchasing Office. When the term "Purchasing Agent" is used in
this chapter, such term shall include his or her designees. (Ord. 2891, 2019)
2.16.040: POWERS AND DUTIES:
Subject to the supervision of the City Manager, the Purchasing Agent shall have
charge of purchasing goods, services and construction required by any City
department, and shall have the power and the duty to:
   A.   Establish a purchasing program providing for competitive bidding or
open market purchasing so as to obtain for the City the greatest possible
advantage.
   B.   Establish and enforce specifications with request to goods, services
and construction required by the City.
   C.   Transfer surplus property between offices, departments or agencies, or
make arrangements to sell surplus property or obsolete/unused goods.
   D.   Prepare operating policies and procedures, consistent with and to
implement this chapter, to be followed by all departments regarding the
purchase, inspection, storage, distribution and disposal of goods, services and
construction.
   E.   Negotiate and recommend the execution of contracts for the purchase of
goods, services and construction.
   F.   Endeavor to obtain full and open competition whenever possible on all
purchases.
   G.   Prepare and implement policies and procedures governing the purchase of
goods, services and equipment for the City. The Purchasing Agent shall be
responsible for developing a purchasing policy and procedures manual which
shall outline procedures for implementing this chapter. Upon approval by the
City Manager, the purchasing policy and procedures manual shall have the same
force and effect as the provisions of this chapter.
   H.   Keep informed of current developments in the field of purchasing,
prices, market conditions and new products. Recommend purchase of alternative
products of a higher quality or lower cost.
   I.   Prescribe and maintain such forms as reasonably necessary to carry out
the operation of this chapter.
   J.   Maintain appropriate records needed for the efficient operation of the
purchasing function.
   K.   Encourage the standardization of similar goods, services and
construction used by City departments.
   L.   Develop and maintain any bidder's list, contractor's list or vendor's
catalog file necessary to the operation of this chapter.
   M.   With written approval of the City Manager, or by action of the City
Council, dependent on established dollar limits set for each, authorize in
writing any City department to purchase or contract for specified goods,
services and construction, independently of the Purchasing Agent. However, the
Purchasing Agent shall require that such purchases be made in conformity with
the procedures established by this chapter and that all documents supporting
the formal or informal bidding procedures be attached to the City's copy of the
purchase requisition.
   N.   Each year, on a quarterly basis, the Purchasing Agent, through the City
Manager, shall prepare and provide to the City Council a summary report of
contracts awarded for seventy five thousand dollars ($75,000.00) or less during
such quarter and not previously approved by the City Council.
   O.   Perform such other duties as may be imposed by the City Council or City
Manager. (Ord. 2984, 2025: Ord. 2891, 2019)
2.16.050: PURCHASING STANDARDS AND ETHICS:
The Purchasing Office and all other employees involved in the procurement of
goods, services and construction will be conducted with absolute integrity. The
very highest ethical standards will be maintained in all material activities.
The Purchasing Office and all other employees will be constantly aware of their
responsibilities in spending public funds and subscribe to the principles and
standards as advocated by the National Association of Purchasing Management and
the California Association of Public Purchasing Officers. Some of these
principles and standards are as follows:
   A.   Regard public service as a sacred trust, giving primary consideration
to the interests of the City.
   B.   Purchase the best value obtainable, securing the maximum benefit for
each tax dollar expended.
   C.   Allow for full and open competition and not participate in uniform
bidding.
   D.   Know and respect their obligations to the public, private sector and
using agencies.
   E.   Accord vendor representative's courteous treatment remembering that
they are important sources of information and assistance in buying decisions.
   F.   Strive constantly for greater knowledge of purchasing methods and of
the goods and services to be procured.
   G.   Conduct themselves with fairness and dignity, and demand honesty in
buying and selling.
   H.   Cooperate with all organizations and individuals engaged in enhancing
the development and standing of the purchasing profession.
   I.   Remember that their conduct reflects on the City and the entire
purchasing profession. (Ord. 2891, 2019)
2.16.060: CONFLICT OF INTEREST:
No officer or employee of the City having any supervisory authority to purchase
any specific goods, services or construction for the City shall have any
financial interest in connection with the purchase of such goods, services or
construction. No officer or employee shall participate in the procurement or
selection process when such officer or employee has a relationship with a
person or business entity seeking a contract under this chapter which would
subject such officer or employee to the prohibition of California Government
Code section 87100 et seq., or Government Code section 1090. (Ord. 2891, 2019)
2.16.070: GRATUITIES:
The Purchasing Agent and all other officers and employees of the City are
prohibited from accepting directly or indirectly from any person to whom any
purchase order or contract is, or might be, awarded, any rebate, kickback,
gift, money or other unlawful consideration. The offer of such gratuity to an
official or employee by any supplier or contractor shall be cause for declaring
such individual to be an irresponsible bidder and for preventing such supplier
or contractor from bidding as otherwise provided for in this chapter. (Ord.
2891, 2019)
2.16.080: PURCHASE REQUISITION:
For other than small purchases, City departments shall submit purchase requests
for goods, services and construction to the Purchasing Office on standard
requisition forms prepared, maintained and updated by the Purchasing Agent. A
requisition shall set forth the characteristics of the goods, services or
construction being requested. No purchase requisition shall be broken into
smaller units to evade any requirement of this chapter, except that unrelated
items requisitioned by departments may be separated to provide different lists
to vendors dealing in different types of goods. (Ord. 2891, 2019)
2.16.090: PURCHASE ORDER:
The purchase of goods, services and construction shall be made only by the
Purchasing Agent through the execution of a purchase order, except in cases of
small purchases or an emergency as defined herein. No officer or employee of
the City shall request a supplier to deliver goods, services or construction to
the City unless a City purchase order number has been issued by the Purchasing
Agent. Purchases and contracts shall not be split, staged or separated into
smaller units of work for the purpose of evading the competitive bidding
procedures or any other requirement of this chapter. (Ord. 2891, 2019)
2.16.100: ENCUMBRANCE OF FUNDS:
The Purchasing Agent shall not issue any purchase order for goods, services or
construction unless there exists an unencumbered appropriation in the account
against which the purchase is to be charged. (Ord. 2891, 2019)
2.16.110: COMPETITIVE PROCUREMENT:
Procurement of goods, services and construction by the City shall whenever
practicable be based on competitive procurement, whether by formal procurement,
if required, or procurement in the open market, if permitted, except that
competitive procurement shall not be required in the following circumstances:
   A.   When emergency procurement is required as defined in section
2.16.130 of this chapter;
   B.   When the procurement involved is seven thousand dollars ($7,000.00) or
less;
   C.   When the City department director certifies, in writing, to the
Purchasing Agent that procurement can only be obtained from a sole source, or
timely from a single source, and the Purchasing Agent is satisfied that the
best price, terms and conditions have been negotiated; single or sole source
procurement for goods, services or construction greater than seven thousand
dollars ($7,000.00) and less than or equal to forty thousand dollars
($40,000.00) requires the approval of the City Manager, and approval of the
City Council for single or sole source procurement in excess of forty thousand
dollars ($40,000.00);
   D.   When competitively awarded, cooperative purchasing is available and
undertaken, as pursuant to section
2.16.210 of this chapter;
   E.   When the goods, services or construction can be obtained from a
contractor who offers the same or better price, terms and conditions as the
same contractor previously offered as the lowest responsible bidder under
competitive procurement or negotiations conducted by the City or another public
agency, provided that in the opinion of the Purchasing Agent, it is in the best
interests of the City to do so;
   F.   When the goods, services or construction can be obtained through
Federal, State and/or other public entity pricing contracts or price agreements
which were competitively awarded.
Purchasing without providing for full and open competition shall not be
justified on the basis of a lack of advanced planning on the part of the
requesting City department or based upon concerns related to the amount of
funds available (e.g., funds will expire as a result of grant or fiscal year).
(Ord. 2984, 2025: Ord. 2891, 2019)
2.16.120: FORMAL PROCUREMENT:
Formal procurement shall be required for all estimated procurement expenditures
that meet the formal procurement limits set forth in section
 2.16.160 of this chapter. Except as otherwise provided herein, contracts for
goods, services and nonpublic project improvement work shall be made pursuant
to the procedures described herein:
   A.   Bid Notice: Notices inviting bids shall include a general description
of the articles to be purchased or the improvement work to be performed and
shall state where and when bid packages may be secured, and the time and place
of the bid opening.
   B.   Publication And Mailing: Notice inviting bids shall be published at
least ten (10) calendar days before the opening of bids in a newspaper of
general circulation in the City or as otherwise permitted by law through the
City's electronic bidding system. The Purchasing Agent may establish and
maintain a list of prospective bidders. It shall not be the responsibility of
the Purchasing Agent to ensure that the list contains current information in
respect to the address, service or product of the prospective bidder. The
Purchasing Agent is authorized to mail or otherwise distribute written
invitations for bids directly to the appropriate prospective bidders appearing
on the list and to other prospective bidders.
   C.   Bidder's Security: Each bid or proposal may be required by the
Purchasing Agent to be accompanied by a bidder's bond, certified or cashier's
check, or cash, in an amount not more than ten percent (10%) of the total bid.
When deemed necessary by the Purchasing Agent, bidder's security may be
prescribed in the public notice inviting bids. When bid security is required,
bidders shall be entitled to return of bid security; however, if a successful
bidder refused to or failed to execute the contract within ten (10) business
days after the notice of award has been mailed or otherwise delivered in a
written format, unless, and to the extent the City is not responsible for the
delay, its bid security shall be deemed forfeited. The City Council may, upon
refusal or failure of the successful bidder to execute the contract, award the
contract to the next lowest and responsible bidder.
   D.   Bid Opening Procedures: Formal bids shall be submitted to the City
Clerk in accordance with the notice inviting bids and shall be identified as a
bid on the envelope when submitted in paper format. Bids shall be opened in
public at the time and place stated in the public notice. A record of the bids
received shall be available for public inspection after the bids have been
opened, indicating the amount bid by the various bidders and the basis for
awarding the contract or purchase order if other than the lowest bidder is
awarded the contract/purchase order. Such list shall be available for at least
thirty (30) days after the award has been made.
   E.   Rejection Of Bids: The Purchasing Agent, City Manager or the City
Council, in accordance with the limits established by this chapter, shall each
have the power to reject bids presented, for any reason, and re-advertise for
bids.
   F.   Tie Bids: If two (2) or more bids received are for the same total
amount, unit price or quality, and service being equal, and if the public
interest will not permit the delay of re- advertising for bids, the Purchasing
Agent, City Manager or the City Council in accordance with the limits
established by this chapter, may accept the bid it chooses or accept the lowest
bid made by negotiation with the tie bidders at time of the bid opening.
   G.   Performance And Payment Bonds: The Purchasing Agent may require
performance and payment bonds before a contract is awarded for goods or
services in such amounts as the Purchasing Agent shall find reasonably
necessary to protect the best interest of the City and to comply with law. If
the Purchasing Agent requires a performance or payment bond, the form and
amount of the bonds shall be described in the notice inviting bids.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, a payment bond shall be required of a contractor
that is awarded a public works contract involving an expenditure in excess of
twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00). (Ord. 2891, 2019)
2.16.130: EMERGENCY PROCUREMENT FOR NONPUBLIC PROJECT:
While the need for emergency procurement is recognized, the practice shall be
curtailed as much as possible by anticipating needs so that normal competitive
procurement may be used.
   A.   Any one or more of the following circumstances shall constitute an
emergency:
      1.   A great public calamity;
      2.   An immediate need to prepare for national or local defense;
      3.   A breakdown in machinery or essential service which requires the
immediate procurement of goods, services or construction, to protect the public
health, welfare, safety or property;
      4.   A City department's operation, directly affecting the public health,
welfare or safety or the protection of public property, is so severely impacted
by any cause that personal injury or property destruction appears to be
imminent and probable unless goods, services or construction designed or
intended to mitigate the risks thereof are procured immediately;
      5.   A department is involved in a City project which is of such a nature
that the need for particular goods, services or construction can only be
ascertained as the project progresses and, when ascertained, must be satisfied
immediately for the preservation of public health, welfare, safety or property.
   B.   Emergency procurement may be initiated by a City department director or
his or her duly authorized representative as follows:
      1.   During normal City business hours, the department director, or his
or her representative, shall provide reasons and justification for the
emergency procurement. If the nature of the emergency is such that goods,
services or construction must be procured immediately and the Purchasing Agent
is satisfied with the explanation of reasons and justification given therefor,
the Purchasing Agent shall authorize the procurement and cause an emergency
purchase order to be issued as soon as possible, and in no event later than the
following business day. A purchase requisition confirming the procurement must
be prepared by the department director or his or her authorized representative
and submitted to the Purchasing Agent no later than the following business day.
      2.   After normal City business hours, the City department representative
shall exercise his or her best judgment in ascertaining whether the actual
circumstances necessitate emergency procurement, and if deemed necessary shall
order it. As soon as possible and in no event later than the following business
day, the City department representative, with approval of the department
director, shall prepare a purchase requisition confirming the emergency
procurement and deliver it to the Purchasing Agent, who shall then cause an
emergency purchase order to be prepared.
   C.   Following the emergency procurement, a written report shall be made,
within ten (10) days of the purchase, by the Purchasing Agent to the City
Manager for procurement between forty thousand dollars ($40,000.00) and seventy
five thousand dollars ($75,000.00), and through the City Manager to the City
Council for procurement exceeding seventy five thousand dollars ($75,000.00).
(Ord. 2984, 2025: Ord. 2891, 2019)
2.16.140: PUBLIC PROJECT CONSTRUCTION WORK:
Procurement for public projects shall be made in accordance with the Uniform
Public Construction Cost Accounting Act. The notice inviting bids for any
public project involving an expenditure in excess of twenty five thousand
dollars ($25,000.00) shall state that a payment bond is required from the
successful bidder in an amount not less than one hundred percent (100%) of the
total amount payable pursuant to the public project contract. The payment bond
shall be in a form of a bond and not a deposit or other security in lieu of a
bond. Prior to or concurrent with the award of a contract for a public project,
the City Engineer shall review and approve the working details, drawings,
plans, and specifications prepared for every public project which may affect
the design or operation of public improvements and which may bring into
question the City's liability for dangerous conditions of public property. The
City Council shall review and approve the working details, drawings, plans and
specifications prepared for every public project of more than seventy five
thousand dollars ($75,000.00) prior to or concurrent with the award of a
contract for the public project.
   A.   A "public project" is defined in Public Contract Code section 22002 as
any of the following:
      1.   Construction, reconstruction, erection, alteration, renovation,
improvement, demolition and repair work involving any publicly owned, leased,
or operated facility;
      2.   Painting or repainting of any publicly owned, leased or operated
facility;
      3.   In the case of a publicly owned utility system, "public project"
shall include only the construction, erection, improvement or repair of dams,
reservoirs, power plants, and electrical transmission lines of two hundred
thirty thousand (230,000) volts and higher.
   B.   The contracting procedures and the dollar limits set forth in Public
Contract Code section 22032 are as follows:
      1.   Seventy Five Thousand Dollars Or Less: Public projects of seventy
five thousand dollars ($75,000.00) or less may be performed by the employees of
the City by force account, by negotiated contract, or by purchase order.
      2.   Seventy Five Thousand One Dollars To Two Hundred Twenty Thousand
Dollars: Public projects having a contract value greater than seventy five
thousand dollars ($75,001.00) and up to two hundred twenty thousand dollars
($220,000.00) may be let to contract by informal bidding procedures as set
forth in the Uniform Public Construction Cost Accounting Act and as follows:
         a.   Contractors List: A list of qualified contractors shall be
developed and maintained by the Purchasing Agent in accordance with the
provisions of section 22034 of the Public Contract Code and any applicable
criteria promulgated, from time to time, by the California Uniform Construction
Cost Accounting Commission.
         b.   Notice Inviting Informal Bids: When a public project is to be
undertaken which is subject to the provisions of this chapter, a notice
inviting informal bids shall be mailed, faxed, or emailed to all contractors
for the category of work to be bid, as shown on the City's list of qualified
contractors and to all construction trade journals as specified by the
California Uniform Construction Cost Accounting Commission in accordance with
section 22036 of the Public Contract Code. Additional contractors and/or
construction trade journals may be notified at the discretion of the City
department responsible for undertaking the public project and soliciting bids,
provided, however:
            (1)   If there is not a list of qualified contractors maintained by
the City for the particular category of work to be performed, the notice
inviting bids for the public project shall be sent only to the construction
trade journals specified by the commission.
            (2)   If the product or service comprising the public project is
proprietary in nature such that it may be obtained only from a certain
contractor or contractors, the notice inviting informal bids for the public
project may be sent exclusively to such contractor or contractors.
         c.   Publicly Opened: Informal bids shall be publicly opened and/or
received by the Office of the City Clerk at the time and date specified by the
Purchasing Agent or other City employee when soliciting requests for informal
bids.
      3.   Excess Of Two Hundred Twenty Thousand Dollars: If all bids received
through the informal bidding process are in excess of two hundred twenty
thousand dollars ($220,000.00), the City Council may, by adoption of a
resolution by a four-fifths (4/5) vote, award the contract, at two hundred
twelve thousand five hundred dollars ($212,500.00) or less, to the lowest
responsible bidder, if the City Council determines the cost estimate for the
public project originally made by the City was reasonable.
      4.   Two Hundred Twenty Dollars And Above: Public projects having a
contract value of more than two hundred twenty thousand dollars ($220,000.00)
shall, except as otherwise provided in the Uniform Public Construction Cost
Accounting Act, be let to contract by formal bidding procedures.
      5.   Awards: Award of purchase orders or contracts for public projects
shall be as follows:
         a.   Seventy Five Thousand Dollars($75,000.00) or less: Award shall be
made by the City Manager or the Purchasing Agent in the best interests of the
City;
         b.   Greater Than Seventy Five Thousand Dollars ($75,000.00) Up To Two
Hundred Twenty Thousand ($220,000.00): Award shall be made by the City Council
to the lowest responsible bidder, pursuant to public projects informal bidding
procedures;
         c.   Greater Than Two Hundred Twenty Thousand Dollars ($220,000.00):
Award shall be made by the City Council to the lowest responsible bidder
pursuant to public projects formal bidding procedures, except as provided in,
and in accordance with, subsection B3 of this section.
      6.   Change Order:
         a.   For public projects, the total of change orders shall not exceed
twenty five percent (25%) of the amount of the original contract. Change orders
exceeding twenty five percent (25%) of the original contract amount should be
bid and awarded separately and approved in relation to approval limits
established in this section.
         b.   Change orders over seventy five thousand dollars ($75,000.00)
should be approved by City Council.
      7.   Bond: A payment bond shall be required of a contractor that is
awarded a public works contract involving an expenditure in excess of twenty-
five thousand dollars ($25,000.00). It is recommended to require performance
bond as well.
      8.   Emergency Contracting Procedure:
         a.   "Emergency" as used in this section, means a sudden, unexpected
occurrence that poses a clear and imminent danger, requiring immediate action
to prevent or mitigate the loss or impairment of life, health, property, or
essential public services as defined in Public Contract Code section 1102. In
cases of emergency when repair or replacements are necessary the City Council
may proceed at once to replace or repair any public facility without adopting
plans, specifications, strain sheets, or working details, or giving notice to
let bids for contracts. The work may be done by day labor under the direction
of the City Council, by contract, or by a combination of the two. The
provisions of California Public Contract Code section 22050, including, but not
limited to, the requirement of a four-fifths (4/5) vote of the City Council
finding substantial evidence of an emergency prior to taking emergency action,
shall apply when notice for bids to let contracts in emergency situations is
not given. The City Council may delegate by resolution the authority to order
any action pursuant to paragraph (1) of subdivision (a) of California Public
Contract Code section 22050 to the City Manager, City Engineer, or other
appropriate non-elected City officer. (Ord. 2984, 2025: Ord. 2891, 2019)
2.16.150: NONPUBLIC PROJECT IMPROVEMENT WORK:
Procurement for nonpublic project improvement work is not subject to the
requirements of the Public Contract Code and shall be made in accordance with
the provisions of subsection
2.16.140B of this chapter, as permitted by Public Contract Code section 22003.
   A.   Nonpublic project improvement work includes the maintenance work for
public improvements such as:
      1.   Routine, recurring, and usual work for the preservation or
protection of any publicly owned or publicly operated facility for its intended
purposes;
      2.   Minor repainting;
      3.   Resurfacing of streets and highways at less than one inch (1");
      4.   Landscape maintenance, including mowing, watering, trimming,
pruning, planting, placement of plants and servicing of irrigation and
sprinkler systems;
      5.   Work performed to keep, operate, and maintain publicly owned water,
power or waste disposal systems, including, but not limited to, dams,
reservoirs, power plants, and electrical transmission lines of two hundred
thirty thousand (230,000) volts and higher.
   B.   All requests for informal and formal bids for nonpublic project
improvement work having a value in excess of twenty five thousand dollars
($25,000.00) shall state that a payment bond is required. The payment bond
shall comply with the requirements of Civil Code section 9554. (Ord. 2891,
2019)
2.16.160: BIDDING REQUIREMENTS FOR SUPPLIES, MATERIALS, EQUIPMENT AND
SPECIALIZED GOODS:
   A.   Seven Thousand Dollars Or Less: Procurement of supplies, materials,
equipment and goods of seven thousand dollars ($7,000.00) or less may be made
by purchase order or contract and executed by the Purchasing Agent or
department director in the open market without the use of competitive bidding.
The City Manager may direct the Purchasing Agent or department director to
employ competitive bidding for certain types of goods, nonprofessional services
or construction for amounts of seven thousand dollars ($7,000.00) or less.
   B.   Seven thousand one dollars ($7,000.00) to forty thousand dollars
($40,000.00) procurement of supplies, materials, equipment and goods of more
than seven thousand dollars ($7,000.00) but less than or equal to forty
thousand dollars ($40,000.00) may be made by the Purchasing Agent in the open
market using an informal bidding procedure whereby informal bids or quotations
are obtained. Although less formal, procedurally, than formal procurement,
procurement in the open market shall be conducted by the Purchasing Agent in a
manner and under circumstances intended to elicit competitive informal bids.
The Purchasing Agent shall obtain, or direct City staff to obtain, informal
bids from at least three (3) different bidders and shall maintain and keep
records of all open market procurements, including informal bids received, in
accordance with the City's records retention schedule. Award shall be made by
the Purchasing Agent to the lowest responsible bidder.
   C.   Forty Thousand One Dollars ($40,001.00) To Seventy Five Thousand
Dollars ($70,500.00): Procurement of supplies, materials, equipment and goods
of more than forty thousand dollars ($40,000.00) but less than seventy five
thousand dollars ($75,000.00) may be made by the Purchasing Agent in the open
market using an informal bidding procedure whereby informal bids or quotations
are obtained. Although less formal, procedurally, than formal procurement,
procurement in the open market shall be conducted by the Purchasing Agent in a
manner and under circumstances intended to elicit competitive informal bids.
The Purchasing Agent shall obtain, or direct City staff to obtain, informal
bids from at least three (3) different bidders and shall maintain and keep
records of all open market procurements, including informal bids received, in
accordance with the City's records retention schedule. Award shall be made by
the City Manager to the lowest responsible bidder.
   D.   Seventy Five Thousand Dollars ($75,000.00) And Above: Procurement of
supplies, materials, equipment and goods of more than seventy five thousand
dollars ($75,000.00) shall be made by using formal procurement as required by
section
2.16.120 of this chapter. Award shall be made by the City Council to the lowest
responsible bidder.
   E.   "No Cost" Procurement: Procurement of services which results in no
expenditure of funds by the City and instead results in the City receiving
remuneration from the service provider shall be made in accordance with the
procedures described in this section based upon the estimated amount of
remuneration the City will receive from the service provider during the term,
and any extensions thereof, of the contract with the service provider.
   F.   Purchase Through Auction: From time to time, the City may procure goods
through auction when such are offered up for bid, and which are subject to any
limitations imposed by State or Federal law. Prior to participating in an
auction, City staff shall inform the Purchasing Agent and department director
and shall prepare and provide a written justification describing the goods
sought, estimated cost, and the not to exceed budgeted amount proposed to be
spent at the auction, and obtain approval per the procurement limits
established in this section. (Ord. 2984, 2025: Ord. 2891, 2019)
2.16.170: "BEST VALUE" FOR SPECIALIZED GOODS, NONPROFESSIONAL SERVICES, AND
NONPUBLIC PROJECT IMPROVEMENT WORK:
From time to time, the City may procure specialized goods, nonprofessional
services and nonpublic project improvement work, on a "best value" basis, at
the lowest cost commensurate with the quality and scope needed, subject to any
limitations imposed by State or Federal law. "Best value" methodology is a
procurement process solicited as a request for proposals which has functional
specifications and evaluation criteria, which will allow the proposer to
determine the manner in which to best meet the needs of the City. "Best value"
procurements shall be approved by the Purchasing Agent prior to the
solicitation of any proposals. In addition to price, consideration will be
given to quality and performance of the goods, services, or nonpublic project
construction to be purchased. Criteria for determining the "best value"
proposer shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
   A.   Ability, capacity and skill of the proposer to provide the goods,
services or nonpublic project construction, as required by the City and within
the time specified.
   B.   Character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience, and efficiency
of the proposer.
   C.   Quality or performance of previous purchases from the proposer.
   D.   Ability of the proposer to provide future maintenance, repair parts and
services for the use of the goods purchased.
   E.   Performance by the proposer under past contracts with the City and with
other public or private entities.
   F.   Listing of contractor as "debarred" or determination that the proposer
has submitted a fraudulent proposal or bid to another public agency within the
prior five (5) years.
   G.   Possession of required licenses, permits or other governmental
approvals, if any, to supply or provide the subject goods, services or
nonpublic project construction.
   H.   Purchasing process and award shall follow the requirements indicated in
subsection
2.16.180B of this chapter. (Ord. 2891, 2019)
2.16.180: PROFESSIONAL SERVICES:
   A.   Landscaping, Engineering, Architectural, Surveying, And Construction
Management: The retention of professional services for architectural, landscape
architectural, engineering, land surveying or construction project management
shall be on the basis of demonstrated competence and on the professional
qualifications necessary for the satisfactory performance of the services
required, and at fair and reasonable prices to the City, in accordance with
section 4526 of the Government Code, although the City is not adopting the
formal procedures specified within Government Code section 4525 et seq. A
request for proposal and/or statement of qualifications shall be prepared by
the initiating City department, and proposal requests solicited, where
practical, from at least three (3) professional service providers.
   B.   Other Professional Services: Except as may otherwise be provided in
this Code or as may be required by State or Federal law, the retention of other
professional services of individuals or organizations exercising professional
discretion and judgment based upon advanced or specialized knowledge, expertise
or training, gained by formal study or experience, shall be based upon both the
demonstrated competence and on the professional qualifications necessary for
the satisfactory performance of the services required, and the cost for such
services. A request for sealed proposals and/or statement of qualifications,
for formal RFPs, and a request for a separate, sealed proposal for the cost for
the performance of the services, shall be prepared by the initiating City
department. Proposals shall be solicited, when practical, from at least three
(3) professional service providers. The negotiations associated with the award
of a contract for services identified in this subsection shall occur as
follows: Upon receipt of the proposals, the initiating City department shall
first determine and identify those persons or organizations that are qualified
to perform the services and shall rank such persons and organizations based on
their demonstrated competence and professional qualifications deemed necessary
for the satisfactory performance of the services required. Second, the cost
proposals submitted by all the qualified persons and organizations shall be
reviewed. Third, negotiations shall be undertaken with the person or
organization ranked most qualified in an attempt to secure the services at a
cost equivalent to the lowest cost offered to the City by the qualified persons
and organizations. If the person or organization ranked most qualified is
unwilling to provide the services at a cost equivalent to such lowest cost: 1)
such person or organization may nevertheless be awarded a contract, provided
the Purchasing Agent, City Manager or City Council, as appropriate, determines
the initiating City department director has substantiated that the cost for the
services is reasonable and appropriate; or 2) negotiations with the most
qualified person or organization may be terminated and the initiating City
department may undertake similar negotiations with the other qualified persons
and organizations in order of rank.
      1.   Seven Thousand Dollars ($7,000.00) Or Less: Procurement of
professional services of seven thousand dollars ($7,000.00) or less may be
solicited by informal RFP and awarded by purchase order or contract, executed
by the department director or Purchasing Agent, in the open market by
negotiation without the use of competitive bidding given the price is fair and
reasonable. The City Manager may direct the Purchasing Agent or department
director to employ competitive solicitation, on a case by case basis, for
certain types of services for amounts of seven thousand dollars ($7,000.00) or
less.
      2.   Seven Thousand One Dollars ($7,001.00) To Forty Thousand Dollars
($40,000.00): Procurement of professional services of more than seven thousand
dollars ($7,000.00) and up to forty thousand dollars ($40,000.00) may be
awarded by the Purchasing Agent using an informal RFP. Although less formal,
procedurally, than formal procurement, procurement in the open market shall be
conducted in a manner and under circumstances intended to elicit competitive
informal proposals. The Purchasing Agent shall obtain, or direct City staff to
obtain, informal proposals from at least three (3) different vendors and shall
maintain and keep records of all open market procurements, including informal
proposals received, in accordance with the City's records retention schedule.
Award shall be made by the Purchasing Agent or the City Manager to the highest
ranked proposer.
      3.   Forty Thousand One Dollars ($40,001.00) To Seventy Five Thousand
Dollars ($75,000.00): Procurement of professional services of more than forty
thousand dollars ($40,000.00) and up to seventy five thousand dollars
($75,000.00) may be awarded by the City Manager using an informal RFP. Although
less formal, procedurally, than formal procurement, procurement in the open
market shall be conducted in a manner and under circumstances intended to
elicit competitive informal proposals. The Purchasing Agent shall obtain, or
direct City staff to obtain, informal proposals from at least three (3)
different vendors and shall maintain and keep records of all open market
procurements, including informal proposals received, in accordance with the
City's records retention schedule. Award shall be made by the City Manager to
the highest ranked proposer.
      4.   Seventy Five Thousand One Dollars ($75,001.00) And Above:
Procurement of services of more than seventy five thousand one dollars
($75,001.00) shall be made by using formal RFP. A request for sealed proposals
and/or statement of qualifications, including a request for a separate, sealed
proposal for the cost for the performance of the services, shall be prepared by
the initiating City department. Proposals shall be solicited, when practical,
from at least three (3) professional service providers. Upon receipt of the
proposals, the initiating City department shall first determine and identify
those persons or organizations that are qualified to perform the services and
shall rank such persons and organizations based on their demonstrated
competence and professional qualifications deemed necessary for the
satisfactory performance of the services. Second, the cost proposals submitted
by all of the qualified persons and organizations shall be opened and reviewed.
Third, negotiations shall be undertaken with the person or organization ranked
most qualified in an attempt to secure the services at the lowest, fair and
reasonable cost. If the person or organization ranked most qualified is
unwilling to provide the services at the lowest, fair and reasonable cost,
negotiations with the most qualified person or organization may be terminated,
and the initiating City department may undertake similar negotiations with the
other qualified persons and organizations in order of rank.
   C.   Award Of Contracts: Professional services contracts shall be awarded by
the department director, Purchasing Agent, City Manager or City Council, as
appropriate, based upon the dollar limits specified in this section. (Ord.
2984, 2025: Ord. 2891, 2019)
2.16.190: NONPROFESSIONAL SERVICES:
Nonprofessional services shall be retained on the basis of competitive
procurement in accordance with section
2.16.160 or
2.16.170 of this chapter if applicable. Examples of nonprofessional service or
services contracts are: a) maintenance, overhaul, repair, rehabilitation,
salvage, modernization or modification of supplies, systems, equipment; b)
facilities maintenance; c) janitorial services; and d) transportation and
related services. Public works nonprofessional services shall be retained in
accordance with Federal and State laws such as prevailing wages 1 and bonds 2 .
(Ord. 2891, 2019)
 
Notes
1 1. LAB § 1770 et seq.
2 2. CIV § 9554.
2.16.200: CHANGE ORDERS:
Except for change orders for public projects, which shall be approved in
accordance with the contract documents for such projects, changes to previously
awarded purchase orders or contracts in excess of ten percent (10%) of the
original value of that purchase order or contract shall require approval by the
Purchasing Agent, City Manager or City Council, depending on the new value of
the purchase order or contract after the increase and in relation to the
approval limits established in sections 2.16.140 through 2.16.180 of this
chapter. Changes equal to or less than ten percent (10%) are allowed at the
department discretion unless the change causes the new value of the purchase
order or contract to exceed seventy five thousand dollars ($75,000.00), which
if not previously approved by the City Council, must then be so approved. Any
change order that increases a purchase order or contract by fifty percent (50%)
or more of the original value requires City Manager approval for purchase
orders or contracts totaling less than or equal to seventy five thousand
dollars ($75,000.00) and City Council approval for those totaling seventy five
thousand dollars ($75,000.00) or more. The City Manager may request City
Council approval for the former, if he or she believes it is in the best
interests of the City to do so. (Ord. 2984, 2025: Ord. 2891, 2019)
2.16.210: COOPERATIVE PURCHASING:
Where advantageous for the City, the Purchasing Agent is authorized to allow
for the purchase of goods, services and construction through legal contracts of
other governmental jurisdictions or public agencies without further
contracting, solicitation or formal bidding, provided such practice otherwise
complies with State law and was competitively awarded. Awards will be made
based on approval limits established in section
2.16.160 of this chapter. (Ord. 2891, 2019)
2.16.220: BUSINESS PREFERENCES:
In administration of competitive procurement pursuant to this chapter, the
purchasing agent shall be authorized to give such preferences for supplies,
materials, equipment, and specialized goods as general law cities are permitted
or required to give by applicable State or Federal law, or as provided for in
this chapter.
   A.   Local Business Preference: To promote business retention within the
city and the economic health of the city and to encourage local business
participation in the procurement process, the purchasing agent, in determining
the lowest responsible bidder for contracts for supplies, materials, equipment
and specialized goods shall grant an eight percent (8%) local business
preference to local businesses. For purposes of this chapter, a local business
is defined as a business possessing a valid Redlands Business License and
having its principal business operation located in the City of Redlands.
   B.   Business Preferences: To promote the economic health of the County of
San Bernardino and to encourage County business participation in the
procurement process, the purchasing agent, in determining the lowest
responsible bidder for contracts for supplies, materials, equipment and
specialized goods shall grant a two percent (2%) County business preference to
County businesses. For the purposes of this chapter, a County business is
defined as a business possessing a valid Redlands Business License and having
its principal business operation located within the County of San Bernardino
and outside of the City of Redlands.
   C.   Application To Bids: When applying the local business preference or
County business preference to a bid, the purchasing agent shall apply the
preference to the bid price solely for bid evaluation purposes such that the
total price bid by a local business shall be reduced by eight percent (8%) of
the amount bid by the local business, and by two percent (2%) to the County of
San Bernardino business and the reduced bid shall be deemed the amount bid by
that bidder. The contract price shall in all events be the amount bid by the
successful bidder awarded the contract.
   D.   Change In Preferences: The local business and County business
preferences established by this Chapter shall terminate on December 31, 2026.
Commencing on January 1, 2027, to further promote business retention within the
city and the economic health of the city and to encourage local participation
in the procurement process, the Purchasing Agent, in determining the lowest
responsible bidder for contracts for supplies, materials, equipment and
specialized goods having a value of forty thousand dollars ($40,000.00) or
less, may take into consideration the one percent (1%) sales tax which would be
returned to the city as a result of the bid award. For procurement where sales
tax would not be generated as a result of the bid award and where the quality
and price are equal to another bidder or bidders, the local vendor may be given
the bid award.
   E.   Recycled Goods: Whenever practicable, all City departments shall use
recycled content products and recycled materials to meet their needs. This
subsection is enacted to facilitate compliance with State requirements and to
foster the development of new, improved markets for recycled products.
      1.   Definitions: For purposes of this subsection E, the following words
shall have the meanings ascribed to them:
         POSTCONSUMER RECYCLED MATERIALS: A finished material or product that
has served its intended use and would normally be disposed of as solid waste.
Examples of postconsumer recovered materials include, but are not limited to,
old newspaper, office paper, green waste (yard waste), steel, glass, aluminum
cans, plastic bottles, oil, asphalt, concrete and tires.
         PRACTICABLE: Available within a reasonable time period; the recycled
product shall be of equal or better quality or value at either no or minimal
additional cost and subject to consideration of product durability as a
criterion of the cost or value of the product.
         PRE-CONSUMER: Materials or byproducts generated after manufacturing of
a product is completed, but before the product reaches the consumer. Examples
of pre-consumer recovered materials include, but are not limited to, obsolete
inventories of finished goods, rejected unused stock and paper wastes generated
during printing, cutting and other conversion operations.
         RECYCLED MATERIAL: Waste material and byproducts that have been
recovered or diverted from the solid waste stream and can be utilized in place
of raw or virgin material in a product. Recycled content materials may consist
of material derived from postconsumer waste, manufacturing waste, industrial
scrap, agricultural waste and other items, all of which can be used in the
manufacture of new products.
      2.   City Departments' Procurement Of Recycled Content Products:
         a.   All departments shall use recycled content products whenever
practicable. Special emphasis shall be placed on the purchase of products
manufactured with postconsumer recycled materials.
         b.   Whenever practicable, recycled materials shall be procured and
used in City operations (e.g., recycled paper shall be used in copy machines
and for printing purposes by departments).
         c.   All departments may require procurement of designated recycled
content products above levels required by this subsection.
         d.   The City shall require its contractors and consultants to use
recycled content products in fulfilling contractual obligations whenever
practical.
         e.   The City shall promote the use of recycled content products
publicizing its procurement policy whenever practicable (e.g., use of recycling
symbol and statement on recycled content products).
         f.   A life cycle cost analysis may be an appropriate tool for
departments to use when evaluating purchasing alternatives. Life cycle cost
should reflect the annual cost of the product calculated over the life of the
product and should consider final costs, not just initial up-front costs. A
life cycle cost analysis may include factors such as capital costs,
installation costs, maintenance costs, energy and other operating costs, and
disposal costs which may utilize the "best value" procurement method.
         g.   The City shall procure recycled products if the product fitness
and quality are equal to the non-recycled product and available at the same or
lesser total cost than non-recycled items. These products shall include paper
products, printing and writing papers, mulch, compost, and compost products,
glass products, lubricating oils, plastic products, paint, antifreeze, tires,
tire derived products and metal.
         h.   The City will favorably consider the selection of other recycled
and environmentally preferable materials, products, and supplies over their
non-recycled or non-environmentally preferable alternatives when the
availability, fitness, operational efficiency, quality, safety, and price of
the recycled or environmentally preferable product is equal to, or better than,
the non-recycled or non-environmentally preferable alternative. The list of
materials, products, and supplies shall include, but not be limited to,
business office products, alternative fuels, rubberized asphalt, and other
items.
         i.   Departments are encouraged to consider less toxic alternatives
when purchasing products or services such as pesticides or pest control
services, and to purchase energy and water conserving products whenever
possible.
      3.   Duties Of The Purchasing Agent: The purchasing agent shall
coordinate implementation of this subsection. Duties of the purchasing agent
for implementation of this subsection include:
         a.   Establishment of a list of recycled products for purchase by all
departments when practicable and review of purchase requests to encourage the
substitution of recycled products when practicable.
         b.   Maintenance of a list and standard specifications and, the
undertaking of a periodic review of available products. Products may be added
as they become available.
         c.   Giving preference to approving and promoting the purchase of
products with the highest postconsumer content, all other considerations being
equal.
      4.   City Departments' Responsibilities: City departments shall be
responsible for the following:
         a.   City staff shall identify the recycled content products available
and the vendors from whom such products are available for purchase. This
information shall be compiled and provided to the purchasing agent and the
sustainability manager, when practical.
         b.   Departments shall evaluate the recycled products on the
established list and shall make efforts to purchase recycled products when
practicable. (Ord. 2984, 2025: Ord. 2952, 2022: Ord. 2891, 2019)
2.16.230: AUTHORIZATION TO EXECUTE CONTRACTS:
Pursuant to section 40602 of the Government Code, the Mayor must execute all
contracts on behalf of the City, unless another City officer or employee is
authorized to do so pursuant to this Code. The City Manager, Purchasing Agent,
and department directors, in addition to the Mayor, in accordance with the
procurement dollar limits established in this chapter, are hereby authorized to
execute procurement contracts on behalf of the City. Execution of all
procurement contracts shall be attested to by the City Clerk. (Ord. 2891, 2019)
2.16.240: STANDARDIZATION OF EQUIPMENT/SUPPLIES:
Standardization of equipment and supplies to promote efficiency and reduce
costs to the City is encouraged. Equipment and supplies standardization shall
not, however, negate the requirement to solicit competitive bids for
standardized equipment and supplies when reasonably possible. (Ord. 2891, 2019)
2.16.250: INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS:
Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation or combination thereof who is
awarded a purchase order or contract with the City must comply with all
insurance requirements as established by State law or within the limits
established from time to time by the City and its insurance advisors. (Ord.
2891, 2019)
2.16.260: EXTERNAL RESTRICTIONS:
Some purchases may be subject to the terms and conditions of various codes,
statutes and agreements of other governmental entities in connection with
Federal and State grants. If any section, subsection, subdivision, sentence,
clause or phrase of this chapter conflicts with any Federal or State
requirements mandated for any grant funded procurement, the applicable Federal
or State requirements shall apply to that procurement. (Ord. 2984, 2025: Ord.
2891, 2019)
2.16.270: RESALE ITEMS:
Items purchased for resale, even though their form may be changed before sold
to a customer, may be purchased noncompetitively; however, a reasonableness of
price statement must be included in the file. Items consigned or purchased for
resale may also be given away as prizes. A summary of resale items acquired and
sold shall be submitted to the Purchasing Agent annually for review. (Ord.
2891, 2019)
2.16.280: COMPETITIVE PROCUREMENT EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   Commercial Activity/Entertainment/Excursions And Competition:
Commercial activity entertainment/excursions provided by the City's Recreation
Division to the general public may be purchased noncompetitively by group,
instructor, act name or tour agency. The negotiated prices must be at the
lowest obtainable prices based on the particulars of performance/services
desired. Transportation services shall be acquired by way of the competitive
bidding process, unless it is an intrinsic part of the excursion as determined
by the Purchasing Agent. Revenue generating agreements and Purchase Orders may
be approved by the City Manager, without the prior approval of the City
Council.
   B.   Cybersecurity: The City Manager may enter into contracts for the
procurement of cybersecurity-related hardware, software, and services,
including but not limited to firewalls, intrusion detection and prevention
systems, encryption tools, endpoint protection, secure access solutions,
cybersecurity consultants, threat monitoring and response services, penetration
testing, forensic investigations, and other individuals or entities possessing
specialized knowledge in cybersecurity, without the prior approval of the City
Council and without adherence to the procedures set forth in the city's
standard purchasing ordinance. (Ord. 2984, 2025: Ord. 2891, 2019)
2.16.290: DESIGNATION OF SURPLUS PERSONAL PROPERTY:
The City Council, City Manager or any City department director, may declare any
personal property held by such department as surplus. Such declaration shall be
in writing, and such property, together with such written declaration, shall be
delivered to the Purchasing Agent. The Purchasing Agent shall store such
property and maintain a written inventory for review by each City department
director. If any department director has a use for such property, he or she may
so request from the Purchasing Agent, who shall have the authority to assign
the property to any department. (Ord. 2891, 2019)
2.16.300: SALE IN OPEN MARKET OF SURPLUS PERSONAL PROPERTY:
Surplus City property in usable condition, if each individual item's estimated
value is less than seven thousand dollars ($7,000.00), may be disposed of in
the following manner: the Purchasing Agent shall make an investigation of the
market conditions of personal property of the type declared surplus and
determine prices for all surplus property, which, in his/her opinion, will be
competitive with prices in the open market. The Purchasing Agent may then sell
such personal property at such prices by advertising in the most appropriate
means, which, in his or her opinion, will bring the greatest number of
potential purchasers to include sales on a consignment basis. He or she shall
cause to be published at least once, at least three (3) days before such sale,
in a newspaper of general circulation, published and distributed in the City,
or posted on the City's website, a notice of the sale setting forth the day it
shall begin; the number of days it is to be continued, if it is to last more
than one day; the place where the articles may be examined; the place where the
purchase price is to be paid and the property delivered; and a general
description of the type of property being sold. The terms of all such sales
shall be cash in the amount of the full purchase price. The Purchasing Agent
shall give a receipt to the purchaser of such property and keep a copy for the
official files, and shall forward a copy of such receipt to the Finance
Department, Revenue Division, together with the money so collected from the
buyer. The Revenue Division shall receive and deposit such money and shall
forward the information to the Finance Director who shall credit the money
received from the sale of such property to the appropriate fund account. (Ord.
2984, 2025: Ord. 2891, 2019)
2.16.310: SALE BY BID OR AUCTION OF SURPLUS PERSONAL PROPERTY:
As an alternate to the method of sale in the open market, the Purchasing Agent
shall, in all cases, where the estimated value of personal property is seven
thousand dollars ($7,000.00) or more, and may, in the sale of all other
personal property, where, in his or her discretion, he or she determines it is
in the best interest of the City, sell surplus personal property by means of
sealed or electronic bid or public auction. In conducting an auction, the
Purchasing Agent may contract with a professional auctioneer or online auction
service, for either a flat or hourly fee, or a percentage of the amount of the
sale, based upon that which is the common and customary method and rate for
such auctioneering services. The procedure for conducting such sale shall be
determined by the Purchasing Agent; provided, however, that the following are
included in such procedure:
   A.   For personal property having a value of seven thousand dollars
($7,000.00) or more, at least three (3) days before the sale, notice shall be
published in a newspaper of general circulation published and distributed in
the City, or posted on the City's website, containing a general description of
the type of property to be sold and the time and place of such bid opening or
auction.
   B.   That the terms of all sales shall be cash.
   C.   The sale by sealed or electronic bid or auction shall be to the highest
responsible bidder.
   D.   That a receipt be given to the purchaser and a copy of such receipt,
together with the money received, be deposited with the Finance Department,
Revenue Division, and that the Finance Director shall credit such funds to the
appropriate fund account. (Ord. 2984, 2025: Ord. 2891, 2019)
2.16.320: TRADE IN SURPLUS PERSONAL PROPERTY:
Notwithstanding any provisions of this chapter for the sale of surplus personal
property in the open market or by auction, the Purchasing Agent may trade in
surplus personal property with an amount he/she determines to be reasonable, to
be allowed toward the purchase of a similar type of personal property. Typical
situations where this might apply would be in the disposal of used motor
vehicles and other machinery and equipment for which trade-ins are commonly
permitted by the manufacturer/dealer. (Ord. 2891, 2019)
2.16.330: DISPOSAL OF UNSERVICEABLE JUNK OR SCRAP PERSONAL PROPERTY:
When any surplus City property is deemed to be unserviceable, junk or scrap, or
no longer suitable for its original purpose, the Purchasing Agent shall dispose
of such personal property by destruction, recycling, trade or sale of said
personal property at the best competitive price available in the open market
without regard to the other provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2891, 2019)
2.16.340: DISPOSAL OF SURPLUS PERSONAL PROPERTY TO PUBLIC AGENCIES AND
NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the City Council may sell
without recourse to sealed bid or auction surplus personal property to public
agencies and nonprofit organizations as may be determined by the City Council,
or donate surplus personal property to public agencies and nonprofit
organizations upon a finding by the City Council that such donation serves a
public purpose of the City. (Ord. 2891, 2019)
2.16.350: DISPOSAL OF UNCLAIMED PROPERTY:
Notwithstanding other provisions of this chapter, unclaimed property in the
possession of the Police Department held by the department for the period set
forth by this Code or State law for such property, if the true owners thereof
do not make claim for their return in accordance with the provisions of
division 3, title 6, chapter 4 (entitled "lost and unclaimed property"),
commencing at section 2080 of the Civil Code, may be either retained by the
City upon the finding that the property is needed for public use or may be
disposed of in accordance with the provisions set forth in this chapter for
disposing of personal surplus property. (Ord. 2891, 2019)
2.16.360: DISPOSAL OF BICYCLES:
Notwithstanding other provisions of this chapter, bicycles that have been lost
or abandoned and recovered by the Police Department and held by the department
for the minimum time period set forth by this Code or State law, may be
disposed of by the City by either auction or by placing such bicycles with
service clubs, charitable agencies, other government agencies concerned with
the welfare of the poor and needy, or with individuals who are poor, needy or
disadvantaged. (Ord. 2891, 2019)
CHAPTER 2.17
UNCLAIMED PROPERTY
SECTION:
2.17.010: Custodian Designated
2.17.020: Return To Legal Owner; Exception
2.17.030: Return Of Found Property
2.17.040: Disposition Of Property
2.17.050: Public Auction
2.17.060: Destruction
2.17.010: CUSTODIAN DESIGNATED:
   A.   If the owner of the property is unknown or has not claimed the
property, the person saving or finding the property shall, if the property is
of the value of one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more, within a reasonable time
turn the property over to the Redlands police department if found in the city,
and execute an affidavit, stating when and where he or she found or saved the
property, particularly describing it. If the property was saved, the affidavit
shall state: 1) from what and how it was saved, 2) whether the owner of the
property is known to the affiant, and 3) the affiant has not secreted, withheld
or disposed of any part of the property.
   B.   The city's chief of police shall be the custodian of all property
seized, recovered and found, stored or otherwise coming into the custody of the
city's police department as a result of police officers and employees carrying
out their official duties, and as a result of found property which is given to
the care and custody of the city's police department by citizens. The chief of
police or his or her designee shall notify the owner, if the owner's identity
is reasonably ascertainable, that the city's police department possesses the
property and where it may be claimed. The police department may require payment
by the owner of a reasonable charge to defray costs of storage and care of the
property. (Ord. 2731, 2011: Ord. 2636 § 1, 2006)
2.17.020: RETURN TO LEGAL OWNER; EXCEPTION:
If the owner appears within ninety (90) days, after receipt of the property of
value of one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more by the city's police department,
and proves his or her ownership of the property, and pays all reasonable
charges, the city's police department shall return the property to the owner.
Property which is evidence in a criminal trial shall be disposed of as the
court directs. Property which is contraband, or the return of which is
otherwise prohibited by statute, or the return of which may encumber the city
with civil liability by its return, shall be disposed of by court order or
authorized by statute or ordinance. (Ord. 2731, 2011: Ord. 2636 § 1, 2006)
2.17.030: RETURN OF FOUND PROPERTY:
   A.   If the reported value of the property is two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00), or more, and no person appears and proves his or her ownership of
the property within ninety (90) days, the police department shall cause notice
of the found property to be published at least once in a newspaper of general
circulation. If, after seven (7) days following the first publication of the
notice, no owner appears and proves his or her ownership of the property and
the person who found or saved the property pays the cost of publication of the
notice, the title to the property shall vest in the person who found or saved
the property, unless the property was found in the course of employment by an
employee of any public agency, in which case the property shall be sold at
public auction. Title to the property shall not vest in the person who found or
saved the property or in the successful bidder at the public auction unless the
cost of publication is first paid to the city, whose police department caused
the notice to be published.
   B.   If the reported value of the property is less than two hundred fifty
dollars ($250.00), and no owner appears and proves his or her ownership of the
property within ninety (90) days, the title shall vest in the person who found
or saved the property, unless the property was found in the course of
employment by an employee of any public agency, in which case the property
shall be sold at public auction.
   C.   This chapter is enacted pursuant to California Civil Code section
2080.4 in that the unclaimed property shall be: 1) held by the police
department for at least three (3) months, and 2) that thereafter such property
shall be sold at public auction to the highest bidder, with notice of such sale
being given by the city's chief of police at least five (5) days before the
time fixed thereof by publication once in a newspaper of general circulation
published in the county, or that thereafter such property shall be transferred
to a local government purchasing and storage agency for sale to the public at
public auction. Such property shall not be redeemable by the owner or the other
person entitled to the possession. If the city determines that such property
transferred to it for sales is needed for a public use, such property may be
retained by the agency and need not be sold. (Ord. 2731, 2011: Ord. 2636 § 1,
2006)
2.17.040: DISPOSITION OF PROPERTY:
   A.   The city's police department may sell such property by public auction,
in the manner and upon the notice of sale of personal property under execution,
if it is a thing that is commonly the subject of sale, when the owner cannot,
with reasonable diligence, be found, or, being found, refuses upon demand to
pay the lawful charges as provided by law in the following cases: 1) when the
thing is in danger of perishing, or of losing the greater value or part of its
value, or 2) when the lawful charges provided by law amount to two-thirds (2/3)
of its value.
   B.   Pursuant to California Welfare And Institutions Code section 217, any
personal property with a value less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) in the
possession of the city's police department which has been unclaimed for at
least ninety (90) days may, instead of being sold at public auction to the
highest bidder pursuant to the provisions of Civil Code section 2080.5, be
donated to the county probation or welfare departments, or to any charitable or
nonprofit organization that is authorized under its articles of incorporation
to participate in a program or activity designed to prevent juvenile
delinquency and which is exempt from income taxation under federal or state
law, or both, for use in any program or activity designed to prevent juvenile
delinquency.
   C.   Before any property subject to this section is donated to the county
probation or welfare departments, or to any charitable or nonprofit
organization, the city's police department shall notify the owner of the
property, if his or her identity is known or can be reasonably ascertained,
that the city possesses the property, and where the property may be claimed.
The owner may be notified by mail, telephone, or by means of a notice published
in a newspaper of general circulation which it determines is most likely to
give notice to the owner of the property. If after notice and for a period of
not less than ninety (90) days, the property is not claimed by the owner, the
property may be disposed of as provided in this chapter.
   D.   Currency and coin, except mounted coin collections, shall be given into
the custody of the city's treasurer in exchange for a receipt therefor. Mounted
coin collections remaining unclaimed shall be disposed of by sealed bid at
public auction, which bid shall exceed the current actual face value of the
coins contained in the collection.
   E.   Such unclaimed property, as provided by law and this chapter, that may
be retained and, if in the opinion of the city's chief of police, would assist
the city's police department in carrying out its mission, may be retained and
any such retained property shall be included in the assets of the city and
entered into the inventory of the police department. (Ord. 2731, 2011: Ord.
2636 § 1, 2006)
2.17.050: PUBLIC AUCTION:
A public auction of unclaimed property shall be performed as the city's
treasurer directs. Notice of the auction shall be given to the general public
not less than five (5) days prior to the time fixed therefor by publication
once in a newspaper of general circulation within the city. (Ord. 2731, 2011:
Ord. 2636 § 1, 2006)
2.17.060: DESTRUCTION:
Disposal by destruction of property which is contraband, or for which
destruction is authorized or directed by statute or ordinance, shall be
accomplished by rendering such property totally useless and inaccessible to
reuse. (Ord. 2731, 2011: Ord. 2636 § 1, 2006)
CHAPTER 2.18
AIRPORT ADVISORY BOARD
SECTION:
2.18.010: Existence
2.18.020: Membership; Qualifications
2.18.030: Membership; Appointment And Terms
2.18.035: Forfeiture Of Membership By Absence
2.18.040: Organization
2.18.050: Powers And Duties
2.18.010: EXISTENCE:
There is an Airport Advisory Board as established by City Council resolution
2212. (Ord. 1951 § 1, 1986: Prior Code § 18001)
2.18.020: MEMBERSHIP; QUALIFICATIONS:
The Airport Advisory Board shall consist of seven (7) members appointed by the
Mayor with the approval of the City Council. (Ord. 2027 § 1, 1988: Ord. 1951 §
1, 1986: Prior Code § 18002)
2.18.030: MEMBERSHIP; APPOINTMENT AND TERMS:
The Airport Advisory Board shall consist of seven (7) members appointed by the
Mayor with the approval of the City Council. Each member shall serve a
staggered four (4) year term and shall serve until his or her successor is
appointed. No person shall serve more than two (2) consecutive full terms
unless appointed to an additional term by a four-fifths (4/5) vote of the City
Council. Vacancies on the board shall be filled by appointment by the Mayor
with the approval of the City Council for the unexpired portion of the term.
Appointments made to fill an unexpired term will constitute a full term if more
than one-half (1/2) of a term remains. For example, if a term is four (4) years
and an appointment for an unexpired term is for more than two (2) years, this
appointment constitutes a full term. The members of the board shall serve
without compensation, shall each be a resident of the City, and neither a
member of any other standing commission, board or committee of the City nor an
employee thereof. The City Council may remove any member of the board at any
time, without cause, by a majority vote. Four (4) members of the board shall
constitute a quorum. (Ord. 2751, 2011)
2.18.035: FORFEITURE OF MEMBERSHIP BY ABSENCE:
Any member of the board who absents himself or herself from any three (3)
consecutive regular meetings of the board, unless excused from such absence by
consent of the board expressed by action recorded in its minutes, shall thereby
automatically forfeit his or her position as a member of the board immediately
after adjournment of any such third consecutive meeting at which such member
has not appeared. The Chairperson or Secretary of the board shall thereupon,
within three (3) business days, notify in writing the City Council, and any
such person so ceasing to be a member of the board, of such fact; whereupon the
vacancy so created shall be filled by appointment pursuant to section
2.18.030 of this chapter. (Ord. 2850, 2017)
2.18.040: ORGANIZATION:
The board shall, during the month of July of each year, select from among its
members a Chairman to serve for one (1) year. The board shall determine the
order of business for the conduct of its meetings, which shall be on call of
the Chairman or three (3) members of the board. Three (3) members of the board
shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. (Ord. 1951 § 1,
1986: Prior Code § 18004)
2.18.050: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The Airport Advisory Board shall have the power and duty to act in an advisory
capacity to the City Council in all matters pertaining to the administration,
operation, development, improvement and maintenance of the Redlands Municipal
Airport. (Ord. 1951 § 1, 1986: Prior Code § 18005)
CHAPTER 2.20
BOARD OF APPEALS
SECTION:
2.20.010: Existence
2.20.010: EXISTENCE:
There is a board of appeals, which shall pass upon matters pertaining to
building construction, as set forth in section
15.04.020 of this code. (Ord. 1951 § 1, 1986: prior code § 18101)
CHAPTER 2.24
HISTORIC AND SCENIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION
SECTION:
2.24.010: Purpose And Intent
2.24.020: Historical And Scenic Property Defined
2.24.030: Existence
2.24.040: Membership
2.24.042: Forfeiture Of Membership By Absence
2.24.050: Organization
2.24.060: Duties
2.24.070: Procedure For Designation Of Historical Or Scenic Property; Notice Of
Sale Or Transfer
2.24.080: Demolition, Alteration Or Removal; Generally (Rep. by Ord. 2899,
2019)
2.24.090: Demolition, Alteration Or Removal; Permit Required (Rep. by Ord.
2899, 2019)
2.24.100: Demolition, Alteration Or Removal; Commission Referral (Rep. by Ord.
2899, 2019)
2.24.110: Demolition, Alteration Or Removal; Notification Of Objections (Rep.
by Ord. 2899, 2019)
2.24.120: Demolition, Alteration Or Removal; Public Hearing; Commission
Recommendation (Rep. by Ord. 2899, 2019)
2.24.130: Demolition, Alteration Or Removal; Council Review (Rep. by Ord. 2899,
2019)
2.24.140: Demolition, Alteration Or Removal; Substantial Alteration Defined
(Rep. by Ord. 2899, 2019)
2.24.150: Hardship Showing; Removal From Register (Rep. by Ord. 2899, 2019)
2.24.010: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The City Council finds and declares as follows:
   A.   That the City possesses many distinctive structures, beautiful trees
and gardens, public parks and other scenic and aesthetic qualities that enhance
its value as an attractive community;
   B.   That the well preserved properties established before and after the
City's incorporation in 1888 contribute to this community's fine character,
atmosphere and reputation;
   C.   That certain of these properties, by virtue of their age, architectural
style, aesthetic appeal, or association with local history, are of great
historical significance and value;
   D.   That these irreplaceable historical properties should be preserved to
be enjoyed and valued by the generations that follow us;
   E.   That the adoption of reasonable and fair regulations is necessary as a
means of documenting and preserving these properties, and of providing
recognition of their value to the community. (Ord. 1951 § 1, 1986: Prior Code §
18301)
2.24.020: HISTORICAL AND SCENIC PROPERTY DEFINED:
A historical or scenic property is any property, structure or improvement,
including any significant trees or other plant life, which satisfies any of the
following requirements:
   A.   The property is the first, last, only or most significant historical or
scenic property of its type in the City;
   B.   The property is associated with an individual or group having
significant influence on the history or development of the City;
   C.   The property is an example or contains an example of a period, style,
architectural movement, or construction of historical, aesthetic, or
architectural interest;
   D.   The property is a part of or contributes aesthetically to the
historical or scenic heritage of the City. This category includes, but is not
limited to, landscaping, light standards, trees, curbings and signs;
   E.   The property is located within a geographically definable area
possessing a concentration of historical or scenic properties that contribute
to each other and are unified aesthetically by plan or by physical development.
(Ord. 1951 § 1, 1986: Prior Code § 18309)
2.24.030: EXISTENCE:
There is a Historic and Scenic Preservation Commission, which shall serve in an
advisory capacity to the City Council and make recommendations and
determinations relating to the designation, preservation, protection,
enhancement and perpetuation of the City's historical and scenic properties.
(Ord. 1951 § 1, 1986: Prior Code § 18302)
2.24.040: MEMBERSHIP:
The Historic and Scenic Preservation Commission shall consist of nine (9)
members who shall each serve for a four (4) year term and until his or her
successor is appointed. Eight (8) members shall be appointed by the Mayor with
the approval of the City Council, shall serve without compensation, shall each
be a resident of the City, and neither a member of any other standing
commission, board or committee of the City nor an employee thereof. The ninth
member of the commission shall be the Archivist Curator of the City's A.K.
Smiley Public Library, or his or her designated appointee. No person, except
for the Archivist Curator, shall serve more than two (2) consecutive full terms
unless appointed to an additional term by a four-fifths (4/5) vote of the City
Council. Vacancies on the commission shall be filled by appointment by the
Mayor with the approval of the City Council for the unexpired portion of the
term. Appointments made to fill an unexpired term will constitute a full term
if more than one-half (1/2) of a term remains. For example, if a term is four
(4) years and an appointment for an unexpired term is more than two (2) years,
this appointment constitutes a full term. The City Council may remove any
member of the commission at any time, without cause, by a majority vote. Five
(5) members of the commission shall constitute a quorum. (Ord. 2751, 2011)
2.24.042: FORFEITURE OF MEMBERSHIP BY ABSENCE:
Any member of the commission who absents himself or herself from any three (3)
consecutive regular meetings of the commission, unless excused from such
absence by consent of the commission expressed by action recorded in its
minutes, shall thereby automatically forfeit his or her position as a member of
the commission immediately after adjournment of any such third consecutive
meeting at which such member has not appeared. The Chairperson or Secretary of
the commission shall thereupon, within three (3) business days, notify in
writing the City Council, and any such person so ceasing to be a member of the
commission, of such fact; whereupon the vacancy so created shall be filled by
appointment pursuant to section
 2.24.040 of this chapter. (Ord. 2853, 2017)
2.24.050: ORGANIZATION:
The commission shall annually elect a Chairperson for the term of one (1) year,
and such other officers as the commission may deem advisable. The commission
shall adopt such rules and regulations for its own organization as are
necessary to carry out its duties and functions, and shall designate the time
and place for its meetings. The commission shall keep records of all of its
actions and proceedings and shall have regular meeting dates. The commission
shall submit annually a proposed budget to the City Council covering personnel
services, supplies, and equipment necessary for the performance of its duties.
(Ord. 1951 § 1, 1986: Prior Code § 18304)
2.24.060: DUTIES:
The commission shall have the following duties:
   A.   To promote public interest in and understanding of historical and
scenic properties and the preservation thereof;
   B.   To consult with and advise public officials and agencies; civic,
educational, professional and other organizations; and citizens generally, in
relation to the preservation of historical and scenic properties;
   C.   To consider all inquiries and requests for the preservation or
cataloging of historical or scenic properties located within the City limits of
the City;
   D.   To compile and maintain a current register of all properties it has
determined to be registerable historical or scenic properties. The register
shall contain a description of each property, the reason or reasons for its
inclusion in the register, and an inventory detailing those parts or
characteristics of the property which are being classified as historical or
scenic. Copies of the register shall be available to all interested
departments, governmental or civic agencies, and interested individuals;
   E.   To consider requests by property owners for nontechnical advice on
proposed work on a registered historical or scenic property;
   F.   To perform such other duties as are specified by ordinance of the City.
(Ord. 1951 § 1, 1986: Prior Code § 18305)
2.24.070: PROCEDURE FOR DESIGNATION OF HISTORICAL OR SCENIC PROPERTY; NOTICE OF
SALE OR TRANSFER:
   A.   A property shall be considered for registration as a historical or
scenic property upon completion and filing of an application by the owner of
the property. The application shall be filed with the Historic and Scenic
Preservation Commission, and shall contain all information requested by the
commission.
   B.   Upon the filing of an application, the commission shall determine,
within forty five (45) days, whether the property qualifies as historical or
scenic property and, if so, which part or parts of the property shall be
included in the City's Register of Historic and Scenic Properties. Upon
approval of an application, the commission shall notify the owner by mail of
the approval, and shall give notice of any regulations, restrictions or duties
that arise from such designation, including specific notice as to what part or
parts of the property may not be destroyed, altered or removed without first
obtaining a permit from the Department of Building and Safety.
   C.   Upon its determination that a property is registerable as historical or
scenic property, the commission shall notify the City Clerk, who shall set the
matter for hearing at the next regular City Council meeting. At the hearing on
the matter, the Council shall vote on the inclusion of the property in the
City's Register of Historic and Scenic Properties.
   D.   Upon a property's acceptance by the City Council, the commission shall
enter the property on the register, and the owner shall have recorded in the
Office of the County Recorder that his property has been registered as a
historical and scenic property and is subject to all restrictions applicable to
such property under this Code. After a property is so registered, the owner or
owners or his or their legal representatives, assignees or heirs shall be
required to give written notice of the property's sale or transfer of ownership
to the Historic and Scenic Preservation Commission within ten (10) days of the
sale or transfer. (Ord. 1951 § 1, 1986: Prior Code § 18306)
2.24.080: DEMOLITION, ALTERATION OR REMOVAL; GENERALLY: (Rep. by Ord. 2899,
2019)
2.24.090: DEMOLITION, ALTERATION OR REMOVAL; PERMIT REQUIRED: (Rep. by Ord.
2899, 2019)
2.24.100: DEMOLITION, ALTERATION OR REMOVAL; COMMISSION REFERRAL: (Rep. by Ord.
2899, 2019)
2.24.110: DEMOLITION, ALTERATION OR REMOVAL; NOTIFICATION OF OBJECTIONS: (Rep.
by Ord. 2899, 2019)
2.24.120: DEMOLITION, ALTERATION OR REMOVAL; PUBLIC HEARING; COMMISSION
RECOMMENDATION: (Rep. by Ord. 2899, 2019)
2.24.130: DEMOLITION, ALTERATION OR REMOVAL; COUNCIL REVIEW: (Rep. by Ord.
2899, 2019)
2.24.140: DEMOLITION, ALTERATION OR REMOVAL; SUBSTANTIAL ALTERATION DEFINED:
(Rep. by Ord. 2899, 2019)
2.24.150: HARDSHIP SHOWING; REMOVAL FROM REGISTER: (Rep. by Ord. 2899, 2019)
CHAPTER 2.26
HOUSING AUTHORITY AND APPEALS BOARD
(Rep. by Ord. 2805, 2014)
CHAPTER 2.28
HOUSING COMMISSION
(Rep. by Ord. 2745, 2011)
CHAPTER 2.32
PARKS AND RECREATION ADVISORY COMMISSION
SECTION:
2.32.010: Existence
2.32.020: Membership
2.32.030: Members; Forfeiture Of Office By Absence
2.32.040: Organization
2.32.050: Duties
2.32.010: EXISTENCE:
There is a Parks and Recreation Advisory Commission established to make
recommendations and advise the City Council regarding parks, parkways, street
trees and recreation. (Ord. 2745, 2011)
2.32.020: MEMBERSHIP:
The Parks and Recreation Advisory Commission shall consist of seven (7)
members. Six (6) members shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of
the City Council. The seventh member shall be a City Council appointed student
member who shall be a full voting member from the junior class of a Redlands
Unified School District high school for a term of one year, beginning January 1
and ending December 31 when the student is a senior. Each member shall serve
for a four (4) year term until his or her successor is appointed. No person
shall serve more than two (2) consecutive full terms unless appointed to an
additional term by a four-fifths (4/5) vote of the City Council. Vacancies on
the commission shall be filled by appointment by the Mayor with the approval of
the City Council for the unexpired portion of the term. Appointments made to
fill an unexpired term will constitute a full term if more than one-half (1/2)
of a term remains. For example, if a term is four (4) years and an appointment
for an unexpired term is for more than two (2) years, this appointment
constitutes a full term. The members of the commission shall serve without
compensation, shall each be a resident of the City, with the exception of the
student member, and neither a member of any other standing commission, board or
committee of the City, nor an employee thereof. The City Council may remove any
member of the commission at any time, without cause, by a majority vote. Four
(4) members of the commission shall constitute a quorum. (Ord. 2875, 2019)
2.32.030: MEMBERS; FORFEITURE OF OFFICE BY ABSENCE:
Any member of the commission who absents himself or herself from any three (3)
regular meetings of the commission within any twelve (12) month period, unless
excused from such attendance by consent of the commission expressed by action
of record in its minutes, shall thereby automatically forfeit his or her office
as a member of the commission. The Chairperson or Secretary of the commission
shall thereupon, notify the City Council in writing within three (3) business
days after adjournment of any such third meeting at which such member has not
appeared within any twelve (12) month period. The vacancy so created shall be
filled pursuant to section
2.32.020 of this chapter for the unexpired portion of the term. (Ord. 2875,
2019)
2.32.040: ORGANIZATION:
The Commissioners shall, upon their appointment, organize and elect a Chairman
for the term of one year, and such other officers as the Commissioners may deem
advisable, and shall make such rules and regulations as are necessary to
fulfill the obligations and duties of the commission. (Ord. 2745, 2011)
2.32.050: DUTIES:
The commission shall recommend to the City Council policies for the
acquisition, development, maintenance and improvement of parks, public trails
and open space areas, and for the planting, care and removal of landscaping and
amenities in all parks, public trails and open space areas. In addition, the
commission shall have the following duties relating to recreation:
   A.   Use the Commissioners' skills, knowledge and experience to assist and
advise the City Recreation Division staff;
   B.   Keep the public informed about the City's recreation program;
   C.   Serve as a forum for the promotion of activities for the Recreation
Division and the City's Community Center;
   D.   Serve as a forum for residents' suggestions, reactions, opinions,
interests and needs regarding the City's Recreation Division and its programs.
The commission shall have regular meeting dates and shall keep records of all
of its acts and proceedings. (Ord. 2745, 2011)
CHAPTER 2.36
PLANNING COMMISSION
SECTION:
2.36.010: Existence
2.36.020: Membership
2.36.022: Forfeiture Of Membership By Absence
2.36.030: Organization And Meetings
2.36.040: Powers And Duties
2.36.050: Hearing; Application
2.36.060: Hearing; Procedures
2.36.070: Hearing; Commission Actions
2.36.080: Hearing; Appeals
2.36.010: EXISTENCE:
There is a Planning Commission which shall serve as the planning agency of the
City. (Ord. 1951 § 1, 1986: Prior Code § 18901)
2.36.020: MEMBERSHIP:
   A.   Membership and Selection of the Planning Commission.
      1.   The Planning Commission shall consist of seven (7) members appointed
by the City Council.
      2.   The members shall be selected pursuant to procedures and guidelines
adopted by City Council resolution.
   B.   Terms.
      1.   Each member shall serve for a four (4) year term until his or her
successor is appointed.
      2.   No person shall serve more than two (2) consecutive full terms
unless appointed to an additional term by a four-fifths (4/5) vote of the City
Council.
      3.   The terms of the members shall be staggered such that the terms of
not more than three members shall expire in any year.
      4.   Members whose initial appointments are less than one-half the full
term of four (4) years will be allowed to serve their partial term and then two
full terms.
   C.   Vacancies. Vacancies on the commission shall be filled in accordance
with the procedures and guidelines adopted by City Council resolution, and with
the approval of the City Council for the unexpired portion of the term.
Appointments made to fill an unexpired term will constitute a full term if more
than two (2) years of a term remains.
   D.   Compensation. The members of the commission shall serve without
compensation, shall each be a resident of the City, and neither a member of any
other standing commission, board or committee of the City nor an employee
thereof.
   E.   Removal. The City Council may remove any member of the commission at
any time, without or without cause, by a majority vote.
   F.   Quorum. Four (4) members of the commission shall constitute a quorum.
(Ord. 2981 § 1, 2025: Ord. 2751, 2011)
2.36.022: FORFEITURE OF MEMBERSHIP BY ABSENCE:
Any member of the commission who absents himself or herself from any three (3)
consecutive regular meetings of the commission, unless excused from such
absence by consent of the commission expressed by action recorded in its
minutes, shall thereby automatically forfeit his or her position as a member of
the commission immediately after adjournment of any such third consecutive
meeting at which such member has not appeared. The Chairperson or Secretary of
the commission shall thereupon, within three (3) business days, notify in
writing the City Council, and any such person so ceasing to be a member of the
commission, of such fact; whereupon the vacancy so created shall be filled by
appointment pursuant to section
2.36.020 of this chapter. (Ord. 2853, 2017)
2.36.030: ORGANIZATION AND MEETINGS:
The commission shall annually elect from its number a Chairman, who shall serve
for a term of one (1) year, and such other officers as the commission may deem
advisable. Except as otherwise provided in this Code, or by the laws of this
State, the commission shall provide for its own organization, shall adopt rules
and regulations for the transaction of business before it, and shall designate
the time and place for its regular monthly meeting or meetings. The commission
may use the Council Chambers as the place for its meetings, provided that such
meetings do not conflict or interfere with meetings of the City Council. (Ord.
2981 § 2, 2025: Ord. 1951 § 1, 1986: Prior Code § 18903)
2.36.040: POWERS AND DUTIES:
As planning agency of the City, the Planning Commission shall have such powers
and duties as are provided for such agencies by the general laws of the State.
In addition, the commission shall have such powers and duties as are provided
by City ordinance. The commission shall keep proper records of all of its
official acts and proceedings. (Ord. 1951 § 1, 1986: Prior Code § 18904)
2.36.050: HEARING; APPLICATION:
Applications are filed with the Development Services Department on forms
provided by the Department with the applicable filing fee(s) established by
Council resolution. A complete application shall be filed not less than sixty
(60) days prior to a hearing date. The hearing date shall be determined by the
Department. (Ord. 2981 § 3, 2025: Ord. 1000, 1955)
2.36.060: HEARING; PROCEDURES:
Planning Commission hearing procedures shall be as follows:
   A.   Director will present a report and recommendation to the commission.
   B.   Following discussion the Chairman will open the meeting for public
hearing.
   C.   The applicant and persons favoring the application are invited to speak
first.
   D.   Protestants may speak to the subject following applicant's presentation
and those supporting the application.
   E.   Following the opposition arguments, the applicant is permitted a short
period of rebuttal.
   F.   Chairman will close the hearing and call for discussion and a motion on
the subject. (Ord. 1000, 1955)
2.36.070: HEARING; COMMISSION ACTIONS:
   A.   Commission action on a variance is final unless appealed.
   B.   The City Council is not required to act on a commission recommendation
for denial of a zone change. A commission recommendation for approval is
forwarded to the City Council for action.
   C.   The City Council may approve, modify, or reject any decision of the
Planning Commission subject to certain procedures established in the zoning
ordinance for the particular application. (Ord. 2981 § 4, 2025: Ord. 1000,
1955)
2.36.080: HEARING; APPEALS:
Any interested citizen or applicant may appeal a decision of the Planning
Commission. Appeals shall be filed in writing with the City Clerk. (Ord. 1000,
1955)
CHAPTER 2.38
MUNICIPAL UTILITIES/PUBLIC WORKS COMMISSION
SECTION:
2.38.010: Membership
2.38.020: Organization And Meetings
2.38.025: Forfeiture Of Membership By Absence
2.38.030: Duties
2.38.010: MEMBERSHIP:
The Municipal Utilities/Public Works Commission shall consist of seven (7)
members appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the City Council. Each
member shall serve for a four (4) year term until his or her successor is
appointed. No person shall serve more than two (2) consecutive full terms
unless appointed to an additional term by a four-fifths (4/5) vote of the City
Council. Vacancies on the commission shall be filled by appointment by the
Mayor with the approval of the City Council for the unexpired portion of the
term. Appointments made to fill an unexpired term will constitute a full term
if more than one-half (1/2) of a term remains. For example, if a term is four
(4) years and an appointment for an unexpired term is for more than two (2)
years, this appointment constitutes a full term. The members of the commission
shall serve without compensation, shall each be a resident of the City, and
neither a member of any other standing commission, board or committee of the
City nor an employee thereof. The City Council may remove any member of the
commission at any time, without cause, by a majority vote. Four (4) members of
the commission shall constitute a quorum. (Ord. 2751, 2011)
2.38.020: ORGANIZATION AND MEETINGS:
   A.   The commission shall meet within one (1) month of its formation and
elect a Chairman and Vice Chairman. Unless earlier removed by vote of the full
commission, the Chairman and Vice Chairman shall serve for a term of one (1)
year.
   B.   A regular time and place of meetings shall be established and adhered
to in the manner of holding public meetings of legislative bodies in the State.
Except as otherwise provided by law, all meetings shall be open to the public.
   C.   The Municipal Utilities Director shall act as Secretary to the
commission and shall provide staff support as necessary. The commission is
encouraged to appoint ad hoc committees to study specific problems particularly
when the resolution of any problem requires special skills not possessed by
commission members. (Ord. 2491 § 9, 2002: Ord. 1971 § 1, 1986: Ord. 1951 § 1,
1986: Prior Code § 19003)
2.38.025: FORFEITURE OF MEMBERSHIP BY ABSENCE:
Any member of the commission who absents himself or herself from any three (3)
consecutive regular meetings of the commission, unless excused from such
absence by consent of the commission expressed by action recorded in its
minutes, shall thereby automatically forfeit his or her position as a member of
the commission immediately after adjournment of any such third consecutive
meeting at which such member has not appeared. The Chairperson or Secretary of
the commission shall thereupon, within three (3) business days, notify in
writing the City Council, and any such person so ceasing to be a member of the
commission, of such fact; whereupon the vacancy so created shall be filled by
appointment pursuant to section
2.38.010 of this chapter. (Ord. 2850, 2017)
2.38.030: DUTIES:
   A.   The commission is a resource for the City Council and City staff and
buffer with the general public. In its advisory capacity, the commission shall
be knowledgeable of all the public works, utilities and engineering programs.
The commission shall, through the individual and collective expertise of its
members, provide advice to the Public Works and Municipal Utilities Departments
regarding the public acceptability of proposed plans, programs and projects.
   B.   The commission shall conduct periodic reviews of the following items,
providing guidance and/or approval to the Public Works and Municipal Utilities
Departments and provide recommendations to the City Council, either direct,
through the City Council appointed liaison and/or City staff:
      1.   Quarterly review of master plans for the Public Works and Municipal
Utilities Departments.
      2.   Annual review of the City Capital Improvements Program under the
purview of the Public Works and Municipal Utilities Departments.
      3.   Annual review of the City General Plan, and provide input to the
Planning Commission and City Council.
      4.   Review the status of all active projects on at least a quarterly
basis (Public Works and Municipal Utilities Department are on differing 3 month
schedules).
      5.   Review all studies and proposals related to rates and fees charged
to the public, including water, sewer, solid waste and impact development fees.
      6.   Conduct meetings at least quarterly and provide minutes to the City
Council and City staff.
      7.   Provide quarterly reports of the commission activities to the City
Council and City staff. (Ord. 2491 §§ 9, 11, 2002: Ord. 1971 § 1, 1986: Ord.
1951 § 1, 1986: Prior Code § 19004)
CHAPTER 2.40
RECREATION ADVISORY COMMISSION 1
(Rep. by Ord. 2745, 2011)
 
Notes
1 1. See chapter 2.32 of this title.
CHAPTER 2.44
REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY
(Rep. by Ord. 2805, 2014)
CHAPTER 2.46
RELOCATION APPEALS BOARD
(Rep. by Ord. 2805, 2014)
CHAPTER 2.48
TRAFFIC AND PARKING COMMISSION
SECTION:
2.48.010: Existence
2.48.020: Membership
2.48.022: Forfeiture Of Membership By Absence
2.48.030: Organization And Meetings
2.48.040: Duties
2.48.010: EXISTENCE:
There is established a Traffic and Parking Commission of the City to serve in
an advisory capacity to the City Council. (Ord. 2265 § 1, 1994)
2.48.020: MEMBERSHIP:
The Traffic and Parking Commission shall consist of seven (7) members. Six (6)
of its members shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the City
Council. Each member shall serve for a four (4) year staggered term and until
his or her successor is appointed. No person shall serve more than two (2)
consecutive terms unless appointed to an additional term by a four-fifths (4/5)
vote of the City Council. Vacancies on the commission shall be filled by
appointment by the Mayor with the approval of the City Council for the
unexpired portion of the term. Appointments made to fill an unexpired term will
constitute a full term if more than one-half (1/2) of a term remains. For
example, if a term is four (4) years and an appointment for an unexpired term
is for two (2) years or more, this appointment constitutes a full term. The
members of the commission shall serve without compensation, shall each be a
resident of the City, with the exception of the student member, and neither a
member of any other standing committee, board or commission of the City nor an
employee thereof. The Council may remove any member of the commission at any
time, without cause, by a majority vote. Four (4) members of the commission
shall constitute a quorum.
The City Council shall also appoint one (1) student member as a full voting
member of the commission from a junior class of a Redlands high school for a
term of one (1) year, beginning January 1 and ending December 31 when the
student is a senior.
The Sergeant of the Traffic Division of the Redlands Police Department and a
representative of the Municipal Utilities and Engineering Department shall be
ex officio advisory members of the commission. (Ord. 2757, 2011)
2.48.022: FORFEITURE OF MEMBERSHIP BY ABSENCE:
Any member of the commission who absents himself or herself from any three (3)
consecutive regular meetings of the commission, unless excused from such
absence by consent of the commission expressed by action recorded in its
minutes, shall thereby automatically forfeit his or her position as a member of
the commission immediately after adjournment of any such third consecutive
meeting at which such member has not appeared. The Chairperson or Secretary of
the commission shall thereupon, within three (3) business days, notify in
writing the City Council, and any such person so ceasing to be a member of the
commission, of such fact; whereupon the vacancy so created shall be filled by
appointment pursuant to section
 2.48.020 of this chapter. (Ord. 2853, 2017)
2.48.030: ORGANIZATION AND MEETINGS:
The commission shall establish regular meeting dates, and, at its
organizational meeting, shall elect a Chairman for one (1) year and other
officers as it may deem advisable. The commission shall make necessary rules
and regulations as are necessary to fulfill its obligations and duties. (Ord.
2265 § 1, 1994)
2.48.040: DUTIES:
   A.   It shall be the duty of the Traffic and Parking Commission to advise
the City Engineer, Planning Commission, City Manager, and City Council, and to
generally serve as a liaison between the general public and the City Council
regarding traffic matters, including:
      1.   Receiving complaints relating to motorized and non-motorized traffic
and parking matters and the enforcement of traffic regulations within public
rights-of-way and parking facilities and to recommend ways and means of
improving traffic conditions;
      2.   Reviewing and providing input for traffic reports, studies, and
analyses prepared by City staff and consultants related to city-initiated
public pedestrian, motorized and non-motorized transportation, and parking
projects not subject to Planning Commission review;
      3.   Reviewing and making recommendations on city-initiated master plans,
projects, and programs related to pedestrian, motorized, non-motorized, and
mass transit facilities not subject to Planning Commission review; and
      4.   Advising the City Council with respect to on-street and public off-
street parking, posting of speed limits, traffic calming alternatives, bicycle
and pedestrian facilities, and traffic circulation.
   B.   The commission shall keep records of all of its acts and proceedings
and shall submit all of its recommendations to the City Council and to the City
Manager. (Ord. 2974 § 1, 2025: Ord. 2265 § 1, 1994)
CHAPTER 2.50
CULTURAL ARTS COMMISSION
SECTION:
2.50.010: Purpose And Intent
2.50.020: Existence
2.50.030: Membership
2.50.032: Forfeiture Of Membership By Absence
2.50.040: Organization
2.50.050: Duties
2.50.010: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The City Council finds and declares as follows:
   A.   The City enjoys many distinctive arts activities in the schools, in
museums, and in the community which enhance the cultural life of the community;
   B.   The City desires to encourage coordination of arts events, promote and
encourage art education, recommend development of facilities for the arts, and
institute a program of "Art in Public Places". (Ord. 1970 § 1, 1986: Prior Code
§ 19600)
2.50.020: EXISTENCE:
There is established a Cultural Arts Commission which shall serve in an
advisory capacity to the City Council and make recommendations and
determinations relating to the encouragement of the arts. (Ord. 1970 § 1, 1986:
Prior Code § 19601)
2.50.030: MEMBERSHIP:
The Cultural Arts Commission shall consist of seven (7) members appointed by
the Mayor with the approval of the City Council. Each member shall serve for a
four (4) year term and until his or her successor is appointed. No person shall
serve more than two (2) consecutive full terms unless appointed to an
additional term by a four-fifths (4/5) vote of the City Council. Vacancies on
the commission shall be filled by appointment by the Mayor with the approval of
the City Council for the unexpired portion of the term. Appointments made to
fill an unexpired term will constitute a full term if more than one-half (1/2)
of a term remains. For example, if a term is four (4) years and an appointment
for an unexpired term is for more than two (2) years, this appointment
constitutes a full term. The members of the commission shall serve without
compensation, shall each be a resident of the City, and neither a member of any
other standing commission, board or committee of the City nor an employee
thereof. The Council may remove any member of the commission at any time,
without cause, by a majority vote. Four (4) members of the commission shall
constitute a quorum. (Ord. 2751, 2011)
2.50.032: FORFEITURE OF MEMBERSHIP BY ABSENCE:
Any member of the commission who absents himself or herself from any three (3)
consecutive regular meetings of the commission, unless excused from such
absence by consent of the commission expressed by action recorded in its
minutes, shall thereby automatically forfeit his or her position as a member of
the commission immediately after adjournment of any such third consecutive
meeting at which such member has not appeared. The Chairperson or Secretary of
the commission shall thereupon, within three (3) business days, notify in
writing the City Council, and any such person so ceasing to be a member of the
commission, of such fact; whereupon the vacancy so created shall be filled by
appointment pursuant to section
2.50.030 of this chapter. (Ord. 2853, 2017)
2.50.040: ORGANIZATION:
The commission shall annually elect a Chairperson for the term of one (1) year
and other such officers as deemed advisable. The commission shall keep records
of all of its proceedings and actions and shall have regular meeting dates. The
Community Services Administrator, or his/her designated appointee, shall serve
as staff to the Cultural Arts Commission. (Ord. 1970 § 1, 1986: Prior Code §
19604)
2.50.050: DUTIES:
The commission shall have the following duties:
   A.   Promote public interest in the arts;
   B.   Recommend new arts programs and sources of funding for those programs;
   C.   Assist the City Council by recommendation of policies to encourage,
develop, and support the arts in Redlands;
   D.   Advise the City Council in the administration of the City's "Art in
Public Places" Program. (Ord. 1970 § 1, 1986: Prior Code § 19605)
CHAPTER 2.52
EMERGENCY ORGANIZATION
SECTION:
2.52.010: Emergency Defined
2.52.020: Purpose
2.52.030: Expenditures
2.52.040: Statutory Authority; Repeal Of Conflicting Ordinances
2.52.050: Disaster Council; Creation; Membership; Citizens Corps Council
2.52.060: Disaster Council; Development And Recommendation Of Plans And
Agreements
2.52.070: Disaster Council; Meetings
2.52.080: Director; Office Created
2.52.090: Emergency Services Chief
2.52.100: Powers And Duties Of Officers
2.52.110: Order Of Succession
2.52.120: Emergency Services Chief; Powers And Duties
2.52.130: Director; Powers During Local Emergency And State Of Emergency
2.52.140: Organization; Personnel
2.52.150: Organization; Emergency Multihazard Functional Plan And Hazard
Mitigation Plan
2.52.155: Standardized Emergency Management System
2.52.156: National Incident Management System
2.52.160: Violation; Penalty
2.52.010: EMERGENCY DEFINED:
   A.   The city will participate in the county of San Bernardino operational
area disaster response and recovery organization as required by California
Government Code section 8607. As part of that participation, the city hereby
adopts the standardized emergency management system (SEMS). The SEMS framework
includes use of the incident command system (ICS), multiagency or interagency
coordination, participation in the master mutual aid agreement and system of
the state of California and of operational area concept.
   B.   As used in this chapter, "emergency" means the actual or threatened
existence of conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of
persons and property within the city caused by such conditions as air
pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot, or earthquake, or other
conditions, including conditions resulting from war or imminent threat of war,
but other than conditions resulting from a labor controversy, which conditions
are or are likely to be beyond the controls of the services, personnel,
equipment, and facilities of the city, requiring the combined forces of other
political subdivisions to combat. (Ord. 2485 § 1, 2002: prior code § 45000)
2.52.020: PURPOSE:
The declared purposes of this chapter are to provide for the preparation and
carrying out of plans for the protection of persons and property within the
city in the event of an emergency; the direction of the emergency organization;
and the coordination of the emergency functions of the city with all other
public agencies, corporations, organizations, and affected private persons.
(Prior code § 45001)
2.52.030: EXPENDITURES:
Any expenditures made in connection with emergency activities, including mutual
aid activities, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct protection
and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the city. (Prior code § 45002)
2.52.040: STATUTORY AUTHORITY; REPEAL OF CONFLICTING ORDINANCES:
Under the provisions of section 8668(a) of the California emergency services
act, existing civil defense and disaster ordinances will remain in full force
and effect until revised, amended, or revoked; therefore, the existing
ordinances should be expressly repealed by number. Provided, that it is the
intent of the city council in enacting this chapter, that it shall be
considered a revision and continuation of ordinance 926, which is repealed by
the ordinance codified in this chapter, and the status of volunteers shall not
be affected by such repeal; nor shall plans and agreements, rules and
regulations, or resolutions adopted pursuant to such repealed ordinance be
affected by such repeal until amended, modified, or superseded as provided in
this chapter. (Prior code § 45003)
2.52.050: DISASTER COUNCIL; CREATION; MEMBERSHIP; CITIZENS CORPS COUNCIL:
The city disaster council shall consist of the following:
   A.   The mayor of the city, who shall be chairperson;
   B.   The city manager of the city, who shall serve as the director of
emergency services, and who shall be vice chairperson;
   C.   The emergency services chief who shall coordinate all emergency
services for the city and is provided for in the current plan of the city;
   D.   The disaster council of the city of Redlands shall consist of existing
groups that support a strong team merging sectors of the community including
elected officials, emergency management, first responders, volunteer services,
major industry and commercial, healthcare and education;
   E.   A citizens corps council shall be created as a subgroup of the disaster
council. The citizens corps council will utilize members of the disaster
council for the management of existing volunteer resources defined by the
council, to leverage mutually supportive endeavors among the represented
groups, and to direct overall local plans to implement citizens corps in the
community. This council will have the lead role in implementing citizen corp
groups within the city of Redlands. (Ord. 2547 § 1, 2003: Ord. 2485 § 2, 2002)
2.52.060: DISASTER COUNCIL; DEVELOPMENT AND RECOMMENDATION OF PLANS AND
AGREEMENTS:
It shall be the duty of the city disaster council, and it is empowered, to
develop and recommend for adoption by the city council emergency and mutual aid
plans and agreements. (Prior code § 45201)
2.52.070: DISASTER COUNCIL; MEETINGS:
The disaster council shall meet upon call of the chairman or, in his absence
from the city or inability to call such meeting, upon call of the vice
chairman. (Prior code § 45202)
2.52.080: DIRECTOR; OFFICE CREATED:
There is created the office of director of emergency services. The city manager
shall be the director of emergency services. (Prior code § 45301)
2.52.090: EMERGENCY SERVICES CHIEF:
There is created a position of the emergency services chief. The emergency
services chief shall manage and/or coordinate all activities and
responsibilities of this position that relate to disaster planning, response,
recovery and mitigation. (Ord. 2639 § 1, 2006: Ord. 2485 § 3, 2002)
2.52.100: POWERS AND DUTIES OF OFFICERS:
The director is empowered to:
   A.   Proclaim Emergency: Request the city council to proclaim the existence
or threatened existence of a "local emergency" if the city council is in
session, or to issue such proclamation if the city council is not in session.
Whenever a local emergency is proclaimed by the director, the city council
shall take action to ratify the proclamation within seven (7) days thereafter
or the proclamation shall have no further force or effect;
   B.   Proclaim State Of Emergency: Request the governor to proclaim a "state
of emergency" when, in the opinion of the director, the locally available
resources are inadequate to cope with the emergency;
   C.   Control, Direct Effort: Control and direct the effort of the emergency
organization of the city for the purposes of this chapter;
   D.   Direct Cooperation, Coordination: Direct cooperation between and
coordination of services and staff of the emergency organization of the city;
and resolve questions of authority and responsibility that may arise between
them;
   E.   Represent Organization: Represent the city in all dealings with public
or private agencies on matters pertaining to emergencies as defined herein.
(Prior code §§ 45303–45308)
2.52.110: ORDER OF SUCCESSION:
The director of emergency services shall designate the order of succession to
that office, to take effect in the event the director is unavailable to attend
meetings and otherwise perform his duties during an emergency. Such order of
succession shall be approved by the city council. (Prior code § 45309)
2.52.120: EMERGENCY SERVICES CHIEF; POWERS AND DUTIES:
The emergency services chief shall, under the supervision of the director of
emergency services, develop emergency plans, manage and/or coordinate the
emergency programs of the city that relate to disaster planning, response,
recovery and mitigation, and shall have such other powers and duties as may be
assigned by such director. (Ord. 2639 § 2, 2006: Ord. 2485 § 4, 2002)
2.52.130: DIRECTOR; POWERS DURING LOCAL EMERGENCY AND STATE OF EMERGENCY:
In the event of the proclamation of a "local emergency" as provided in
subsection
2.52.100A of this chapter, the proclamation of a "state of emergency" by the
governor or the director of the state office of emergency services, or the
existence of a "state of war emergency", the director is empowered:
   A.   Promulgate Rules: To make and issue rules and regulations on matters
reasonably related to the protection of life and property as affected by such
emergency; provided, however:
      1.   City Council; Confirm Rules: Such rules and regulations must be
confirmed at the earliest practicable time by the city council;
   B.   Require Emergency Services: To require emergency services of any city
officer or employee, and, in the event of the proclamation of a "state of
emergency" in the county in which the city is located or the existence of a
"state of war emergency", to command the aid of as many citizens of the
community as he deems necessary in the execution of his duties.
      1.   Benefits: Such persons shall be entitled to all privileges,
benefits, and immunities as are provided by state law for registered disaster
service workers;
   C.   Requisition Personnel; Material: To requisition necessary personnel or
material of any city department or agency;
   D.   Execute Powers: To execute all of his ordinary power as city manager,
all of the special powers conferred upon him by this chapter or by resolution
or emergency plan pursuant hereto adopted by the city council, all powers
conferred upon him by any statute, by any agreement approved by the city
council, and by other lawful authority. (Prior code §§ 45401–45406)
2.52.140: ORGANIZATION; PERSONNEL:
All officers and employees of the city, together with those volunteer forces
enrolled to aid them during an emergency, and all groups, organizations, and
persons who may be in agreement or operation of law, including persons
impressed into service under the provisions of subsection
2.52.130C of this chapter, be charged with duties incident to the protection of
life and property in the city during such emergency, shall constitute the
emergency organization of the city. (Prior code § 45501)
2.52.150: ORGANIZATION; EMERGENCY MULTIHAZARD FUNCTIONAL PLAN AND HAZARD
MITIGATION PLAN:
The emergency services chief shall be responsible for the development and
update of the city of Redlands emergency multihazard functional plan and hazard
mitigation plan. The multihazard functional plan shall provide for the
effective mobilization of all of the resources of the city, both public and
private, to meet any condition constituting a local emergency, state of
emergency, or state of war emergency. The hazard mitigation plan shall provide
a well organized public education and awareness effort involving preparedness
and mitigation. These actions include hazard, risk and vulnerability
identification, the identification of mitigation action, and the support of
mitigation efforts. Such plans shall take effect upon adoption by resolution of
the city council. (Ord. 2639 § 3, 2006: Ord. 2485 § 4 [5], 2002)
2.52.155: STANDARDIZED EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT SYSTEM:
In accordance with California Government Code section 8607, the city of
Redlands hereby adopts the standardized emergency management system (SEMS). The
SEMS framework includes use of the incident command system (ICS), multiagency
or interagency coordination, participation in the master mutual aid agreement
and system of operational area concept. (Ord. 2547 § 2, 2003)
2.52.156: NATIONAL INCIDENT MANAGEMENT SYSTEM:
The city of Redlands adopts the national incident management system (NIMS). The
NIMS framework includes use of the incident command system (ICS) and the
standardized emergency management system (SEMS), multiagency or interagency
coordination, participation in the master mutual aid agreement, and system of
operational area concept. The federal homeland security presidential directive
5, entitled "Management Of Domestic Incidents" requires the adoption of NIMS by
all federal departments and agencies. This directive also requires that federal
preparedness assistance funding for states, territories, local jurisdictions,
and tribal entities be dependent on NIMS compliance and adoption. (Ord. 2639 §
4, 2006)
2.52.160: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
It shall be a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not to exceed five hundred
dollars ($500.00), or by imprisonment for not to exceed six (6) months, or
both, for any person, during an emergency, to:
   A.   Obstruct Organization: Wilfully obstruct, hinder, or delay any member
of the emergency organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or
regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, or in the performance of any duty
imposed upon him by virtue of this chapter;
   B.   Violate Rules: Do any act forbidden by any lawful rule or regulation
issued pursuant to this chapter, if such act is of such a nature as to give or
be likely to give assistance to the enemy or to imperil the lives or property
of inhabitants of the city, or to prevent, hinder, or delay the defense or
protection thereof;
   C.   Misuse Identification: Wear, carry, or display, without authority, any
means of identification specified by the emergency agency of the state. (Prior
code §§ 45601–45604)
CHAPTER 2.54
PUBLIC LIBRARY
SECTION:
2.54.010: Established
2.54.020: Trustees
2.54.030: Books; Uses And Purposes Designated
2.54.040: Books; Taking And Damaging Prohibited
2.54.010: ESTABLISHED:
A free public library and reading room for the city is established under and by
virtue of an act of the legislature of the state entitled "an act to establish
free public libraries and reading rooms" approved April 26, 1880. (Prior code §
52100)
2.54.020: TRUSTEES:
There is a library board of trustees as established by ordinance 170 of the
city. The board shall consist of five (5) trustees who shall be appointed by
the mayor with the consent of the city council, and who shall have the powers
and duties set forth in this section. The trustees shall hold office for three
(3) years. Vacancies shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired term in
the same manner as the original appointments are made. In accordance with
California Education Code section 18900 et seq., the board of library trustees
shall manage the public library.
The trustees shall have the powers and perform the duties with regard to the
public library and reading room and the care, management and control thereof,
and of the books, property and funds belonging thereto, prescribed by the
aforesaid act of the legislature and who shall in the exercise of their
functions conform to and be governed by the provisions of the state Education
Code. (Ord. 2303 § 3, 1996: Ord. 2027 § 13, 1988: prior code § 52101)
2.54.030: BOOKS; USES AND PURPOSES DESIGNATED:
The books heretofore donated to the city by the Redlands public library and all
other books, property and funds hereafter donated to the city for library
purposes are and shall be devoted to the uses and purposes of the free public
library and reading room. (Prior code § 52103)
2.54.040: BOOKS; TAKING AND DAMAGING PROHIBITED:
It is a misdemeanor for any person wilfully to injure any of the property
pertaining to the public library and reading room or any books thereof or to
carry any such books from the library room without proper authority. (Prior
code § 52104)
CHAPTER 2.56
PERSONNEL SYSTEM
SECTION:
2.56.010: Adoption
2.56.020: Personnel Director
2.56.030: Competitive Service; Applicability
2.56.040: Adoption Of Rules
2.56.050: Appointments; Generally
2.56.060: Probationary Period
2.56.070: Status Of Present Employees
2.56.080: Applicability Of Rules To Certain Exempt Positions
2.56.090: Appointments And Disciplinary Action; Authority
2.56.100: Suspension
2.56.130: Position Abolition
2.56.140: Improper Political Activity
2.56.150: Political Activities Not Affected
2.56.160: Discrimination
2.56.170: Right Of Contract For Special Service
2.56.180: Appropriation Of Funds
2.56.190: Violation; Penalty
2.56.010: ADOPTION:
In order to establish an equitable and uniform procedure for dealing with
personnel matters; to attract to municipal service the best and most competent
persons available; to assure that appointments and promotions of employees will
be based on merit and fitness as determined by competitive test; and to provide
reasonable security for quality employees, the personnel system set out in this
chapter is adopted. (Ord. 2365 § 1, 1998)
2.56.020: PERSONNEL DIRECTOR:
The city manager shall be ex officio personnel director. With the approval of
the city council, the city manager may delegate any of the powers and duties
authorized under this chapter to any other officer or employee of the city or
may recommend that such powers and duties be performed under contract as
provided in section
2.56.170 of this chapter. The city manager shall:
   A.   Administer all the provisions of this chapter and of the personnel
rules not specifically reserved to the city council;
   B.   Prepare and recommend to the city council revisions and amendments to
the personnel rules. The city attorney shall review the legality of such
revisions and amendments prior to their submission to the city council;
   C.   Prepare a position classification plan, including class specifications
and revisions of the plan;
   D.   Prepare a plan of compensation, and revisions thereof, covering all
classifications in the competitive service. The plan and any revisions thereof
shall become effective upon approval by the city council;
   E.   Recommend to the city council any sound personnel practices consistent
with the intent of this chapter;
   F.   Publish or post notices of examination for positions in the competitive
service, receive applications therefor, conduct and score examinations and
certify to the appointing power a list of all persons eligible for appointment
in the appropriate class in the competitive service. (Ord. 2365 § 1, 1998)
2.56.030: COMPETITIVE SERVICE; APPLICABILITY:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all offices, positions and
employments in the service of the city, except:
   A.   City attorney;
   B.   City manager;
   C.   Assistant city manager;
   D.   Directors of city departments ("department heads");
   E.   Elective officers;
   F.   Members of appointive boards, commissions and committees;
   G.   Temporary, provisional or seasonal employees in any office or
department of the city;
   H.   Part time employees in any office or department of the city;
   I.   Volunteers or per diem personnel;
   J.   Persons engaged under contract to supply expert professional or
technical services for a definite period of time;
   K.   Officers and employees of the San Bernardino County department of
public health and welfare engaged in the enforcement of public health
regulations in the city;
   L.   Emergency employees in any office or department of the city. All such
positions and employments shall be for the duration of the emergency and shall
terminate immediately thereafter. (Ord. 2667 § 1, 2007: Ord. 2365 § 1, 1998)
2.56.040: ADOPTION OF RULES:
Personnel rules pursuant to this chapter shall be adopted, and may be amended
from time to time, by resolution of the city council. The rules shall establish
specific procedures and regulations governing the following phases of the
personnel system:
   A.   Preparation, installation, revision, and maintenance of a position
classification plan covering all positions in the competitive service,
including employment standards and qualifications for each class;
   B.   Preparation, revision, and administration of a plan of compensation
directly correlated with the position classification plan, providing a rate or
range of pay for each class;
   C.   Public announcement of all tests for initial employment;
   D.   Acceptance of applications for beginning employment;
   E.   Preparation and conduct of tests and the establishment and use of
resulting employment lists containing names of persons eligible for
appointment;
   F.   Certification and appointment of persons from employment lists, and the
making of temporary, provisional and emergency appointments;
   G.   Evaluation of employees during the probationary period;
   H.   Transfer, promotion, demotion, and reinstatement of employees in the
competitive service;
   I.   Separation of employees from city service through layoff, suspension
and dismissal;
   J.   Standardization of hours of work, attendance and leave regulations,
working conditions and the development of employee morale, welfare and
training;
   K.   Suitable provisions for orderly and equitable presentations to the city
manager and to the city council by employees relating to general conditions of
employment;
   L.   Content, maintenance, and the use of personnel records and forms. (Ord.
2365 § 1, 1998)
2.56.050: APPOINTMENTS; GENERALLY:
   A.   Appointments to vacant positions in the competitive service shall be
made in accordance with the personnel rules. Appointments and promotions shall
be based on merit and fitness to be ascertained so far as practicable by
competitive examinations. Examinations shall be used and conducted to aid in
the selection of qualified employees, and shall consist of such recognized
selection techniques including consideration of job related educational
requirements, experience, aptitude tests and other written tests, personal
interview, performance tests, evaluation of daily work performance, work
sample, or any combination of these, which will, in the opinion of the
personnel director, test fairly the qualifications of the candidates. Medical
or psychological evaluation may be required as part of any examination, as well
as periodically following appointment.
   B.   In any examination, the personnel director may include, in addition to
competitive tests, a qualifying test or tests, and set minimum standards
therefor.
   C.   Appointments shall be made by the city manager pursuant to the
authority established in chapter 2.04 of this title.
   D.   When appointment is to be made to a vacancy in the competitive service,
the personnel director shall transmit to the city manager a list of names of
persons who have successfully completed the examination process for a position
in the competitive service. (This list is not public information.)
   E.   In the absence of appropriate eligibility lists, a provisional/
temporary appointment of up to six (6) months in duration may be made by the
appointing authority of the person meeting the minimum training and experience
qualifications for the position. An employment list shall be established within
six (6) months for any regular position filled by provisional/temporary
appointment for not more than thirty (30) days, by any one action. When a
position is to be filled by provisional/temporary appointment or a provisional/
temporary appointment is to be extended, the city council shall direct the city
clerk to record such action in the minutes of the meeting of the city council.
   F.   No special credit shall be allowed in meeting any qualifications or in
the giving of any test or the establishment of any employment or promotional
lists for service rendered under a provisional appointment. However, a
provisional/temporary appointee who is subsequently appointed to the position
as a regular employee shall be entitled to credit for time served in the
provisional status towards completion of his/her probationary period.
   G.   During the period of suspension of an employee or pending final action
on proceedings to review suspension, demotion or dismissal of an employee, such
vacancy may be filled by the appointing authority subject to the provisions of
this chapter and the personnel rules. (Ord. 2365 § 1, 1998)
2.56.060: PROBATIONARY PERIOD:
All regular appointments, including demotions and promotional appointments,
shall be subject to a probationary period of not less than six (6) months,
except that the probationary period for safety employees (such as sworn police
and fire personnel) and public safety dispatchers shall be not less than one
year. As to any class of position, the rules may provide for an extension of
the probationary period for not more than an additional six (6) months. During
the probationary period, the employee may be rejected at any time without right
of appeal or hearing. (Ord. 2365 § 1, 1998)
2.56.070: STATUS OF PRESENT EMPLOYEES:
Any person holding a position included in the competitive service who, on the
effective date of the initial ordinance codified in this chapter, shall have
served continuously in such position, or in some other position in the
competitive service, for a period equal to the probationary period prescribed
in the rules of his class, shall assume regular status in the competitive
service in the position held on such effective date without qualifying test,
and shall thereafter be subject in all respects to the provisions of this
chapter and the personnel rules.
Any other persons holding positions in the competitive service shall be
regarded as probationers who are serving out the balance of their probationary
periods as prescribed in the personnel rules before obtaining regular status.
The probationary period shall be computed from the date of appointment or
employment. (Ord. 2365 § 1, 1998)
2.56.080: APPLICABILITY OF RULES TO CERTAIN EXEMPT POSITIONS:
The provisions of the personnel rules relating to attendance and leaves shall
apply to the incumbents of full time positions otherwise exempt from the
personnel rules. (Ord. 2365 § 1, 1998)
2.56.090: APPOINTMENTS AND DISCIPLINARY ACTION; AUTHORITY:
The city manager is vested with the power to appoint, make transfers,
promotions, demotions, reductions in pay, reinstatements, layoffs, and to
suspend or dismiss employees. Department heads are vested with the power to
initiate disciplinary actions such as employee suspensions, demotions,
dismissals and reductions in pay, subject to the procedures established in this
chapter and the personnel rules. (Ord. 2365 § 1, 1998)
2.56.100: SUSPENSION:
Any person holding a position or employment in the competitive service shall be
subject to disciplinary suspension without pay, but such suspension shall not
exceed a total of thirty (30) calendar days in any fiscal year. Except in
emergencies or as authorized by law, suspensions of five (5) days or more,
demotions, reductions in pay or discharge shall not be put into effect until
the employee has received a written predisciplinary notice and an opportunity
to respond as provided in the personnel rules.
If deemed necessary by the department head, the employee may be placed on
administrative leave with pay pending investigation of any allegations which
may lead to discipline. In the event that a suspension of five (5) days or
more, demotion, reduction in pay or discharge is imposed, the employee may
appeal such action in accordance with this chapter and the personnel rules. The
provisions of this section shall not apply to layoffs or to reductions in pay
which are a part of a general plan to reduce salaries and wages. (Ord. 2365 §
1, 1998)
2.56.130: POSITION ABOLITION:
Whenever, in the judgment of the city manager, it becomes necessary in the
interest of economy or because the necessity for the position or employment
involved no longer exists, the city manager shall recommend to the city council
and the city council may abolish any position or employment in the competitive
service and the city manager may lay off, demote or transfer an employee
holding such position or employment without filing written charges and without
the right of appeal. Should layoffs be necessary to meet the needs of the city,
the city manager shall determine the order of layoffs in accordance with the
personnel rules and/or applicable memorandum of understanding. (Ord. 2365 § 1,
1998)
2.56.140: IMPROPER POLITICAL ACTIVITY:
Any person holding an office or employment in the competitive service shall
not:
   A.   Engage in any activity which would be inconsistent, incompatible or
conflict with public employment;
   B.   Solicit political funds or contributions from other officers or
employees of the city;
   C.   Misuse the employees office, authority or influence;
   D.   Participate in political activities of any kind while in city uniform;
or
   E.   Engage in political activities during working hours or on city
premises. (Ord. 2365 § 1, 1998)
2.56.150: POLITICAL ACTIVITIES NOT AFFECTED:
This chapter does not prevent any officer or employee from:
   A.   Becoming or continuing to be a member of a political club or
organization;
   B.   Attending a political meeting;
   C.   Enjoying entire freedom from all interference in casting a vote;
   D.   Seeking or accepting election or appointment to public office;
   E.   Seeking signatures to any initiative or referendum petition directly
affecting his rates of pay, hours of work, retirement, civil service or other
working conditions;
   F.   Distributing badges, pamphlets, dodgers, or handbills or other
participation in any campaign in connection with such petition, if the activity
is not carried on during hours of work, or when the employee is dressed in the
uniform required in any department of the city government;
   G.   Soliciting or receiving political funds and contributions to promote
the passage or defeat of a ballot measure which would affect the rate of pay,
hours of work, retirement or other working conditions of officers or employees
of the city, except that employees shall not conduct such activities during
working hours or on city premises.
The violation of any provision of section
2.56.140 of this chapter and this section is grounds for discharge of any
officer or employee. (Ord. 2365 § 1, 1998)
2.56.160: DISCRIMINATION:
The city shall not unlawfully discriminate in matters affecting recruitment,
hiring, promotion, discipline, compensation, assignments, benefits, training,
layoff, and recall practices and any other matters affecting employment. It is
the policy of the city to assure equal opportunity for all qualified employees
and job applicants without regard to race, creed, color, sex, age, national
origin, religion, disability, veterans' status, sexual orientation, pregnancy,
childbirth or related condition. (Ord. 2365 § 1, 1998)
2.56.170: RIGHT OF CONTRACT FOR SPECIAL SERVICE:
The city manager shall consider and make recommendations to the city council
regarding the extent to which the city should contract for the performance of
technical services in connection with the establishment or operation of the
personnel system. The city council may contract with any qualified person or
agency for the performance of all or any of the following responsibilities and
duties imposed by this chapter:
   A.   The preparation of personnel rules and subsequent revisions and
amendments thereof;
   B.   The preparation of a position classification plan, and subsequent
revisions and amendments thereof;
   C.   The preparation of a plan of compensation, and subsequent revisions and
amendments thereof;
   D.   The preparation, conduct and grading of competitive tests;
   E.   Special and technical services of advisory or informational character
on matters relating to personnel administration. (Ord. 2365 § 1, 1998)
2.56.180: APPROPRIATION OF FUNDS:
The city council may appropriate such funds as are necessary to carry out the
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2365 § 1, 1998)
2.56.190: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Violation of any provisions of this chapter by any person, firm or corporation
shall constitute a misdemeanor violation. (Ord. 2365 § 1, 1998)
CHAPTER 2.58
ELECTIONS
SECTION:
Article I. Generally
2.58.010: General Provisions
Article II. Consolidation Of Elections
2.58.020: Statutory Authority
2.58.030: Intent
2.58.040: Applicability
2.58.050: Day Of Election Designated
2.58.060: Resolution Of Consolidation
2.58.070: Filing Of Nomination Documents
ARTICLE I. GENERALLY
2.58.010: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
All elections within the city shall be held and conducted in accordance with
the election laws of the state pertaining to municipalities as amended from
time to time. (Prior code § 10202)
ARTICLE II. CONSOLIDATION OF ELECTIONS
2.58.020: STATUTORY AUTHORITY:
This article is adopted pursuant to the authority granted to the city in
California Government Code section 36503.5 to call general municipal elections
for the same day as school district elections as set by California Elections
Code section 2602. (Ord. 1809 § 1, 1983)
2.58.030: INTENT:
The intent of this article is to reduce the costs of conducting general
municipal elections in the city by permitting the consolidation of the general
municipal election with another election already to be held on the same date
and to be conducted by the San Bernardino County registrar of voters. In
addition, it is anticipated that there will be an increase in voter
participation in the general municipal election because of this combination of
elections. It is also anticipated that voter convenience will be served, and
that some relief can be provided to the city clerk's office from potentially
burdensome administrative work. (Ord. 1809 § 2, 1983)
2.58.040: APPLICABILITY:
This article will govern the calling of general municipal elections in the city
unless and until repealed pursuant to California Government Code section
36503.5. (Ord. 1809 § 3, 1983)
2.58.050: DAY OF ELECTION DESIGNATED:
The general municipal election shall be held in the city on the same day as the
regular election to select governing board members of the Redlands Unified
School District, which is presently established by the district as the first
Tuesday after the first Monday in November of each even numbered year. (Ord.
2707 § 1, 2008)
2.58.060: RESOLUTION OF CONSOLIDATION:
At the same time a resolution calling a general municipal election hereunder is
adopted, the San Bernardino County board of supervisors may be requested, by
resolution, to order that the general municipal election for the city be
consolidated with the regular election to select governing board members in the
school district. Such resolution shall set forth the exact form of any
question, proposition, or office to be voted upon at such election as the same
is to appear on the ballot. (Ord. 1809 § 5, 1983)
2.58.070: FILING OF NOMINATION DOCUMENTS:
The period for the filing of nomination documents by candidates in each general
municipal election for the city shall commence on the eighty ninth day prior to
the election. The nomination documents shall be filed not later than five
o'clock (5:00) P.M. on the sixty eighth day prior to the general election in
the office of the city clerk of the city during regular office hours. (Ord.
1809 § 6, 1983)
CHAPTER 2.60
PUBLIC DISCLOSURE OF CLOSED SESSION DECISIONS
SECTION:
2.60.010: Disclosure, Generally
2.60.020: Access To Documents
2.60.030: Real Property Transactions And Settlement Of Litigation
2.60.010: DISCLOSURE, GENERALLY:
The disclosure of any action taken by the city council in closed session, and
the vote or abstention of each council member thereon, shall be publicly
reported in accordance with the provisions of the Ralph M. Brown act,
Government Code section 54950 et seq., as amended from time to time. (Ord.
2731, 2011)
2.60.020: ACCESS TO DOCUMENTS:
Any written materials finally approved by the city council as part of a closed
session action shall be made available to any person who has made a written
request for the same within twenty four (24) hours of the posting of the agenda
relating to such closed session action, or who has made a standing request for
all such documentation as part of a request for notice of meetings pursuant to
Government Code 54954.1 or 54956, if the requester is present at the time the
closed session ends. Further, such written materials shall be made available to
the public generally on the next city business day following the meeting in
which the materials were approved in accordance within the provisions of the
Ralph M. Brown act, Government Code section 54950 et seq., as amended from time
to time. (Ord. 2731, 2011)
2.60.030: REAL PROPERTY TRANSACTIONS AND SETTLEMENT OF LITIGATION:
Notwithstanding the provisions of any other section of this chapter, if the
city council takes action in closed session relating to a real property
transaction or the settlement of litigation, and final approval of such real
property transaction rests with some other party, or in the case of litigation,
with another party or with the court, then as soon as the matter becomes final
the city council shall publicly disclose the same, and the vote or abstention
of each council member thereon, at the city council's next regularly scheduled
meeting. (Ord. 2731, 2011)
CHAPTER 2.62
HISTORIC AND SCENIC PRESERVATION
SECTION:
Article I. General Provisions
2.62.010: Short Title
2.62.020: Purpose And Intent
2.62.030: Definitions
2.62.040: Commission; Authorization
2.62.050: Members; Generally
2.62.060: Members; Number
2.62.070: Members; Appointment Of Citizens At Large
2.62.080: Members; Library Archivist
2.62.090: Members; Term
2.62.100: Commission Procedures; Generally
2.62.110: Commission Procedures; Election Of Officers
2.62.120: Commission Procedures; Internal Rules And Regulations
2.62.130: Commission Procedures; Records
2.62.140: Commission; Compensation
2.62.150: Commission; Powers And Duties
Article II. Nomination And Designation
2.62.160: Establishment Of List Of Nominated Resources
2.62.170: Criteria
2.62.180: Procedure For Designation
2.62.190: Design Guidelines
Article III. Application For Certificate Of Appropriateness And Certificate Of
Hardship
2.62.200: Certificate Of Appropriateness; Alterations, New Construction,
Subdivisions, Lot Splits, Lot Line Adjustments And Signs
2.62.210: Certificate Of Appropriateness; Moving
2.62.220: Certificate Of Hardship
Article IV. Administration
2.62.240: Applicability Of State Historic Building Code
2.62.250: Preservation Easements
2.62.260: Building Permit Waiver
2.62.265: Moving Permit Waiver
2.62.270: Maintenance And Repair
2.62.280: City Council Right Of Review
2.62.290: Violation; Penalty
ARTICLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS
2.62.010: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the HISTORIC AND SCENIC PRESERVATION ORDINANCE
OF THE CITY. (Ord. 1954 § 1, 1986)
2.62.020: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The city finds, determines and declares:
   A.   The state legislature of California has recognized the value of
identifying, protecting, and preserving places, buildings, structures and other
objects of historical, aesthetic, and cultural importance and has empowered
cities to adopt regulations and incentives for the protection, enhancement,
perpetuation and use of such places, buildings, structures and other objects;
   B.   The city possesses many distinctive places, structures, and
neighborhoods; beautiful trees, gardens and streetscapes; public parks, scenic
areas and urban design features (all herein referred to as "resources") that
enhance its value as an attractive and delightful community in which to live
and work;
   C.   Certain of these resources are of cultural, aesthetic or historical
significance and value because of age, architectural style, aesthetic appeal,
or association with local history;
   D.   By preserving these resources Redlands shall contribute to the
livability and beauty of the community, stimulate economic revitalization,
foster architectural creativity, increase neighborhood stability and
conservation; reinforce the distinctive character of the community, add to the
community's understanding of its history and connection with the life and
values of the past; and ensure that Redlands' cultural, historical and
architectural heritage will be imparted to future generations;
   E.   Shifts in population and in the economy, changes in the way people live
and changes in land use threaten to destroy these irreplaceable and desirable
resources. Construction and alterations of inferior quality and appearance are
also a threat;
   F.   The adoption of reasonable and fair regulations is necessary as a means
of recognition, documentation, preservation and maintenance of resources of
cultural, aesthetic or historical significance. This chapter is intended to
carry out the goals and policies of the historic and scenic preservation
element of the Redlands general plan. (Ord. 1954 § 2, 1986)
2.62.030: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
   ADAPTIVE REUSE: Converting a building to a use other than that for which it
was designed.
   ALTERATION: Any permanent exterior change in a historic resource.
   APPLICANT: Any person who applies for designation of a nominated resource or
for a certificate of appropriateness or certificate of hardship.
   ARCHEOLOGY: The study of ancient peoples and customs as shown by monuments,
sites, implements, inscriptions and relics.
   CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS: The permit granted after review by the
historic and scenic preservation commission of applications to alter, demolish,
move, or subdivide a historic resource or for new construction on the site of a
historic resource.
   CERTIFICATE OF HARDSHIP: A permit to alter, move or subdivide granted by the
historic and scenic preservation commission because of extreme privation or
adversity and in accordance with the procedure and findings in this chapter.
   COMMISSION: Refers to the historic and scenic preservation commission.
   CONTRIBUTOR: A historic resource in a designated or pending historic
district, as defined in this chapter, which was built within the period of
significance and/or retains enough historic integrity to contribute to the
overall character and significance of other buildings and structures within the
historic district which are unified aesthetically by plan or physical
development.
   DAY: Calendar day, including all weekend days and holidays.
   DEMOLITION: The act or process of wrecking or destroying, specifically
destruction of a historic resource or a major portion of a historic resource,
including natural features, trees, agricultural areas as well as exterior
architectural features.
   DESIGN GUIDELINES: Principles contained in a document which illustrate
appropriate and inappropriate methods of rehabilitation and construction. The
purpose of using design guidelines is to help decision making with regard to
retaining the scale, pattern and historical character of a structure or
district. Design guidelines are contained in the book entitled, "City Of
Redlands Historic And Scenic Preservation Design Manual".
   DESIGNATION: The act of selecting in accordance with the criteria in this
chapter a historic resource for official city status as significant by the
historic and scenic preservation commission and the city council.
   DISTRICT: A general term referring to historic and/or scenic and urban
conservation districts.
   HISTORIC AND/OR SCENIC DISTRICT: A significant neighborhood, agricultural or
passive recreational open space, an enclave or collection of historical
buildings, the majority of which are fifty (50) years old or older and are
contributors to the district, that may have been part of one settlement,
architectural period, or era of development. A historic and scenic district has
both historic and scenic value.
   HISTORIC PROPERTY: A separate structure or site fifty (50) years old or
older that has significant historic, architectural, or cultural value but is
not a landmark.
   HISTORIC RESOURCE: A general term that refers to areas, districts, streets,
places, buildings, structures, outdoor works of art, natural or agricultural,
cultural, archeological, architectural, community or aesthetic value and are
fifty (50) years old or older.
   INTRUSION: A building or structure that does not fit into and detracts from
a historic area because of inappropriate scale, materials, landscaping or other
such characteristics.
   LANDMARK: A building, site, or area with exceptional importance or character
or exceptional historical or aesthetic interest or value as a part of the
development, heritage, or cultural characteristics of the city, state, or
nation.
   NOMINATED RESOURCES: Those structures, buildings, places, urban design
features and other objects that have been identified in a preliminary survey
prepared by the commission.
   NON-CONTRIBUTOR: A resource in a designated or pending historic district
that was either not built within the historic district's period of significance
or does not retain enough historic integrity to contribute to the overall
character and significance of the historic district.
   PRELIMINARY SURVEY: An informal determination by the commission that a
resource is of potential significance as a historic resource. Such resources
are to be kept on a list by the historic and scenic preservation commission.
   PRESERVATION OFFICER: The person designated by the administrator of the
community development department to serve as staff to the historic and scenic
preservation commission and to coordinate Redlands' historic preservation
programs.
   REGISTER OF HISTORIC AND SCENIC RESOURCES: The official city list of all
designated historic resources.
   SURVEY: The accepted method of systematically studying historic resources.
It includes a physical description and a photograph of each historic resource,
legal information from title or assessment records, statements of significance
according to the criteria in this chapter and a statement of any threat to the
integrity or continued existence of the resource. The information for each
resource is recorded on a survey sheet.
   URBAN CONSERVATION DISTRICT: A residential or commercial neighborhood, a
majority of whose buildings are fifty (50) years old or older and are
contributors to the district, which the city wishes to maintain and revitalize
although it contains a significant proportion of non- contributor properties.
(Ord. 2899 §2, 2019: Ord. 1954 §3, 1986)
2.62.040: COMMISSION; AUTHORIZATION:
A historic and scenic preservation commission is authorized to make
recommendations, decisions, and determinations concerning the designation,
preservation, protection, enhancement and perpetuation of these historical,
scenic and cultural resources which contribute to the culture and aesthetic
values of the city. (Ord. 1954 § 4, 1986)
2.62.050: MEMBERS; GENERALLY:
The regulations set out in sections
2.62.060 through
2.62.090 of this article shall apply to the membership and organization of the
historic and scenic preservation commission. (Ord. 1954 § 5, 1986)
2.62.060: MEMBERS; NUMBER:
The historic and scenic preservation commission shall consist of seven (7)
members. (Ord. 2142 § 2, 1990: Ord. 1954 § 5(a), 1986)
2.62.070: MEMBERS; APPOINTMENT OF CITIZENS AT LARGE:
Six (6) members of the commission shall be appointed by the mayor with the
approval of the city council from city residents at large who have demonstrated
that they have knowledge of and long standing interest in the preservation of
historic resources. Current members shall continue to serve their terms. (Ord.
2142 § 3, 1990: Ord. 1954 § 5(b), 1986)
2.62.080: MEMBERS; LIBRARY ARCHIVIST:
One member of the commission shall be the archivist curator of the Redlands
A.K. Smiley public library. (Ord. 2491 § 18, 2002: Ord. 1954 § 5(c), 1986)
2.62.090: MEMBERS; TERM:
Members of the commission appointed from the Redlands citizens at large shall
serve for terms of four (4) years. (Ord. 1954 § 5(d), 1986)
2.62.100: COMMISSION PROCEDURES; GENERALLY:
The regulations set out in sections
2.62.110 through
2.62.150 of this article shall govern the procedural matters of the historic
and scenic preservation commission. (Ord. 1954 § 6, 1986)
2.62.110: COMMISSION PROCEDURES; ELECTION OF OFFICERS:
The commission shall, at its first regular meeting in January, elect a
chairperson and such other officers as the commission may deem advisable. (Ord.
1954 § 6(a), 1986)
2.62.120: COMMISSION PROCEDURES; INTERNAL RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The historic and scenic preservation commission shall adopt such rules and
regulations for its own organization as are necessary to carry out the purpose
and intent of sections
2.62.100 through
 2.62.150 of this article, and shall designate the time and place for the
meetings of the commission. (Ord. 1954 § 6(b), 1986)
2.62.130: COMMISSION PROCEDURES; RECORDS:
The historic and scenic preservation commission shall keep records of all its
actions and proceedings and shall have regular meeting dates. Meetings shall be
tape recorded; tapes shall be kept for at least twelve (12) weeks. (Ord. 1954 §
6(c), 1986)
2.62.140: COMMISSION; COMPENSATION:
The members of the historic and scenic preservation commission of the city
shall serve without monetary compensation. (Ord. 1954 § 6(d), 1986)
2.62.150: COMMISSION; POWERS AND DUTIES:
The powers and duties of the historic and scenic preservation commission are as
follows:
   A.   Conduct or cause to be conducted a survey of structures, buildings,
places, scenic areas, urban design features, and objects (resources) for the
purpose of identifying those of cultural, aesthetic or historical significance;
   B.   Recommend, in accordance with the criteria set forth in sections
2.62.160 through
2.62.190 of this chapter, the designation of landmarks, historic properties,
historic and scenic districts, and urban conservation districts to the city
council;
   C.   Compile and maintain a list of nominated resources and a current local
register of all properties designated as historic resources;
   D.   Approve, approve conditionally, or deny applications for certificates
of appropriateness and certificates of hardship for designated or nominated
resources pursuant to sections
2.62.200 through 2.62.230 of this chapter;
   E.   Review and send comments to the appropriate commission about proposed
general plan and zoning text and map changes, municipal improvements, and
housing and redevelopment plans that have bearing on the protection,
maintenance and enhancement of designated or nominated resources;
   F.   Endeavor to promote public interest in and understanding of historic,
cultural and aesthetic resources and their preservation;
   G.   Consult with and advise public officials and agencies; civic,
educational, professional and other agencies; and with citizens generally in
relation to the preservation of these resources and to serve as liaison between
the city and historical organizations;
   H.   Undertake educational programs and activities in order to teach
community members methods to maintain and rehabilitate Redlands' historic
resources;
   I.   Advise the city council regarding easements, other less than fee
interest in property, and development agreements for the purposes of
preservation of resources;
   J.   Seek out information and advise the city council regarding the
availability and utilization of gifts or special funds from federal, state and
private sources;
   K.   Make recommendations to the city council in order to provide technical
expertise necessary to carry on the functions of the commission;
   L.   From time to time to issue commendations to owners of historic
resources who have rehabilitated their property in an exemplary manner;
   M.   Ensure that historic preservation is coordinated with other city
activities;
   N.   Acquire facade easements and monitor them;
   O.   Submit a budget to the city council and make recommendations regarding
the hiring of staff. (Ord. 1954 § 7, 1986)
ARTICLE II. NOMINATION AND DESIGNATION
2.62.160: ESTABLISHMENT OF LIST OF NOMINATED RESOURCES:
   A.   The commission shall undertake to establish and maintain a list of
nominated resources that have been identified in a preliminary survey. An
individual who presents documentation equal to that collected in the
preliminary survey may request that resource be placed on the list. This list
may include single structures or sites, portions of structures, urban design
features, manmade or natural landscape elements, or works of art that are fifty
(50) years old or older. Districts may not be placed on the list.
   B.   A nominated resource may be designated a landmark or historic property
and a district may be designated a historic and/or scenic or urban conservation
district by the city council after public hearings and a recommendation by the
historic and scenic preservation commission.
   C.   In determining the category for a resource, the commission shall refer
to the definitions set out in section
2.62.030 of this chapter. (Ord. 1954 § 8, 1986)
2.62.170: CRITERIA:
The criteria, any one of which may be used to determine such designation, are
as follows:
   A.   It has significant character, interest, or value as part of the
development, heritage or cultural characteristics of the city of Redlands,
state of California, or the United States;
   B.   It is the site of a significant historic event;
   C.   It is strongly identified with a person or persons who significantly
contributed to the culture, history or development of the city;
   D.   It is one of the few remaining examples in the city possessing
distinguishing characteristics of an architectural type or specimen;
   E.   It is a notable work of an architect or master builder whose individual
work has significantly influenced the development of the city;
   F.   It embodies elements of architectural design, detail, materials, or
craftsmanship that represents a significant architectural innovation;
   G.   It has a unique location or singular physical characteristics
representing an established and familiar visual feature of a neighborhood,
community, or the city;
   H.   It has unique design or detailing;
   I.   It is a particularly good example of a period or style;
   J.   It contributes to the historical or scenic heritage or historical or
scenic properties of the city (to include, but not be limited to, landscaping,
light standards, trees, curbings, and signs);
   K.   It is located within a historic and scenic or urban conservation
district, being a geographically definable area possessing a concentration of
historic or scenic properties which contribute to each other and are unified
aesthetically by plan or physical development. (Ord. 1954 § 8(a), 1986)
2.62.180: PROCEDURE FOR DESIGNATION:
   A.   Designation of nominated resources and designation of districts shall
take place in accordance with the procedures in this section:
      1.   No nominated resource shall be altered, moved, demolished,
subdivided or otherwise permanently changed until eligibility for designation
has been determined or the designation process has been initiated in accordance
with this section and a certificate of appropriateness, if applicable, has been
secured.
      2.   Any person or group may request the designation of a nominated
resource or ten percent (10%) of the property owners in a potential district
may request the designation of a historic and/or scenic or urban conservation
district by submitting an application for such designation to the commission on
forms prescribed by the commission. The commission or city council may also
initiate such proceedings on their own motion.
   B.   The commission shall use the survey process to prepare a written report
regarding the proposed designation including a description of the proposed
designated resource, reasons for its significance, criteria used to determine
eligibility and other appropriate data.
   C.   The commission shall schedule a public hearing as soon as feasible but
not less than twenty one (21) days after the filing of the application. Notice
shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation not less than ten (10)
days before the date set for the commission hearing. The notice shall be filed
with the city clerk and mailed to the applicant and owner.
   D.   In the case of a proposed landmark or historic property, notice of the
date, place, time and purpose of the hearing shall be given by first class mail
to the applicants, owners, and occupants of the improvement at least ten (10)
days prior to the date of the public hearing, using the name and address of
such owners as shown on the latest equalized assessment rolls, and shall be
advertised once in a daily newspaper of general circulation.
   E.   In the case of a proposed historic and/or scenic or urban conservation
district, notice of the date, place, time and purpose of the hearing shall be
given by first class mail to the applicant and owners of all properties within
the proposed district at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the public
hearing, using the name and address of such owners as shown on the latest
equalized assessment rolls, and shall be advertised five (5) consecutive days
in a daily newspaper of general circulation. Notices shall be posted every
three hundred feet (300') within the proposed district. An area is not eligible
for designation if more than forty nine percent (49%) of the property owners as
shown on the last equalized assessment rolls within the potential district
object in writing to the proposed designation. Such objection shall be dated
and signed by the objectors and filed with the commission.
   F.   At the conclusion of the public hearing for the designation of a
proposed landmark, historic property, historic and/or scenic district, or urban
conservation district, the commission shall recommend to the city council in
writing approval in whole or in part, or disapproval in whole or in part of the
proposed designation stating the findings of fact and the reasons for its
recommendation based on the report and information brought out at the public
hearing.
   G.   Following receipt of such report, the city council shall within forty
five (45) days consider at a noticed public hearing, the designation by
resolution of each property recommended for designation by the commission.
   H.   Following such designation by the city council, the city clerk shall
within thirty (30) days cause to be recorded in the office of the county
recorder notice that such property has been designated and placed on the city's
register of historic and scenic resources. Following the recordation of such
notice, such property shall be subject to all the provisions of this chapter.
If the city council decides not to designate a property, it may review the
proposed designation again after one year, sooner if there are substantial
changes in the application.
   I.   The historic and scenic preservation commission may effect the
amendment or rescission of any designation in the same manner and procedure as
was followed in the original designation. (Ord. 1954 § 8(b), 1986)
2.62.190: DESIGN GUIDELINES:
Following designation, the provisions of Redlands' design guidelines shall
apply to landmarks, historic properties, historic and/or scenic districts and
urban conservation districts. Thereafter, any alteration, improvement,
subdivision, lot split, demolition or moving of any historic resource or sign
associated with a historic resource shall be subject to the review of the city
in accordance with article III of this chapter. The purpose of this review is
to retain buildings and their features as well as features of the site, and
streetscape and landscape features which are important in defining the historic
character of the property or district.
The design guidelines contain recommendations for making exterior changes to
historic resources and are intended to be interpreted most strictly for
landmarks and more broadly for urban conservation districts. (Ord. 1954 § 8(c),
1986)
ARTICLE III. APPLICATION FOR CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS AND CERTIFICATE OF
HARDSHIP
2.62.200: CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS; ALTERATIONS, NEW CONSTRUCTION,
SUBDIVISIONS, LOT SPLITS, LOT LINE ADJUSTMENTS AND SIGNS:
   A.   A certificate of appropriateness issued by the commission or the
preservation officer is required for any exterior alteration to any designated
historic resource, for new construction on the site of a designated historic
resource, and for a lot split, lot line adjustment or subdivision (whether
tentative or parcel map) relating to property which is, or has thereon, a
designated historic resource. A certificate of appropriateness shall be
required to erect, alter or relocate any sign which is in a designated district
or associated with property which is, or has thereon, a designated historic
resource. New construction in a historic and/or scenic district shall also
require a certificate of appropriateness. The community development department
shall direct applicants for building permits and sign permits for designated
and nominated resources to apply for a certificate of appropriateness from the
commission. A nominated historic resource need not be designated before a
certificate of appropriateness can be granted. No building, alteration, lot
split, lot line adjustment, subdivision (whether tentative or parcel map),
demolition or removal shall occur, nor shall any permits be issued therefor,
for any exterior improvement, sign, building, structure or property within the
proposed district, or relative to a proposed historic resource, while the
public hearing for designation or any appeal related thereto is pending, except
after a certificate of appropriateness has been secured. In the event any
contributing or non-contributing building in a designated or pending historic
district is completely demolished or partially demolished without approval of a
demolition permit pursuant to Chapter 15.44 of this Code, all provisions of
Section 15.44.120 of this Code may apply. In the case of a property in a
pending historic district for which a historic resource survey has not been
submitted by a consultant retained by the City and meeting the Secretary of the
Interior's Professional Qualification Standards, the Director of Development
Services shall, as required to establish the applicability of the various
enforcement provisions of Section 15.44.120, determine whether the property is
a contributor or a non-contributor to the pending historic district and, for a
property determined to be a contributor, identify its character defining
features. These determinations are rebuttable presumptions and shall be based
on the information included in the historic district application under
consideration by the City and any additional information or materials as may be
necessary for a complete review.
   B.   Applicants are encouraged first to consult with staff about using the
design guidelines before submitting a formal application. Any application for a
certificate of appropriateness shall be made on a form prescribed by the
preservation officer and shall be accompanied by a fee set by resolution of the
city council. The application shall include the information required by the
preservation officer, including, but not limited to, elevation drawings of the
proposed alterations, samples of proposed colors and materials, plan view for
new construction, and color photographs of all sides of any existing structures
on the site.
   C.   The preservation officer shall use a preservation checklist to
determine if the proposal is minor or major, and shall use the design
guidelines to determine if the proposal is compatible with the existing
resource and surrounding resources. All requests for new construction,
subdivision, lot splits, demolitions, or moving of a historic resource shall be
considered major except in urban conservation districts. Applications for a
certificate of appropriateness for major alterations shall be reviewed by the
commission.
   D.   Certificates of appropriateness for minor improvements where proposed
work does not adversely affect the exterior architectural features of the
historic resource nor adversely affect the character or historical,
architectural, or aesthetic interest or value of the resource and its site, may
be approved by the preservation officer. Alterations in urban conservation
districts may be approved by the preservation officer except that major
alterations to designated landmarks and historic properties within an urban
conservation district shall be reviewed by the commission.
The preservation officer shall inform the commission in writing of decisions
regarding minor alterations. All such decisions go into effect within ten (10)
days following presentation to the commission unless appealed or called up for
review by the commission or city council.
   E.   The preservation officer will determine whether the application
involves a land use decision. If so, the application will be forwarded to the
planning commission for recommendation prior to commission consideration.
   F.   The commission shall hold a public hearing on all applications for
certificates of appropriateness referred to it after notice is given in the
same manner as subsection
2.62.180D of this chapter.
   G.   Using the Redlands' design guidelines, the survey, the designation
report, and the preservation officer's report, the commission shall review any
major alterations, appeals of staff determinations, and subdivisions, lot
splits and new construction within historic and scenic districts and make a
determination with due speed to approve, approve conditionally, or deny the
certificate of appropriateness. Approval requires finding that the action
proposed is consistent with this chapter and will not be detrimental to a
historic resource, or that the action is necessary to correct an unsafe or
dangerous condition pursuant to subsection
2.62.270A of this chapter. In case of hardship, the applicant may apply for a
certificate of hardship pursuant to section
 2.62.220 of this article.
A report of the action taken or determination made shall be forwarded to the
city council and a copy of the decision sent to the applicant by mail and, if
appropriate, to the city departments responsible for issuing necessary permits.
The commission's decision shall be in writing and shall state the findings of
fact and reasons relied upon in reaching its decision.
   H.   The applicant or others may appeal the preservation officer's decision
to the commission, or a commissioner or city council member may call it up for
review within ten (10) days of the commission's receipt of the decision.
The applicant or others may appeal the commission's decision to the city
council within ten (10) days. Appeals shall be made on a form prescribed by the
commission and filed with the city clerk.
   I.   The building inspector shall issue the permit applied for provided that
all requirements of city and state codes, including the historical building
code, are met. If the commission fails to consider an application for a
certificate of appropriateness within sixty (60) days of the date of submission
of the application, the building inspector shall issue the building permit. If
an appeal to the city council is filed within ten (10) days from the date of a
commission decision on an application, no permit shall be issued until the
outcome of the appeal is determined by the city council.
   J.   After the permit has been issued, the administrator of the community
development department or his/her designee shall, from time to time, inspect
the work approved by the commission in order to assure compliance. If the work
is not being performed in accordance with the certificate of appropriateness, a
stop work order shall be issued and all work shall cease.
   K.   A certificate of appropriateness shall become void unless construction
is commenced within eighteen (18) months of the date of issuance. Certificates
of appropriateness may be renewed for a thirty six (36) month period by
applying to the preservation officer. If the project is not completed within
thirty six (36) months after the expiration of the last building permit, a new
certificate of appropriateness shall be required to complete work.
   L.   Any change in the scope of the work which is determined to be a major
alteration which occurs subsequent to the issuance of a certificate of
appropriateness shall require issuance of a new certificate of appropriateness.
Certificates of appropriateness for minor alterations shall be issued by the
preservation officer upon the request of the applicant. (Ord. 2899 §3, 2019:
Ord. 2605 §1, 2005: Ord. 1954 §9(a), 1986)
2.62.210: CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS; MOVING:
A certificate of appropriateness for moving of a designated structure shall be
granted if the applicant produces evidence to the satisfaction of the
commission that the following findings can be made:
   A.   The moving will not have a significant effect on the applicable goals
and objectives of the historic and scenic preservation element of Redlands
general plan and on the implementation of this chapter.
   B.   The structure in its original setting is of such interest or quality
that it would reasonably meet federal or state criteria for designation as a
historic landmark and thus should be retained in that setting. (Ord. 1954 § 9
(b), 1986)
2.62.220: CERTIFICATE OF HARDSHIP:
   A.   A certificate of hardship permitting demolition, moving, subdivision, a
lot split, new construction or alteration which has been denied a certificate
of appropriateness may be granted under the conditions described herein.
Applications shall be made in a form prepared by the preservation officer and
the same procedure for public notice, public hearing and appeal as for a
certificate of appropriateness shall apply.
   B.   A certificate of hardship shall be granted only if the owner(s) of the
designated property in question can produce evidence to show that:
      1.   Reasonable use or return on the property is not possible under the
conditions of the certificate of appropriateness; and
      2.   Alternative plans which would be in keeping with the interest of
this chapter are not feasible.
   C.   The commission may delay the decision on the application for a period
not to exceed ninety (90) days to investigate plans to allow for a reasonable
use of or return from the property or other measures to preserve the property,
including selling the property to an individual or group that would preserve
it.
   D.   The commission shall review the evidence and make a written finding,
stating the facts and reasons behind the decision. It shall notify the
applicant by mail of the acceptance or denial of the certificate of hardship.
(Ord. 2467 § 1, 2002: Ord. 1954 § 9(d), 1986)
ARTICLE IV. ADMINISTRATION
2.62.240: APPLICABILITY OF STATE HISTORIC BUILDING CODE:
The state historic building code provides alternative building regulations for
the rehabilitation, preservation, restoration or relocation of structures
designated as historic resource buildings. The historic building code, part 8
of the uniform building code, shall be used for any historic resource through
the city's building permit procedure. (Ord. 1954 § 10, 1986)
2.62.250: PRESERVATION EASEMENTS:
Preservation easements on the facades of buildings designated as a historic
resource may be acquired by the city or nonprofit group through purchase,
donation or condemnation pursuant to California Civil Code 815. (Ord. 1954 §
11, 1986)
2.62.260: BUILDING PERMIT WAIVER:
The city shall waive building permit fees for a historic resource building if
construction costs for structural changes are predicted to be less than ten
thousand dollars ($10,000.00), and a prorated reduction of fees for projects
over ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). (Ord. 2053, 1988: Ord. 1954 § 12, 1986)
2.62.265: MOVING PERMIT WAIVER:
The city shall waive moving permit fees for a designated historic resource
building if the new location is in the city of Redlands and if the new use
approximates the prior use. If the new use is different from the prior use, the
fees shall be reduced on a pro rata basis. All capital improvement impact and
processing fees shall be waived. All physical infrastructure requirements for
the new site shall still be applied. (Ord. 2053, 1988)
2.62.270: MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR:
   A.   This chapter shall not be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance
or repair of exterior architectural features, walls, landscapes, etc., in or on
any designated property that does not involve a change in design, materials or
external appearance thereof, nor does this chapter prevent the construction,
reconstruction, alteration, restoration, demolition or removal of any such
feature when the planning and community development department certifies to the
council that such action is required for the public safety due to unsafe or
dangerous conditions which cannot be rectified through the use of the
California historical building code.
   B.   Every owner of a designated historic resource shall maintain and keep
such resource in a manner that ensures the continued availability of such
premises for lawful and reasonable uses, its continued eligibility for listing
on the City's Register of Historic Resources, does not constitute "demolition
by neglect" and prevents deterioration, dilapidation and decay of any portion
of such resource. Specifically, it shall be the responsibility of the owner of
a designated resource to maintain in good repair the building, walls, and
landscaping in order to prevent deterioration of exterior architectural and
scenic features. In order to prevent demolition by neglect the City may repair
a historic resource and treat the cost of repairs as a lien against the
property. (Ord. 2899 §4, 2019: Ord. 1954 §13, 1986)
2.62.280: CITY COUNCIL RIGHT OF REVIEW:
Any member of the city council may initiate proceedings for review of any
decision by the historic and scenic preservation commission granting or denying
an application pursuant to the procedures outlined in subsection
2.62.200H of this chapter. (Ord. 1954 § 14, 1986)
2.62.290: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Every person violating any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of
an infraction or misdemeanor in accordance with section
18.208.050 of this code, as amended. (Ord. 1954 § 16, 1986)
CHAPTER 2.64
CITRUS PRESERVATION COMMISSION
SECTION:
2.64.010: Existence
2.64.020: Membership
2.64.030: Members; Forfeiture Of Office By Absence
2.64.040: Organization
2.64.050: Powers And Duties
2.64.010: EXISTENCE:
There is a citrus preservation commission established which shall make
recommendations and advise the city council regarding the acquisition,
improvement, preservation and retention of citrus properties within the city.
(Ord. 2775, 2012)
2.64.020: MEMBERSHIP:
The citrus preservation commission shall consist of seven (7) members appointed
by the mayor with the approval of the city council. Four (4) members shall each
serve a four (4) year term, and three (3) members shall each serve a two (2)
year term; and each member thereafter shall serve for a staggered four (4) year
term until his or her successor is appointed. Vacancies on the commission shall
be filled by appointment by the mayor with the approval of the city council of
the unexpired portion of the term. The members of the commission shall serve
without compensation, and shall be neither a member of any other standing
commission, board or committee of the city nor an employee thereof. The city
council may remove any member of the commission at any time, without cause, by
a majority vote of the members of the city council. Four (4) members of the
commission shall constitute a quorum. (Ord. 2775, 2012)
2.64.030: MEMBERS; FORFEITURE OF OFFICE BY ABSENCE:
Any commissioner who is absent from any three (3) consecutive regular meetings
of the commission, unless excused from such attendance by consent of the
commission expressed by action of record in its minutes, shall automatically
forfeit his or her office as a member of the commission. (Ord. 2775, 2012)
2.64.040: ORGANIZATION:
The commissioners shall, upon their appointment, organize and elect a chairman
for the term of one year, and such other officers as the commissioners may deem
advisable, and shall make such rules and regulations, and establish such
subcommittees as are reasonable or necessary to fulfill the obligations and
duties of the commission.
The commission shall meet at least monthly. There shall be a member of city
staff, appointed by the city manager, who shall serve as an ex officio member
of the commission, attend all meetings of the commission and shall act as a
staff liaison for the city manager and the city council. (Ord. 2775, 2012)
2.64.050: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The citrus preservation commission shall recommend to the city manager and the
city council policies for the acquisition, improvement, preservation and
retention of citrus properties within the city. The commission shall have
regular meeting dates in compliance with the provisions of the Ralph M. Brown
act and shall keep records of all of its acts and proceedings. In addition to
the foregoing, the commission shall have the following specific powers and
duties:
   A.   The commission shall supply farming expertise and management to the
commercial farming companies retained by the city to farm the city's citrus
groves. The commission shall periodically update the city council on the
performance of the farming companies and shall make recommendation to the city
council regarding the performance of such companies.
   B.   The commission shall have the authority and responsibility to advise
city staff on the oversight and coordination of the marketing of crops produced
from the city's citrus groves, for the benefit of the city; provided, however,
that the commission shall have no authority to expend any funds, incur any
expenses or enter into any contractual obligations on behalf of the city.
   C.   The commission shall have the authority and responsibility to advise
city staff regarding the day to day operations associated with the management
of the city's groves; provided, however, that the commission shall have no
authority to expend any funds, incur any expenses or enter into any contractual
obligations on behalf of the city.
   D.   City staff shall supply the commission with monthly invoices, packing
house statements, financial reports and other data reasonably necessary for the
commission to carry out its responsibilities. It is the goal of the city to
sustain its citrus heritage by operating its citrus groves and marketing its
crops in a manner consistent with best practices of commercial citrus growers
in the area. The commission shall review, monthly, the farming and financial
operations associated with the city's citrus groves and provide recommendations
to the city staff and city council to achieve the goal of well operated and
managed commercial groves from both financial and farming practices
perspectives.
   E.   The commission with assistance from staff shall provide the city
council with an annual report on the operational and financial aspects of the
citrus groves, including unaudited financial data with comparisons to previous
year and to budget along with explanations for significant variances. The
report shall include a management forecast for coming months to the extent
practical. The reports shall be provided to the city council no later than the
council's second meeting in January. (Ord. 2775, 2012)
CHAPTER 2.66
HUMAN RELATIONS COMMISSION
SECTION:
2.66.010: Established
2.66.020: Membership
2.66.030: Members; Forfeiture Of Office By Absence
2.66.040: Organization
2.66.050: Powers, Duties And Responsibilities
2.66.010: ESTABLISHED:
There is a human relations commission established to serve in an advisory
capacity to the city council and to aid the city in achieving better human
relations by providing assistance to all persons and groups in promoting
goodwill and better relations among all people. (Ord. 2895 §1, 2019)
2.66.020: MEMBERSHIP:
The human relations commission shall consist of nine (9) members who shall
each, with the exception of the student member, serve for a four (4) year term
and until his or her successor is appointed. Vacancies on the commission shall
be filled by members of the city council on a rotational basis and the term of
a commissioner appointed to fill a vacancy shall be for a four (4) year period.
No person shall serve more than two (2) consecutive terms unless appointed to
an additional term by a four-fifths (4/5) vote of the city council. The
commission members shall serve without compensation, shall each be a resident
of the city, with the exception of the student member, and shall be neither a
member of any other standing commission, board or committee of the city nor an
employee thereof. One commission member appointed by the city council shall be
from the junior class of a Redlands high school. The student member's term
shall be for one year, beginning January 1 when the student is a junior and
ending December 31 when the student is a senior. The student member shall be
considered one of the nine (9) members of the commission with full voting
powers. Five (5) members of the commission shall constitute a quorum. (Ord.
2895 §1, 2019)
2.66.030: MEMBERS; FORFEITURE OF OFFICE BY ABSENCE:
Any member of the commission who absents himself or herself from any three (3)
consecutive regular meetings of the commission, unless excused from such
absence by consent of the commission expressed by action recorded in its
minutes, shall thereby automatically forfeit his or her position as a member of
the commission immediately after adjournment of any such third consecutive
meeting at which such member has not appeared. The chairperson or secretary of
the commission shall thereupon, within three (3) business days, notify in
writing the city council, and any such person so ceasing to be a member of the
commission, of such fact; whereupon the vacancy so created shall be filled by
appointment pursuant to section
2.66.020 of this chapter. (Ord. 2895 §1, 2019)
2.66.040: ORGANIZATION:
The commission shall annually elect a chairperson and a vice chairperson and
there is no prohibition to the number of terms a member may serve in either
capacity. The commission shall keep records of all of its proceedings and
actions and shall have regular meeting dates noticed in accordance with law.
Five (5) members of the commission shall constitute a quorum. (Ord. 2895 §1,
2019)
2.66.050: POWERS, DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
The powers, duties and responsibilities of the commission shall include, but
are not necessarily limited to, the following:
   A.   To foster mutual respect and understanding with regard to race,
religion, national origin, age, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
disability or other minority affiliation;
   B.   To undertake such studies in any field of human relationship in the
community as in the judgment of the commission will aid in effectuating its
general purposes;
   C.   To recommend such educational programs as, in the judgment of the
commission, will increase goodwill among inhabitants of the community and open
new opportunities into all phases of community life for all inhabitants;
   D.   To hold public meetings, in the interest of the constructive resolution
of prejudice and discrimination occasioned thereby;
   E.   To issue such publications and reports as in its judgment will tend to
effectuate the purposes of this chapter;
   F.   To enlist the cooperation and participation of the various racial and
nationality groups, community organizations, industry and labor organizations,
media or mass communication, fraternal and benevolent associations, and other
groups in an educational campaign devoted to fostering among the diverse groups
of the community mutual esteem, justice and equity;
   G.   To recommend to the city council that agencies under the jurisdiction
of the city take such action as will fulfill the purposes of this chapter;
   H.   To submit an annual report to the city council. (Ord. 2895 §1, 2019)
CHAPTER 2.68
BUSINESS AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ADVISORY COMMISSION
(Rep. by Ord. 2745, 2011)
CHAPTER 2.70
UTILITY ADVISORY COMMITTEE
SECTION:
2.70.010: Existence
2.70.020: Membership
2.70.030: Members; Forfeiture Of Office By Absence
2.70.040: Organization
2.70.050: Powers, Duties And Responsibilities
2.70.010: EXISTENCE:
There is hereby established a utilities advisory committee to serve in an
advisory capacity to the city council regarding the establishment of rates for
water and sewer service provided by the city. (Ord. 2697 § 1, 2008)
2.70.020: MEMBERSHIP:
The committee shall consist of seven (7) members, appointed by the mayor and
approved by the city council, who shall each serve for a two (2) year term and
until his or her successor is appointed. No person shall serve more than two
(2) consecutive terms unless appointed to an additional term by a four-fifths
(4/5) vote of the city council. Vacancies of the committee shall be filled in
the same manner as the committee members are appointed. Appointments made to
fill an unexpired term will constitute a full term if more than one-half (1/2)
of a term remains. For example, if a term is two (2) years and an appointment
for an unexpired term is for one year or more, this appointment constitutes a
full term. The committee members shall be customers of the city of Redlands'
water or wastewater system and neither elected officials nor employees of the
city. Members of the committee shall serve without compensation. (Ord. 2697 §
1, 2008)
2.70.030: MEMBERS; FORFEITURE OF OFFICE BY ABSENCE:
Any committee member who is absent from any three (3) consecutive regular
meetings of the committee, unless excused from such attendance by consent of
the committee expressed by action of record in its minutes, shall automatically
forfeit his or her office as a member of the committee. The vacancy so created
shall be filled pursuant to section
2.70.020 of this chapter. (Ord. 2697 § 1, 2008)
2.70.040: ORGANIZATION:
The committee shall elect a chairperson and a vice chairperson on a biannual
basis. The committee shall keep records of all of its proceedings and
recommendations and shall have regular meeting dates in conformance with law.
Four (4) members of the committee shall constitute a quorum. (Ord. 2697 § 1,
2008)
2.70.050: POWERS, DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
The powers, duties and responsibilities of the committee are to review the
water and wastewater rates, charges and revenue requirements of the city on a
biannual basis. The primary goal of the committee shall be to recommend water
and wastewater rates that provide revenue which recovers the costs reasonably
borne by the city in providing water and wastewater services; are equitable to
all customer classes; are in compliance with all state and federal law; and are
easily explained to customers. The committee shall prepare and present its
recommendations to the city council. (Ord. 2697 § 1, 2008)
CHAPTER 2.72
MEASURE T (2020) ADVISORY COMMITTEE
SECTION:
2.72.010: Established
2.72.020: Membership
2.72.030: Members; Forfeiture Of Office By Absence
2.72.040: Organization
2.72.050: Duties and Responsibilities
2.72.010: ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby established a citizens' Measure T (2020) advisory committee to
serve in an advisory capacity to the city council for the purpose of providing
independent advisory review of the proposed expenditure of revenues generated
by the city's transactions and use tax. For purposes of this chapter and its
implementation, the committee established by this chapter may be commonly
referred to as the "Measure T Advisory" or "Measure T Oversight" committee,
with no distinction for legal purposes or otherwise. (Ord. 2916, 2020)
2.72.020: MEMBERSHIP:
   A.   The citizens' Measure T (2020) advisory committee shall consist of
seven (7) members. Two (2) members shall represent the city’s employee
bargaining units and shall each serve for a one (1) year term until his or her
successor is appointed. Three (3) members shall each initially serve a four (4)
year term, and two (2) members shall each initially serve a two (2) year term;
and thereafter, each member shall serve for a staggered four (4) year term
until his or her successor is appointed.
   B.   The five (5) citizen members of the committee shall each be selected
from one (1) council district, and be appointed by the council member of that
corresponding district, with the approval of the city council. One (1) member
of the committee shall represent the public safety employee bargaining units,
rotating each fiscal year between police and fire, and appointed by the mayor
with the approval of the city council. One (1) member of the committee shall
represent the remaining non-public safety employee bargaining units, rotating
each fiscal year between the five (5) non-public safety employee bargaining
units, and appointed by the mayor with the approval of the city council.
   C.   Vacancies on the committee shall be filled by appointment as set forth
above for the unexpired portion of the term. No person representing a council
district shall serve more than two (2) consecutive terms unless appointed to an
additional term by a four-fifths (4/5) vote of the city council. The committee
members shall serve without compensation, shall each be a resident of the city
with the exception of the two (2) members representing the city's employee
bargaining units, and shall be neither a member of any other standing
commission, board or committee of the city nor an employee thereof. Any member
of the committee may be removed from the committee prior to the end of his or
her term by a four-fifths (4/5) vote of the city council. (Ord. 2923, 2021;
Ord. 2916, 2020)
2.72.030: MEMBERS; FORFEITURE OF OFFICE BY ABSENCE:
Any committee member who is absent from any three (3) consecutive meetings of
the committee, unless excused from such attendance by consent of the committee
expressed by action of record in its minutes, shall automatically forfeit his
or her office as a member of the committee. The vacancy so created shall be
filled pursuant to section
2.72.020 of this chapter. (Ord. 2916, 2020)
2.72.040: ORGANIZATION:
   A.   The committee shall annually elect a chairperson and a vice chairperson
and there is no prohibition to the number of terms a member may serve in either
capacity. The committee shall keep records of all of its proceedings and
actions. All meetings of the committee shall be publicly noticed and held in
accordance with law. Four (4) members of the committee shall constitute a
quorum.
   B.   The city manager, or his or her designee, shall provide the committee
with technical assistance and shall provide administrative assistance in
support of its purpose and sufficient resources to publicize the conclusions of
the committee, including any periodic reports to the city council. (Ord. 2916,
2020)
2.72.050: DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
The committee shall advise the city council regarding the use of transactions
and use tax revenue, according to the priorities set forth in each fiscal year
adopted budget. The duties of the committee shall include the following:
   A.   Review, on an annual basis, the city's expenditure of revenues received
from the one percent (1%) transactions and use tax imposed by Measure T (2020);
   B.   Act in an advisory capacity to the city council in all other policy
matters pertaining to Measure T (2020) funds;
   C.   Present an annual written report to the city council, which shall
include a summary of the committee's proceedings and activities during the most
recent review period. The annual written report shall also include, but not be
limited to, a response to the following questions:
      1.   Does the current audited financial information reflect that Measure
T (2020) revenue was collected and appropriately spent in accordance with the
city's corresponding fiscal year budget plan?
      2.   Does the city's most recently adopted general fund budget promote
and maintain the city's core services, including public safety? (Ord. 2916,
2020)
CHAPTER 2.74
ELECTRONIC FILING OF CAMPAIGN DISCLOSURE STATEMENTS AND STATEMENTS OF ECONOMIC
INTEREST
SECTION:
2.74.010: Purpose and Authority
2.74.020: Findings
2.74.030: General Application
2.74.040: Procedures for Utilizing Online Filing
2.74.050: Availability of Statements for Public Review
2.74.060: Record Retention
2.74.010: PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY:
That the purpose of this Ordinance is to require the filing of Campaign
Disclosure Statements and Statements of Economic Interest by elected officials,
candidates, staff, consultants or committees electronically. The City Council
enacts this ordinance in accordance with the authority granted to cities by
State law. (Ord. 2935, 2022)
2.74.020: FINDINGS:
   A.   California Government Code Section 84615 provides that a legislative
body of a local government agency may adopt an ordinance that requires an
elected officer, candidate, committee, or other person required to file
statements, reports, or other documents required by Chapter 4 of the Political
Reform Act to file such statements, reports, or other documents online or
electronically with the City Clerk.
   B.   In any instance in which the original statement is required to be filed
with the Secretary of State and a copy of that statement is required to be
filed with the local government agency, the ordinance may permit that the copy
be filed online or electronically.
   C.   The City Council expressly finds and determines that the City’s web-
based System contains multiple safeguards to protect the integrity and security
of the data, and will operate securely and effectively and will not unduly
burden filers; and
   D.   The City Clerk will operate the electronic filing system in compliance
with the requirements of California Government Code Section 84615 and any other
applicable laws. (Ord. 2935, 2022)
2.74.030: GENERAL APPLICATION:
   A.   Any elected officer, candidate, or committee required to file
statements, reports or other documents (“Statements”) as required by Chapter 4
of the Political Reform Act (California Government Code Section 84100 et seq.)
shall file such Statements using the City’s online system according to
procedures established by the City Clerk. These procedures shall ensure that
the online system complies with the requirements set forth in Section 84615 of
the Government Code.
   B.   The online filing system shall ensure the integrity of the data
transmitted and shall include safeguards against efforts to tamper with,
manipulate, alter, or subvert the data.
   C.   The online filing system shall only accept a filing in the standardized
record format that is developed by the California Secretary of State pursuant
to Section 84602(a)(2) of the California Government Code and that is compatible
with the Secretary of State’s system for receiving an online or electronic
filing. (Ord. 2935, 2022)
2.74.040: PROCEDURES FOR UTILIZING ONLINE FILING:
   A.   Commencing with the effective date of this ordinance, elected officers,
candidates, or committees required to file statements must file such statements
electronically, unless exempt from the requirement to file online pursuant to
Government Code Section 84615(a) because the officer, candidate, or committee
receives less than $2,000 in contributions and makes less than $2,000 in
expenditures in a calendar year. All other individuals required to file
Statements of Economic Interest according to the City’s adopted Conflict of
Interest Code shall file electronically.
   B.   The electronic filing system shall include a procedure for filers to
comply with the requirement that they sign statements and reports under penalty
of perjury pursuant to Section 81004 of the Government Code.
   C.   Any elected officer, candidate, or committee who has electronically
filed a statement using the City’s online system is not required to file a copy
of that document in paper format with the City Clerk.
   D.   The City Clerk shall issue an electronic confirmation that notifies the
filer that the Statement was received; the notification shall include the date
and the time that the Statement was received and the method by which the filer
may view and print the data received by the City Clerk. The date of filing for
a Statement filed online shall be the day that it is received by the City
Clerk.
   E.   If the City’s system is not capable of accepting a Statement due to
technical difficulties, an elected officer, candidate, or committee shall file
that Statement in paper format with the City Clerk.
   F.   The online filing system shall enable electronic filers to complete and
submit filings free of charge.
   G.   The City Clerk is authorized to adopt such additional administrative
policies and procedures as deemed necessary to implement, and not otherwise in
conflict with, this Chapter. (Ord. 2935, 2022)
2.74.050: AVAILABILITY OF STATEMENTS FOR PUBLIC REVIEW:
   A.   The City’s system shall make all the data filed available on the
Internet in an easily understood format that provides the greatest public
access. The data shall be made available free of charge and as soon as possible
after receipt. The data made available on the Internet shall not contain the
street name and building number of the persons or entity representatives listed
on the electronically filed forms or any bank account number required to be
disclosed by the filer. The City Clerk’s office shall make a complete,
unredacted copy of the statement available to the Fair Political Practices
Commission for 87200 filers.
   B.   The City Clerk’s office shall maintain, for a period as described in
the City’s adopted records retention schedule, a secured, official version of
each online or electronic statement which shall serve as the official version
of that record for purpose of audits and any other legal purpose. (Ord. 2935,
2022)
2.74.060: RECORDS RETENTION:
   A.   The City Clerk’s office shall maintain records according to the City’s
records retention schedule and applicable State law commencing from the date
filed, a secured, official version of each online or electronic statement,
report, form, or other document, which shall serve as the official version of
that record. (Ord. 2935, 2022)
TITLE 3
REVENUE AND FINANCE
CHAPTER 3.04
FISCAL PROCEDURES
SECTION:
3.04.010: Contract Signing And Attestation
3.04.020: Bond Requirement Authority
3.04.030: Payments To The City
3.04.040: Unpaid Negotiable Instruments
3.04.050: Handling Charge
3.04.060: Nonnegotiable Instruments
3.04.070: Collection Charge
3.04.080: Exhaustion Of Administration Remedies For Challenges To Fees,
Charges, And Assessments On Real Property
3.04.010: CONTRACT SIGNING AND ATTESTATION:
All contracts authorized or awarded by the city council shall be signed by the
mayor, and attested by the city clerk for and on behalf of the city, unless
otherwise provided by law or by the council. (Prior code § 14101)
3.04.020: BOND REQUIREMENT AUTHORITY:
The city council may, at any time prior to the execution of any contract with
the city, require the contractor to execute to the city a bond, in such amount
as the council may require, conditioned for the faithful performance of such
contract; which bond shall be signed by two (2) sureties satisfactory to the
council, who shall justify in double the amount of such bond over and above all
statutory liabilities or a surety bond. (Prior code § 14102)
3.04.030: PAYMENTS TO THE CITY:
Negotiable instruments tendered the city shall only be accepted subject to
final payment of same in cash being received by the city. (Prior code § 14300)
3.04.040: UNPAID NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS:
Receipts, permits or other evidence of payment to the city issued in acceptance
of a negotiable instrument shall be void and of no effect should said
instrument be uncollectible in cash for any reason. (Prior code § 14301)
3.04.050: HANDLING CHARGE:
A handling charge in an amount equal to the current amount charged by banks for
"not sufficient funds" checks shall immediately become due and payable to the
city for each negotiable instrument returned unpaid to the city. Such handling
charge shall be credited to the general fund. (Prior code § 14302)
3.04.060: NONNEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS:
Nonnegotiable instruments shall not be accepted for immediate credit nor will
there be a receipt or other evidence of payment into the city treasury issued.
(Prior code § 14303)
3.04.070: COLLECTION CHARGE:
Nonnegotiable instruments may be entered for collection through the city
treasurer. A collection charge of five dollars ($5.00) for each shall be paid
to the treasurer at the time the instrument is entered for collection. Such
collection charge shall be credited to the general fund. (Prior code § 14304)
3.04.080: EXHAUSTION OF ADMINISTRATIVE REMEDIES FOR CHALLENGES TO FEES,
CHARGES, AND ASSESSMENTS ON REAL PROPERTY:
   A.   Scope. The duty to exhaust administrative remedies imposed by this
section extends to:
      1.   Any fee or charge subject to articles XIII C or XIII D of the
California Constitution,
      2.   Any assessment on real property levied by the City, and
      3.   The methodology used to develop and levy such a fee, charge, or
assessment.
   B.   "Hearing" as used in this section means the hearing referenced in
paragraph 4 of subsection D of this section.
   C.   Duty to Exhaust Issues. No person may bring a judicial action or
proceeding alleging noncompliance with the California Constitution or other
applicable law for any new, increased, or extended fee, charge, or assessment
levied by the City, unless that person submitted to the City Clerk a timely,
written objection to that fee, charge, or assessment specifying the grounds for
alleging noncompliance. The issues raised in any such action or proceeding
shall be limited to those raised in such an objection unless a court finds the
issue could not have been raised in such an objection by those exercising
reasonable diligence.
   D.   Procedures. The City shall:
      1.   Make available to the public any proposed fee, charge, or assessment
to which this section is to apply no less than forty five (45) days before the
deadline for a ratepayer or assessed property owner to submit an objection
pursuant to paragraph 4 of this subsection D.
      2.   Post on its internet website a written basis for the fee, charge, or
assessment, such as a cost of service analysis or an engineer's report, and
include a link to the internet website in the written notice of the Hearing,
including, but not limited to, a notice pursuant to subdivision (c) of Section
4 or paragraph (1) of subdivision (a) of Section 6 of Article XIII D of the
California Constitution.
      3.   Mail the written basis described in paragraph 2 of this subsection D
to a ratepayer or property owner on request.
      4.   Provide at least forty five (45) days for a ratepayer or assessed
property owner to review the proposed fee or assessment and to timely submit to
the City Clerk a written objection to that fee, charge, or assessment that
specifies the grounds for alleging noncompliance. Any objection shall be
submitted before the end of the public comment portion of a Hearing on the
rate, charge or assessment.
      5.   Include in a written notice of the Hearing, a statement in bold-
faced type of 12 points or larger that:
         a.   All written objections must be submitted to the City Clerk by the
end of public comment period at the Hearing and that a failure to timely object
in writing bars any right to challenge that fee, charge, or assessment in court
and that any such action will be limited to issues identified in such
objections.
         b.   All substantive and procedural requirements for submitting an
objection to the proposed fee, charge, or assessment such as those specified
for a property-related fee under California Constitution, article XIII D,
section 6(a) or for an assessment on real property under California
Constitution, article XIII D, section 4(e).
   E.    Council Consideration; City Responses. Before or during the Hearing,
the City Council shall consider and the City shall respond in writing to, any
timely written objections. The City Council may adjourn the Hearing to another
date if necessary to respond to comments received after the agenda is posted
for the meeting at which the Hearing occurs. The City's responses shall explain
the substantive basis for retaining or altering the proposed fee, charge, or
assessment in response to written objections, including any reasons to reject
requested amendments.
   F.   City Council Determinations. The City Council, in exercising its
legislative discretion, shall determine whether:
      1.   The written objections and the City's response warrant
clarifications to the proposed fee, charge, or assessment.
      2.   To reduce the proposed fee, charge or assessment.
      3.   To further review the proposed fee, charge, or assessment before
determining whether clarification or reduction is needed.
      4.   To proceed with the Hearing, to continue it, or to abandon the
proposal. (Ord. 2978 § 2, 2025)
CHAPTER 3.06
GENERAL FUND RESERVE POLICY
SECTION:
3.06.010: Purpose
3.06.020: Policy
3.06.010: PURPOSE:
The city council of the city of Redlands acknowledges its responsibility to
maintain a sufficient level of funds to provide for the continuation of city
services to the community in the event of a natural disaster, downturns in the
economy, the loss of economic resources to the city or any other fiscal
emergency. The purpose of this chapter is to formalize the city council's
desire to ensure sound financial management of the city by establishing a
reserve fund policy for the city's general fund. (Ord. 2660 § 1, 2007)
3.06.020: POLICY:
It shall be the fiscal policy of the city council:
   A.   To adopt a balanced budget on an annual basis. For purposes of this
chapter, a "balanced budget" is defined as a condition wherein total financial
sources, excluding any available beginning fund balance and any established
reserves, meet or exceed the total financial requirements of the city,
excluding onetime capital expenditures. Except as otherwise provided for in
this section, this "pay as you go" approach mandates that any increase in
financial requirements, decrease in financial sources, or a combination of the
two, that would result in a budget imbalance will require cost cutting and/or
revenue enhancements, rather than spending reserves to support ongoing
operations. Cost cutting measures may include reductions in capital
expenditures, reductions in staffing levels, salaries and benefits through the
negotiation process, or reductions in expenditures for equipment, supplies and
services. Expenditure reductions may result in reduced service levels to the
community.
   B.   To establish a reserve fund equivalent to a minimum of twelve percent
(12%) of the general fund financial requirements. The term "financial
requirements", for purposes of this chapter, is defined as the sum of approved
operating expenditures and operating transfers out. Onetime (nonrecurring)
expenditures shall not be used in the required reserve calculation.
   C.   That the city council may, by four (4) affirmative votes of its total
membership, utilize the reserve fund described by this chapter only when faced
with an unforeseen or uncontrollable event affecting the city's fiscal
situation. Examples of an unforeseen or uncontrollable event include, but are
not in any manner limited to, the following:
      1.   Federal or state budget cuts that financially impact the city;
      2.   Local revenue shortfalls due to a major business closure or
relocation;
      3.   Legislative or judicial mandates to provide new or expanded services
or programs; that in total will cost the city two hundred thousand dollars
($200,000.00) or more; and
      4.   Natural and civil disasters such as earthquakes, fires, floods,
riots and health epidemics. (Ord. 2660 § 1, 2007)
CHAPTER 3.08
CLAIMS AND WARRANTS
SECTION:
3.08.010: Auditing Of Claims
3.08.020: Itemizing Claims
3.08.030: Warrant For Payment
3.08.040: Register Of Warrants
3.08.050: Auditing Of Employee Salaries
3.08.060: Register Of Salary Warrants
3.08.070: Payment Of Warrants
3.08.080: Unpaid Warrants
3.08.090: Account Of Warrants Issued
3.08.100: Report Of Monies Received By Officials
3.08.010: AUDITING OF CLAIMS:
No claim or demand against the city shall be paid or ordered paid until the
same has been audited and allowed by the city's finance director. All warrants
and payments shall be ratified by the city council annually in the form of the
city's audited comprehensive annual financial report. (Ord. 2725 § 1, 2009)
3.08.020: ITEMIZING CLAIMS:
Every account, claim or demand against the city shall be presented to the
city's finance director and shall contain a full and complete statement of the
items thereof, and shall also, if required by the finance director, be
supported by an oath of the claimant that such claim or demand is correct and
just, and that the services were rendered and that the materials, supplies or
things were furnished as in the items charged; that the amounts are due and no
part of the same has been paid. (Ord. 2725 § 1, 2009)
3.08.030: WARRANT FOR PAYMENT:
The finance director shall prepare warrants on the city's treasurer, which
warrants shall be drawn payable to the claimant's order and for the amount
ordered paid. Warrants shall be signed by the mayor, or by any other member of
the city council, and countersigned by the finance director. (Ord. 2725 § 1,
2009)
3.08.040: REGISTER OF WARRANTS:
Each time warrants are prepared, a register of the same shall be prepared by
the finance director showing the names of the payees and the number and amounts
of the warrants. The finance director shall specify on the register the fund or
funds out of which the warrants are to be paid. The register shall be signed by
the finance director and the mayor, or by any other member of the city council.
(Ord. 2725 § 1, 2009)
3.08.050: AUDITING OF EMPLOYEE SALARIES:
No salaries or wages will be paid until supporting documents for such salaries
or wages shall have been audited and allowed by the finance director. (Ord.
2725 § 1, 2009)
3.08.060: REGISTER OF SALARY WARRANTS:
A register of warrants issued for salaries and wages shall be prepared as
provided in section
 3.08.040 of this chapter. (Ord. 2725 § 1, 2009)
3.08.070: PAYMENT OF WARRANTS:
All warrants drawn in accordance with this chapter shall, on presentation to
the treasury of the city by the holder thereof, be paid, provided the amount in
the city treasurer's hands of the fund on which drawn shall be sufficient to
pay the same. (Ord. 2725 § 1, 2009)
3.08.080: UNPAID WARRANTS:
All warrants presented and not paid for lack of funds shall be registered by
the city treasurer so as to show the number, amount, the fund on which drawn,
the name of the original holder and the date of presentation; and the fact of
such presentation and the date thereof shall be endorsed on the warrant by the
city treasurer. (Ord. 2725 § 1, 2009)
3.08.090: ACCOUNT OF WARRANTS ISSUED:
The finance director shall maintain a record of every claim or demand against
the city disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, and
shall also note therein the final disposition made of the same, the amount
thereof ordered paid, if any, and the number of the warrant drawn therefor with
the date thereof; and shall file all such claims and demands. (Ord. 2725 § 1,
2009)
3.08.100: REPORT OF MONIES RECEIVED BY OFFICIALS:
Any official receiving money belonging to the city must report such fact to the
city treasurer making at least monthly settlements with the treasurer. (Ord.
2725 § 1, 2009)
CHAPTER 3.09
LOCAL GOVERNMENT CLAIMS AND CITY INITIATED CLAIMS
SECTION:
3.09.010: Authority
3.09.020: Claims Presentation; Prerequisite For Bringing Suit
3.09.030: Claims Presentation; Statutory Authority
3.09.040: Statute Of Limitations
3.09.050: Suits Prohibited Where Full Payment Or Compromise Effected
3.09.060: Time Limitations
3.09.070: Late Filing
3.09.080: Disposition Of Claims
3.09.090: Authority To Compromise Pending Claims
3.09.100: Suit
3.09.110: Threatened Or Pending Litigation
3.09.010: AUTHORITY:
This chapter is enacted pursuant to section 935 of the California Government
Code. (Ord. 2811, 2015)
3.09.020: CLAIMS PRESENTATION; PREREQUISITE FOR BRINGING SUIT:
No suit for money or damages may be brought against the city until a written
claim therefor has been presented to, and rejected by, the city in conformity
with the provisions of general state law relating to claims against public
entities and this chapter. Pursuant to the authority of Government Code section
935, all claims against the city shall be subject to this requirement,
including those claims otherwise exempt from claim filing requirements under
Government Code section 905, except where the claims are governed by other
statutes or regulations relating expressly thereto. (Ord. 2811, 2015)
3.09.030: CLAIMS PRESENTATION; STATUTORY AUTHORITY:
Those claims governed by section
3.09.020 of this chapter shall be filed with the city clerk in accordance with,
and in the manner provided for in part 3 (commencing with section 900),
division 3.6, title 1 of the Government Code.
   A.   A claim shall be presented in writing on a form authorized and provided
by the city, or in a written form which satisfies the requirements of
Government Code sections 910 and 910.2.
   B.   The city manager, or the city manager's designee with the concurrence
of the city attorney, is authorized to extend, by agreement with the claimant,
the time within which a claim may be considered for purposes of payment or
compromise. (Ord. 2811, 2015)
3.09.040: STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS:
Any suit brought against the city for which a claim is required to be presented
in accordance with section
3.09.020 of this chapter must be commenced within the period prescribed by
Government Code section 945.6. (Ord. 2811, 2015)
3.09.050: SUITS PROHIBITED WHERE FULL PAYMENT OR COMPROMISE EFFECTED:
Where a claim that is required to be presented to the city in accordance with
this chapter is so presented and action thereon is taken:
   A.   If the claim is allowable in full and the claimant accepts the amount
allowed, no suit may be maintained on any part of the cause of action to which
the claim relates;
   B.   If the claim is allowed in part and the claimant accepts the amount
allowed, no suit may be maintained on that part of the cause of action which is
represented by the allowed portion of the claim; and
   C.   If the claim is allowed in part and the claimant accepts the amount
allowed, no suit may be maintained on any portion of the cause of action where,
pursuant to requirement of such effect, the claimant has accepted the amount
allowed in settlement of the entire claim. (Ord. 2811, 2015)
3.09.060: TIME LIMITATIONS:
Claims shall be presented in accordance with the time limitations set forth in
Government Code section 911.2. In addition, pursuant to Government Code section
901, any claim against the city for equitable indemnity shall be presented not
later than six (6) months after the date upon which a defendant is served with
the complaint giving rise to the defendant's claim for a cause of action for
equitable indemnity or partial equitable indemnity against the City. (Ord.
2811, 2015)
3.09.070: LATE FILING:
In accordance with Government Code section 935, the late filing of a claim
pursuant to this chapter is governed by section 911.4, and sections 911.6
through 912.2 inclusive, of the Government Code. Provided, however, that the
City Council hereby delegates the authority to the City Manager, and his or her
designees, in consultation with the City Attorney, to determine whether a
request or application for leave to file a late claim shall be granted or
denied by the City in accordance with Government Code section 911.6. (Ord.
2879, 2018)
3.09.080: DISPOSITION OF CLAIMS:
   A.   All claims, regardless of how presented, shall be forwarded to the City
Manager's designee for review. The City Manager's designee, upon receipt of a
claim, may request an investigation by the City department which has
jurisdiction over the matter or property giving rise to the claim. The
appropriate department shall submit a report with respect to the circumstances
of the claim and its recommendation thereon to the City Attorney. The City
Attorney shall review the claim and determine whether the claim substantially
complied with Government Code sections 910 and 910.2, and then make
recommendation on the claim and the department's report to the City Manager's
designee.
   B.   Pursuant to Government Code section 935.4, the City Council hereby
authorizes the City Manager, his or her designee, and the City Attorney to
reject any and all claims filed with the City. The City Manager's designee,
with the concurrence of the City Manager, shall have the discretion to take any
claim to the City Council for action or compromise such claim in accordance
with section
3.09.090 of this chapter. (Ord. 2811, 2015)
3.09.090: AUTHORITY TO COMPROMISE PENDING CLAIMS:
Pursuant to Government Code section 949, the City Council may compromise any
claim initiated by, or filed against, the City. The City Council further
delegates the authority to the City Manager and City Attorney to compromise any
such pending claim as follows:
 
City Manager's designee                                   $10,000.00 or less
City Manager's designee, with concurrence of City Manager 30,000.00 or less
and City Attorney
 
(Ord. 2902 §1, 2019: Ord. 2811, 2015)
3.09.100: SUIT:
Any action brought against the City upon any claim or demand shall conform to
the requirements of sections 940 through 949 of the Government Code. Any action
brought against any employee of the City shall conform with the requirements of
sections 950 through 951 of the Government Code. (Ord. 2811, 2015)
3.09.110: THREATENED OR PENDING LITIGATION:
The City Manager, or his or her designee, and the City Attorney may compromise
and settle any threatened or pending litigation initiated by, or filed against,
the City for personal injury (including death), damages to personal or real
property, breach of contract, or for any other reason, for the amounts set
forth in section
3.09.090 of this chapter. In the alternative, the City Manager's designee, with
the consent of the City Manager, may present any such threatened or pending
litigation to the City Council for action. (Ord. 2902 §2, 2019: Ord. 2811,
2015)
CHAPTER 3.10
LOCAL GOVERNMENT TAX REFUND CLAIMS
SECTION:
3.10.010: Authority
3.10.020: Claims Required
3.10.030: Form Of Claim
3.10.040: Claim Prerequisite To Suit
3.10.050: Suit
3.10.010: AUTHORITY:
This chapter is enacted pursuant to section 935 of the California Government
Code. (Ord. 2504 § 1, 2002)
3.10.020: CLAIMS REQUIRED:
All claims against the city for money or damages not otherwise governed by the
tort claims act, California Government Code section 900 et seq., or another
state law (hereinafter in this chapter, "claims") shall be presented within the
time, and in the manner, prescribed by part 3, division 3.6, title 1 of the
California Government Code (commencing with section 900 thereof) for the claims
to which that part applies by its own terms, as those provisions now exist or
shall hereafter be amended, and as further provided by this chapter. (Ord. 2504
§ 1, 2002)
3.10.030: FORM OF CLAIM:
All claims shall be in writing and verified by the claimant or by his or her
guardian, conservator, executor or administrator. No claim may be filed on
behalf of a class of persons unless verified by every member of that class as
required by this section. In addition, all claims shall contain the information
required by California Government Code section 910. (Ord. 2504 § 1, 2002)
3.10.040: CLAIM PREREQUISITE TO SUIT:
In accordance with California Government Code sections 935(b) and 945.6, all
claims shall be presented as provided in this section and acted upon by the
city council prior to the filing of any action on such claims and no such
action may be maintained by a person who has not complied with the requirements
of section 3.10.020 of this chapter. (Ord. 2504 § 1, 2002)
3.10.050: SUIT:
Any action brought against the city upon any claim or demand shall conform to
the requirements of sections 940 through 949 of the California Government Code.
Any action brought against any employee of the city shall conform with the
requirements of sections 950 through 951 of the California Government Code.
(Ord. 2504 § 1, 2002)
CHAPTER 3.12
TRANSFER OF TAX COLLECTION DUTIES
SECTION:
3.12.010: Declaration Of Policy
3.12.020: Definitions
3.12.030: Transfer Of Duties
3.12.040: Abolition Of Offices
3.12.010: DECLARATION OF POLICY:
The city of Redlands, a municipal corporation, desires to transfer the
assessment and tax collection duties performed by the city assessor and city
tax collector to the assessor and tax collector of the county of San Bernardino
pursuant to sections 51500 to 50519 of the Government Code. (Prior code § 2581)
3.12.020: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and expressions when used in this chapter shall for the
purpose of this chapter have the meanings respectively ascribed to them as
follows:
   CITY: The city of Redlands, a municipal corporation, situated in the county
of San Bernardino, state of California.
   COUNTY: The county of San Bernardino, a political subdivision of the state
of California. (Prior code §§ 2582, 2582.1, 2582.2)
3.12.030: TRANSFER OF DUTIES:
The assessment and tax collection duties, and the collection of assessments
levied for municipal improvements, now performed by the assessor and the tax
collector of the city are transferred to the assessor and the tax collector of
the county for the purpose of assessment and collection of and for ad valorem
property taxes that become a lien after the adoption hereof, and the collection
of assessments for municipal improvements becoming due and payable on and after
March 1, 1957. (Prior code § 2583)
3.12.040: ABOLITION OF OFFICES:
The offices of city assessor and city tax collector are abolished as of
February 7, 1957, and thereafter all duties performed by the city assessor,
other than the assessing of property in the city, and all duties performed by
the city tax collector, other than the collection of ad valorem taxes on
property that becomes a lien after the adoption hereof and the collection of
assessments for municipal improvements becoming due and payable on and after
March 1, 1957, are transferred to and are to be performed by the city clerk.
(Prior code § 2584)
CHAPTER 3.16
FEE AND SERVICE CHARGE REVENUE/COST COMPARISON SYSTEM
(Rep. by Ord. 2779, 2012)
CHAPTER 3.18
TRANSACTIONS AND USE TAX
SECTION:
3.18.010: Title
3.18.020: Operative Date
3.18.030: Purpose
3.18.040: Contract With State
3.18.050: Imposition Of Transactions And Use Tax; Transaction Tax Rate
3.18.060: Place Of Sale
3.18.070: Imposition Of Use Tax; Use Tax Rate
3.18.080: Adoption Of Provisions Of State Law
3.18.090: Limitations On Adoption Of State Law And Collection Of Use Taxes
3.18.100: Permit Not Required
3.18.110: Exemptions And Exclusions
3.18.120: Adoption Of Amendments To State Law
3.18.130: Enjoining Collection Forbidden
3.18.140: Independent Annual Audit
3.18.150: Citizens’ Advisory Committee
3.18.160: Severability
3.18.010: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the "City of Redlands' Transactions and Use Tax"
chapter. The City of Redlands hereinafter shall be called the "City." This
chapter shall be applicable in the incorporated territory of the City. (Ord.
2913 § 2 (part), 2020)
3.18.020: OPERATIVE DATE:
"Operative date" means the first day of the first calendar quarter commencing
more than one hundred ten (110) days after the adoption of the ordinance
enacting this chapter. (Ord. 2913 § 2 (part), 2020)
3.18.030: PURPOSE:
This chapter is enacted to achieve the following, among other purposes, and
directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish those
purposes:
   A.   To impose a retail Transactions and Use Tax in accordance with the
provisions of Part 1.6 (commencing with Section 7251) of Division 2 of the
Revenue and Taxation Code and Section 7285.9 of Part 1.7 of Division 2 which
authorizes the City to enact the tax ordinance establishing this chapter, which
shall be operative if a majority of the electors voting on the measure vote to
approve the imposition of the tax at an election called for that purpose.
   B.   To adopt a retail Transactions and Use Tax that incorporates provisions
identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the State of California
insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and
limitations contained in Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation
Code.
   C.   To adopt a retail Transaction and Use Tax that imposes a tax and
provides a measure therefore that can be administered and collected by the
California Department of Tax and Fee Administration in a manner that adapts
itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation
from, the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the
California Department of Tax and Fee Administration in administering and
collecting the California State Sales and Use Taxes.
   D.   To adopt a retail Transaction and Use Tax that can be administered in a
manner that will be, to the greatest degree possible, consistent with the
provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize
the cost of collecting the Transactions and Use Taxes, and at the same time,
minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under
the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2913 § 2 (part), 2020)
3.18.040: CONTRACT WITH STATE:
Prior to the operative date, the City shall contract with the California
Department of Tax and Fee Administration to perform all functions incident to
the administration and operation of this Transactions and Use Tax; provided,
that if the City shall not have contracted with the California Department of
Tax and Fee Administration prior to the operative date, the City shall
nevertheless so contract and in such a case the operative date shall be the
first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a
contract. (Ord. 2913 § 2 (part), 2020)
3.18.050: IMPOSITION OF TRANSACTIONS AND USE TAX; TRANSACTION TAX RATE:
For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is
hereby imposed upon all retailers in the incorporated territory of the City at
the rate of one percent (1.0%) of the gross receipts of any retailer from the
sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in said territory on and
after the operative date of the ordinance enacting this chapter. Such tax shall
be in addition to any other transactions tax imposed by this Code or applicable
State law. (Ord. 2913 § 2 (part), 2020)
3.18.060: PLACE OF SALE:
For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place
of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is
delivered by the retailer to his agent to an out-of-state destination or to a
common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts
from such sales tax shall include delivery charges, when such charges are
subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which
delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in
the State or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which
the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and
regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the California Board of Tax and Fee
Administration. (Ord. 2913 § 2 (part), 2020)
3.18.070: IMPOSITION OF USE TAX; USE TAX RATE:
An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the
City of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the
operative date of this chapter for storage, use or other consumption in said
territory at the rate of one percent (1.0%) of the sales price of the property.
The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to
state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. (Ord.
2913 § 2 (part), 2020)
3.18.080: ADOPTION OF PROVISIONS OF STATE LAW:
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except insofar as they are
inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and
Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 (commencing with Section 6001)
of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are hereby adopted and made a
part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein. (Ord. 2913 § 2 (part),
2020)
3.18.090: LIMITATIONS ON ADOPTION OF STATE LAW AND COLLECTION OF USE TAXES:
In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation
Code:
   A.   Wherever the State of California is named or referred to as the taxing
agency, the name of this City shall be substituted therefor. However, the
substitution shall not be made:
      1.   When the word "State" is used as a part of the title of the State
Controller, State Treasurer, State Treasury, California Department of Tax and
Fee Administration, or the Constitution of the State of California;
      2.   When the result of that substitution would require action to be
taken by or against this City or any agency, officer, or employee thereof
rather than by or against the California Department of Tax and Fee
Administration, in performing the functions incident to the administration or
operation of this chapter;
      3.   In those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to
sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the State of California, where
the result of the substitution would be to:
         a.   Provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales,
storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not
otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other
consumption remain subject to tax by the State under the provisions of Part 1
of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or;
         b.   Impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or
other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to
tax by the State under the said provision of that code; or
      4.   In Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711,
6715, 6737, 6797 or 6798 of the Revenue and Taxation Code.
   B.   The word "City" shall be substituted for the "State" in the phrase
"retailer engaged in business in this State" in Section 6203 and in the
definition of that phrase in Section 6203. (Ord. 2913 § 2 (part), 2020)
3.18.100: PERMIT NOT REQUIRED:
If a seller's permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the
Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional transactor's permit shall not be
required by this chapter. (Ord. 2913 § 2 (part), 2020)
3.18.110: EXEMPTIONS AND EXCLUSIONS:
   A.   There shall be excluded from the measure of the Transactions Tax and
the Use Tax the amount of any sales tax or use tax imposed by the State of
California or by any city, city and county, or county pursuant to the Bradley-
Burns Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Law or the amount of any State-
administered transactions or use tax.
   B.   There are exempted from the computation of the amount of transactions
taxes the gross receipts from:
      1.   Sales of tangible personal property, other than fuel or petroleum
products, to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside
the county in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of
such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of
the laws of this State, the United States, or any foreign governments.
      2.   Sales of property to be used outside the City which is shipped to a
point outside the City, pursuant to the contract of sale, by delivery to such
point by the retailer or his agent, or by delivery by the retailer to a carrier
for shipment to a consignee at such point. For the purposes of this subsection,
delivery to a point outside the City shall be satisfied:
         a.   With respect to vehicles (other than commercial vehicles) subject
to registration pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 4000) of
Division 3 of the Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with Section
21411 of the Public Utilities Code, and undocumented vessels registered under
Division 3.5 (commencing with Section 9840) of the Vehicle Code by registration
to an out-of-City address and by a declaration under penalty of perjury, signed
by the buyer, stating that such address is, in fact, his or her principal place
of residence; and
         b.   With respect to commercial vehicles, by registration to a place
of business out-of-City and declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the
buyer, that the vehicle will be operated from that address.
      3.   The sale of tangible personal property if the seller is obligated to
furnish the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into
prior to the operative date of this chapter.
      4.   A lease of tangible personal property which is a continuing sale of
such property, for any period of time for which the lessor is obligated to
lease the property for an amount fixed by the lease prior to the operative date
of this chapter.
      5.   For the purposes of subparagraphs 3 and 4 of this subsection B, the
sale or lease of tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated
pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to
the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or
lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised.
   C.   There are exempted from the Use Tax imposed by this chapter, the
storage, use or other consumption in this City of tangible personal property:
      1.   The gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to a
Transactions Tax under any State-administered Transactions and Use Tax
ordinance.
      2.   Other than fuel or petroleum products purchased by operators of
aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the
use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or
compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued
pursuant to the laws of this State, the United States, or any foreign
government. This exemption is in addition to the exemption provided in Sections
6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State of California.
      3.   If the purchaser is obligated to purchase the property for a fixed
price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to the operative date of this
chapter.
      4.   If the possession of, or the exercise of any right or power over,
the tangible personal property arises under a lease which is a continuing
purchase of such property for any period of time for which the lessee is
obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by a lease prior to the
operative date of this chapter.
      5.   For the purposes of subparagraphs 3 and 4 of this subsection C,
storage, use or other consumption, or possession of, or exercise of any right
or power over, tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated
pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to
the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or
lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised.
      6.   Except as provided in subparagraph 7 of this subsection C, a
retailer engaged in business in the City shall not be required to collect Use
Tax from the purchaser of tangible personal property, unless the retailer ships
or delivers the property into the City or participates within the City in
making the sale of the property, including, but not limited to, soliciting or
receiving the order, either directly or indirectly, at a place of business of
the retailer in the City or through any representative, agent, canvasser,
solicitor, subsidiary, or person in the City under the authority of the
retailer.
      7.   "A retailer engaged in business in the City" shall also include any
retailer of any of the following: vehicles subject to registration pursuant to
Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 3 of the Vehicle Code,
aircraft licensed in compliance with Section 21411 of the Public Utilities
Code, or undocumented vessels registered under Division 3.5 (commencing with
Section 9840) of the Vehicle Code. That retailer shall be required to collect
Use Tax from any purchaser who registers or licenses the vehicle, vessel, or
aircraft at an address in the City.
   D.   Any person subject to Use Tax under this chapter may credit against
that tax any Transactions Tax or reimbursement for Transactions Taxes paid to a
district imposing, or retailer liable for a transactions tax pursuant to Part
1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code with respect to the sale to
the person of the property the storage, use or other consumption of which is
subject to the Use Tax. (Ord. 2913 § 2 (part), 2020)
3.18.120: ADOPTION OF AMENDMENTS TO STATE LAW:
   A.   All amendments, subsequent to the operative date of this chapter, to
Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code relating to sales and use
taxes and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of Division 2
of the Revenue and Taxation Code, and all amendments to Part 1.6 and Part 1.7
of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, shall automatically become a
part of this chapter; provided, however, that no such amendment shall operate
so as to affect the rate of tax imposed by this chapter unless any increase in
the rate of this tax is first approved by the voters of the City voting on such
question.
   B.   Pursuant to California Elections Code Section 9217, or any successor
statute, the City Council of the City may amend or repeal this chapter, but not
increase or extend the rate of tax imposed herein, or any indebtedness
authorized hereunder, without the approval of the voters of the City voting on
such question.
3.18.130: ENJOINING COLLECTION FORBIDDEN:
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall
issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the State or City,
or against any officer of the State or the City, to prevent or enjoin the
collection under this chapter, or Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and
Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. (Ord.
2913 § 2 (part), 2020)
3.18.140: INDEPENDENT ANNUAL AUDIT:
The proceeds of the Transactions and Use Tax levied and imposed pursuant to
this chapter shall be deposited into the City's General Fund for use by the
City, and become subject to the same independent annual audit requirements as
other General Fund revenue. The independent auditor's report, which shall
include an accounting of the revenues received and expenditures made from the
Transactions and Use Tax, will be presented annually to the City Council and
made available for public review. (Ord. 2913 § 2 (part), 2020)
3.18.150: CITIZENS' ADVISORY COMMITTEE:
A Citizens' Advisory Committee (the "Committee") shall be established by the
City Council for the purpose of providing independent advisory review of
revenues generated by the Transactions and Use Tax. The Committee shall meet at
least once each calendar year, and all meetings shall be subject to the
provisions of the Ralph M. Brown Act (Government Code Section 54950 et seq.)
(Ord. 2913 § 2 (part), 2020)
3.18.160: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or
circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of this chapter and the application
of such provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected
thereby. (Ord. 2913 § 2 (part), 2020)
CHAPTER 3.20
SALES AND USE TAX
SECTION:
3.20.010: Short Title
3.20.020: Purpose
3.20.030: Rate
3.20.040: Operative Date; Contract With State
3.20.050: Sales Tax; Imposition
3.20.060: Place Of Sale; Determination
3.20.070: Use Tax; Imposition
3.20.080: Adoption Of State Law Provisions
3.20.090: Limitations On Adoption Of State Law
3.20.100: When Permit Not Required
3.20.110: Exclusions And Exemptions; Aircraft
3.20.120: Exclusions And Exemptions; Waterborne Vessels
3.20.130: Exclusions And Exemptions; Alternating Operability
3.20.140: Amendments
3.20.150: Enjoinment Of Collection Prohibited
3.20.160: Violation; Penalty
3.20.010: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the UNIFORM LOCAL SALES AND USE TAX ORDINANCE OF
THE CITY. (Prior code § 2500)
3.20.020: PURPOSE:
The city council of the city declares that this chapter is adopted to achieve
the following, among other purposes, and directs that the provisions hereof be
interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes:
   A.   To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which complies with the
requirements and limitations contained in part 1.5 of division 2 of the Revenue
and Taxation Code;
   B.   To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which incorporates provisions
identical to those of the sales and use tax law of the state insofar as those
provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained
in part 1.5 of division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code;
   C.   To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which imposes a tax and provides
a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by the state board of
equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and
requires the least possible deviation from, the existing statutory and
administrative procedures followed by the state board of equalization in
administering and collecting the California state sales and use taxes;
   D.   To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which can be administered in a
manner that will, to the degree possible consistent with the provisions of part
1.5 of division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of
collecting city sales and use taxes and at the same time minimize the burden of
record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this
chapter. (Prior code §§ 2501–2501.4)
3.20.030: RATE:
The rate of sales tax and use tax imposed by this chapter shall be one percent
(1%). (Prior code § 2501.5)
3.20.040: OPERATIVE DATE; CONTRACT WITH STATE:
This chapter shall be operative on January 1, 1976. Prior to the operative date
this city shall contract with the state board of equalization to perform all
functions incident to the administration and operation of this sales and use
tax ordinance; provided, that if this city shall not have contracted with the
state board of equalization prior to the operative date, it shall nevertheless
so contract and in such a case the operative date shall be the first day of the
first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract rather than
the first day of the first calendar quarter following the adoption hereof.
(Prior code § 2502)
3.20.050: SALES TAX; IMPOSITION:
For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail a tax is
imposed upon all retailers in the city at the rate stated in section
3.20.030 of this chapter of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of
all tangible personal property sold at retail in the city on and after the
operative date of this chapter. (Prior code § 2503)
3.20.060: PLACE OF SALE; DETERMINATION:
For the purpose of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place
of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is
delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out of state destination or to a
common carrier for delivery to an out of state destination. The gross receipts
from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject
to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is
made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state
or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail
sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be
prescribed and adopted by the state board of equalization. (Prior code §
2503.1)
3.20.070: USE TAX; IMPOSITION:
An excise tax is imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the city
of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the
operative date of this chapter for storage, use or other consumption in the
city at the rate stated in section
3.20.030 of this chapter of the sales price of the property. The sales price
shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or
use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. (Prior code § 2504)
3.20.080: ADOPTION OF STATE LAW PROVISIONS:
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except insofar as they are
inconsistent with the provisions of part 1.5 of division 2 of the Revenue and
Taxation Code, all of the provisions of part 1 of division 2 of the Revenue and
Taxation Code are adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set
forth herein. (Prior code § 2505)
3.20.090: LIMITATIONS ON ADOPTION OF STATE LAW:
In adopting the provisions of part 1 of division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation
Code, wherever the state is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name
of the city shall be substituted therefor. The substitution, however shall not
be made when the word "state" is used as part of the title of the state
controller, the state treasurer, the state board of control, the state board of
equalization, the state treasury, or the constitution of the state of
California; the substitution shall not be made when the result of that
substitution would require action to be taken by or against the city, or any
agency thereof rather than by or against the state board of equalization, in
performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this
chapter; the substitution shall not be made in those sections, including, but
not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of
the state of California, where the result of the substitution would be to
provide an exemption from the tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use
or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be
exempt from the tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain
subject to tax by the state under the provisions of part 1 of division 2 of the
Revenue and Taxation Code, or to impose the tax with respect to certain sales,
storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not
be subject to tax by the state under the provisions of that code; the
substitution shall not be made in sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last
sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation
Code; and the substitution shall not be made for the word "state" in the phrase
"retailer engaged in business in this state" in section 6203 or in the
definition of that phrase in section 6203. (Prior code § 2505.1)
3.20.100: WHEN PERMIT NOT REQUIRED:
If a seller's permit has been issued to a retailer under section 6067 of the
Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional seller's permit shall not be required
by this chapter. (Prior code § 2506)
3.20.110: EXCLUSIONS AND EXEMPTIONS; AIRCRAFT:
   A.   The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax
imposed by the state of California upon a retailer or consumer.
   B.   The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property,
the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a
sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with part 1.5 of division 2
of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county, or city, in
this state shall be exempt from the tax due under this chapter.
   C.   There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax
the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of
aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale
is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common
carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state,
the United States, or any foreign government.
   D.   In addition to the exemptions provided in sections 6366 and 6366.1 of
the Revenue and Taxation Code the storage, use, or other consumption of
tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or
consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft
as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a
certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of
this state, the United States, or any foreign government is exempted from the
use tax. (Ord. 1841 § 1, 1984: prior code § 2507)
3.20.120: EXCLUSIONS AND EXEMPTIONS; WATERBORNE VESSELS:
   A.   The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax
imposed by the state of California upon a retailer or consumer.
   B.   The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property,
the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a
sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with part 1.5 of division 2
of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county, or city in
this state shall be exempt from the tax due under this chapter.
   C.   There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax
the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of
waterborne vessels to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which
the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or
property in such vessels for commercial purposes.
   D.   The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property
purchased by operators of waterborne vessels and used or consumed by such
operators directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property of
such vessels for commercial purposes is exempted from the use tax.
   E.   There are exempted from the computation of the amount of sales tax the
gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of
aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale
is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common
carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state,
the United States, or any foreign government.
   F.   In addition to the exemptions provided in section 6366 and 6366.1 of
the Revenue and Taxation Code the storage, use, or other consumption of
tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or
consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft
as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a
certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of
this state, the United States, or any foreign government is exempted from the
use tax. (Ord. 1841 § 2, 1984: prior code § 2507)
3.20.130: EXCLUSIONS AND EXEMPTIONS; ALTERNATING OPERABILITY:
   A.   Section
3.20.110 of this chapter shall be operative January 1, 1984.
   B.   Section
3.20.120 of this chapter shall be operative on the operative date of any act of
the legislature of the state of California which amends section 7202 of the
Revenue and Taxation Code or which repeals and reenacts section 7202 of the
Revenue and Taxation Code to provide an exemption from city sales and use taxes
for operators of waterborne vessels in the same, or substantially the same,
language as that existing in subdivisions (i)(7) and (i)(8) of section 7202 as
those subdivisions read on October 1, 1983. (Ord. 1841 §§ 3, 4, 1984: prior
code § 207)
3.20.140: AMENDMENTS:
All subsequent amendments of the Revenue and Taxation Code which relate to the
sales and use tax and which are not inconsistent with part 1.5 of division 2 of
the Revenue and Taxation Code shall automatically become a part of this
chapter. (Prior code § 2508)
3.20.150: ENJOINMENT OF COLLECTION PROHIBITED:
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall
issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or the
city, or against any officer of the state or the city, to prevent or enjoin the
collection under this chapter, or part 1.5 of division 2 of the Revenue and
Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. (Prior
code § 2508.1)
3.20.160: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a
fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment for a
period of not more than six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(Prior code § 2509)
CHAPTER 3.24
TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX
SECTION:
3.24.010: Short Title
3.24.020: Definitions; Generally
3.24.030: Hotel Defined
3.24.040: Occupancy Defined
3.24.050: Operator Defined
3.24.060: Person Defined
3.24.070: Rent Defined
3.24.080: Tax Administrator Defined
3.24.090: Transient Defined
3.24.100: Imposition
3.24.110: Exemptions
3.24.120: Operator; Duties
3.24.130: Registration Certificate; Issuance
3.24.140: Registration Certificate; Contents
3.24.150: Report And Remittance
3.24.160: Determination Of Tax
3.24.170: Appeal Of Decision
3.24.180: Recordation
3.24.190: Refund; Filing Of Claim
3.24.200: Refund; Operator Claim Establishment
3.24.210: Refund; Transient Claim Establishment
3.24.220: Refund; Entitlement
3.24.230: Actions To Collect
3.24.240: Penalty And Interest; Generally
3.24.250: Penalty And Interest; Original Delinquency
3.24.260: Penalty And Interest; Continued Delinquency
3.24.270: Penalty And Interest; Fraud
3.24.280: Penalty And Interest; Rate Of Interest
3.24.290: Penalty And Interest; Merger With Tax
3.24.300: Violation; Misdemeanor
3.24.310: Violation; Penalty
3.24.010: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the UNIFORM TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX ORDINANCE OF
THE CITY. (Prior code § 2600)
3.24.020: DEFINITIONS; GENERALLY:
Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions given in sections
3.24.030 through
 3.24.090 of this chapter shall govern the construction of this chapter. (Prior
code § 2601)
3.24.030: HOTEL DEFINED:
"Hotel" means any structure, or any portion of any structure, which is occupied
or intended or designed for occupancy by transients for dwelling, lodging or
sleeping purposes and includes any hotel, inn, tourist home or house, motel,
studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodging house, rooming house, apartment house,
dormitory, public or private club, mobilehome located outside a mobilehome
park, or house trailer at a fixed location, or other similar structure or
portion thereof. "Hotel" does not mean any hospital, convalescent home or
sanitarium. (Ord. 1921 § 1, 1986: prior code § 2601.2)
3.24.040: OCCUPANCY DEFINED:
"Occupancy" means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession,
of any room or portion thereof, in any hotel for dwelling, lodging or sleeping
purposes. (Prior code § 2601.3)
3.24.050: OPERATOR DEFINED:
"Operator" means the person who is proprietor of the hotel, whether in the
capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee, or any
other capacity. Where the operator performs his functions through a managing
agent of any type or character other than an employee, the managing agent shall
also be deemed an operator for the purposes of this chapter and shall have the
same duties and liabilities as his principal. Compliance with the provisions of
this chapter by either the principal or the managing agent shall, however, be
considered to be compliance by both. (Prior code § 2601.6)
3.24.060: PERSON DEFINED:
"Person" means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association,
social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, estate,
trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or
combination acting as a unit. (Prior code § 2601.1)
3.24.070: RENT DEFINED:
"Rent" means the consideration charged, whether or not received, for the
occupancy of space in a hotel valued in money, whether to be received in money,
goods, labor or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property
and services of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever.
(Prior code § 2601.5)
3.24.080: TAX ADMINISTRATOR DEFINED:
"Tax administrator" means the city's finance director, or the director's
designee. (Ord. 2684 § 2, 2007: prior code § 2601.7)
3.24.090: TRANSIENT DEFINED:
"Transient" means any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to
occupancy by reason of concession, permit, right of access, license or other
agreement for a period of thirty (30) consecutive calendar days or less,
counting portions of calendar days as full days. Any such person occupying
space in a hotel shall be deemed to be a transient until the period of thirty
(30) days has expired unless there is an agreement in writing between the
operator and the occupant providing for a longer period of occupancy. In
determining whether a person is a transient, uninterrupted periods of time
extending both prior and subsequent to the effective date hereof may be
considered. "Transient" does not include a mobilehome tenant when the tenant is
an employee of the owner or operator of the mobilehome. (Ord. 1921 § 2, 1986:
prior code § 2601.4)
3.24.100: IMPOSITION:
For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel, each transient is subject to and
shall pay a tax in the amount of ten percent (10%) of the rent charged by the
operator. Such tax constitutes a debt owed by the transient to the city which
is extinguished only by payment to the operator or to the city. The transient
shall pay the tax to the operator of the hotel at the time the rent is paid. If
the rent is paid in installments, the proportionate share of the tax shall be
paid with each installment.
The unpaid tax shall be due upon the transient's ceasing to occupy space in the
hotel. If for any reason the tax due is not paid to the operator of the hotel,
the city may require that such tax shall be paid directly to the city's finance
director, or the director's designee. (Ord. 2684 § 2, 2007: Ord. 2083 § 1,
1989: prior code § 2610)
3.24.110: EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   No tax shall be imposed upon:
      1.   Any person as to whom, or any occupancy as to which, it is beyond
the power of the city to impose the tax herein provided;
      2.   Any federal or state officer or employee when on official business;
      3.   Any officer or employee of a foreign government who is exempt by
reason of express provision of federal law or international treaty;
      4.   A corporation or association organized and operated exclusively for
religious, charitable or educational purposes, or for one or more such
purposes, no part of the net earnings of which inures to the benefit of any
private shareholder or individual;
      5.   Where the rent is at the rate of two dollars ($2.00) a day or less.
   B.   No exemption shall be granted except upon a claim therefor made at the
time rent is collected and under penalty of perjury upon a form prescribed by
the tax administrator. (Prior code §§ 2620–2620.5)
3.24.120: OPERATOR; DUTIES:
Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this chapter to the same extent
and at the same time as the rent is collected from every transient. The amount
of tax shall be separately stated from the amount of the rent charged, and each
transient shall receive a receipt for payment from the operator. No operator of
a hotel shall advertise or state in any manner, whether directly or indirectly,
that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator,
or that it will not be added to the rent, or that, if added, any part will be
refunded except in the manner provided in this chapter. (Prior code § 2630)
3.24.130: REGISTRATION CERTIFICATE; ISSUANCE:
Within thirty (30) days after the effective date hereof, or within thirty (30)
days after commencing business, whichever is later, each operator of any hotel
renting occupancy to transients shall register such hotel with the tax
administrator and obtain from him a transient occupancy registration
certificate to be at all times posted in a conspicuous place on the premises.
Such certificate shall, among other things, state the following:
   A.   The name of the operator;
   B.   The address of the hotel;
   C.   The date upon which the certificate was issued. (Prior code § 2631)
3.24.140: REGISTRATION CERTIFICATE; CONTENTS:
The certificate shall state, in part, as follows:
This Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate signifies that the person
named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of the Uniform
Transient Occupancy Tax Ordinance by registering with the Tax Administrator for
the purpose of collecting from transients the Transient Occupancy Tax and
remitting said tax to the Tax Administrator. This certificate does not
authorize any person to conduct any unlawful business or to conduct any lawful
business in an unlawful manner, nor to operate a hotel without strictly
complying with all local applicable laws, including but not limited to those
requiring a permit from any board, commission, department or office of this
City. This certificate does not constitute a permit.
(Prior code § 2632)
3.24.150: REPORT AND REMITTANCE:
Each operator shall, on or before the last day of the month following the close
of each calendar quarter, or at the close of any shorter reporting period which
may be established by the tax administrator, make a return to the tax
administrator, on forms provided by him of the total rents charged and received
and the amount of tax collected for transient occupancies. At the time the
return is filed, the full amount of the tax collected shall be remitted to the
tax administrator. The tax administrator may establish shorter reporting
periods for any certificate holder if he seems it necessary in order to ensure
collection of the tax and he may require further information in the return.
Returns and payments are due immediately upon cessation of business for any
reason. All taxes collected by operators pursuant to this chapter shall be held
in trust for the account of the city until payment thereof is made to the tax
administrator. (Prior code § 2633)
3.24.160: DETERMINATION OF TAX:
If any operator shall fail or refuse to collect such tax and to make, within
the time provided in this chapter, any report and remittance of such tax or any
portion thereof required by this chapter, the tax administrator shall proceed
in such manner as he may deem best to obtain facts and information on which to
base his estimate of the tax due. As soon as the tax administrator shall
procure such facts and information as he is able to obtain upon which to base
the assessment of any tax imposed by this chapter and payable by any operator
who has failed or refused to collect the same and to make such report and
remittance, he shall proceed to determine and assess against such operator the
tax, interest and penalties provided for by this chapter. If such determination
is made, the tax administrator shall give a notice of the amount so assessed by
serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States mail, postage
prepaid, addressed to the operator so assessed at his last known place of
address. Such operator may within ten (10) days after the serving or mailing of
such notice make application in writing to the tax administrator for a hearing
on the amount assessed. If application by the operator for a hearing is not
made within the time prescribed, the tax, interest and penalties, if any,
determined by the tax administrator shall become final and conclusive and
immediately due and payable. If such application is made, the tax administrator
shall give not less than five (5) days' written notice in the manner prescribed
herein to the operator to show cause at a time and place fixed in such notice
why such amount specified therein should not be fixed for such tax, interest
and penalties. At such hearing, the operator may appear and offer evidence why
such specified tax, interest and penalties should not be so fixed. After such
hearing the tax administrator shall determine the proper tax to be remitted and
shall thereafter give written notice to the person in the manner prescribed
herein of such determination and the amount of such tax, interest and
penalties. The amount determined to be due shall be payable after fifteen (15)
days unless an appeal is taken as provided in section
3.24.170 of this chapter. (Prior code § 2641)
3.24.170: APPEAL OF DECISION:
Any operator aggrieved by any decision of the tax administrator with respect to
the amount of such tax, interest and penalties, if any, may appeal to the
council by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk within fifteen (15)
days of the serving or mailing of the determination of the tax due. The council
shall fix a time and place for hearing such appeal and the city clerk shall
give notice in writing to such operator at his last known place of address. The
findings of the council shall be final and conclusive and shall be served upon
the appellant in the manner prescribed above for service of notice of hearing.
Any amount found to be due shall be immediately due and payable upon the
service of notice. (Prior code § 2642)
3.24.180: RECORDATION:
It shall be the duty of every operator liable for the collection and payment to
the city of any tax imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve, for a period
of three (3) years, all records of rents and transients as required by the tax
administrator, who shall have the right to inspect such records at reasonable
times. (Prior code § 2643)
3.24.190: REFUND; FILING OF CLAIM:
Whenever the amount of any tax, interest or penalty has been overpaid or paid
more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by
the city under this chapter it may be refunded as provided in sections
3.24.200 and
3.24.210 of this chapter provided a claim in writing therefor, stating under
penalty of perjury the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded, is
filed with the tax administrator within three (3) years of the date of payment.
The claim shall be on forms furnished by the tax administrator. (Prior code §
2650)
3.24.200: REFUND; OPERATOR CLAIM ESTABLISHMENT:
An operator may claim a refund or take as credit against taxes collected and
remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than once, or erroneously or illegally
collected or received, when it is established in a manner prescribed by the tax
administrator that the person from whom the tax has been collected was not a
transient; provided, however, that neither a refund nor a credit shall be
allowed unless the amount of the tax so collected has either been refunded to
the transient or credited to rent subsequently payable by the transient to the
operator. (Prior code § 2651)
3.24.210: REFUND; TRANSIENT CLAIM ESTABLISHMENT:
A transient may obtain a refund of taxes overpaid, paid more than once, or
erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city, by filing a claim
in the manner provided in section
3.24.190 of this chapter, but only when the tax was paid by the transient
directly to the tax administrator, or when the transient having paid the tax to
the operator, establishes to the satisfaction of the tax administrator that the
transient has been unable to obtain a refund from the operator who collected
the tax. (Prior code § 2652)
3.24.220: REFUND; ENTITLEMENT:
No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this chapter unless the
claimant establishes his right thereto by written records showing entitlement
thereto. (Prior code § 2653)
3.24.230: ACTIONS TO COLLECT:
Any tax required to be paid in accordance with this chapter shall be deemed a
debt owed by the transient to the city. Any such tax collected by an operator
which has not been paid to the city shall be deemed a debt owed by the operator
to the city. Any person owing money to the city under the provisions of this
chapter shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the city for the
recovery of such amount. (Prior code § 2660)
3.24.240: PENALTY AND INTEREST; GENERALLY:
Provisions regarding penalty and interest shall be as set forth in sections
3.24.250 through
3.24.290 of this chapter. (Prior code § 2640)
3.24.250: PENALTY AND INTEREST; ORIGINAL DELINQUENCY:
Any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter within the time
required shall pay a penalty of ten percent (10%) of the amount of the tax in
addition to the amount of the tax. (Prior code § 2640.1)
3.24.260: PENALTY AND INTEREST; CONTINUED DELINQUENCY:
Any operator who fails to remit any delinquent remittance on or before a period
of thirty (30) days following the date on which the remittance first became
delinquent shall pay a second delinquency penalty of ten percent (10%) of the
amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax and the ten percent
(10%) penalty first imposed. (Prior code § 2640.2)
3.24.270: PENALTY AND INTEREST; FRAUD:
If the tax administrator determines that the nonpayment of any remittance due
under this chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of twenty five percent (25%) of
the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties
stated in sections
3.24.250 and
3.24.260 of this chapter. (Prior code § 2640.3)
3.24.280: PENALTY AND INTEREST; RATE OF INTEREST:
In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who fails to emit any tax
imposed by this chapter shall pay interest at the rate of one-half of one
percent (0.5%) per month or fraction thereof on the amount of the tax,
exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became
delinquent until paid. (Prior code § 2640.4)
3.24.290: PENALTY AND INTEREST; MERGER WITH TAX:
Every penalty imposed and such interest as accrues under the provisions of this
chapter shall become a part of the tax herein required to be paid. (Prior code
§ 2640.5)
3.24.300: VIOLATION; MISDEMEANOR:
Any operator or other person who fails or refuses to register as required
herein, or to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses
to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the tax
administrator, or who renders a false or fraudulent return or claim, is guilty
of a misdemeanor, and is punishable as set out in section
 3.24.310 of this chapter. Any person required to make, render, sign or verify
any report or claim who makes any false or fraudulent report or claim with
intent to defeat or evade the determination of any amount due required by this
chapter to be made, is guilty of a misdemeanor and is punishable as set out in
section
3.24.310 of this chapter. (Prior code § 2671)
3.24.310: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be punishable therefor by a fine of not more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment in the city jail for a period of
not more than six (6) months or both such fine and imprisonment. (Prior code §
2670)
CHAPTER 3.28
REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX
SECTION:
3.28.010: Short Title; Adoption Authority
3.28.020: Imposition
3.28.030: Liability
3.28.040: Applicability
3.28.050: Exemption; Federal Agency
3.28.060: Exemption; Filing Of Conveyances
3.28.070: Exemption; Delivery Of Conveyances
3.28.080: Exemption; Foreclosure
3.28.090: Exemption; Division Of Community Property
3.28.100: Administration
3.28.010: SHORT TITLE; ADOPTION AUTHORITY:
This chapter shall be known as the REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX ORDINANCE OF THE
CITY. It is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in part 6.7 (commencing
with section 11901) of division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the
state. (Prior code § 28000)
3.28.020: IMPOSITION:
There is imposed on each deed, instrument or writing by which any lands,
tenements, or other realty sold within the city shall be granted, assigned,
transferred or otherwise conveyed to, or vested in, the purchaser or
purchasers, or any other person or persons, by his or their direction, when the
consideration or value of the interest or property conveyed (exclusive of the
value of any lien or encumbrances remaining thereon at the time of sale)
exceeds one hundred dollars ($100.00), a tax at the rate of twenty seven and
one-half cents ($0.275) for each five hundred dollars ($500.00) or fractional
part thereof. (Prior code § 28001)
3.28.030: LIABILITY:
Any tax imposed pursuant to section
3.28.020 of this chapter shall be paid by any person who makes, signs or issues
any document or instrument subject to the tax, or for whose use or benefit the
same is made, signed or issued. (Prior code § 28002)
3.28.040: APPLICABILITY:
Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to any instrument in
writing given to secure a debt. (Prior code § 28003)
3.28.050: EXEMPTION; FEDERAL AGENCY:
Any deed, instrument or writing to which the United States or any agency or
instrumentality thereof, any state or territory, or political subdivision
thereof, is a party shall be exempt from any tax imposed pursuant to this
chapter when the exempt agency is acquiring title. (Ord. 1922 § 1, 1986: prior
code § 28004)
3.28.060: EXEMPTION; FILING OF CONVEYANCES:
   A.   Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to the making,
delivering or filing of conveyances to make effective any plan of
reorganization or adjustment which has been:
      1.   Confirmed under the federal bankruptcy act, as amended;
      2.   Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a
railroad corporation, as defined in subdivision (m) of section 205 of title 11
of the United States Code, as amended;
      3.   Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a
corporation, as defined in subdivision (3) of section 506 of title 11 of the
United States Code, as amended; or
      4.   Whereby a mere change in identity, form or place of organization is
effected.
   B.   Subsections A1 to A4, inclusive, of this section shall only apply if
the making, delivery or filing of instruments of transfer or conveyances occurs
within five (5) years from the date of such confirmation, approval or change.
(Prior code § 28005)
3.28.070: EXEMPTION; DELIVERY OF CONVEYANCES:
Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to the making or
delivery of conveyances to make effective any order of the securities and
exchange commission, as defined in subdivision (a) of section 1083 of the
Internal Revenue Code of 1954; but only if:
   A.   The order of the securities and exchange commission in obedience to
which such conveyance is made recites that such conveyance is necessary or
appropriate to effectuate the provisions of section 79k of title 15 of the
United States Code, relating to the public utility holding company act of 1935;
   B.   Such order specifies the property which is ordered to be conveyed;
   C.   Such conveyance is made in obedience to such order;
      1.   In the case of any realty held by partnership, no tax shall be
imposed pursuant to this chapter by reason of any transfer of an interest in
any partnership or otherwise, if:
         a.   Such partnership (or another partnership) is considered a
continuing partnership within the meaning of section 708 of the Internal
Revenue Code of 1954; and
         b.   Such continuing partnership continues to hold the realty
concerned.
      2.   If there is a termination of any partnership within the meaning of
section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, for purposes of this chapter,
such partnership shall be treated as having executed an instrument whereby
there was conveyed, for fair market value (exclusive of the value of any lien
or encumbrance remaining thereon), all realty held by such partnership at the
time of such termination.
      3.   Not more than one tax shall be imposed pursuant to this chapter by
reason of a termination described in subsection B of this section, and any
transfer pursuant thereto, with respect to the realty held by such partnership
at the time of such termination. (Prior code § 28006)
3.28.080: EXEMPTION; FORECLOSURE:
Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply with respect to any
deed, instrument, or writing to a beneficiary or mortgagee, which is taken from
the mortgagor or trustor as a result of or in lieu of foreclosure; provided
that such tax shall apply to the extent that the consideration exceeds the
unpaid debt, including accrued interest and cost of foreclosure. Consideration,
unpaid debt amount and identification of grantee as beneficiary or mortgagee
shall be noted on such deed, instrument or writing, or stated in an affidavit
or declaration under penalty of perjury for tax purposes. (Ord. 1922 § 2, 1986:
prior code § 28006A)
3.28.090: EXEMPTION; DIVISION OF COMMUNITY PROPERTY:
   A.   Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply with respect
to any deed, instrument, or other writing which purports to transfer, divide,
or allocate community, quasi-community, or quasi-marital property assets
between spouses for the purpose of effecting a division of community, quasi-
community, or quasi- marital property which is required by a judgment decreeing
a dissolution of the marriage or legal separation, by a judgment of nullity, or
by any other judgment or order rendered pursuant to part 5 (commencing with
section 4000) of division 4 of the Civil Code, or by a written agreement
between the spouses, executed in contemplation of any such judgment or order,
whether or not the written agreement is incorporated as part of any of those
judgments or orders.
   B.   In order to qualify for the exemption provided in subsection A of this
section, the deed, instrument, or other writing shall include a written
recital, signed by either spouse, stating that the deed, instrument, or other
writing is entitled to the exemption. (Ord. 1922 § 3, 1986: prior code §
28006B)
3.28.100: ADMINISTRATION:
The county recorder shall administer these provisions in conformity with the
provisions of part 6.7 of division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and the
provisions of any county ordinance adopted pursuant thereto.
   A.   Claims for refund of taxes imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be
governed by the provisions of chapter 5 (commencing with section 5096) of part
9 of division 1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state.
   B.   This chapter shall become operative upon the operative date of any
ordinance adopted by the county, pursuant to part 6.7 (commencing with section
11901) of division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state, or upon the
effective date hereof, whichever is the later.
   C.   Upon its adoption the city clerk shall file two (2) copies of the
ordinance codified in this chapter with the county recorder of San Bernardino
County. (Prior code § 28007)
CHAPTER 3.32
OPEN SPACE AND PARK FEES
SECTION:
3.32.010: Purpose
3.32.020: Definitions
3.32.030: Compliance With Chapter
3.32.040: Fee Imposition
3.32.050: Determination And Payment
3.32.060: Adjustment Of Fee
3.32.010: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to implement the Redlands general
plan to ensure that open space lands and active and passive parks are made
available to the public concurrent with the need for such lands and parks
caused by new development within the city. The fees established pursuant to
this chapter shall be imposed as a condition of approval of new residential,
commercial, office, and industrial development to pay for the costs incurred by
the city for acquiring, developing, improving and expanding open space areas,
scenic drives, parks, playgrounds and recreational facilities to meet the
increased needs for those facilities resulting from the effects of new
development. (Ord. 2661 § 2, 2007; amd. Ord. 2912, 7-21-2020)
3.32.020: DEFINITIONS:
The definitions set forth in this section govern the construction of this
chapter:
COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Any building in which wholesale or retail selling or
educational activities may occur, and hotel/motel development.
DEVELOPMENT PROJECT: Any use to which land is put, and any building,
construction, or other alteration of land incident thereto, and as defined in
Cal. Gov’t Code section 66000(a), as such section may be amended from time to
time.
INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT: All manufacturing and warehouse development.
MULTI-FAMILY UNIT: Each unit of an apartment, duplex, multiple-dwelling
structure or dwelling group or condominium, and a manufactured or mobile home
located in a mobile home park on a temporary, semipermanent or permanent basis.
OFFICE DEVELOPMENT: All general, professional and medical office development.
SINGLE-FAMILY DEVELOPMENT: An attached or detached one-family dwelling unit.
(Ord. 2661 § 2, 2007; amd. Ord. 2912, 7-21-2020)
3.32.030: COMPLIANCE WITH CHAPTER:
As a condition of issuance of a building permit, an applicant for a development
project shall comply with all provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2661 § 2, 2007;
amd. Ord. 2912, 7-21-2020)
3.32.040: FEE IMPOSITION:
Open space and parks fees shall be collected from all applicants for
development projects for the purpose of acquiring, developing, improving and
expanding open space and park lands identified in the city's open space and
park lands acquisition and development capital improvement plan in accordance
with the fees approved by the City Council. No building permit shall be issued
unless the fees required by this chapter are first paid. Fees collected
pursuant to this chapter shall be deposited into a separate account or fund in
a manner to avoid any commingling of such fees with other revenue of the city
and the fees shall be expended solely for the purposes for which the fees were
collected. (Ord. 2962, 2024: Ord. 2912, 2020: Ord. 2661 § 2, 2007)
3.32.050: DETERMINATION AND PAYMENT:
The fees established by this chapter are collected for the acquisition of lands
and the construction of improvements and facilities for which the city has
established an account, appropriated funds and adopted a proposed acquisition
and construction schedule or plan, prior to final inspection or issuance of a
certificate of occupancy for the development project for which the fees are
imposed, or the fees are to reimburse the city for expenditures previously
made, and shall be determined and become due and payable to the city at the
time of issuance of a building permit for a single-family residence, mobile
home space, multi-family unit, or commercial, office or industrial development.
(Ord. 2661 § 2, 2007; amd. Ord. 2912, 7-21-2020)
3.32.060: ADJUSTMENT OF FEE:
On July 1 of each fiscal year, the city's finance director, in coordination
with the city's facilities and community services director, shall make annual
adjustments to the specific amounts of open space and parks fees approved by
the City Council by a percentage equal to the percentage change in the
construction cost index of the "Engineering News-Record" twenty (20) cities
annual average for the preceding twelve (12) month period. The purpose of this
adjustment is to offset the effects of inflation related construction cost
increases or any deflation related decreases. If this index should cease
publication, the finance director shall use any appropriate official index
published by the bureau of labor statistics, or similar agency as may then
exist or may then be most nearly equivalent thereto. Land costs shall also be
evaluated annually and adjusted as necessary based on the current market
conditions at the time. (Ord. 2962, 2024: Ord. 2912, 2020: Ord. 2661 § 2, 2007)
CHAPTER 3.36
CAPITAL OUTLAYS FUND
SECTION:
3.36.010: Establishment
3.36.020: Use
3.36.030: Tax Levy
3.36.040: Transfer Of Funds
3.36.050: Scope Of Capital Outlays
3.36.010: ESTABLISHMENT:
Pursuant to the provisions of chapter 717, statutes of 1937, as amended
(Deering general laws act 8496a), a fund is created for capital outlays, to be
known as "special fund for capital outlays". (Ord. 1920 § 1, 1986: prior code §
15101)
3.36.020: USE:
Such fund shall remain inviolate for the making of such capital outlays as the
city council shall direct to be made from such fund. (Ord. 1920 § 2, 1986:
prior code § 15102)
3.36.030: TAX LEVY:
The city council may include in its annual tax levies, taxes for the raising of
monies for such fund; provided, that except as authorized by law, no levies so
made shall exceed any limitation imposed by the general laws of the state upon
the right of the city to impose taxes. (Ord. 1920 § 3, 1986: prior code §
15103)
3.36.040: TRANSFER OF FUNDS:
The city council may transfer to such fund any unencumbered surplus funds
remaining on hand at the end of any fiscal year. (Prior code § 15104)
3.36.050: SCOPE OF CAPITAL OUTLAYS:
The term "capital outlays" does not include the construction, acquisition,
extension of, or addition to utilities other than utilities for the furnishing
of water supply. For purposes of this section, the term "utilities" does not
include sewage or sanitation facilities or airports. (Ord. 1920 § 4, 1986:
prior code § 15105)
CHAPTER 3.40
GAS TAX FUND
(Rep. by Ord. 2718 § 8, 2009)
CHAPTER 3.41
REVIEW PROCEDURES FOR WATER AND WASTEWATER RATES AND CHARGES
SECTION:
3.41.010: Purpose And Intent
3.41.020: Review Of Rates And Charges
3.41.010: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish procedures for the review of the
city's water and wastewater rates, charges, and revenue requirements on a
regular basis. The water and wastewater utilities must remain fiscally self-
supporting, and require rates and charges to be established that provide
sufficient revenue to recover the reasonable costs incurred by providing water
and wastewater service to its customers. A regular review will provide the city
with the basis necessary to meet fiscal obligations to ensure ongoing fiscal
stability. (Ord. 2530 § 1, 2002)
3.41.020: REVIEW OF RATES AND CHARGES:
   A.   The city council has formed a utilities advisory committee comprised of
city water and wastewater utility customers representing the various customer
classes. The committee is charged with reviewing the current water and
wastewater rates, charges, and revenue requirements on a biannual basis. The
primary goals of the utilities advisory committee are the development of water
and wastewater rates that provide revenues that: 1) recover costs reasonably
borne; 2) are equitable to all customer classes; 3) are in compliance with all
state and federal regulations; and 4) are easily explained to customers. Based
on the review, the committee will prepare and present recommendations to the
city council regarding rates and charges for water and wastewater service
provided by the city. (Ord. 2608 § 1, 2005: Ord. 2530 § 1, 2002)
CHAPTER 3.42
SEPTAGE LOADS CHARGES
SECTION:
3.42.010: Establishment
3.42.010: ESTABLISHMENT:
All persons discharging septic tank loads into the city's wastewater treatment
plant shall pay a fee per gallon as established in section
3.62.040 of this title. (Ord. 2526 § 1, 2002: Ord. 2284 § 2, 1995)
CHAPTER 3.44
SEWER CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT FUND
SECTION:
3.44.010: Establishment
3.44.020: Definitions
3.44.030: Charges
3.44.040: Adjustment Of Charges
3.44.010: ESTABLISHMENT:
   A.   The Sewer Capital Improvement Fund is established to implement the
Redlands general plan and to finance the construction of wastewater capital
facilities to provide new capacity required to serve development requiring
sewer service from the City. Included are wastewater treatment plant
facilities, sewer trunk lines, sewage disposal facilities, outfall sewers,
interceptor sewers, and other capital facilities and appurtenances over and
above the eight inch (8") collection mains and appurtenances used to serve
property frontage, except as otherwise provided in chapter 13.44 of this Code.
   B.   The City Council finds that the construction of wastewater capital
facilities benefits all development which is required to obtain sewer service
from the City. This chapter shall establish the method of collecting fees for
financing the construction of the wastewater capital facilities other than
those facilities which are provided through the approval of subdivision or
parcel maps, or other developments conditioned under title 18, "Zoning
Regulations", of this Code. All interest on the cash balance of the fund shall
accrue to the Sewer Capital Improvement Fund. (Ord. 2880, 2019)
3.44.020: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of carrying out the intent of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply:
   ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT: An attached or a detached residential dwelling unit
which provides complete independent living facilities for one or more persons.
It shall include permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking,
and sanitation on the same parcel as the single-family dwelling is situated. An
accessory dwelling unit also includes the following:
   A.   An efficiency unit, as defined in section 17958.1 of the Health and
Safety Code.
   B.   A manufactured home, as defined in section 18007 of the Health and
Safety Code.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: A detached subordinate structure located on the same
parcel of ground with a main structure, the use of which is customarily
incidental to that permitted in the main structure or to the land upon which
the main structure is located including, but not limited to, laundry rooms,
garages, hobby shops, guesthouses, or swimming pools connected to the building
sewer.
   ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY: The Director of Municipal Utilities and
Engineering of the City.
   BUILDING SEWER: That part of the horizontal piping of a drainage system
which extends from the end of the building sewer drain and which receives the
discharge of the building sewer drain and conveys it to a public sewer, private
sewer, individual sewage disposal system or other point of disposal.
   DEVELOPMENT: Any use to which land is put, building or other alteration of
land and construction incidental thereto.
   DWELLING: A structure designed and used exclusively for residential
occupancy.
   MOBILEHOME: A vehicle, other than a motor vehicle, designed or used for
human habitation, for carrying persons and property on its own structure, and
for being drawn by a motor vehicle.
   MOBILEHOME PARK: Any area or tract of land where one or more mobilehome lots
are rented or leased or held out for rent or lease to accommodate mobilehomes
used for human habitation.
   MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING UNIT: A structure designed and used for the
occupancy of two (2) or more families.
   PERSON: A natural person, his heirs, executors, administrators, or assigns
and also includes a firm, partnership, or corporation, and its or their
successors or assigns, or the agent of any of the aforesaid.
   SENIOR RESTRICTED DWELLING UNIT: For purposes of this chapter, is defined
as:
   A.   A unit restricted by a covenant that runs with the land addressing the
required age restriction to the satisfaction of the City.
   B.   The unit's water meter serves only internal water use. Landscape
irrigation shall be provided through a separate water meter service.
   C.   The dwelling unit shall be less than one thousand five hundred (1,500)
square feet of livable area.
Removal of the age restriction or an increase in the size of the unit will
result in a reassessment of the charges.
   SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING UNIT: A structure or portion thereof designed
exclusively for the occupancy of one family.
   STRUCTURE: Any building or improvement artificially built up or composed of
parts joined together in some definite manner, including, but not limited to,
dwellings, commercial structures, industrial structures, schools, churches, or
hotels.
   WASTEWATER CAPITAL FACILITIES: The wastewater facilities identified or
referred to in the "Water and Wastewater Rate Study Update - 1991" as prepared
by the Public Works Department and approved by the City, which identifies
facilities and improvements required to serve new development that will be
required to obtain City sewer service. (Ord. 2880, 2019)
3.44.030: CHARGES:
The specific amounts of the sewer capital improvement charges shall be approved
by the City Council and shall be paid as a condition of issuing building
permits, or other City approved entitlement, as determined within the sole
discretion of the City, for buildings containing plumbing fixtures and required
to have new sewer services tapping into the City's sewage system or increasing
flow into the City's sewer system as estimated by the City. The charges shall
be those in effect on the date the permit is issued or as such other
entitlement issued by the City. (Ord. 2962, 2024: Ord. 2880, 2019)
3.44.040: ADJUSTMENT OF CHARGES:
On July 1 of each fiscal year, the City's Finance Director, in coordination
with the City's Municipal Utilities and Engineering Director, shall make annual
adjustments to the specific amounts of the sewer capital improvement fees
adopted by the City Council by a percentage equal to the percentage change in
the construction cost index of the Engineering News-Record's "Construction Cost
Index" - twenty (20) cities annual average for the preceding twelve (12) month
period. The purpose of this adjustment is to offset the effects of inflation
related construction cost increases or any deflation related decreases. If this
index should cease publication, the Finance Director shall use any appropriate
official index published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics, or similar agency
as may then exist or may then be most nearly equivalent thereto. (Ord. 2962,
2024: Ord. 2880, 2019)
CHAPTER 3.48
WATER CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT FUND
SECTION:
3.48.010: Establishment
3.48.020: Definitions
3.48.030: Charges
3.48.040: Adjustment Of Charges
3.48.010: ESTABLISHMENT:
The Water Capital Improvement Fund is established to implement the Redlands
general plan and finance the construction of water capital facilities and
improvements to provide new capacity required to serve new development
requiring water service from the City. Included are development of water
resources, water production, transmission, storage, and other capital
facilities and appurtenances over and above the eight inch (8") distribution
mains and appurtenances used to serve property frontage. The City Council finds
that the completion of water capital facilities benefits all development which
is required to obtain water service from the City. This chapter shall establish
the method of collecting fees for financing construction of the water capital
facilities other than those facilities which are provided through the approval
of subdivisions, parcel maps, or other developments conditioned under title 18,
"Zoning Regulations", of this Code. All interest on the cash balance of the
fund shall accrue to the Water Capital Improvement Fund. (Ord. 2880, 2019)
3.48.020: DEFINITIONS:
   ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT: An attached or a detached residential dwelling unit
which provides complete independent living facilities for one or more persons.
It shall include permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking,
and sanitation on the same parcel as the single-family dwelling is situated. An
accessory dwelling unit also includes the following:
   A.   An efficiency unit, as defined in section 17958.1 of the Health and
Safety Code.
   B.   A manufactured home, as defined in section 18007 of the Health and
Safety Code.
   ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY: The Director of Municipal Utilities and
Engineering of the City.
   DEVELOPMENT: Any use to which land is put, building or other alteration of
land and construction incidental thereto.
   SENIOR RESTRICTED DWELLING UNIT: For purposes of this chapter, is defined
as:
   A.   A unit restricted by a covenant that runs with the land addressing the
required age restriction to the satisfaction of the City.
   B.   The unit's water meter serves only internal water use. Landscape
irrigation shall be provided through a separate water meter service.
   C.   The dwelling unit shall be less than one thousand five hundred (1,500)
square feet of livable area.
Removal of the age restriction or an increase in the size of the unit will
result in a reassessment of the charges.
   WATER CAPITAL FACILITIES: The water capital facilities identified or
referred to in the "Water and Wastewater Rate Study Update - 1991" as prepared
by the Public Works Department and approved by the City which identifies
facilities and improvements required to serve new development that will be
required to obtain City water service. (Ord. 2880, 2019)
3.48.030: CHARGES:
   A.   Except as otherwise provided for in this section, the water capital
improvement fees shall be approved by the City Council and shall be paid as a
condition of approval of an application for a new water connection or, for any
property or use having an existing water connection and which is increasing its
water demand on the City's utilities system, as a condition of issuance of any
building permit, business license, or other entitlement from the City
associated with the change in the property or use that is causing such
increased demand. The charge due shall be that charge in effect on the date the
application for a connection is approved or on the date the entitlement
authorizing the increased demand is issued. All water capital improvement
charges shall be deposited into the City's Water Capital Improvement Fund.
(Ord. 2962, 2024: Ord. 2880, 2019)
3.48.040: ADJUSTMENT OF CHARGES:
On July 1 of each fiscal year, the City's Finance Director, in coordination
with the City's Municipal Utilities and Engineering Director, shall make annual
adjustments to the specific amounts of the water capital improvement fees
approved by the City Council by a percentage equal to the percentage change in
the construction cost index of the Engineering News-Record's "Construction Cost
Index" - twenty (20) cities annual average for the preceding twelve (12) month
period. The purpose of this adjustment is to offset the effects of inflation
related construction cost increases or any deflation related decreases. If this
index should cease publication, the Finance Director shall use any appropriate
official index published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics, or similar agency
as may then exist or may then be most nearly equivalent thereto. (Ord. 2962,
2024: Ord. 2880, 2019)
CHAPTER 3.52
WATER FUND
SECTION:
3.52.010: Establishment
3.52.040: Water Service Rate Schedule
3.52.010: ESTABLISHMENT:
There is established a water fund to provide for administration, operation and
maintenance of the Redlands domestic water system and its capacity to serve its
existing users. The following rules shall apply:
   A.   All service charges and all miscellaneous charges not otherwise
designated shall be credited to the water fund. The water fund shall be
operated as an enterprise fund. All interest on the cash balance of the fund
shall accrue to the water fund.
   B.   Established within the water fund are a reserve for capital and a
reserve for legal.
      1.   The reserve for capital shall be in addition to the annual capital
replacement budget, to establish a fund for capital expenditures necessary due
to unforeseen or unusual capital costs in any year, necessary to maintain the
existing system and its capacity.
      2.   The reserve for legal shall be in addition to the annual budget for
legal costs, to establish a fund for legal expenditures due to unforeseen or
unusual legal costs in any one year. (Ord. 2964, 2024: Ord. 1949 § 1, 1986:
prior code § 59102)
3.52.040: WATER SERVICE RATE SCHEDULE:
Amounts of charges are set out in table 3.52.040 of this section.
TABLE 3.52.040
WATER SERVICE RATE SCHEDULE
BIMONTHLY RATES
   A.   Potable water rates effective August 5, 2024:
      1.   Water Usage Charge:
         a.   Building water use:
 
Tiers  Units 1      Rate
Tier 1 1 to 16 hcf  $1.57
Tier 2 17 to 27 hcf 1.86
Tier 3 >27 hcf      2.79
 
   Note:
         1.    1 unit equals 100 cubic feet (hcf).
         b.   Nonbuilding water use:
 
Tiers  Units 1     Rate
Tier 1 1 to 27 hcf $1.77
Tier 2 >27 hcf     2.49
 
   Note:
         1.    1 unit equals 100 cubic feet (hcf).
      2.   Bimonthly Water Service Charge:
Meter Size Total Water     Customer Service Component1
(Inches)   Service Charge1
Meter Size Total Water     Customer Service Component1
(Inches)   Service Charge1
5/8        $   32.94    $6.85
3/4        44.01           6.85
1          65.50           6.85
11/2       117.60          6.85
2          173.62          6.85
3          299.97          6.85
4          462.79          6.85
6          853.56          6.85
8          1,257.36        6.85
10         2,976.76        6.85
12         3,914.61        6.85
 
   Note:
         1.    Prior agriculture irrigation customers are charged the customer
service component of the water service charge only.
      3.   Fire Protection Water Service Charge:
Meter Size Total Fire Protection Water
(Inches)   Service Charge (Bimonthly)
Meter Size Total Fire Protection Water
(Inches)   Service Charge (Bimonthly)
2          $  11.81
3          21.20
4          37.39
6          95.48
8          195.69
10         346.42
12         555.33
 
      4.   Fire Hydrant Construction Water Service:
 
Water usage charge                            $2.79/100 cubic feet
Monthly water service charge1                 $   299.97
Fire hydrant construction meter prepayment1,2 1,200.00
 
      Notes:
         1.   Minimum water service charge (if less than 30 days) will be
$299.97. Repairs to damaged fire hydrant construction meters shall be charged
at prevailing time and material rates to repair the meter.
         2.   Lost or stolen fire hydrant construction meters shall be charged
a $1,200.00 replacement charge.
      5.   Water Meter Installation Charge:
 
Meter Size Installation Charge
(Inches)
3/4        $175.00
1          225.00
11/2       430.00
2          595.00
 
      6.   Outside City Service Review:
      $50.00/unit, $500.00 maximum
      7.   Miscellaneous Fees:
After hours request for turn on service $60.00
(standby call)
Broken angle meter stop                 75.00
Broken lock                             15.00
Remove meter after illegal turn on      50.00
Remove straight connection              75.00
Cut service at main                     Time and materials
Water meter test charge                 $40.00, plus cost of new meter
Turn off for nonpayment                 $46.00
Recheck after turn off for nonpayment   20.00
Returned check                          35.00
Check by phone                          6.00
Establish new municipal services        15.00
account
Failure to notify change of ownership   35.00
Request for same day water turn on      26.00
after 3:00 P.M.
Obstructed meter resulting in an        15.00
estimated read or reread trip
Jumper fee (for use on buildings under  50.00
construction [prelandscape])
Submittal to collection agency          40% of outstanding balance submitted
                                        for collection action
                                        $40.00, plus full nonfire protection
Unauthorized fire protection water      meter service charge and any applicable
usage                                   wastewater charge at the prevailing
                                        rate
Unauthorized fire hydrant connection    $150.00, plus estimated water usage
                                        charge at the prevailing usage rate
 
   B.   Potable water rates effective July 1, 2025:
      1.   Water Usage Charge:
         a.   Building water use:
 
Tiers  Units1       Rate
Tier 1 1 to 16 hcf  $1.61
Tier 2 17 to 27 hcf 1.90
Tier 3 >27 hcf      2.85
 
         Note:
         1.    1 unit equals 100 cubic feet (hcf).
            b.   Nonbuilding water use:
 
Tiers  Units1      Rate
Tier 1 1 to 27 hcf $1.81
Tier 2 >27 hcf     2.54
 
         Note:
         1.    1 unit equals 100 cubic feet (hcf).
      2.   Bimonthly Water Service Charge:
Meter Size Total Water     Customer Service Component1
(Inches)   Service Charge1
Meter Size Total Water     Customer Service Component1
(Inches)   Service Charge1
5/8        $   33.60    $6.99
3/4        44.90           6.99
1          66.81           6.99
11/2       119.96          6.99
2          177.10          6.99
3          305.97          6.99
4          472.05          6.99
6          870.64          6.99
8          1,282.51        6.99
10         3,036.30        6.99
12         3,992.91        6.99
 
         Note:
         1.    Prior agriculture irrigation customers are charged the customer
service component of the water service charge only.
      3.   Fire Protection Water Service Charge:
Meter Size Total Fire Protection Water
(Inches)   Service Charge (Bimonthly)
Meter Size Total Fire Protection Water
(Inches)   Service Charge (Bimonthly)
2          $ 12.05
3          21.63
4          38.14
6          97.39
8          199.61
10         353.35
12         566.44
 
      4.   Fire Hydrant Construction Water Service:
 
Water usage charge                            $2.85/100 cubic feet
Monthly water service charge1                 $   305.97
Fire hydrant construction meter prepayment1,2 1,200.00
 
         Notes:
         1.   Minimum water service charge (if less than 30 days) will be
$305.97. Repairs to damaged fire hydrant construction meters shall be charged
at prevailing time and material rates to repair the meter.
         2.   Lost or stolen fire hydrant construction meters shall be charged
a $1,200.00 replacement charge.
      5.   Water Meter Installation Charge:
 
Meter Size Installation Charge
(Inches)
3/4        $175.00
1          225.00
11/2       430.00
2          595.00
 
      6.   Outside City Service Review:
      $50.00/unit, $500.00 maximum
      7.   Miscellaneous Fees:
After hours request for turn on service $60.00
(standby call)
Broken angle meter stop                 75.00
Broken lock                             15.00
Remove meter after illegal turn on      50.00
Remove straight connection              75.00
Cut service at main                     Time and materials
Water meter test charge                 $40.00, plus cost of new meter
Turn off for nonpayment                 $46.00
Recheck after turn off for nonpayment   20.00
Returned check                          35.00
Check by phone                          6.00
Establish new municipal services        15.00
account
Failure to notify change of ownership   35.00
Request for same day water turn on      26.00
after 3:00 P.M.
Obstructed meter resulting in an        15.00
estimated read or reread trip
Jumper fee (for use on buildings under  50.00
construction [prelandscape])
Submittal to collection agency          40% of outstanding balance submitted
                                        for collection action
                                        $40.00, plus full nonfire protection
Unauthorized fire protection water      meter service charge and any applicable
usage                                   wastewater charge at the prevailing
                                        rate
Unauthorized fire hydrant connection    $150.00, plus estimated water usage
                                        charge at the prevailing usage rate
 
(Ord. 2964, 2024: Ord. 2830, 2016)
CHAPTER 3.53
NONPOTABLE WATER SERVICE RATES AND DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES
SECTION:
3.53.010: Establishment
3.53.020: Nonpotable Water Service Rate Schedule
3.53.030: Nonpotable Water Capital Improvement Fund
3.53.040: Definitions
3.53.050: Impact Fees
3.53.060: Amount Of Fee
3.53.010: ESTABLISHMENT:
There is established a nonpotable water fund to provide for administration,
operation and maintenance of the Redlands nonpotable water system and its
capacity to serve its new and existing users. The following rules shall apply:
   A.   All service charges and all miscellaneous charges not otherwise
designated shall be credited to the nonpotable water fund. The nonpotable water
fund shall be operated as an enterprise fund. All interest on the cash balance
of the fund shall accrue to the nonpotable water fund. (Ord. 2608 § 3, 2005)
3.53.020: NONPOTABLE WATER SERVICE RATE SCHEDULE:
Amounts of charges are set out in table
3.53.020 of this section.
TABLE 3.53.020
NONPOTABLE WATER SERVICE RATE SCHEDULE
BIMONTHLY RATES
Nonpotable water rates effective January 1, 2010:
   A.   Nonpotable Water Usage Charge: $0.99 per 100 cubic feet
   B.   Nonpotable Water Service Charge:
Meter Size (Inches) Customer Service Component Total Nonpotable Water Service
                                               Charge
Meter Size (Inches) Customer Service Component Total Nonpotable Water Service
                                               Charge
3/4                 $4.70                      $ 13.81
1                   4.70                       20.65
11/2                4.70                       37.29
2                   4.70                       55.16
3                   4.70                       95.50
4                   4.70                       147.45
6                   4.70                       272.16
8                   4.70                       401.04
 
   C.   Water Service Charge Reduction: For the purpose of encouraging
conservation of water, there shall be a reduced nonpotable water service charge
applicable to those water customers of the city who voluntarily undertake the
conversion of their plumbing systems in accordance with city standards to
accept the delivery of nonpotable water. Notwithstanding any other provisions
of this section, the water usage charge for such persons shall be sixty four
cents ($0.64) per one hundred (100) cubic feet. (Ord. 2754, 2011)
3.53.030: NONPOTABLE WATER CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT FUND:
A nonpotable water capital improvement fund is hereby established to implement
the Redlands general plan and finance the construction of nonpotable water
capital facilities to provide new capacity required to serve new development
requiring nonpotable water service from the city. Included are development of
nonpotable water resources, nonpotable water production, transmission, storage,
and other capital facilities and appurtenances over and above the eight inch
(8") distribution mains and appurtenances used to serve property frontage. The
city council finds that the construction of nonpotable water capital facilities
benefits all new development which is required to obtain nonpotable water
service from the city. This chapter shall establish the method of collecting
fees for financing construction of the nonpotable water capital facilities
other than those facilities which are provided through the approval of
subdivisions, parcel map, or other development entitlements conditioned under
title 18, "Zoning Regulations", of this code. All interest on the cash balance
of the fund shall accrue to the nonpotable water capital improvement fund.
(Ord. 2704 § 2, 2008)
3.53.040: DEFINITIONS:
   DEVELOPMENT: Any use to which land is put, building or other alteration of
land and construction incidental thereto.
   NONPOTABLE WATER CAPITAL FACILITIES: The water capital facilities described
in the "Non-Potable/Recycled Water Rate Analysis And Development Impact Fees
Study" as prepared by the municipal utilities and engineering department and
approved by the city which identifies facilities and improvements required to
serve new development that will be required to obtain city nonpotable water
service. (Ord. 2704 § 2, 2008)
3.53.050: IMPACT FEES:
Except as otherwise provided for in this section, the nonpotable water
development impact fee shall be paid as a condition of approval of an
application for a new nonpotable water connection or, for any property or use
having an existing nonpotable water connection and which is increasing its
water demand on the city's utilities system, as a condition of issuance of any
building permit, business license or other entitlement from the city associated
with the change in the property or use that is causing such increased demand.
The fee due shall be that charge in effect on the date the application for a
connection is approved or on the date the entitlement authorizing the increased
demand is issued. All nonpotable water development impact fees shall be
deposited into the city's nonpotable water capital improvement fund. The
amounts of fees shall be established as provided for in section
3.53.060 of this chapter. (Ord. 2704 § 2, 2008)
3.53.060: AMOUNT OF FEE:
   A.   Fee: The nonpotable water development impact fee for all new
development shall be in the amount of one hundred forty six dollars ($146.00)
per one hundred (100) cubic feet of estimated flow per month. Effective January
1, 2010, this fee will automatically increase based upon the "Engineering News
Record" construction cost index up to a maximum of five percent (5%).
   B.   Adjustment Of Fee: On January 1, 2010, and every two (2) years
thereafter, the city's finance director, in coordination with the city's
municipal utilities and engineering director, shall make annual adjustments to
the nonpotable water development impact fee established by this chapter by a
percentage equal to the percentage change in the "Engineering News Record"
construction cost index - twenty (20) cities annual average for the preceding
twelve (12) month period. The purpose of such adjustment is to offset the
effects of inflation related construction cost increases or any deflation
related decreases. If this index should cease publication, the finance director
shall use any appropriate official index published by the bureau of labor
statistics or similar agency as may then exist or may then be most nearly
equivalent thereto. (Ord. 2704 § 2, 2008)
CHAPTER 3.54
TRANSPORTATION IMPROVEMENT FEES
SECTION:
3.54.010: Purpose And Intent
3.54.020: Definitions
3.54.030: Compliance With Chapter
3.54.040: Collection Of Transportation Improvement Fees
3.54.050: Credit For Construction Of Improvements
3.54.060: Required Construction
3.54.070: Payment
3.54.080: Establishment Of Fee
3.54.090: Adjustment Of Fee
3.54.010: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to implement the city's general
plan to ensure that streets, street improvements and traffic signal
improvements and facilities which meet city standards are available concurrent
with the need caused by new development within the city. The city council finds
that the implementation of the city's transportation improvement program is of
benefit to all new development within the city. This chapter shall establish
the methods of financing the construction of the required transportation
improvements. (Ord. 2652 § 1, 2006)
3.54.020: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever the following terms are used in this chapter, they shall have the
meanings established by this section:
   DEVELOPMENT PROJECT: Any discretionary permit or entitlement approved by the
city for any use to which land is proposed to be put, and for any building,
construction or alteration of land incident thereto.
   TRANSPORTATION IMPROVEMENT: The street or traffic signal improvements based
on plans prepared by authorized consulting engineers, the city public works
director, or his or her designated representatives, and approved by the city
which identify specific collector and arterial streets and traffic signal
systems as shown in the city's general plan and which are planned for
construction, reconstruction, widening or installation, along with the
appropriate right of way needed for such streets and traffic signals, which are
required on a citywide basis to serve the projected population of the city as
established by the city's general plan. (Ord. 2652 § 1, 2006)
3.54.030: COMPLIANCE WITH CHAPTER:
No development project shall be approved unless the city finds that the
transportation improvements necessary to serve the development project exist or
will be constructed to satisfy the requirements of the city's transportation
improvement program. To ensure consistency with the program, the city may
impose any conditions of approval on the development project which are
necessary to implement the program. The requirements of this chapter are
imposed as a condition of development to ensure implementation of, and
consistency with, the city's general plan and to protect the public health,
safety and welfare by ensuring that adequate transportation improvements will
be constructed and made available to serve new development projects prior to or
concurrently with the need. (Ord. 2652 § 1, 2006)
3.54.040: COLLECTION OF TRANSPORTATION IMPROVEMENT FEES:
Transportation improvement fees shall be collected from applicants for
development projects as provided in this chapter and approved by the City
Council implementing this chapter. No building permit shall be issued unless
the fees required by this chapter are first paid and the development project is
consistent with the city's general plan. Fees collected pursuant to this
chapter shall be deposited in a special fund established for the purpose of
constructing the transportation improvements provided for in the city's general
plan and approved capital improvement programs. The fees required by this
chapter are in addition to any other means of financing facilities or
improvements identified in the city's general plan which may be imposed on the
development of property under the provisions of state law, this code or city
policy. (Ord. 2962, 2024: Ord. 2652 § 1, 2006)
3.54.050: CREDIT FOR CONSTRUCTION OF IMPROVEMENTS:
The amount of transportation improvement fees required to be paid by an
applicant for a development project shall be reduced by the cost of any
transportation improvements identified in the city's program report for
development impact fees for master planned street and traffic signal
improvements which are required to be constructed by the applicant as a
condition of the city's approval of a development project. The applicant shall
be responsible for providing to the city data, satisfactory to the city's
public works director, substantiating the applicant's costs for constructing
such transportation improvements. The determination of the fee credit allowed
by this section shall be made by the city public works director. (Ord. 2652 §
1, 2006)
3.54.060: REQUIRED CONSTRUCTION:
Each applicant for a development project shall construct such transportation
improvements for the development project as may be required by the city public
works director to satisfy the city's transportation improvement program. The
city public works director shall determine what transportation improvements are
required to be constructed for each new development project within the city.
Such determination may be based upon traffic reports furnished by the
applicant, the city's transportation improvement program and plans, and such
other methods as determined by the city public works director. (Ord. 2652 § 1,
2006)
3.54.070: PAYMENT:
The transportation fees established by this chapter shall be paid by the
applicant for a development project as a condition of, and at the time of
issuance of, a building permit for the development project. The city council
has determined that the fees established by this chapter shall be collected for
transportation improvements for which an account has been established and funds
appropriated and for which the city has adopted a proposed construction
schedule or plan prior to the dates of final inspection or issuance of a
certificate of occupancy for the new development project paying the fees, and/
or the fees established by this chapter are to reimburse the city for
expenditures previously made. (Ord. 2652 § 1, 2006)
3.54.080: ESTABLISHMENT OF FEE:
In accordance with the city's general plan, the transportation improvement fees
shall cover one hundred percent (100%) of the city's estimated costs for
transportation improvements required by new development projects. The
transportation improvement fees to be paid by a development project shall be
based upon a determination of the number of vehicle trips generated by the
development project, and the specific transportation improvement fee per trip
generated shall be approved by the City Council. The transportation improvement
fees collected shall be allocated to various transportation improvements
comprising the city's street system, traffic signal system and freeway
interchanges in percentages established by resolution of the city council.
(Ord. 2962, 2024: Ord. 2652 § 1, 2006)
3.54.090: ADJUSTMENT OF FEE:
On July 1 of each fiscal year, beginning in July 2007, the director of finance
shall make annual adjustments to the specific amounts of fees approved by the
City Council by a percentage equal to the percentage chain (in the construction
cost index of the "Engineering News-Record" - 20 cities annual average) for the
preceding twelve (12) month period. This adjustment will offset the effects of
inflation related construction cost increase (or any deflation related
decreases). If this index should cease publication, the director of finance
shall use any appropriate official index published by the bureau of labor
statistics, or similar agency as may then exist or may then be most nearly
equivalent thereto. Land costs may be evaluated annually and adjusted as
necessary based on the current market conditions at the time. (Ord. 2962, 2024:
Ord. 2652 § 1, 2006)
CHAPTER 3.56
STORM DRAIN FACILITIES FEES
SECTION:
3.56.010: Purpose And Intent
3.56.020: Definitions
3.56.030: Compliance With Chapter
3.56.040: Storm Drain Fees
3.56.050: Credit For Construction Of Improvements
3.56.060: Required Construction
3.56.070: Determination And Payment
3.56.080: Adjustment Of Fee
3.56.010: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to implement the Redlands general
plan to ensure that storm drain facilities and improvements which satisfy city
standards are available concurrent with the need caused by new development
within the city. The city council further finds that the completion of a local
citywide storm drain system is of benefit to all new development within the
city. This chapter shall establish the methods of financing the construction of
the required storm drain facilities. (Ord. 2661 § 3, 2007)
3.56.020: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever the following terms are used in this chapter, they shall have the
meanings established by this section:
 
          An attached or a detached residential dwelling unit which provides complete
          independent living facilities for one or more persons. It shall include
          permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation
ACCESSORY on the same parcel as the single-family dwelling is situated. An accessory
DWELLING  dwelling unit also includes the following:
UNIT:     (A)   An efficiency unit, as defined in Section 17958.1 of the Health and
          Safety Code.
          (B)   A manufactured home, as defined in Section 18007 of the Health and
          Safety Code.
 
ADMINISTRATIVE The director of municipal utilities and engineering of the city.
AUTHORITY:
COMMERCIAL     Any building in which wholesale or retail selling or educational activities may
DEVELOPMENT:   occur, and hotel/motel development.
DEVELOPMENT:   Any use to which land is put, and any building, construction, or other
               alteration of land incident thereto.
INDUSTRIAL     All manufacturing and warehouse development.
DEVELOPMENT:
               The storm drain plan prepared by or under the direction of the city public works
MASTER STORM   director and approved by the city and which identifies facilities and
DRAIN PLAN:    improvements required on a citywide basis to serve the projected population of
               the city as established by the city's general plan.
MULTI-FAMILY   Each unit of an apartment, duplex, multiple-dwelling structure or dwelling group
UNIT:          or condominium, and a manufactured or mobilehome located in a mobilehome park on
               a temporary, semi-permanent or permanent basis.
OFFICE         All general, professional and medical office development.
DEVELOPMENT:
               For purposes of this chapter, is defined as:
               (A)   A unit restricted by a covenant that runs with the land addressing the
SENIOR         required age restriction to the satisfaction of the city.
RESTRICTED     (B)   The unit's water meter serves only internal water use. Landscape
DWELLING UNIT: irrigation shall be provided through a separate water meter service.
               (C)   The dwelling unit shall be less than 1,500 square feet of livable area.
               Removal of the age restriction or an increase in the size of the unit will
               result in a reassessment of the charges.
 
 
SINGLE-FAMILY DEVELOPMENT: An attached or detached one-family dwelling unit.
                           (Ord. 2962, 2024: Ord. 2661 § 3, 2007)
 
3.56.030: COMPLIANCE WITH CHAPTER:
No development permit shall be approved for new development unless the city
finds that the storm drain facilities proposed within the development satisfy
the requirements of the city's master storm drain plan. To ensure consistency
with the plan, the city may impose conditions to approval of the development
which are necessary to implement the plan. The requirements of this chapter are
imposed as a condition of development to ensure implementation of and
consistency with the city's general plan and to protect the public health,
safety and welfare by ensuring that adequate public facilities and improvements
will be installed and available to serve new development prior to, or
concurrently with, the need. (Ord. 2661 § 3, 2007)
3.56.040: STORM DRAIN FEES:
Storm drain fees shall be collected from applicants for development permits as
approved by the City Council. No building permit shall be issued unless the
fees approved by the City Council are first paid and the permit is consistent
with the city's master storm drain plan. Fees collected as approved by the City
Council shall be deposited in a special fund established for the purpose of
constructing the storm facilities provided in the city's master storm drain
plan. The fees approved by the City Council are in addition to any other means
of financing facilities or improvements identified in the city's master storm
drain plan which may be imposed on the development of property under the
provisions of state law, this code or city policy. (Ord. 2962, 2024: Ord. 2661
§ 3, 2007)
3.56.050: CREDIT FOR CONSTRUCTION OF IMPROVEMENTS:
The amount of storm drain fees required to be paid by an applicant for a
development project shall be reduced by the cost of any storm drain
improvements identified in the city's master storm drain plan which are
required to be constructed by the applicant as a condition of the city's
approval of the development project. The applicant shall be responsible for
providing to the city data, satisfactory to the city's public works director,
substantiating the applicant's costs for constructing such storm drain
improvements. The determination of the fee credit allowed by this section shall
be made by the city's public works director. (Ord. 2661 § 3, 2007)
3.56.060: REQUIRED CONSTRUCTION:
Each developer shall construct such storm drain facilities and improvements
within its development as may be required by the city's engineer to provide a
complete and workable storm drain system in accordance with the city's master
storm drain plan. The city engineer shall determine what storm drain facilities
are required to be constructed for each new development within the city. Such
determination may be based upon a hydrology report furnished by the developer,
the city's master storm drain plans, and such other methods as determined by
the city engineer. (Ord. 2661 § 3, 2007)
3.56.070: DETERMINATION AND PAYMENT:
The storm drain fees approved by the City Council are collected for the
construction of storm drain facilities and improvements for which the city has
established an account, appropriated funds and adopted a proposed construction
schedule or plan prior to final inspection or issuance of a certificate of
occupancy for the development project for which the fees are imposed, or the
fees are to reimburse the city for expenditures previously made, and shall be
determined and become due and payable to the city at the time of issuance of a
building permit for the development project. (Ord. 2962, 2024: Ord. 2661 § 3,
2007)
3.56.080: ADJUSTMENT OF FEE:
On July 1 of each fiscal year, the city's finance director, in coordination
with the city's public works director, shall make annual adjustments to the
specific amounts of storm drain fees approved by the City Council by a
percentage equal to the percentage change in the construction cost index of the
"Engineering News-Record" - twenty (20) cities annual average for the preceding
twelve (12) month period. The purpose of this adjustment is to offset the
effects of inflation related construction cost increases or any deflation
related decreases. If this index should cease publication, the director of
finance shall use any appropriate official index published by the bureau of
labor statistics, or similar agency as may then exist or may then be most
nearly equivalent thereto. Land costs may be evaluated annually and adjusted as
necessary based on the current market conditions at the time. (Ord. 2962, 2024:
Ord. 2661 § 3, 2007)
CHAPTER 3.58
TRAFFIC SIGNALIZATION FEES
(Rep. by Ord. 2652 § 2, 2006)
CHAPTER 3.60
PUBLIC FACILITIES FEES
SECTION:
3.60.010: Purpose And Intent
3.60.020: Definitions
3.60.030: Compliance With Chapter
3.60.040: Fees
3.60.050: Payment
3.60.060: Adjustment Of Fee
3.60.010: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to implement the Redlands general
plan to ensure that public facilities related to the city's civic center,
corporate yard, fire department, library and police department are available
concurrent with the need for such facilities caused by new development within
the city. The city council further finds that a citywide public facility
program is of benefit to all new development within the city. This chapter
shall establish the methods of financing the construction of such civic center,
corporate yard, fire and police required public facilities and related
improvements. (Ord. 2661 § 4, 2007)
3.60.020: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever the following terms are used in this chapter, they shall have the
meanings established by this section:
 
          An attached or a detached residential dwelling unit which provides complete
          independent living facilities for one or more persons. It shall include
          permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation
ACCESSORY on the same parcel as the single-family dwelling is situated. An accessory
DWELLING  dwelling unit also includes the following:
UNIT:     (A)   An efficiency unit, as defined in Section 17958.1 of the Health and
          Safety Code.
          (B)   A manufactured home, as defined in Section 18007 of the Health and
          Safety Code.
 
ADMINISTRATIVE The director of municipal utilities and engineering of the city.
AUTHORITY:
COMMERCIAL     Any building in which wholesale or retail selling or educational activities may
DEVELOPMENT:   occur, and hotel/motel development.
DEVELOPMENT:   Any use to which land is put, and any building, construction, or other
               alteration of land incident thereto.
INDUSTRIAL     All manufacturing and warehouse development.
DEVELOPMENT:
MULTI-FAMILY   Each unit of an apartment, duplex, multiple-dwelling structure or dwelling
UNIT:          group or condominium, and a manufactured or mobilehome located in a mobilehome
               park on a temporary, semi-permanent or permanent basis.
OFFICE         All general, professional and medical office development.
DEVELOPMENT:
               For purposes of this chapter, is defined as:
               (A)   A unit restricted by a covenant that runs with the land addressing the
               required age restriction to the satisfaction of the city.
SENIOR         (B)   The unit's water meter serves only internal water use. Landscape
RESTRICTED     irrigation shall be provided through a separate water meter service.
DWELLING UNIT: (C)   The dwelling unit shall be less than one thousand five hundred (1,500)
               square feet of livable area.
               Removal of the age restriction or an increase in the size of the unit will
               result in a reassessment of the charges.
SINGLE-FAMILY  An attached or detached one-family dwelling unit. (Ord. 2962, 2024: Ord. 2661 §
DEVELOPMENT:   4, 2007)
 
3.60.030: COMPLIANCE WITH CHAPTER:
No development project shall be approved unless the city finds that public
facility improvements necessary to serve the development project exist or will
be constructed in compliance with the requirements of the city's public
facility program. To ensure consistency with the program, the city may impose
any conditions of approval to the development project which are necessary to
implement the program. The requirements of this chapter are imposed as a
condition of development to ensure implementation of and consistency with the
city's general plan and to protect the public health, safety and welfare by
ensuring that adequate public facilities and related improvements will be
constructed and available to serve new development prior to or concurrently
with the need. (Ord. 2661 § 4, 2007)
3.60.040: FEES:
Public facility fees shall be collected from applicants for development
projects for the purpose of constructing, improving, providing and maintaining
public facilities identified in the city's public facility program in
accordance with the amounts approved by the City Council. No building permit
shall be issued unless the fees approved by the City Council are first paid.
Fees collected as approved by the City Council shall be deposited into separate
capital facilities accounts or funds in a manner to avoid any commingling of
such fees with other revenues of the city and the fees shall be expended solely
for the purposes for which the fees were collected. The fees required of an
applicant for a development project approved by the City Council are in
addition to any other means of financing public facilities or related
improvements identified in the city's public facility program which may be
imposed upon the applicant for the development project under the provisions of
federal, state or local law. (Ord. 2962, 2024: Ord. 2661 § 4, 2007)
3.60.050: PAYMENT:
The public facility fees approved by the City Council shall be paid by the
applicant for a development project as a condition of, and at the time of
issuance of, a building permit for the development project. The City Council
has determined that the approved fees will be collected for public improvements
and public facilities for which an account has been established and funds
appropriated and for which the city has adopted a proposed construction
schedule or plan prior to the dates of final inspection or issuance of a
certificate of occupancy for new development, and/or fees approved by the City
Council are to reimburse the city for expenditures previously made. (Ord. 2962,
2024: Ord. 2661 § 4, 2007)
3.60.060: ADJUSTMENT OF FEE:
On July 1 of each fiscal year, the city's finance director, in coordination
with the city's public works director, shall make annual adjustments to the
specific amounts of public facilities fees approved by the City Council by a
percentage equal to the percentage change in the construction cost index of the
"Engineering News-Record" - twenty (20) cities annual average for the preceding
twelve (12) month period. The purpose for this adjustment is to offset the
effects of inflation related construction cost increases or any deflation
related decreases. If this index should cease publication, the director of
finance shall use any appropriate official index published by the bureau of
labor statistics, or similar agency as may then exist or may then be most
nearly equivalent thereto. Land costs shall also be evaluated annually and
adjusted as necessary based on the current market conditions at the time. (Ord.
2962, 2024: Ord. 2661 § 4, 2007)
CHAPTER 3.62
SEWER SERVICE FUND
SECTION:
3.62.010: Establishment
3.62.020: Definitions
3.62.030: Charges
3.62.040: Amount Of Charges
3.62.010: ESTABLISHMENT:
There is established the sewer service fund to provide for administration,
operation and maintenance of the Redlands domestic sewerage system and its
capacity to serve its existing users. All interest on the cash balance of the
fund shall accrue to the sewer service fund. The following rules shall apply:
   A.   All service charges and all miscellaneous charges not otherwise
designated shall be credited to the sewer service fund.
   B.   Established within the sewer service fund is a reserve for capital. The
reserve for capital shall be in addition to annual capital replacement budget,
to establish a fund for capital expenditures necessary due to unforeseen or
unusual capital costs in any year, necessary to maintain the existing system
and its capacity. (Ord. 2965, 2024: Ord. 2926 § 1 (part), 2021: Ord. 2080 § 3,
1989)
3.62.020: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of carrying out the intent of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply:
 
MULTIPLE-   A structure designed and used for occupancy of two (2) or more families, but
FAMILY      does not include motels, hotels, or rest homes, nursing homes, with common
DWELLING    cooking facilities.
UNIT:
PREMISES:   A lot, parcel of land, building or establishment.
SEWER
CONNECTION  Physically tapping into sewer mains or their laterals for the purpose of
OR          serving a private sewer line or building sewer from a property or premises.
CONNECTION:
SEWER       The sewer rates, rate structures and rate classes to be established by the
RATES:      city council to be used as a basis for charging users for service from the
            sewerage system.
SEWER
SERVICE     Service charges for the use of the sewerage system based on sewer rates.
CHARGE:
            Those pipelines and appurtenances maintained and operated by the city for
SEWERAGE    the collection and conveyance of sewage to the plant owned and operated by
SYSTEM:     the city, wastewater treatment, and treatment and discharge of such
            wastewater to required standards.
SINGLE-
FAMILY      A structure or portion thereof used exclusively for the occupancy of one
DWELLING    family. (Ord. 2965, 2024: Ord. 2926 § 1 (part), 2021: Ord. 2080 § 3, 1989)
UNIT:
 
3.62.030: CHARGES:
The wastewater service charges for the following categories shall be paid for
wastewater service.
Every person whose premises in the city is served by a connection with the
wastewater system of the city, whereby the sewage or industrial wastes, or
either or both, are disposed of by the city, either through the facilities of
the wastewater treatment and sewage disposal works owned by the city, or
otherwise, shall pay a sewer service charge which shall be as specified in
section
3.62.040  of this chapter.
   A.   Residential Rates: For all residential dwelling units, including
single-family and multiple-family dwelling units, there shall be a bimonthly
charge.
   B.   Nonresidential Rates: For all nonresidential users there shall be a
bimonthly charge based upon the strength of the wastewater discharged for each
one hundred (100) cubic feet or fraction thereof. Wastewater strength data is
adapted from state water resources control board's "Revenue Program Guidelines
for Wastewater Agencies".
      1.   Large volume users are classified as users with greater than twenty-
five thousand (25,000) gallons per day discharge.
      2.   A minimum bimonthly charge equivalent to the multiple-family
dwelling unit rate shall apply to any nonresidential user whose wastewater
discharge per one hundred (100) cubic feet or fraction thereof results in a
total charge less than the equivalent of the multiple-family dwelling unit
rate.
   C.   School Rates: Each school shall pay a bimonthly charge for each one
hundred (100) average daily attendance or part thereof. (Ord. 2965, 2024: Ord.
2926 § 1 (part), 2021: Ord. 2608 § 4, 2005: Ord. 2526 § 3, 2002: Ord. 2080 § 3,
1989)
3.62.040: AMOUNT OF CHARGES:
Amounts of bimonthly charges are as follows:
   A.   Wastewater rates effective August 5, 2024:
                                   City Customers
A. Residential:                       
     Single-family dwelling unit $66.04
     Multiple-family dwelling uni$52.40
B. Nonresidential:                    
     Low strength I              $2.82/100 cubic feet
     Low strength II             $3.41/100 cubic feet
     Low strength III            $3.99/100 cubic feet
     Medium strength I           $4.58/100 cubic feet
     Medium strength II          $5.16/100 cubic feet
     Medium strength III         $5.75/100 cubic feet
     High strength I             $6.34/100 cubic feet
     High strength II            $6.92/100 cubic feet
  1. Large volume user:              
     >25,000 gallons per day     $3.99/100 cubic feet
  2. Nonresidential minimum charge:  
     All strengths               $52.40
C. Schools:                           
     Elementary                  $143.11/100 ADA 1
     Secondary and high school   $238.52/100 ADA 1
     Tank dumping                $0.10/gallon
                                     $15.00 minimum
 
      Note:
      1.   ADA: Average Daily Attendance
   B.   Wastewater rates effective July 1, 2025:
                                   City Customers
A. Residential:                       
     Single-family dwelling unit $72.65
     Multiple-family dwelling uni$57.64
B. Nonresidential:                    
     Low strength I              $3.11/100 cubic feet
     Low strength II             $3.76/100 cubic feet
     Low strength III            $4.39/100 cubic feet
     Medium strength I           $5.04/100 cubic feet
     Medium strength II          $5.68/100 cubic feet
     Medium strength III         $6.33/100 cubic feet
     High strength I             $6.98/100 cubic feet
     High strength II            $7.62/100 cubic feet
  1. Large volume user:              
     >25,000 gallons per day     $4.39/100 cubic feet
  2. Nonresidential minimum charge:  
     All strengths               $57.64
C. Schools:                           
     Elementary                  $157.43/100 ADA 1
     Secondary and high school   $262.38/100 ADA 1
D. Septage:                           
  Tank dumping                      $0.11/gallon
                                     $16.50 minimum
 
      Note:
      1.   ADA: Average Daily Attendance
(Ord. 2965, 2024)
CHAPTER 3.66
SOLID WASTE FUND
SECTION:
3.66.010: Establishment
3.66.020: Definitions
3.66.030: Charges
3.66.040: Rates And Charges
3.66.010: ESTABLISHMENT:
There is established the Solid Waste Fund to provide for administration,
operation and maintenance of the Redlands solid waste collection and disposal
system and its capacity to serve existing users. All interest on the cash
balance of the fund shall accrue to the Solid Waste Fund. The following rules
shall apply:
   A.   All service charges and all miscellaneous charges not otherwise
designated shall be credited to the Solid Waste Fund.
   B.   Established within the Solid Waste Fund is a reserve for capital. The
reserve for capital shall be in addition to annual capital replacement budget,
to establish a fund for capital expenditures necessary due to unforeseen or
unusual capital costs in any year, necessary to maintain the existing system
and its capacity. (Ord. 2164 § 2, 1991)
3.66.020: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
   MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING UNIT: A structure designed and used for occupancy
of two (2) or more families but does not include motels, hotels or rest homes
and nursing homes with common cooking facilities.
   PREMISES: A lot, parcel of land, building or establishment.
   SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING UNIT: A structure or portion thereof used exclusively
for the occupancy of one (1) family.
   SOLID WASTE CHARGE: The charge for use of the solid waste system based on
solid waste rates.
   SOLID WASTE RATES: The solid waste rates, rate structure and rate classes to
be established by the City Council to be used as a basis for charging users for
service from the solid waste system.
   SOLID WASTE SYSTEM: That equipment maintained and operated by the City for
the collection and conveyance of solid waste to the sanitary landfill and other
facilities owned and operated by the City for disposal of such solid waste to
required standards. (Ord. 2164 § 2, 1991)
3.66.030: CHARGES:
Every person or entity whose premises in the City are served by the solid waste
system of the City, whereby the solid waste is disposed of by the City, either
through the facilities of the sanitary landfill owned by the City or otherwise,
shall pay solid waste rates or charges as required by this chapter. (Ord. 2787,
2012: Ord. 2729 § 1, 2010)
3.66.040: RATES AND CHARGES:
   A.   The amounts of bimonthly solid waste rates applicable to residential
and nonresidential properties shall be set forth in the below tables. Solid
waste customers who possess local mutual water company stock shall receive a
monthly bill for solid waste service, and the monthly solid waste rates for
such customers shall be fifty percent (50%) of the amounts of the bimonthly
rates.
 
Capacity Rates                   Effective Effective Effective
                                 10-2017   10-2018   10-2019
1 cubic yard refuse (CY)         $12.17    $13.64    $14.32
1 cubic yard of compacted refuse 18.35     20.55     21.57
 
Automated And Pull-Down Service Bi-Monthly Rates Effective Effective Effective
                                                 10-2017   10-2018   10-2019
Automated And Pull-Down Service Bi-Monthly Rates Effective Effective Effective
                                                 10-2017   10-2018   10-2019
1 60-gallon refuse (GW exempt)                   $ 54.64   $ 61.19   $ 64.25
1 90-gallon refuse (GW exempt)                   56.68     63.48     66.65
1 extra 60 gallon refuse                         20.98     23.49     24.67
1 extra 60 gallon greenwaste1                    20.98     23.49     24.67
1 extra 90 gallon refuse                         26.58     29.76     31.25
1 extra 90 gallon greenwaste1                    26.58     29.76     31.25
2 60-gallon refuse                               82.94     92.90     97.54
1 90-gallon refuse                               64.01     71.69     75.28
1 60-gallon refuse                               61.97     69.40     72.87
1 60-gallon refuse and 1 90-gallon refuse        84.99     95.18     99.94
2 90-gallon refuse (GW exempt)                   83.25     93.24     97.91
1 60-gallon refuse - commercial                  51.85     58.07     60.98
1 90-gallon refuse - commercial                  57.82     64.76     68.00
2 90-gallon refuse - commercial                  84.40     94.53     99.25
Pull down service 1-90 RF                        107.82    120.76    126.79
Pull down service 1-60 RF                        105.78    118.47    124.39
1 90-gallon refuse shared by 2 units - multi-    34.28     38.39     40.31
family
1 60-gallon refuse for each unit - multi- family 28.35     31.76     33.34
1 90-gallon refuse for each unit - multi- family 36.37     40.73     42.77
1 60-gallon refuse shared by 2 units - multi-    22.86     25.61     26.89
family
HHW                                              0.78      0.88      0.92
 
Note:
1.    Charge for 4 or more GW carts.
Commercial Bin Bi-Monthly Rates Effective Effective Effective
                                10-2017   10-2018   10-2019
Commercial Bin Bi-Monthly Rates Effective Effective Effective
                                10-2017   10-2018   10-2019
1 yard bin:                                        
 1 time per week               $ 150.33  $ 168.36  $ 176.78
 2 times per week              255.70    286.38    300.70
 3 times per week              361.07    404.40    424.62
 4 times per week              466.63    522.63    548.76
 5 times per week              572.19    640.85    672.89
 6 times per week              677.56    758.87    796.81
2 yard bin:                                        
 1 time per week               255.70    286.38    300.70
 2 times per week              466.63    522.63    548.76
 3 times per week              677.56    758.87    796.81
 4 times per week              888.52    995.15    1,044.90
 5 times per week              1,099.46  1,231.39  1,292.96
 6 times per week              1,310.60  1,467.88  1,541.27
3 yard bin:                                        
 1 time per week               361.08    404.41    424.63
 2 times per week              677.56    758.87    796.81
 3 times per week              994.08    1,113.37  1,169.04
 4 times per week              1,310.60  1,467.88  1,541.27
 5 times per week              1,626.91  1,822.14  1,913.25
 6 times per week              1,943.43  2,176.64  2,285.47
4 yard bin:                                        
 1 time per week               466.63    522.63    548.76
 2 times per week              888.52    995.15    1,044.90
 3 times per week              1,310.60  1,467.88  1,541.27
 4 times per week              1,732.47  1,940.36  2,037.38
 5 times per week              2,154.36  2,412.89  2,533.53
 6 times per week              2,576.26  2,885.41  3,029.68
5 yard bin:                                        
 1 time per week               549.71    615.68    645.46
 2 times per week              1,099.46  1,231.39  1,292.96
 3 times per week              1,604.40  1,796.93  1,886.77
 4 times per week              2,154.36  2,412.89  2,533.53
 5 times per week              2,681.54  3,003.32  3,153.49
 6 times per week              3,208.90  3,593.97  3,773.66
6 yard bin:                                        
 1 time per week               644.04    721.33    757.40
 2 times per week              1,288.09  1,442.66  1,514.79
 3 times per week              1,932.13  2,163.99  2,272.19
 4 times per week              2,576.26  2,885.41  3,029.68
 5 times per week              3,220.22  3,606.65  3,786.98
 6 times per week              3,864.27  4,327.98  4,544.38
 
Commercial Compacted Bin Bi-Monthly Rates Effective Effective Effective
                                          10-2017   10-2018   10-2019
Commercial Compacted Bin Bi-Monthly Rates Effective Effective Effective
                                          10-2017   10-2018   10-2019
11/2 yard compacted bin 4 times per week  $ 954.20  $1,068.71 $1,122.14
2 yard compacted bin:                                        
 1 time per week                         318.18    356.36    374.18
 2 times per week                        636.36    712.72    748.36
 3 times per week                        954.54    1,069.09  1,122.54
 4 times per week                        1,272.77  1,425.50  1,496.78
 5 times per week                        1,590.96  1,781.88  1,870.97
3 yard compacted bin:                                        
 1 time per week                         477.09    534.34    561.05
 2 times per week                        954.21    1,068.71  1,122.15
 3 times per week                        1,431.29  1,603.05  1,683.20
 4 times per week                        1,908.41  2,137.42  2,244.29
 5 times per week                        2,385.43  2,671.68  2,805.27
4 yard compacted bin:                                        
 1 time per week                         636.38    712.75    748.39
 2 times per week                        1,272.77  1,425.50  1,496.78
 3 times per week                        1,908.41  2,137.42  2,244.29
 4 times per week                        2,545.54  2,851.00  2,993.55
 5 times per week                        3,181.82  3,563.64  3,741.82
 
Commercial Can Bi-Monthly Rates Effective Effective Effective
                                10-2017   10-2018   10-2019
Commercial Can Bi-Monthly Rates Effective Effective Effective
                                10-2017   10-2018   10-2019
1 can:                                             
 1 time per week               $ 33.32   $ 37.32   $ 39.18
 2 times per week              66.64     74.64     78.37
2 cans:                                            
 1 time per week               66.64     74.64     78.37
 2 times per week              133.28    149.27    156.74
 3 times per week              199.92    223.91    235.10
3 cans:                                            
 1 time per week               99.96     111.95    117.55
 2 times per week              199.92    223.91    235.10
 5 times per week              499.80    559.77    587.76
 6 times per week              599.75    671.72    705.31
4 cans:                                            
 2 times per week              266.56    298.54    313.47
 5 times per week              666.39    746.36    783.68
5 cans 2 times per week         333.20    373.18    391.84
6 cans:                                            
 2 times per week              399.84    447.82    470.21
 3 times per week              599.75    671.72    705.31
 5 times per week              999.59    1,119.54  1,175.52
 6 times per week              1,199.51  1,343.45  1,410.62
7 cans 2 times per week         466.48    522.45    548.58
11 cans 2 times per week        733.03    821.00    862.05
18 cans 2 times per week        1,199.51  1,343.45  1,410.62
22 cans 2 times per week        1,465.93  1,641.84  1,723.93
39 cans 2 times per week        2,598.93  2,910.81  3,056.35
 
Organic Food Waste Bi-Monthly Rates Effective Effective Effective
                                    10-2017   10-2018   10-2019
Organic Food Waste Bi-Monthly Rates Effective Effective Effective
                                    10-2017   10-2018   10-2019
1 32-gallon can:                                       
 1 time per week                   $ 125.00  $ 140.00  $ 156.80
 2 times per week                  250.00    280.00    313.60
 3 times per week                  374.00    418.88    469.15
1 64-gallon can:                                       
 1 time per week                   145.00    162.40    181.89
 2 times per week                  290.00    324.80    363.78
 3 times per week                  435.00    487.20    545.66
1 96-gallon can:                                       
 1 time per week                   186.00    208.32    233.32
 2 times per week                  371.00    415.52    465.38
 3 times per week                  557.00    623.84    698.70
1 yard bin:                                            
 1 time per week                   298.00    333.76    373.81
 2 times per week                  596.00    667.52    747.62
 3 times per week                  894.00    1,001.28  1,121.43
2 yard bin:                                            
 1 time per week                   551.00    617.12    691.17
 2 times per week                  1,101.00  1,233.12  1,381.09
 3 times per week                  1,652.00  1,850.24  2,072.27
3 yard bin:                                            
 1 time per week                   794.00    889.28    995.99
 2 times per week                  1,588.00  1,778.56  1,991.99
 3 times per week                  2,382.00  2,667.84  2,987.98
 
Roll-Off Debris Boxes Effective Effective Effective
                      10-2017   10-2018   10-2019
Roll-Off Debris Boxes                            Effective Effective Effective
                                                 10-2017   10-2018   10-2019
Greenwaste:                                                         
 10 cubic yard                                  $233.96   $262.04   $275.14
 15 cubic yard                                  280.76    314.45    330.17
 20 cubic yard                                  327.55    366.86    385.20
 30 cubic yard                                  421.14    471.67    495.26
 40 cubic yard                                  514.72    576.49    605.31
Refuse:                                                             
 10 cubic yard                                  262.04    293.49    308.16
 15 cubic yard                                  322.87    361.62    379.70
 20 cubic yard                                  383.70    429.75    451.23
 30 cubic yard                                  505.36    566.01    594.31
 40 cubic yard                                  627.03    702.27    737.38
Construction/demolition:                                            
 10 cubic yard                                  304.15    340.65    357.69
 15 cubic yard                                  386.04    432.37    453.99
 20 cubic yard                                  467.93    524.08    550.28
 30 cubic yard                                  631.70    707.51    742.88
 40 cubic yard                                  795.48    890.94    935.48
Roll-off per ton overage fee (loads greater than 75.00     84.00     88.20
8 tons)
 
Roll-Off Compactor Boxes Effective 10-2017 Effective 10-2018 Effective 10-2019
Roll-Off Compactor Boxes  Effective 10-2017 Effective 10-2018 Effective 10-2019
10 cubic yard             $323.79           $362.65           $ 380.79
15 cubic yard             415.51            465.37            488.64
20 cubic yard             507.21            568.08            596.48
24 cubic yard             580.59            650.26            682.77
25 cubic yard             598.93            670.80            704.34
27 cubic yard             635.61            711.88            747.48
30 cubic yard             696.64            773.51            812.19
34 cubic yard             784.47            878.61            922.54
35 cubic yard             782.35            876.24            920.05
37 cubic yard             819.03            917.32            963.18
40 cubic yard             874.06            978.95            1,027.89
Roll-off per ton overage
fee (loads greater than 8 75.00             84.00             88.20
tons)
 
Miscellaneous Fees (Per Effective 10-2017 Effective 10-2018 Effective 10-2019
Occurrence)
Miscellaneous Fees (Per   Effective 10-2017 Effective 10-2018 Effective 10-2019
Occurrence)
Bagged items              $ 1.70            $ 1.91            $ 2.00
Bulky item pick-up for    37.43             41.92             44.02
single item
Bulky item pick-up for    18.72             20.96             22.01
each additional item
Steam clean bin (per bin, 106.68            119.48            125.46
any size)
Tires in cart, bin or     9.36              10.49             11.01
roll-off (per tire)
Additional roll-off trip  140.35            157.19            165.05
charge
Roll-off box daily rate   42.12             47.18             49.54
(after initial 7 days)
Contamination of
greenwaste roll-off box
(in addition to charge    46.79             52.41             55.03
for corresponding solid
waste roll-off box)
Extra pick-up one 60- or
90-gallon automated cart  6.08              6.81              7.15
(collection day)
Extra pick-up two 60- or
90-gallon automated cart  12.17             13.64             14.32
(collection day)
Extra pick-up one 60- or
90-gallon automated cart  34.15             38.25             40.16
(non-collection day)
Extra pick-up two 60- or
90-gallon automated cart  40.25             45.08             47.34
(non-collection day)
Extra pick-up commercial
bin per cubic yard        12.17             13.64             14.32
(collection day)
Extra pick-up commercial
bin per cubic yard (non-  40.25             45.08             47.34
collection day)
Extra pick-up commercial
compacted bin per cubic   18.35             20.55             21.57
yard (collection day)
Extra pick-up commercial
compacted bin per cubic   46.42             51.99             54.59
yard (non-collection day)
 
   B.   The rates established in subsection A of this section, shall be
increased and effective for the first billing cycle effective after October 19,
2017. For the calendar years 2020 and 2021, the then existing rates shall be
increased based upon the increase, if any, in the U.S. Department of Labor,
Bureau of Labor Statistics, All Urban Customers, Consumer Price Index - Los
Angeles, Riverside, and Orange Counties. (Ord. 2858, 2017: Ord. 2852, 2017)
CHAPTER 3.70
SOLID WASTE CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT FUND
SECTION:
3.70.010: Establishment
3.70.020: Definitions
3.70.030: Charges
3.70.040: Adjustment Of Charges
3.70.010: ESTABLISHMENT:
   A.   The Solid Waste Capital Improvement Fund is established to implement
the Redlands general plan and to finance the capital cost of solid waste
capital facilities and equipment to provide new capacity required to serve
development requiring solid waste service from the City. Included are landfill,
materials recovery and transfer station facilities, solid waste collection
equipment, transfer equipment and other capital facilities equipment.
   B.   The City Council finds that the capital cost of solid waste capital
facilities and equipment benefits all development which is required to obtain
solid waste service from the City. This chapter shall establish the method of
collecting fees for financing the capital costs of the solid waste capital
facilities and equipment other than those facilities which are provided through
the approval of subdivision or parcel maps, or other developments conditioned
under title 18 of this Code. All interest on the cash balance of the fund shall
accrue to the Solid Waste Capital Improvement Fund. (Ord. 2880, 2019)
3.70.020: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of carrying out the intent of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply:
   ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT: An attached or a detached residential dwelling unit
which provides complete independent living facilities for one or more persons.
It shall include permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking,
and sanitation on the same parcel as the single-family dwelling is situated. An
accessory dwelling unit also includes the following:
   A.   An efficiency unit, as defined in section 17958.1 of the Health and
Safety Code.
   B.   A manufactured home, as defined in section 18007 of the Health and
Safety Code.
   ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY: The Director of Municipal Utilities and
Engineering of the City.
   DEVELOPMENT: Any use to which land is put, building or other alteration of
land and construction incidental thereto.
   MOBILEHOME: A vehicle, other than a motor vehicle, designed or used for
human habitation, for carrying persons and property on its own structure, and
for being drawn by a motor vehicle.
   MOBILEHOME PARK: Any area or tract of land where one or more mobilehome lots
are rented or leased or held out for rent or lease to accommodate mobilehomes
used for human habitation.
   MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING UNIT: A structure designed and used for the
occupancy of two (2) or more families.
   PERSON: A natural person, his heirs, executors, administrators or assigns
and also includes a firm, partnership or corporation, and its or their
successors or assigns, or the agent of any of the aforesaid.
   SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING UNIT: A structure or portion thereof designed
exclusively for the occupancy of one family.
   SOLID WASTE CAPITAL FACILITIES: The solid waste facilities identified or
referred to in the "Solid Waste Rate Study - 1991" as prepared by the Public
Works Department and approved by the City, which identifies facilities and
improvements required to serve new development that will be required to obtain
City solid waste service.
   STRUCTURE: Any building or improvement artificially built up or composed of
parts joined together in some definite manner, including, but not limited to,
dwellings, commercial structures, industrial structures, schools, churches or
hotels. (Ord. 2880, 2019)
3.70.030: CHARGES:
   A.   The solid waste capital improvement charge for the following categories
shall be approved by the City Council and shall be paid as a condition of
issuance of building permits for buildings required to have new solid waste
services from the City's solid waste system or increasing the solid waste
stream into the City's solid waste system as estimated by the City. The charges
shall be those in effect on the date the permit is issued.
      1.   Accessory Dwelling Units: The charge for this category shall be per
accessory dwelling unit.
      2.   Single-Family Dwelling Units: The charge for this category shall be
per dwelling or unit.
      3.   Multiple-Family Dwelling Units, Apartments, And Mobilehome Park Lots
Or Space: The charge for this category shall be per dwelling or unit or
mobilehome space.
      4.   Nonresidential Development: The charge for this category shall be a
charge per pound per day estimated solid waste as estimated by the Public Works
Department.
      5.   All solid waste capital improvement charges shall be credited to the
Solid Waste Capital Improvement Fund.
   B.   1.   The owner of the property shall pay to the City the difference in
the solid waste capital improvement charges calculated on the basis of
currently established charges.
         a.   If a building or the use of a building on a parcel of property
which building had been served by the solid waste system is charged in a way
that would make the solid waste capital improvement charge greater; or
         b.   If a building is replaced on a parcel of property, which building
had been served by the solid waste system, and the replacement building would
have a greater solid waste capital improvement charge than the building
replaced.
   The difference in charges shall be due prior to final approval of a
conditional use permit, if applicable, or, if not, prior to building permit
issuance. If not collectible in this manner, such difference shall be invoiced
with the next billing for solid waste service and collectible in the same
manner as the billing for solid waste service.
      2.   If a building or the use of a building on a parcel of property is
changed in any way that would make the solid waste capital improvement charge
less, no refund shall be made, but the property shall retain the amount of
credit established for its previous use. (Ord. 2962, 2024: Ord. 2880, 2019)
3.70.040: ADJUSTMENT OF CHARGES:
On July 1 of each fiscal year, the City's Finance Director, in coordination
with the City's Municipal Utilities and Engineering Director, shall make annual
adjustments to the specific amounts of the solid waste capital improvement fees
approved by the City Council by a percentage equal to the percentage change in
the construction cost index of the Engineering News-Record's "Construction Cost
Index" - twenty (20) cities annual average for the preceding twelve (12) month
period. The purpose of this adjustment is to offset the effects of inflation
related construction cost increases or any deflation related decreases. If this
index should cease publication, the Finance Director shall use any appropriate
official index published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics, or similar agency
as may then exist or may then be most nearly equivalent thereto. (Ord. 2962,
2024: Ord. 2880, 2019)
CHAPTER 3.72
NON-RESIDENT EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICE FIRST RESPONDER FEE
SECTION:
3.72.010: Purpose
3.72.020: Definitions
3.72.030: Emergency Medical Service First Responder Fee
3.72.040: Fee Collection
3.72.050: No Effect On Emergency First Responder Services
3.72.060: No Waiver Of Other Means Of Cost Recovery
3.72.070: Appeals
3.72.010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to recover city costs of providing emergency
medical services, including, but not limited to, non-resident first responder
services for individual medical assessments that result in transport, and
individual medical assessments that do not result in transport. This chapter
shall be interpreted in a manner consistent with applicable law. The fees
imposed pursuant to this chapter are for the purpose of recovering the cost of
certain city operating expenses, including, but not limited to, employee wage
rate and benefits, medical supplies, and the contracting of services with
specialized firms or individuals, which are reasonably related to the actual
and on-going expenses incurred by the city for the services and expenses
described in this section. (Ord. 2904 § 1, 2019)
3.72.020: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply:
   FIRE CHIEF: The chief of the city of Redlands fire department, or his or her
designee.
   FIRST RESPONDER FEE: The fee established by resolution of the city council
pursuant to this chapter, and charged to each non-resident to whom the city
provides medical emergency first responder services to recover the costs for
providing such services.
   INSURER: The recipient's medical insurance provider.
   RECIPIENT: The person to whom the city provides medical emergency first
responder services.
   SERVICES: Medical emergency first responder services provided by the city.
(Ord. 2904 § 1, 2019)
3.72.030: EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICE FIRST RESPONDER FEE:
   A.   Fee Amount Established: The city council shall, by resolution, adopt
and amend from time to time a non-resident first responder fee to recover the
actual and reasonable costs incurred by the fire department in providing
services and processing the non-resident first responder fee, including
administrative or enforcement costs.
   B.   Fee Applies To All: The non-resident first responder fee shall be
charged to each city non-resident who receives services during a single
incident. (Ord. 2904 § 1, 2019)
3.72.040: FEE COLLECTION:
   A.   Policies For Discharging Accountability:
      1.   The fire chief will develop policies and procedures for invoicing,
billing, and receiving payments for each fee charged under this chapter and
will coordinate the administration with any contracted third party service
provider, if applicable. The policies and procedures will include a process to
discharge from accountability accounts that are not collectible.
      2.   The city shall accept the payment, if any, from the insurer as the
full payment for the recipient's first responder fee obligation and the city
shall not require the recipient to pay for any portion of the first responder
fee not paid by the insurer.
   B.   Administration Of The Fee: The fire chief may delegate all or some of
the tasks required for the administration of the non-resident first responder
fee. Administration of the non-resident first responder fee will consist of
tasks including, but not limited to, tracking of emergency medical first
responder services provided by the fire department, identification of
financially responsible parties, calculation of total fees to be charged,
invoicing and payment collection, and appeals, if permitted. The city manager
may approve of delegation of administration of the non-resident first responder
fee by a contracted third party.
   C.   Invoicing: When the fire department provides emergency medical first
responder services to a non-resident, the city, or its designee, shall bill the
non-resident and the insurer, if any, for payment of the non-resident first
responder fee. In the case of a minor, the city, or its designee, shall bill
the parent or guardian of the recipient who received the services and to the
insurer, if the person, or his or her representative, has identified to the
fire department the insurer to which the invoice should be sent.
(Ord. 2904 § 1, 2019)
3.72.050: NO EFFECT ON EMERGENCY FIRST RESPONDER SERVICES:
This chapter neither expands nor limits services. Nothing in this chapter
relieves the fire department from providing services. These services will
continue to be provided without regard to whether a person is insured by an
insurer, has the ability to pay the non-resident first responder fee, or has or
has not paid the non-resident first responder fee in the past.
(Ord. 2904 § 1, 2019)
3.72.060: NO WAIVER OF OTHER MEANS OF COST RECOVERY:
This chapter does not preclude the city from pursuing any additional means of
cost recovery permitted by law.
(Ord. 2904 § 1, 2019)
3.72.070: APPEALS:
   A.   Any person wishing to contest an invoice regarding the non-resident
first responder fee imposed under this chapter must submit a written request
for reconsideration to the fire chief explaining the reasons for requesting a
reconsideration within thirty (30) days of the date of receiving the invoice
for the non-resident first responder fee. The fire chief will review the
written request and, based on that review, make a final decision on the request
and notify the person in writing within thirty (30) days of receiving the
request to reconsider.
   B.   If the aggrieved party wishes to contest the fire chief's decision, the
person may appeal to the city council by filing a notice of appeal pursuant to
chapter 1.06 of this code.
(Ord. 2904 § 1, 2019)
TITLE 4
RESERVED
TITLE 5
BUSINESS TAXES, LICENSES AND REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 5.04
BUSINESS LICENSES GENERALLY
SECTION:
5.04.010: Intent
5.04.020: Business Defined
5.04.030: Contractor And Subcontractor Defined
5.04.040: Employee Defined
5.04.050: Fixed Place Of Business Defined
5.04.060: Gross Receipts Defined
5.04.070: Person Defined
5.04.080: Business License Deemed Receipt, Not A Permit
5.04.090: License Required
5.04.100: License; Obtention Required
5.04.110: License; Scope
5.04.120: Separate Computation Of Fees
5.04.130: Exemption Under Federal Or State Law
5.04.140: Exemption For Nonprofit Charity
5.04.150: Exemption For Civic Activity
5.04.160: Exemption; Council Granting Authority
5.04.170: Exemption For Growers
5.04.180: Exemption For Growers Not Applicable To Resale
5.04.190: Exemption For Domestic Household Help
5.04.200: Issuance; Generally
5.04.210: Issuance; Zoning Compliance Required
5.04.215: Issuance; Rental Dwelling Unit Permit Required
5.04.217: Issuance And Renewal; Payment Of Litter Abatement Fee
5.04.218: Issuance And Renewal; Payment Of NPDES Program Regulatory Fees
5.04.220: Issuance; Revocation When Erroneous
5.04.230: Issuance; Nontransferability
5.04.240: Issuance; Change Of Location
5.04.250: Issuance; Proof Of State License Required For Contractors
5.04.260: Statement For First License
5.04.270: Gross Receipts Estimate
5.04.280: Statement And Payment Required Before Issuance Of Another License
5.04.290: Renewal
5.04.300: Effect Of Statement
5.04.310: Audit Authority
5.04.320: Duty To Show Books
5.04.330: Confidentiality
5.04.340: Misuse Of Information Prohibited
5.04.350: Computation Of Tax When Statement Absent
5.04.360: Appeal Of Arbitrary License Classification
5.04.370: Payment; Time Extension Authority
5.04.380: Payment; Manner
5.04.390: Payment; Annual Due Date
5.04.400: Payment; Semiannual Due Date
5.04.410: Payment; Annual When Unspecified
5.04.420: Payment; Fees Not To Be Prorated
5.04.430: Collection; License And Fees Deemed A Debt
5.04.440: Collection; Procedure For Attachment
5.04.450: Collection; Assessment Of Court Costs
5.04.460: Collection; Disposition Of Proceeds
5.04.470: Posting
5.04.480: Carrying
5.04.490: Showing
5.04.500: Police Authority; Inspection
5.04.510: Police Authority; Enforcement
5.04.520: Building Inspection Department; Duty
5.04.530: Revocation; Vested Right
5.04.540: Revocation; Refund
5.04.550: Error Not To Invalidate Collection
5.04.560: Remedies Deemed Cumulative
5.04.570: Defenses
5.04.580: Penalty For Delinquency
5.04.590: Penalty For Starting Business Without License
5.04.600: Unlawful Manner Of Operation Prohibited
5.04.610: Continuing Violation
5.04.620: Violation; Penalty
5.04.010: INTENT:
The provisions set out in this chapter and chapter 5.08 of this title were
enacted solely to raise revenue for municipal purposes and are not intended as
regulation. (Prior code § 2101)
5.04.020: BUSINESS DEFINED:
"Business" includes any activity engaged in by any person or persons or caused
to be engaged in by him or them with the object of gain, benefit, or advantage,
either direct or indirect. For the purposes of this chapter and chapter 5.08 of
this title, the determination of a business shall be vested in the city's
finance director, or the director's designee. (Ord. 2684 § 3, 2007: prior code
§ 2102)
5.04.030: CONTRACTOR AND SUBCONTRACTOR DEFINED:
The terms "contractor" and "subcontractor" as used in this chapter and chapter
5.08 of this title are defined to include all contractors and subcontractors
subject to the provisions of the contractor's license law, beginning with
section 7000 of the Business and Professions Code, as amended from time to
time. (Ord. 1916 § 1, 1986: prior code § 2102.3)
5.04.040: EMPLOYEE DEFINED:
An "employee" is a person who receives his compensation from an employer that
carries workers' compensation insurance, makes all necessary payroll deductions
from such compensation, and assumes all other responsibilities as an employer.
Any person who is not an employee shall be deemed self-employed and in business
for himself subject to the provisions of this chapter and chapter 5.08 of this
title. (Prior code § 2102.2)
5.04.050: FIXED PLACE OF BUSINESS DEFINED:
As used in this chapter and chapter 5.08 of this title, a "fixed place of
business" is a permanent location within the city at which a sufficient stock
of goods, wares or merchandise and/or equipment and supplies is maintained to
conduct the particular business licensed. Such location shall be staffed and
open for business the hours and days customary to such a type of business
activity. The determination of the requirements necessary to establish a
permanent location shall be vested with the city's finance director, or the
director's designee. The assessment of city and county property taxes on the
stock in trade and/or equipment and supplies at such location and the payment
thereof shall be deemed as contributory evidence of a fixed place of business.
(Ord. 2684 § 3, 2007: prior code § 2102.5)
5.04.060: GROSS RECEIPTS DEFINED:
As used in this chapter and chapter 5.08 of this title, "gross receipts" means
all business receipts from whatever source derived, excepting only city and
state sales taxes and federal retail excise taxes, including, but not limited
to, the following items:
   A.   Cash sales;
   B.   Credit sales;
   C.   Contract sales;
   D.   Rents;
   E.   Rebates;
   F.   Donations;
   G.   Interest;
   H.   Fees and other charges;
   I.   Commissions. (Prior code § 2102.4)
5.04.070: PERSON DEFINED:
As used in this chapter and chapter 5.08 of this title, the term "person"
includes all domestic and foreign corporations, associations, syndicates, joint
stock corporations, partnerships of every kind, clubs, Massachusetts Trusts, or
common law trusts, societies, and individuals transacting or carrying on any
business activity in the city. (Prior code § 2102.1)
5.04.080: BUSINESS LICENSE DEEMED RECEIPT, NOT A PERMIT:
The business license issued pursuant to this title constitutes a receipt for
the license tax paid and shall have no other legal effect. A business license
is a requirement, not a permit, to conduct, manage or carry on any business
activity in the city. (Prior code § 2104)
5.04.090: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person, whether as principal or agent, clerk or
employee, either for himself or for any other person, or for any body
corporate, or as an officer of any corporation, or otherwise to commence or
carry on any lawful business, trade, calling, profession or occupation in the
city without first having procured a license from this city so to do or without
complying with any and all regulations of such trade, calling, profession or
occupation contained in this chapter and chapter 5.08 of this title. (Prior
code § 2111)
5.04.100: LICENSE; OBTENTION REQUIRED:
All persons, firms or corporations must pay the license, license tax, fee or
money to the proper officer and take out a license without any tender of such
license or demand for the license tax or fee or money. (Prior code § 2112)
5.04.110: LICENSE; SCOPE:
A separate license must be obtained for each branch establishment or separate
place of business, in which the trade, calling, profession or occupation is
carried on; and each license shall authorize the party obtaining it to carry
on, pursue or conduct only that trade, calling, profession or occupation
described in such license, and only at the location or place of business which
is indicated thereby. (Prior code § 2113)
5.04.120: SEPARATE COMPUTATION OF FEES:
Where a license is herein imposed upon any business, profession, trade or
occupation, and the number of persons employed or the annual gross receipts of
such business is made the basis for fixing the amount of such license, a
separate tax shall be paid for each branch establishment or place of business
in which the trade, calling, or occupation is carried on, based upon the number
of persons employed in or on the annual gross receipts of each branch
establishment or separate place of business. (Prior code § 2114)
5.04.130: EXEMPTION UNDER FEDERAL OR STATE LAW:
Nothing in this chapter or
chapter 5.08 of this title contained shall be deemed or construed as applying
to any person, firm, or corporation conducting, managing or carrying on or
engaged in any business or occupation exempt from taxation by municipal
corporations by virtue of the constitution and laws of the United States or of
the state of California. However, such businesses exempt from taxation pursuant
to this section, are required to obtain a city business license. (Ord. 2979 §
2, 2025: Prior code § 2121)
5.04.140: EXEMPTION FOR NONPROFIT CHARITY:
The provisions of this chapter and
chapter 5.08 of this title shall not be deemed or construed to require the
payment of a license to conduct or manage or carry on any business, occupation
or activity or require the payment of any license from any person, firm or
corporation which is conducted, managed or carried on wholly for charitable
purposes and from which profit is not derived either directly or indirectly by
any person, firm or corporation. (Prior code § 2122)
5.04.150: EXEMPTION FOR CIVIC ACTIVITY:
No license shall be required for the conducting of any entertainment, concert,
exhibition, or lecture on scientific, historical, literary, religious or moral
subjects whenever the receipts of any such entertainment, concert, exhibition
or lecture are to be appropriated to any church, or school or to any religious
or benevolent purpose within the city. (Prior code § 2123)
5.04.160: EXEMPTION; COUNCIL GRANTING AUTHORITY:
It shall be within the exclusive province of the council to determine whether
or not sections
5.04.140 and
5.04.150 of this chapter shall be applicable to any particular case; and the
determination of the city council thereon shall be final. (Prior code § 2124)
5.04.170: EXEMPTION FOR GROWERS:
The license provisions of this chapter and chapter 5.08 of this title shall not
be deemed to include or apply to farmers, poultrymen, vegetable gardeners or
horticulturists who may sell their own produce exclusively. (Prior code § 2125)
5.04.180: EXEMPTION FOR GROWERS NOT APPLICABLE TO RESALE:
The exemption set out in section
5.04.170 of this chapter shall not apply to any person, firm or commercial
establishment buying any goods or merchandise for resale as well as selling
their own produce. (Prior code § 2126)
5.04.190: EXEMPTION FOR DOMESTIC HOUSEHOLD HELP:
The license provisions of this chapter and chapter 5.08 of this title shall not
be deemed to include or apply to domestic household help in the employ of an
individual homeowner. (Prior code § 2127)
5.04.200: ISSUANCE; GENERALLY:
Every person required to have a license under the provisions of this chapter
and chapter 5.08 of this title shall make application for the same to the
city's finance director, or the director's designee, and, upon the payment of
the prescribed tax, the city's finance director, or the director's designee,
shall issue to such person a license which shall contain:
   A.   The name of the person to whom the license is issued;
   B.   The business licensed;
   C.   The place where such business is to be transacted and carried on;
   D.   The date of the expiration of such license; and
   E.   Such other information as may be necessary for the enforcement of the
provisions of this chapter and chapter 5.08 of this title. (Ord. 2684 § 3,
2007: prior code § 2131)
5.04.210: ISSUANCE; ZONING COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
No license shall be issued to do business in any district in which such
business is prohibited by law; and each license issued shall specify the
address at which such business is to be conducted. (Prior code § 2132)
5.04.215: ISSUANCE; RENTAL DWELLING UNIT PERMIT REQUIRED:
No license shall be issued to any person renting or leasing residential
dwelling units unless such person has a valid rental dwelling unit permit
required by chapter 5.98 of this title. (Ord. 2773, 2012)
5.04.217: ISSUANCE AND RENEWAL; PAYMENT OF LITTER ABATEMENT FEE:
As a condition to the issuance or renewal of a business license, the applicant
shall pay a litter abatement fee pursuant to chapter 5.92 of this title. (Ord.
2168 § 2, 1991)
5.04.218: ISSUANCE AND RENEWAL; PAYMENT OF NPDES PROGRAM REGULATORY FEES:
   A.   Except as otherwise provided in this section, as a condition to the
issuance or renewal of a business license, the applicant shall pay to the city
the national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) program regulatory
fee, in the amount established by resolution of the city council, pursuant to
title 13, chapter 13.54 of this code.
   B.   Any person whose sole place of business is his or her residence, and
who is conducting such business pursuant to a valid home occupation permit
issued by the city, shall be exempt from payment of the NPDES program
regulatory fee as a condition of issuance or renewal of a business license.
(Ord. 2742, 2010)
5.04.220: ISSUANCE; REVOCATION WHEN ERRONEOUS:
Any license erroneously issued may be revoked as hereinafter provided. (Prior
code § 2133)
5.04.230: ISSUANCE; NONTRANSFERABILITY:
No license issued pursuant to this chapter and chapter 5.08 of this title shall
be transferable. (Prior code § 2134)
5.04.240: ISSUANCE; CHANGE OF LOCATION:
Where a license is issued authorizing a person to transact and carry on a
business at a particular place, such licensee may, upon application therefor
and approval by city's finance director, or the director's designee, have the
license amended to authorize the transacting and carrying on of such business
under such license at some other location to which the business is or is to be
moved. (Ord. 2684 § 3, 2007: prior code § 2135)
5.04.250: ISSUANCE; PROOF OF STATE LICENSE REQUIRED FOR CONTRACTORS:
No license shall be issued to do business as a contractor in a classification
which requires licenses from the California contractors' state license board
until proof of a valid state contractor's license is provided to the city's
finance director, or the director's designee. (Ord. 2684 § 3, 2007: prior code
§ 2136)
5.04.260: STATEMENT FOR FIRST LICENSE:
Upon a person making application for the first license to be issued hereunder
or for a newly established business, in all cases where the amount of license
tax to be paid is based upon gross receipts, such person shall furnish to the
city's finance director, or the director's designee for guidance in
ascertaining the amount of license tax to be paid by the applicant, a written
statement made and signed under the penalties of perjury, upon a form provided
by the city's finance director, or the director's designee, setting forth such
information as may be therein required and as may be necessary properly to
determine the amount of the license tax to be paid by the applicant. (Ord. 2684
§ 3, 2007: prior code § 2141)
5.04.270: GROSS RECEIPTS ESTIMATE:
   A.   Estimation: If the amount of the license tax to be paid by the
applicant is based upon the gross receipts, he shall estimate the gross
receipts for the current calendar year, all or part of which is to be covered
by the license to be issued.
   B.   Use Of Estimate: Such estimate, if accepted by the city's finance
director, or the director's designee as reasonable, shall be used in
determining the amount of license tax to be paid by the applicant.
   C.   Tentative Tax: The amount of the license tax so determined shall be
tentative only.
   D.   Statement Of Actual Receipts; Final Computation: Such person shall,
within twenty (20) days after the expiration of his first licensed calendar
year, furnish the city's finance director, or the director's designee with a
statement made and signed under the penalties of perjury, upon a form furnished
by the city's finance director, or the director's designee, showing the gross
receipts during the period of such license; and the license tax for such period
shall be finally ascertained and paid in the manner provided by this chapter
and chapter 5.08 of this title for the ascertaining and paying of renewal
license taxes for other business, after deducting from the payment found to be
due, the amount paid at the time such first license was issued. (Ord. 2684 § 3,
2007: prior code §§ 2142–2142.3)
5.04.280: STATEMENT AND PAYMENT REQUIRED BEFORE ISSUANCE OF ANOTHER LICENSE:
The city's finance director, or the director's designee shall not issue to any
such person another license for the same or any other business, until such
person shall have furnished to him the written statement and paid the license
tax as herein required. (Ord. 2684 § 3, 2007: prior code § 2143)
5.04.290: RENEWAL:
In all cases, the applicant for the renewal of a license shall submit to the
city's finance director, or the director's designee for guidance in
ascertaining the amount of the license tax to be paid by the applicant, a
written statement made and signed under the penalties of perjury, upon a form
to be provided by the city's finance director, or the director's designee,
setting forth such information concerning the applicant's business during the
preceding calendar year as may be required by the city's finance director, or
the director's designee to ascertain the amount of the license tax to be paid
by such applicant pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and chapter 5.08
of this title. (Ord. 2684 § 3, 2007: prior code § 2144)
5.04.300: EFFECT OF STATEMENT:
No statement shall be conclusive as to the matter set forth therein, nor shall
the filing of the same preclude the city from collecting by appropriate action
such sum as is actually due and payable hereunder. (Prior code § 2145)
5.04.310: AUDIT AUTHORITY:
Such statement and each of the several items therein contained shall be subject
to audit and verification by the city's finance director, or the director's
designee, who is authorized to examine, audit, and inspect such books and
records of any licensee or applicant for license, as may be necessary in such
person's judgment to verify or ascertain the amount of license fee due. (Ord.
2684 § 3, 2007: prior code § 2146)
5.04.320: DUTY TO SHOW BOOKS:
All licensees, applicants for licenses, and persons engaged in business in the
city are required to permit an examination of such books and records for the
purpose aforesaid. (Prior code § 2146.1)
5.04.330: CONFIDENTIALITY:
The information furnished or secured pursuant to the foregoing sections of this
chapter shall be confidential. (Prior code § 2147)
5.04.340: MISUSE OF INFORMATION PROHIBITED:
Any unwarranted disclosures or use of such information by any officer or
employee of the city shall constitute a misdemeanor; and such officer or
employee shall be subject to the penalty provision of this code. (Prior code §
2147.1)
5.04.350: COMPUTATION OF TAX WHEN STATEMENT ABSENT:
If any person fails to file any required statement within the time prescribed,
or if after demand therefor made by the city's finance director, or the
director's designee, such person fails to file a corrected statement, the
city's finance director, or the director's designee may determine the amount of
license tax due from such person by other reasonable means. (Ord. 2684 § 3,
2007: prior code § 2148)
5.04.360: APPEAL OF ARBITRARY LICENSE CLASSIFICATION:
Any person objecting to such arbitrary classification may refer the matter to
the city council, which shall set a time for hearing such objection and upon
notice of not less than three (3) days, to the said objector and the city's
finance director, or the director's designee shall consider the same and
classify such business; and the determination thereon shall be final. (Ord.
2684 § 3, 2007: prior code § 2148.1)
5.04.370: PAYMENT; TIME EXTENSION AUTHORITY:
In addition to all other powers conferred upon him, the city's finance
director, or the director's designee shall have the power, for good cause
shown, to extend the time for filing any required statement and the time for
payment of the license tax for a period of not exceeding thirty (30) days, and
in such case to waive any penalty that would otherwise have accrued; and shall
have the further power with the consent of the city council to compromise any
claims as to the amount of license tax due. (Ord. 2684 § 3, 2007: prior code §
2149)
5.04.380: PAYMENT; MANNER:
All licenses shall be paid in advance in the legal currency of the United
States at the office of the city's finance department. (Ord. 2684 § 3, 2007:
prior code § 2151)
5.04.390: PAYMENT; ANNUAL DUE DATE:
All annual license fees shall become due and payable January 1 each year,
unless otherwise provided. The annual license period is defined as the calendar
year January through December. (Ord. 2979 § 3, 2025: Prior code § 2152)
5.04.400: PAYMENT; SEMIANNUAL DUE DATE:
All semiannual license fees shall become due and payable on January 1 and July
1 of each year, unless otherwise provided. Semiannual license periods are
defined as the periods January 1 through June 30 and July 1 through December 31
of each calendar year. (Ord. 2979 § 4, 2025: Prior code § 2153)
5.04.410: PAYMENT; SEMIANNUAL WHEN UNSPECIFIED:
All licenses in this chapter and chapter 5.08 of this title unspecified are
payable annually, unless otherwise provided. (Ord. 2979 §§ 1, 5, 2025: Prior
code § 2154)
5.04.420: PAYMENT; FEES NOT TO BE PRORATED:
License tax fees as specified in this chapter and chapter 5.08 of this title
shall not be prorated, such fee being for the prescribed time or any fractional
part thereof. (Prior code § 2156)
5.04.430: COLLECTION; LICENSE AND FEES DEEMED A DEBT:
The amount of any license tax imposed by this chapter and chapter 5.08 of this
title, and any other fees required to be paid as a condition of issuance of
such license, shall be deemed a debt to the city; and any person, firm or
corporation carrying on any trade, calling, profession or occupation mentioned
in this chapter or chapter 5.08 of this title without having a license from the
city to do so, shall be liable to an action in the name of the city in any
court of competent jurisdiction, for the amount of the license, and any fees
required to be paid as a condition of issuance of such license. (Ord. 2742,
2010)
5.04.440: COLLECTION; PROCEDURE FOR ATTACHMENT:
The city attorney, the city's finance director, or the director's designee, on
behalf of the city, may make the necessary affidavit for legal action; and a
writ of attachment may issue without any undertaking or bond given on behalf of
the plaintiff. (Ord. 2684 § 3, 2007: prior code § 2162)
5.04.450: COLLECTION; ASSESSMENT OF COURT COSTS:
In case of recovery by the plaintiff, twenty five dollars' ($25.00) damage must
be added to the judgment as costs to be collected from the defendant or
defendants. (Prior code § 2163)
5.04.460: COLLECTION; DISPOSITION OF PROCEEDS:
All money collected by the city's finance director, or the director's designee,
shall be placed in the general fund of the city. (Ord. 2684 § 3, 2007: prior
code § 2164)
5.04.470: POSTING:
Every person having a license under the provisions of this chapter and chapter
5.08 of this title for carrying on a business at a fixed place of business,
shall keep such license posted for exhibition while in force in some
conspicuous part of such business. (Prior code § 2173)
5.04.480: CARRYING:
Every person having such license and not having a fixed place of business shall
carry such license with him at all times while carrying on the business for
which the same was granted. (Prior code § 2173.1)
5.04.490: SHOWING:
Every person having license shall produce and exhibit the same when applying
for a renewal, and whenever requested to do so by any police officer, or by any
officer authorized to issue, inspect or collect licenses. (Prior code § 2173.2)
5.04.500: POLICE AUTHORITY; INSPECTION:
All police officers are appointed inspectors of licenses, and in addition to
their duties as police officers, may examine all places of business and persons
transacting business liable to pay a license tax, and to see that such licenses
are taken out. All police officers, shall have the power to make arrests for
violations of this chapter and chapter 5.08 of this title. (Ord. 2684 § 3,
2007: prior code § 2174)
5.04.510: POLICE AUTHORITY; ENFORCEMENT:
The chief of police is directed to carry into effect the foregoing provisions
of this chapter. (Prior code § 2174.1)
5.04.520: BUILDING INSPECTION DEPARTMENT; DUTY:
The building inspector, when issuing permits and when making building
inspections in the field, will reasonably assure himself that all persons as
herein defined, doing construction work in the city are properly licensed to do
so by the city. (Prior code § 2174.2)
5.04.530: REVOCATION; VESTED RIGHT:
No provisions of this chapter and chapter 5.08 of this title shall give any
vested or other right pursuant to any license issued or required to be issued
thereunder, either as to the rate or amount of license fee, or as to the term
or duration of any license. (Prior code § 2175)
5.04.540: REVOCATION; REFUND:
If any license shall be revoked, or the term or duration of any license
decreased in time, the amount of the license tax shall be proportioned
accordingly and the proportional part for the unexpired term repaid to the
licensee within ten (10) days after written demand has been made, or at
licensee's option credited on any license required of him. This section shall
not apply to the payment of any litter abatement fee or NPDES program
regulatory fees paid as a condition of issuance of a business license. (Ord.
2742, 2010)
5.04.550: ERROR NOT TO INVALIDATE COLLECTION:
In no case shall any error made by the city's finance director, or the
director's designee, in preparing a license or stating the amount of the fee
therefor, or determining the proper classification hereunder, prejudice the
collection of the proper license fee by the city; nor shall the issuance of any
license authorize the carrying on of any business, trade, or occupation in any
zone or location contrary to the provisions of the zoning ordinance. (Ord. 2684
§ 3, 2007: prior code § 2176)
5.04.560: REMEDIES DEEMED CUMULATIVE:
The conviction and punishment of any person for transacting any business
without the required license shall not excuse or exempt such person from the
payment of such license fee due or unpaid at the time of such conviction.
(Prior code § 2171)
5.04.570: DEFENSES:
Nothing herein shall prevent a criminal prosecution for any violation of the
provisions of this chapter and chapter 5.08 of this title. (Prior code § 2172)
5.04.580: PENALTY FOR DELINQUENCY:
All renewal license tax payments, and fees which are required to be paid as a
condition of issuance of such license, shall be delinquent if not paid on or
before the last day of the month next succeeding the expiration of a license. A
ten percent (10%) penalty shall be added to the delinquent license tax and fees
due. If still unpaid, additional penalties of ten percent (10%) shall be added
on the first day of each succeeding month; provided, that the amount of such
penalty shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the license tax and fees due.
(Ord. 2742, 2010)
5.04.590: PENALTY FOR STARTING BUSINESS WITHOUT LICENSE:
A penalty of ten percent (10%) of the prescribed license tax shall be added to
the license for any business starting operations before first applying for and
securing a business license, unless otherwise provided. (Prior code § 2155.1)
5.04.600: UNLAWFUL MANNER OF OPERATION PROHIBITED:
The granting of a license for carrying on any business, show, exhibition or
game as provided in this chapter and chapter 5.08 of this title shall not be
deemed a permit to conduct the same in an unlawful manner or at a place
prohibited by law or ordinance. (Prior code § 2183)
5.04.610: CONTINUING VIOLATION:
The carrying on of any business, trade, calling, profession or occupation as
aforesaid without complying with any and all regulations of such business,
trade, calling, profession or occupation contained in this chapter and chapter
5.08 of this title shall be deemed a separate violation of such chapters for
each and every day that such business, trade, calling, profession or occupation
is carried on. (Prior code § 2182)
5.04.620: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this
chapter and chapter 5.08 of this title shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and
upon conviction thereof, and in addition to any other penalties as herein
provided, shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars
($500.00), or imprisonment in the city jail, or the county jail, of the county
of San Bernardino, for a period of not more than six (6) months or by both such
fine and imprisonment. (Prior code § 2181)
CHAPTER 5.08
BUSINESS LICENSE RATES
SECTION:
Article I. General Provisions
5.08.005: Establishment
5.08.010: Rate For Undetermined Classification
5.08.015: Constitutionality; Provisional Fee
Article II. Gross Receipts Schedule
5.08.020: General Rate Based Upon Gross Receipts
5.08.025: [Reserved]
Article III. Gross Receipts Businesses
5.08.030: Cleaning And Dyeing
5.08.035: Feed And Fuel
5.08.040: Fertilizer
5.08.045: Funeral Directors, Undertakers
5.08.050: Fumigating
5.08.055: Hotels, Apartment Houses Or Living Unit Rentals
5.08.060: Ice Delivery
5.08.065: Landscaping
5.08.070: Laundries
5.08.075: Service Station
5.08.080: Upholstering
5.08.085: Commercial Storage Or Warehouse Facility
5.08.090: Commission Merchant; Rate
5.08.095: Commission Merchant; Defined
Article IV. Professions
5.08.100: License Fee
5.08.105: No Fixed Place Of Business
5.08.110: Enumeration
5.08.115: [Reserved]
5.08.120: Realtors
5.08.125: [Reserved]
5.08.130: Auto Camps
Article V. No Fixed Place Of Business Rates
5.08.135: [Reserved]
5.08.140: Cannery
5.08.145: Commercial Art; Seasonal
5.08.150: Construction Generally
5.08.155: Builder, Large Operation
5.08.160: Electrical
5.08.165: Plumbing, Plastering, Masonry
5.08.170: Roofing, Sheet Metal, Furnace, Ventilating
5.08.175: Sundry Construction Work
5.08.180: Construction Activities Enumerated
5.08.185: Construction Activities Not Enumerated
5.08.190: When Licensed Under Two Or More Sections
5.08.195: Initial License; Annual
5.08.200: Delinquency, Renewal, New Or Initial License
5.08.205: Dog Kennels; Rate
5.08.210: Dog Kennels; No Other License Required
5.08.215: Employment Bureau; Rate
5.08.220: Employment Bureau; Defined
5.08.225: House Moving; Rate And Permit Fee
5.08.230: House Moving; License Prerequisite For Street Use
5.08.235: House Moving; Permit Prerequisite To Moving
5.08.240: House Moving; Form Of Permit
5.08.245: Manufacturers, Processors And Millers
5.08.250: Newspapers
5.08.255: Packinghouse
5.08.260: Peddling; Fish And Meat
5.08.265: Peddling; Food Products
5.08.270: Peddling; Merchandise
5.08.275: Popcorn Wagon
5.08.280: Ready Cut Houses
5.08.285: Roller Or Ice Skating Rink
5.08.290: Tree Surgery, Topping And Trimming
5.08.295: Transportation Of Passengers
5.08.300: Transportation Of Baggage Or Goods
5.08.305: Janitorial Services
Article VI. Daily Rates
5.08.310: Amusements, Transient
5.08.315: Auctioneer; Rate
5.08.320: Auctioneer; Exemption For Established Merchant Or Realtor
5.08.325: Exemption For Official Sales
5.08.330: Auctions
5.08.335: Carnival; Rate
5.08.340: Carnival; Defined
5.08.345: Carnival; Single Or Multiple Ownership Provisions
5.08.350: Circus
5.08.355: Trained Animals Exhibition
5.08.360: Side Show
5.08.365: Ferris Wheel Or Riding Devices
5.08.370: Peddling; Badges, Balloons, Etc.
5.08.375: Peddling; Agents And Canvassers
5.08.380: Peddling; Other Goods
Article VII. Particular Business
5.08.385: Billiard And Pool Hall
5.08.390: Bowling
5.08.395: Sale Of Merchandise In Billiard Or Pool Hall Or Bowling Alley
5.08.400: Boxing And Wrestling Exhibition
5.08.405: Clothing Club
5.08.410: Bingo Games
5.08.415: Dances
5.08.420: Academy; Dramatic School
5.08.425: Junk Collector
5.08.430: Solicitor
5.08.435: Motion Picture Theater
5.08.440: Open Air, Tent Show
5.08.445: Pawnbroker; Rate
5.08.450: Pawnbroker; Sale Of Goods Not Included
5.08.455: Photographers
5.08.460: [Reserved]
5.08.465: [Reserved]
5.08.470: [Reserved]
5.08.475: Shooting Gallery
5.08.480: Wholesalers
5.08.482: Distribution Center
Article VIII. Advertising
5.08.485: Billboards And Real Estate Signs
5.08.490: Circulars And Dodgers
5.08.495: Distribution Of Handbills To Be In Code Compliance
5.08.500: Exemptions
Article IX. Coin Operated Machines
5.08.505: Fee; Exemptions
5.08.510: Prohibited Devices
5.08.515: Seizure For Nonpayment
5.08.520: Redemption And/Or Sale
Article X. Wheel Tax
5.08.525: Rate
5.08.530: Application To Local Businesses
5.08.535: Intent Of Tax
ARTICLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS
5.08.005: ESTABLISHMENT:
The rates of license for the businesses, trades, professions, exhibitions and
occupations hereinafter named are established for and within the city as in
this chapter set forth. (Ord. 2980 § 1, 2025: Prior code § 2201)
5.08.010: RATE FOR UNDETERMINED CLASSIFICATION:
Every person, firm or corporation conducting, managing or carrying on any
business of any kind in the city, and not otherwise provided for, shall pay a
license fee of twenty four dollars ($24.00) annually. (Ord. 2980 § 1, 2025:
Prior code § 2202)
5.08.015: CONSTITUTIONALITY; PROVISIONAL FEE:
If any article, section, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter or
chapter 5.04 of this title is for any reason held to be invalid or
unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining
portion of this chapter or
chapter 5.04 of this title; and in the event that any license fee or
classification shall be discriminatory, unreasonable, or prohibitory, and
invalid, then in that event that license fee for such business or
classification thereof shall be the sum of twenty four dollars ($24.00). (Ord.
2980 § 1, 2025: Prior code § 2203)
ARTICLE II. GROSS RECEIPTS SCHEDULE
5.08.020: GENERAL RATE BASED UPON GROSS RECEIPTS:
Every person, not otherwise licensed by other provisions of this chapter and
chapter 5.04 of this title, having a fixed place of business in the city,
selling, keeping for sale, goods, wares or merchandise, or any article of
personal property, or who charges for services rendered, or for work or labor
performed, or who conducts or carries on any line of business therein, not
otherwise licensed herein, shall pay an annual license fee in accordance with
the following schedule based on the annual gross receipts for the preceding
calendar year:
 
At Least  But Less Than Semiannual Fee
$0.00     $1,500.00     $8.00
$1,500.00 $5,000.00     $12.00
 
Five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) and over shall pay the annual fee of twelve
dollars ($12.00) plus three dollars ($3.00) for each additional five thousand
dollars ($5,000.00) annual gross receipts or fraction thereof. (Ord. 2980 § 1,
2025: Prior code § 2211)
5.08.025: [RESERVED]:
ARTICLE III. GROSS RECEIPTS BUSINESSES
5.08.030: CLEANING AND DYEING:
For every cleaning and dyeing works, plant and place of business located within
the city, where electricity, steam, gas, or water is used for the operation of
machinery in connection therewith the license fee shall be based on the gross
business as set forth in the schedule as per section
5.08.020 of this chapter. (Ord. 2980 § 1, 2025: Prior code § 2221)
5.08.035: FEED AND FUEL:
Every person, firm, or corporation conducting, managing, or carrying on the
business of feed and fuel store shall pay a license based on the gross business
of the previous twelve (12) months as set forth in the schedule of fees in
section
5.08.020 of this chapter. (Ord. 2980 § 1, 2025: Prior code § 2222)
5.08.040: FERTILIZER:
For every person, firm, or corporation conducting, managing, or carrying on the
business of selling, soliciting for the sale of, or delivering fertilizer of
any kind within the city, the license fee shall be based on the gross business
of the previous twelve (12) months specified under section
5.08.020 of this chapter. (Ord. 2980 § 1, 2025: Prior code § 2222.1)
5.08.045: FUNERAL DIRECTORS, UNDERTAKERS:
For every person, firm, or corporation conducting, managing, or carrying on the
business of funeral director, embalmer, or undertaker, or the operation of
ambulance service, the license fee shall be based on the gross business of the
previous twelve (12) months at the rate under the proper class as set forth in
section
5.08.020 of this chapter. (Ord. 2980 § 1, 2025: Prior code § 2222.2)
5.08.050: FUMIGATING:
For every person, firm or corporation conducting, managing, or carrying on the
business of fumigation, spraying or sulfur dusting, the license fee shall be
based on the gross business of the previous twelve (12) months at the rate
under the proper class as set forth in section
5.08.020 of this chapter. (Ord. 2980 § 1, 2025: Prior code § 2222.3)
5.08.055: HOTELS, APARTMENT HOUSES OR LIVING UNIT RENTALS:
Every person, firm or corporation conducting, managing or maintaining a hotel,
apartment house or an activity of renting living quarters of any nature
consisting of four (4) or more rental units whether or not all of the units are
located on the same lot or parcel of property, not otherwise provided for in
this chapter and chapter 5.04 of this title, shall pay a license tax based on
the gross business receipts of the previous calendar year as set forth in the
schedule of fees in section
5.08.020 of this chapter. (Ord. 2980 § 1, 2025: Prior code § 2223)
5.08.060: ICE DELIVERY:
For every person, firm or corporation conducting, managing or carrying on the
business of manufacturing or selling ice from an established place of business
within the city, the license fee shall be based on the gross business of the
past twelve (12) months, as set forth in the schedule of fees in section
5.08.020 of this chapter. (Ord. 2980 § 1, 2025: Prior code § 2224)
5.08.065: LANDSCAPING:
For every person, firm or corporation conducting, managing or carrying on the
business of landscaping, the license fee shall be based on the gross business
of the previous twelve (12) months and at the proper rate as specified the
schedule of fees in section
5.08.020 of this chapter. (Ord. 2980 § 1, 2025: Prior code § 2225)
5.08.070: LAUNDRIES:
The rates for laundries shall be the same as those as set forth in the schedule
of fees in section
5.08.020 of this chapter. (Ord. 2980 § 1, 2025: Prior code § 2225.1)
5.08.075: SERVICE STATION:
For every person, firm or corporation conducting, managing or operating a
service station, where gasoline, oil, grease, tires, batteries, accessories or
any other goods, wares, merchandise or service rendered, is sold, the license
fee shall be based on the gross business of the preceding twelve (12) months
and according to the schedule of fees as set forth in section
5.08.020 of this chapter. (Ord. 2980 § 1, 2025: Prior code § 2226)
5.08.080: UPHOLSTERING:
For every person, firm or corporation conducting, managing or carrying on the
business of making, renovating, cleaning or recovering mattresses, or
upholstering household furniture, or other articles of personal property, the
license fee shall be based on the gross business of the last twelve (12) months
at the proper rate specified in the schedule set forth in section
5.08.020 of this chapter. (Ord. 2980 § 1, 2025: Prior code § 2227)
5.08.085: COMMERCIAL STORAGE OR WAREHOUSE FACILITY:
For every person, firm, partnership, business or corporation conducting,
managing or operating a business of leasing, renting or otherwise providing
warehouse or storage space for compensation, for household goods, personal
property, wares or merchandise of any kind, the business license tax shall be
based on the gross business in the past twelve (12) months as set forth in
section
5.08.020 of this chapter. (Ord. 2980 § 1, 2025: Ord. 2664, § 1, 2007: prior
code § 2228)
5.08.090: COMMISSION MERCHANT; RATE:
Every person, firm or corporation conducting, managing or carrying on the
business of a commission merchant shall pay a license fee based on the gross
business of the past year, according to the schedule set forth in section
5.08.100 of this chapter. (Ord. 2980 § 1, 2025: Prior code § 2229)
5.08.095: COMMISSION MERCHANT; DEFINED:
For the purpose of this chapter and
chapter 5.04 of this title, the term "commission merchant" is defined to be the
business of buying or selling melons, fruit, vegetables, meat, provisions,
produce, food products, drugs, medicines, jewelry, precious metals, or goods,
wares, or merchandise, as a broker or agent for the owner or consignee thereof
for a fee or commission, whether or not the operation of such business
customarily includes that actual possession, custody or control of such goods,
wares or merchandise. (Ord. 2980 § 1, 2025: Prior code § 2229.1)
ARTICLE IV. PROFESSIONS
5.08.100: LICENSE FEE:
Every person not otherwise licensed by other provisions of this chapter and
chapter 5.04 of this title, having a fixed place of business in the city,
managing, conducting or carrying on or engaging in any business, profession or
occupation included, but not limited to, those mentioned in section
5.08.110 of this article, shall pay an annual license fee in accordance with
the following schedule based on the gross receipts for the preceding calendar
year:
 
At Least  But Less Than Semiannual Fee
$0.00     $3,000.00     $16.00
$3,000.00 $5,000.00     $24.00
 
Five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) and over shall pay the annual fee of twenty
four dollars ($24.00) plus seven dollars and fifty cents ($7.50) for each
additional two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) annual gross receipts
or fraction thereof. (Ord. 2980 § 1, 2025: Prior code § 2231)
5.08.105: NO FIXED PLACE OF BUSINESS:
For every person not having a fixed place of business in the city who would
otherwise be licensed under section
5.08.100 of this article, the license fee shall be forty dollars ($40.00)
annually. (Ord. 2980 § 1, 2025: Prior code § 2231.1)
5.08.110: ENUMERATION:
The licenses provided for in this article shall be paid by every person engaged
in the following business, profession or occupation:
   Accountant.
   Architect.
   Attorney at law.
   Auditor.
   Bond broker.
   Bookkeeper.
   Chemist.
   Chiropodist.
   Chiropractor.
   Civil, electrical, chemical or structural engineer.
   Decorator, interior.
   Dentist.
   Laboratory technician.
   Lending firm.
   Loan broker.
   Oculist.
   Optician.
   Optometrist.
   Osteopath.
   Personnel consultant.
   Physician.
   Public stenographer.
   Security broker.
   Stockbroker.
   Surgeon.
   Veterinarian.
and every person carrying on or engaged in the business of treating, curing,
administering, or giving treatment to the sick, wounded, infirm by any method
or pursuant to any doctrine or system, and whether medicine is used or
prescribed or not, and where a fee or compensation is received or charged, or
donations made therefor. (Ord. 2980 § 1, 2025: Prior code § 2232)
5.08.115: [RESERVED]:
5.08.120: REALTORS:
For every real estate broker, firm or salesman, a annual license as set forth
in section
5.08.100 of this chapter shall be required. (Ord. 2980 § 1, 2025: Prior code §
2234)
5.08.125: [RESERVED]:
5.08.130: AUTO CAMPS:
For every person, firm or corporation engaged in the renting of, auto camps,
with five (5) or more rentals, not to include the sale of merchandise, the
license shall be fifteen dollars ($15.00) annually. Each rental in excess of
five (5), at the rate of three dollars ($3.00) annually. (Ord. 2980 § 1, 2025:
Prior code § 2241)
ARTICLE V. NO FIXED PLACE OF BUSINESS RATES
5.08.135: [RESERVED]:
5.08.140: CANNERY:
Every person, firm or corporation conducting, managing or carrying on the
business of a cannery, not licensed under any other provision of this chapter
and
chapter 5.04 of this title, the license shall be twenty five dollars ($25.00)
semiannually. (Ord. 2980 § 1, 2025: Prior code § 2241.2)
5.08.145: COMMERCIAL ART; SEASONAL:
Every person, firm or corporation operating exclusively in the activity of
decorating with impermanent materials, seasonal displays or murals having an
intended use of not more than sixty (60) days shall pay a semiannual license
tax of fifteen dollars ($15.00). (Ord. 2980 § 1, 2025: Prior code § 2241.3)
5.08.150: CONSTRUCTION GENERALLY:
Every builder, constructor, contractor, subcontractor, land developer or self-
employed person conducting, managing or carrying on the business of
construction work in the city shall pay a license tax or taxes as specified in
sections
5.08.155 through
5.08.185 of this article, solely for raising revenue for municipal purposes and
not in any way intended as regulation. (Ord. 2980 § 1, 2025: Prior code § 2242)
5.08.155: BUILDER, LARGE OPERATION:
For every person, firm or corporation conducting, managing or carrying on the
business of constructing, repairing, altering, or adding to any houses,
buildings, or structures, or maintaining the general supervision of the
construction of any houses, buildings or structures, or is licensed by the
state as a general contractor or general engineering contractor, the license
shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) semiannually. (Ord. 2980 § 1, 2025: Prior code
§ 2242.1)
5.08.160: ELECTRICAL:
For every person, firm or corporation conducting, managing, or carrying on the
business of electric wiring, engaged in the business of installing electric
wires or electric lighting, heating fixtures or refrigeration, or similar
construction activity, or constituting a master electrician within the meaning
of the electric code of the city, bidding or submitting a bid for any
electrical work, the license shall be twenty five dollars ($25.00)
semiannually. (Ord. 2980 § 1, 2025: Prior code § 2242.2)
5.08.165: PLUMBING, PLASTERING, MASONRY:
For every person, firm or corporation conducting, managing or carrying on the
business of plumbing, plumbing and heating combined, lathing or plastering,
drywall or drywall and painting combined, cement, concrete, masonry or brick
work, cesspool or septic tank construction, paving, surveying, sewer work,
swimming pool construction, sandblasting, or similar construction activity,
bidding or submitting a bid for any of the same, the license shall be twenty
five dollars ($25.00) semiannually. (Ord. 2980 § 1, 2025: Prior code § 2242.3)
5.08.170: ROOFING, SHEET METAL, FURNACE, VENTILATING:
For every person, firm or corporation conducting, managing or carrying on the
business of installing furnaces, sheet metal work, roofing, siding, heating or
air conditioning, steam fittings or boilers, evaporative coolers, or similar
construction activity, bidding or submitting a bid for any of the same, the
license shall be twenty five dollars ($25.00) semiannually. (Ord. 2980 § 1,
2025: Prior code § 2242.4)
5.08.175: SUNDRY CONSTRUCTION WORK:
For every person, firm or corporation conducting, managing or carrying on any
of the businesses enumerated in section 5.08.180 of this article, bidding or
submitting a bid for any of the same, the license shall be twenty five dollars
($25.00) semiannually. (Ord. 2980 § 1, 2025: Prior code § 2242.5)
5.08.180: CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES ENUMERATED:
The license tax provided for herein shall be paid by every person engaged in
the business of installing, fabricating, performing, maintaining, servicing or
applying the following:
   Awnings.
   Cabinets.
   Carpentry.
   Cesspool cleaning.
   Chemical flameproofing.
   Chemical toilets.
   Door hanging.
   Elevators.
   Equipment and fixtures.
   Excavating.
   Fencing.
   Flooring.
   Glass.
   Glazing.
   Grading.
   Insulation.
   Interior decorating.
   Iron work.
   Landscaping.
   Lawn sprinklers.
   Marble.
   Millwork.
   Ornamental metal.
   Painting.
   Pest control, commercial.
   Sewer line cleaning.
   Signs: electric, neon, painted.
   Steel: reinforcing, structural.
   Tile: acoustical, asphalt, ceramic, drainboard, metal, ornamental.
   Trenching.
   Venetian blinds.
   Wallpapering.
   Weather stripping.
   Well digging.
   Well drilling.
   Wind machines.
   Window shades. (Ord. 2980 § 1, 2025: Prior code § 2242.51)
5.08.185: CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES NOT ENUMERATED:
For every person, firm or corporation conducting, managing, or carrying on any
other line of construction business not herein mentioned, bidding or submitting
a bid therefor, not otherwise licensed, the license shall be twenty five
dollars ($25.00) semiannually. (Ord. 2980 § 1, 2025: Prior code § 2242.6)
5.08.190: WHEN LICENSED UNDER TWO OR MORE SECTIONS:
For every person, firm or corporation conducting, managing or carrying on a
business, the operation of which requires licenses provided for herein under
two (2) or more subsections within section
5.08.150 of this article, maximum fee fifty dollars ($50.00) semiannually.
(Ord. 2980 § 1, 2025: Prior code § 2242.7)
5.08.195: INITIAL LICENSE; ANNUAL:
New or initial licenses issued under the provisions of section
5.08.150 of this article shall be for the annual period to expire at the end of
the next succeeding semiannual license period and at a fee twice the respective
semiannual license prescribed. (Ord. 2980 § 1, 2025: Prior code § 2242.8)
5.08.200: DELINQUENCY, RENEWAL, NEW OR INITIAL LICENSE:
Licenses issued under the provisions of section
5.08.150 of this article when delinquent and when the business activities
within the city by the licensee have been continuous throughout the delinquency
the license may be renewed by payment of the semiannual license tax and
penalty. (Ord. 2980 § 1, 2025: Prior code § 2242.9)
5.08.205: DOG KENNELS; RATE:
For every person conducting, managing or carrying on a dog kennel business
where dogs are boarded or bred for sale, the license shall be six dollars
($6.00) semiannually. (Ord. 2980 § 1, 2025: Prior code § 2243)
5.08.210: DOG KENNELS; NO OTHER LICENSE REQUIRED:
Where the dogs of any kennel are held entirely under restraint, no other fee or
license under any ordinance of the city shall be required. (Ord. 2980 § 1,
2025: Prior code § 2243.2)
5.08.215: EMPLOYMENT BUREAU; RATE:
Every person, firm or corporation conducting, managing or carrying on the
business of employment bureau, the license fee shall be twelve dollars ($12.00)
semiannually. (Ord. 2980 § 1, 2025: Prior code § 2244)
5.08.220: EMPLOYMENT BUREAU; DEFINED:
For the purpose of this chapter and
chapter 5.04 of this title, the term "employment bureau" is defined as the
business of securing employment for any person or persons for a fee or
compensation of any kind or furnishing information regarding situations or
employment for a fee or compensation. (Ord. 2980 § 1, 2025: Prior code §
2244.1)
5.08.225: HOUSE MOVING; RATE AND PERMIT FEE:
Every person, firm or corporation conducting, managing, carrying on, or engaged
in the business of house moving, salvaging or house wrecking shall pay a
license fee of twelve dollars ($12.00) semiannually. (Ord. 2980 § 1, 2025:
Prior code § 2245)
5.08.230: HOUSE MOVING; LICENSE PREREQUISITE FOR STREET USE:
It shall be unlawful for any person except a house mover duly licensed by the
city, to move any building over, across, or along any street or public place in
the city. (Ord. 2980 § 1, 2025: Prior code § 2245.1)
5.08.235: HOUSE MOVING; PERMIT PREREQUISITE TO MOVING:
It is unlawful for any person to move any building over, across or along any
street or other public place in the city, without first obtaining a permit from
the appropriate departments. (Ord. 2980 § 1, 2025: Prior code § 2245.2)
5.08.240: HOUSE MOVING; FORM OF PERMIT:
Such permit shall specify the building to be moved and the route to be taken in
the moving thereof which shall be designated by the appropriate department.
(Ord. 2980 § 1, 2025: Prior code § 2245.3)
5.08.245: MANUFACTURERS, PROCESSORS AND MILLERS:
Every person, firm or corporation conducting, managing, or carrying on a
business consisting mainly of manufacturing or processing goods, wares or
merchandise or a milling operation, together with every other association of
persons maintaining a place of business wherein the products of its members are
received and prepared for shipment or sale, not otherwise especially licensed
by any other section of this chapter and
chapter 5.04 of this title, the annual gross receipts of such business for the
calendar year preceding which a license tax is due amounts to less than one
hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) shall pay the semiannual tax of fifteen
dollars ($15.00), one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) and over shall pay
the semiannual tax of fifteen dollars ($15.00) plus one dollar twenty five
cents ($1.25) for each additional ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) annual
gross receipts or fraction thereof. (Ord. 2980 § 1, 2025: Prior code § 2246)
5.08.250: NEWSPAPERS:
For every person, firm or corporation engaged in printing and publishing of any
newspaper within the city, or for every agency for any newspaper not printed
and published in the city, the license fee shall be nine dollars ($9.00)
semiannually. (Ord. 2980 § 1, 2025: Prior code § 2246.1)
5.08.255: PACKINGHOUSE:
For every fruit packinghouse, buying, packing, shipping, or selling citrus or
deciduous fruits or melons or other similar commodities, either for their own
account or that of any other person, the license shall be twenty five dollars
($25.00) semiannually. (Ord. 2980 § 1, 2025: Prior code § 2247)
5.08.260: PEDDLING; FISH AND MEAT:
For every peddler of fish or meat, from house to house by means of wagon,
truck, vehicle, tray or basket, after permission has been secured from the city
meat inspector, the license shall be twelve dollars ($12.00) semiannually.
(Ord. 2980 § 1, 2025: Prior code § 2247.1)
5.08.265: PEDDLING; FOOD PRODUCTS:
Every person, firm or corporation conducting, managing or carrying on the
business of selling or offering for sale, bread, pastries, food products, or
any other goods, wares, or merchandise by wagon, truck, vehicle, tray, or
basket and not licensed under any section of this chapter and
chapter 5.04 of this title, for each such wagon, truck, vehicle, tray or
basket, the license shall be twelve dollars ($12.00) semiannually. (Ord. 2980 §
1, 2025: Prior code § 2247.2)
5.08.270: PEDDLING; MERCHANDISE:
Every person, firm or corporation selling or offering for sale, gasoline, oil,
grease, tires, tubes, batteries, goods, wares, or merchandise from wagons,
trucks, tankers or other vehicles, and not licensed under any other provision
of this chapter and chapter 5.04 of this title, the license shall be twelve
dollars ($12.00) semiannually. (Ord. 2980 § 1, 2025: Prior code § 2247.3)
5.08.275: POPCORN WAGON:
For every popcorn, peanut or lunch wagon operated on any street, or public way
or place, after permission from Redlands city council, the license shall be
fifty dollars ($50.00) semiannually. (Ord. 2980 § 1, 2025: Prior code § 2247.4)
5.08.280: READY CUT HOUSES:
For every person, firm or corporation selling, offering for sale, or
contracting for the sale of ready cut buildings, the license fee shall be fifty
dollars ($50.00) semiannually. (Ord. 2980 § 1, 2025: Prior code § 2247.5)
5.08.285: ROLLER OR ICE SKATING RINK:
For every person, firm or corporation conducting or operating a roller or ice
skating rink, the license fee shall be twenty five dollars ($25.00)
semiannually. (Ord. 2980 § 1, 2025: Prior code § 2247.6)
5.08.290: TREE SURGERY, TOPPING AND TRIMMING:
For every person, firm or corporation conducting, managing or carrying on the
business of tree surgery, topping or trimming, the license tax shall be twelve
dollars ($12.00) semiannually. (Ord. 2980 § 1, 2025: Prior code § 2247.7)
5.08.295: TRANSPORTATION OF PASSENGERS:
For every person, firm or corporation conducting, managing or carrying on the
business of auto livery, bus, taxi, cab, or other vehicle, for the
transportation of passengers for hire, license for four (4) vehicles or less,
twenty dollars ($20.00) semiannually and five dollars ($5.00) semiannually for
each additional vehicle. (Ord. 2980 § 1, 2025: Prior code § 2248)
5.08.300: TRANSPORTATION OF BAGGAGE OR GOODS:
For every person, firm or corporation operating or carrying on the business of
driving any automobile, truck or other vehicle for transportation of baggage,
express, freight, household goods, materials, goods, wares, or merchandise, and
receiving compensation, either directly, or indirectly for such operation,
shall pay a license fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) semiannually for the first
vehicle and seven dollars fifty cents ($7.50) semiannually for each additional
vehicle. (Ord. 2980 § 1, 2025: Prior code § 2248.1)
5.08.305: JANITORIAL SERVICES:
Every person, firm or corporation conducting, managing or carrying on the
business of window washing, commercial janitorial services, building or house
renovating not otherwise provided, shall pay a license tax of twelve dollars
($12.00) semiannually. (Ord. 2980 § 1, 2025: Prior code § 2249)
ARTICLE VI. DAILY RATES
5.08.310: AMUSEMENTS, TRANSIENT:
For every traveling rope, wire, dancing, magic, legerdemain, game, and all
traveling shows, theatrical or vaudeville exhibitions, showing in a tent or
tents, on the street, or other places, where the public is invited, an
admission charged, or contributions solicited (after permission granted by
chief of police or license collector), the license shall be six dollars ($6.00)
per day. (Ord. 2980 § 1, 2025: Prior code § 2251)
5.08.315: AUCTIONEER; RATE:
For every auctioneer or person engaged in the auctioning of goods, wares, or
merchandise, not otherwise provided for, the license shall be ten dollars
($10.00) per day. (Ord. 2980 § 1, 2025: Prior code § 2253)
5.08.320: AUCTIONEER; EXEMPTION FOR ESTABLISHED MERCHANT OR REALTOR:
Section
5.08.315 of this article shall not apply to persons auctioning goods, wares or
merchandise of a regularly established merchant nor the real estate nor
personal property of a resident of the city. (Ord. 2980 § 1, 2025: Prior code §
2253.1)
5.08.325: EXEMPTION FOR OFFICIAL SALES:
No such license shall be required for selling any goods, at public sale
belonging to the United States or the state of California, or for the sale of
property by virtue of process issued by any state or federal court or of the
assets of the estate of a decedent. (Ord. 2980 § 1, 2025: Prior code § 2253.2)
5.08.330: AUCTIONS:
For every auction, the license tax and the regulations thereof shall be the
same as those set forth and provided in chapter 5.44 of this title. (Ord. 2980
§ 1, 2025: Prior code § 2254)
5.08.335: CARNIVAL; RATE:
For every person owning, maintaining, conducting or presenting a carnival, as
defined herein, in the city, after having first obtained a permit so to do from
the city council, the following license fee shall be charged and collected in
advance: fifty dollars ($50.00) per day, and an additional fee or charge of
five dollars ($5.00) per day for each and every separate show, attraction, or
exhibition carried on by such person conducting such carnival after special
permit has been granted. (Ord. 2980 § 1, 2025: Prior code § 2255)
5.08.340: CARNIVAL; DEFINED:
For the purpose of this chapter and
chapter 5.04 of this title, the word "carnival" shall be held to mean and
include any group of attractions, such as ball games, dice games, whips, ferris
wheels, or other riding devices, freaks, dancing shows, minstrels, or any other
like entertainment or game for which a charge is made for playing or
participating therein. (Ord. 2980 § 1, 2025: Prior code § 2255.1)
5.08.345: CARNIVAL; SINGLE OR MULTIPLE OWNERSHIP PROVISIONS:
If the group of attractions as mentioned herein is owned or conducted by any
one person, or if any one or more of the group of attractions, as mentioned
herein, is owned by different persons exhibiting or showing the attraction at
the same time, in each instance the group of attractions, shall for the purpose
of this chapter and chapter 5.04 of this title, be considered a carnival. (Ord.
2980 § 1, 2025: Prior code § 2255.2)
5.08.350: CIRCUS:
For every circus, menagerie, acrobatic performance, or exhibition of trained
animals connected by or showing with other attractions:
   A.   One-ring circus, fifty dollars ($50.00) per day;
   B.   Two-ring circus, one hundred dollars ($100.00);
   C.   Three- or more ring circus, one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per
day. (Ord. 2980 § 1, 2025: Prior code § 2256)
5.08.355: TRAINED ANIMALS EXHIBITION:
For every exhibition of trained animals without such other attractions, the
license shall be five dollars ($5.00) per day. (Ord. 2980 § 1, 2025: Prior code
§ 2256.1)
5.08.360: SIDE SHOW:
   A.   For every side show, or exhibition where admission is charged, other
than in public or private halls, the license shall be five dollars ($5.00) per
day.
   B.   After special permit has been granted. (Ord. 2980 § 1, 2025: Prior code
§§ 2256.2, 2256.3)
5.08.365: FERRIS WHEEL OR RIDING DEVICES:
For every person, firm or corporation conducting, managing or operating any
ferris wheel, merry-go-round or any other riding device, the license shall be
five dollars ($5.00) per day. (Ord. 2980 § 1, 2025: Prior code § 2257)
5.08.370: PEDDLING; BADGES, BALLOONS, ETC.:
For every person selling or offering for sale:
   A.   Badges, balloons, banners, flags, canes, horns, or any other
noisemaking instruments, or toys, notions, lead pencils, or souvenirs of any
kind, the license shall be five dollars ($5.00) per day. (Ord. 2980 § 1, 2025:
Prior code §§ 2258, 2258.1)
5.08.375: PEDDLING; AGENTS AND CANVASSERS:
For every agent, canvasser, hawker or peddler or other person, other than a
licensed merchant doing business in the city, not otherwise herein provided
for, selling commodities, or any other articles in the city, by samples or
otherwise, unless such person shall have the legal right to solicit and sell
such articles by samples or otherwise under the interstate commerce law, or any
other law of the national government, the license shall be four dollars ($4.00)
per day. (Ord. 2980 § 1, 2025: Prior code § 2258.2)
5.08.380: PEDDLING; OTHER GOODS:
For every person carrying on the business of peddling, either and if lawfully
allowed, any goods, materials or articles other than those mentioned in any
other specific section of this chapter and
chapter 5.04 of this title, the license shall be four dollars ($4.00) per day.
(Ord. 2980 § 1, 2025: Prior code § 2258.3)
ARTICLE VII. PARTICULAR BUSINESS
5.08.385: BILLIARD AND POOL HALL:
For every place where billiards, pool, cards are played or other similar
device, the license shall be ten dollars ($10.00) annually per table. (Ord.
2980 § 1, 2025: Prior code § 2261)
5.08.390: BOWLING:
   A.   For every place where bowling, skee ball are played, the license shall
be twelve dollars ($12.00) annually per alley or device.
   B.   Provided that permission so to operate has been obtained from the city
council. (Ord. 2980 § 1, 2025: Prior code §§ 2261.1, 2261.2)
5.08.395: SALE OF MERCHANDISE IN BILLIARD OR POOL HALL OR BOWLING ALLEY:
The rates set out in sections
5.08.385 and
5.08.390 of this article shall not include the sale of goods, wares, or
merchandise for which a license under article II of this chapter shall be
required. (Ord. 2980 § 1, 2025: Prior code § 2261.3)
5.08.400: BOXING AND WRESTLING EXHIBITION:
For every person conducting, managing or carrying on a boxing or wrestling
exhibition where an admission is charged, the license shall be fifteen dollars
($15.00) per day or two hundred dollars ($200.00) semiannually after consent
from the city council. (Ord. 2980 § 1, 2025: Prior code § 2261.4)
5.08.405: CLOTHING CLUB:
For every person conducting, managing, or carrying on a clothing club by
coupons, contract sales or otherwise within the city, the license shall be
fifty dollars ($50.00) per month. (Ord. 2980 § 1, 2025: Prior code § 2261.5)
5.08.410: BINGO GAMES:
For every religious, charitable, scientific, literary, educational, or
prevention of cruelty to children or animal groups, the license shall be twenty
five dollars ($25.00) semiannually. (Ord. 2980 § 1, 2025: Prior code § 2261.6)
5.08.415: DANCES:
The rate of license for any person, firm or corporation conducting, managing or
operating any public dance, public dance hall, or public ballroom, open to the
public either by invitation or by payment of an admission fee, shall be five
dollars ($5.00) per day. (Ord. 2980 § 1, 2025: Prior code § 2262)
5.08.420: ACADEMY; DRAMATIC SCHOOL:
   A.   Fee: For every person, firm or corporation conducting, managing or
carrying on a dramatic, art, music, dancing, painting, speech or other school,
college, or studio, the license tax shall be ten dollars ($10.00) semiannually
for each such school, college or studio having at any time five (5) or more
students at one assembly.
   B.   Exemptions: Provided that this license may not apply to the public
school system or a nonprofit school, college or university. (Ord. 2980 § 1,
2025: Prior code §§ 2262.1, 2262.11)
5.08.425: JUNK COLLECTOR:
Every person conducting, managing or carrying on the business of buying,
selling, or bartering secondhand goods, old rubber tires, rubber tubes, rubber
hose, sacks, bottles, old iron, lead, brass, copper, or junk of any kind at a
fixed place of business, shall pay a license fee based on the gross business of
the past year, according to the schedule set forth in section
5.08.020 of this chapter. (Ord. 2980 § 1, 2025: Prior code § 2263)
5.08.430: SOLICITOR:
For every person who shall solicit from house to house by wagon, truck, or any
vehicle for the purchase of secondhand goods, old rubber tires, old rubber
tubes, rubber hose, sacks, bottles, old iron, lead, brass, copper, or junk of
any kind, shall pay a license fee of thirty dollars ($30.00) semiannually.
(Ord. 2980 § 1, 2025: Prior code § 2263.1)
5.08.435: MOTION PICTURE THEATER:
For every person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of conducting or
carrying on a theater or moving picture show at an established place of
business, wholly within a permanent building constructed for theatrical
purposes, there shall be an initial registration fee of one thousand five
hundred dollars ($1,500.00) to be paid at once only by each theater and in
addition thereto the regular annual license fee based on the annual gross
business of such theater as set forth in the schedule in section
5.08.020 of this chapter. (Ord. 2980 § 1, 2025: Prior code § 2264)
5.08.440: OPEN AIR, TENT SHOW:
For every person engaged in the business of conducting an open air, or tent
motion picture show, at a temporary location, the license shall be six dollars
($6.00) per day. (Ord. 2980 § 1, 2025: Prior code § 2264.1)
5.08.445: PAWNBROKER; RATE:
For every person conducting, managing or carrying on the business of
pawnbroker, the license shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) semiannually. (Ord.
2980 § 1, 2025: Prior code § 2265)
5.08.450: PAWNBROKER; SALE OF GOODS NOT INCLUDED:
The rate set out in section
5.08.445 of this article shall not include the sale of goods, wares, or
merchandise for which a license under section
5.08.020 of this chapter shall be required. (Ord. 2980 § 1, 2025: Prior code §
2265.1)
5.08.455: PHOTOGRAPHERS:
For every photograph business, the license fee shall be based on the gross
business of the last twelve (12) months and at the proper rate as specified in
the schedule set forth in section 5.08.020 of this chapter. (Ord. 2980 § 1,
2025: Prior code § 2266)
5.08.460: [RESERVED]:
5.08.465: [RESERVED]:
5.08.470: [RESERVED]:
5.08.475: SHOOTING GALLERY:
   A.   Fee: For every person keeping, conducting or having charge of a
shooting gallery, the license shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) annually.
   B.   Permit: Provided that permission so to operate has been obtained from
the city council. (Ord. 2980 § 1, 2025: Prior code §§ 2268, 2268.1, 2268.2)
5.08.480: WHOLESALERS:
Every person, firm or corporation conducting, managing or carrying on a
business in which over half of the gross receipts are from selling for resale
any goods, wares, or merchandise, not otherwise especially licensed by any
other section of this chapter and chapter 5.04 of this title shall pay an
annual license fee in accordance with the following schedule:
   ANNUAL GROSS RECEIPTS
At Least But Less Than Annual Fee
At Least   But Less Than Annual Fee
$0.00      $10,000.00    $12.80
$10,000.00 $15,000.00    $14.70
$15,000.00 $20,000.00    $16.60
$20,000.00 $25,000.00    $18.50
$25,000.00 $30,000.00    $20.40
$30,000.00 $35,000.00    $22.30
$35,000.00 $40,000.00    $24.20
$40,000.00 $45,000.00    $26.10
$45,000.00 $50,000.00    $28.00
 
Fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) and over shall pay the annual fee of twenty
eight dollars ($28.00) plus three dollars eighty cents ($3.80) for each
additional ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) annual gross receipts or fraction
thereof. (Ord. 2980 § 1, 2025: Prior code § 2269)
5.08.482: DISTRIBUTION CENTER:
   A.   Commencing on the effective date hereof (the "effective date") for
every person, firm, partnership, business or corporation conducting or managing
a business consisting primarily of receiving, temporarily storing and
subsequently distributing goods, wares or merchandise of any kind to
wholesalers or retailers (hereinafter a "distribution center"), the business
license tax shall be in the amount of ten and one-half cents per square foot of
gross floor area principally devoted to such use, as calculated by the city's
community development department.
   B.   Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, any person, firm,
partnership, business or corporation which conducts a wholesale or retail
business within the city and which also conducts or operates a distribution
center solely in support of such wholesale or retail business shall not be
subject to the distribution center business license tax established by this
section.
   C.   Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, any person, firm,
partnership, business or corporation which conducts a wholesale or retail
business within the city and which also conducts or operates a distribution
center in support of such wholesale or retail business and other wholesale or
retail businesses located outside the city shall pay the distribution center
business license tax established by this section only on the percentage of
gross floor area of the distribution center principally devoted to supporting
the wholesale or retail businesses located outside the city. (Ord. 2980 § 1,
2025: Ord. 2936, 2022:Ord. 2664 § 2, 2007)
ARTICLE VIII. ADVERTISING
5.08.485: BILLBOARDS AND REAL ESTATE SIGNS:
   A.   Fee: For every person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of
bill poster or advertising sign painting upon billboards or advertising by
means of posting or otherwise affixing bills, signs, or other advertisements,
the annual license shall be seventy five dollars ($75.00).
   B.   Real Estate Signs Exempt: Provided, that nothing herein contained shall
be deemed as applying to owners of real estate or their agents, in advertising
their property for sale or a lease by means of billboards located thereon.
(Ord. 2980 § 1, 2025: Prior code §§ 2271, 2272)
5.08.490: CIRCULARS AND DODGERS:
For every person, firm or corporation who distributes or causes to be
distributed, handbills, circulars, posters, pictures, lithographs, maps,
plates, samples or other devices or advertisements of any kind, within the
corporate limits of the city, the license fee shall be five dollars ($5.00) per
day. (Ord. 2980 § 1, 2025: Prior code § 2273)
5.08.495: DISTRIBUTION OF HANDBILLS TO BE IN CODE COMPLIANCE:
All such handbills, circulars, posters, pictures, lithographs, maps, plates,
samples or other forms of advertising are to be distributed in accordance with
the regulations of the peddling, solicitation, and distribution of advertising
ordinance of the city. (Ord. 2980 § 1, 2025: Prior code § 2274)
5.08.500: EXEMPTIONS:
No license shall be charged for distribution of matter, advertising goods,
wares, or merchandise stocked by regularly licensed merchants, advertising of
churches, lodges, charitable or educational institutions, public organizations,
political candidates or parties or notices prescribed by law. (Ord. 2980 § 1,
2025: Prior code § 2275)
ARTICLE IX. COIN OPERATED MACHINES
5.08.505: FEE; EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   Fee: Every person, firm, or corporation renting, leasing or operating a
coin operated machine or similar device dispensing goods, wares, merchandise or
providing a service within the city shall pay a license fee based on the gross
receipts therefrom as set forth in section
5.08.020 of this chapter.
   B.   Exemption; Local Ownership: Machines otherwise licensed under this
section, maintained together and in conjunction with a business paying a
license tax based on a gross receipts schedule may be operated without payment
of a coin machine license tax; provided, that the machines dispensing sanitary
hygienic articles or drinking cups, towels or medicines are entirely owned and
supplied by the owner or operator of the premises where installed and
maintained solely for the convenience of employees, visitors and customers and
not for profit to him or any other person.
   C.   Exemption; Nonprofit: No license under this section shall be required
for the maintenance or operation of machines dispensing sanitary hygienic
articles or drinking cups, towels or medicines, which machines are entirely
owned and supplied by the owner or operator of the premises where installed and
maintained solely for the convenience of employees, visitors and customers and
not for profit to him or any other person. (Ord. 2980 § 1, 2025: Prior code §§
2281, 2281.1, 2281.2)
5.08.510: PROHIBITED DEVICES:
Nothing in this article shall be construed to permit the licensing, maintenance
or operation of any coin operated machine which is forbidden by any state or
local law or regulation or to permit the operation of any coin operated machine
in such a manner as to constitute gambling or otherwise be contrary to any such
state law or local regulation. (Ord. 2980 § 1, 2025: Prior code § 2287)
5.08.515: SEIZURE FOR NONPAYMENT:
If any of the coin operated machines, devices or games licensed under this
article are maintained in any store, hotel, motel, restaurant, cafe, pool hall
or other commercial establishment or public place in the city, without payment
of the prescribed license taxes, they may be subject to seizure by the chief of
police or the city's finance director or the director's designee. Such machine
or machines shall be redeemable only by the true owner thereof within a period
of not exceeding sixty (60) days, upon the payment of costs to the city
together with the license taxes plus penalty for the period during which such
machines, devices, or games were maintained unlicensed. (Ord. 2980 § 1, 2025:
Ord. 2718 § 10, 2009)
5.08.520: REDEMPTION AND/OR SALE:
If the true owner cannot be found after reasonable inquiry, or if the owner
fails to redeem, then the machine may be confiscated and sold by the city's
finance director or the director's designee at the end of the sixty (60) day
period, after notice by registered mail to the last known address, if any, of
the owner. The proceeds of such sale shall be credited to the general fund of
the city. (Ord. 2980 § 1, 2025: Ord. 2718 § 11, 2009)
ARTICLE X. WHEEL TAX
5.08.525: RATE:
The business of running, driving or operating any automobile, automobile truck,
automobile tank wagon, or any vehicle used for the transportation, selling,
collection or delivery of goods, wares, merchandise or other personal property
of any kind from a vehicle, either as the principal business or in connection
with any other business, or of soliciting for work, labor services to be
performed upon the public street in or from a vehicle, or to be performed on
goods, wares, merchandise or other personal property to be taken for such
purpose to plant or establishment inside or outside of the city limits of the
city, an annual license fee of twenty four dollars ($24.00) per vehicle so used
in such business in the city. (Ord. 2980 § 1, 2025: Prior code § 2291)
5.08.530: APPLICATION TO LOCAL BUSINESSES:
The provisions of this article shall not be deemed to apply to persons, firms
or corporations operating such vehicles together and in conjunction with a
fixed place of business within the city, for which such business a license is
paid under other provisions of this chapter and chapter 5.04 of this title.
(Ord. 2980 § 1, 2025: Prior code § 2292)
5.08.535: INTENT OF TAX:
The provisions of this article are not to be construed as imposing a tax upon
vehicles, but as a method of classification of business and distinguishing
between those maintaining a fixed place of business in the conduct of which
vehicles are used and those maintaining a business in the conduct of which
vehicles are used but who do not have a fixed place of business in the city.
(Ord. 2980 § 1, 2025: Prior code § 2293)
CHAPTER 5.12
ALARM SYSTEM BUSINESSES
SECTION:
5.12.010: Definitions
5.12.020: Business License; Required
5.12.030: Alarm Agents; Identification Card Required
5.12.040: Exemptions
5.12.050: Registration; Procedure Generally
5.12.060: Alarm Agent Registration; Application
5.12.070: Registration; Application Fee Nonrefundable
5.12.080: Registration; Investigation And Identification
5.12.090: Registration; Application Approval
5.12.100: Registration; Certificate
5.12.110: Registration; Validity
5.12.120: Registration; Notification Of Change And/Or Correction
5.12.130: Registration; Renewal By Council Upon Revocation
5.12.140: Emergency Service
5.12.150: Notification Posting
5.12.160: Alarm System Standards
5.12.170: Report Of False Alarm Required
5.12.180: False Alarm Response Fees
5.12.190: Audible Alarm Requirements
5.12.200: Alarm System Inspection
5.12.210: Monitoring Services
5.12.220: Telephone Devices
5.12.230: Use Of Panic Button
5.12.240: Enforcement
5.12.250: Nuisance Abatement
5.12.260: Nonresponse Policy
5.12.270: Verified Response Required
5.12.010: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings ascribed to them:
   ALARM AGENT: Any person who is employed by an alarm business, either
directly or indirectly, whose duties include any of the following: selling,
maintaining, leasing, monitoring, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing,
moving or installing in or on any building, place or premises, any alarm
system.
   ALARM BUSINESS: Any person, firm or corporation engaged in or causing the
selling, leasing, monitoring, maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering,
replacing, moving or installing any alarm system in or on any building, place
or premises.
   ALARM SYSTEM: Any device designed for the detection of fire, an unauthorized
entry on premises or for alerting others of the commission of an unlawful act
or a combination thereof, which, when actuated, emits a sound or transmits a
signal or message to indicate that an emergency situation exists, and to which
safety personnel are expected to respond.
   ALARM USER: Any person using an alarm system whether as a subscriber or
proprietor, at a place of business or residence of such person.
   AUDIBLE ALARM: A device designed for the detection of fire or an
unauthorized entry and which, when actuated, generates an audible sound on the
premises.
   CHIEF: The chief of police of the city or the chief's designee.
   FALSE ALARM: An alarm signal necessitating response by the fire or police
department when an emergency does not exist. The activation of an alarm
resulting from human error, a system malfunction, improper installation of the
system, or design deficiencies shall constitute a false alarm. The activation
of an alarm resulting from earthquakes, high intensity winds, unusual acts of
nature, or general power outages shall not constitute a false alarm.
   NONPRIORITY: That police response to the activation of an alarm will not be
given precedence over other calls and will be predicated upon availability of
police units and other service needs.
   PERSON: Any individual, partnership, corporation or other entity.
   PROPRIETOR ALARM: An alarm system or audible alarm which is not serviced by
an alarm business.
   SUBSCRIBER: A person contracting with an alarm business for the leasing,
servicing, or maintenance of an alarm system. (Ord. 2457 § 1, 2000)
5.12.020: BUSINESS LICENSE; REQUIRED:
No person, firm or corporation shall engage in the business of installing,
monitoring, maintaining, repairing, altering, replacing, or moving in or on any
building, place or premises abutting on or adjacent to a public street, alley
or way, any device commonly known as a burglar alarm, fire alarm, holdup alarm
or similar protective device or system without first having obtained from the
city's finance director, or the director's designee, a license to do so. (Ord.
2684 § 3, 2007: Ord. 2457 § 1, 2000)
5.12.030: ALARM AGENTS; IDENTIFICATION CARD REQUIRED:
Every person engaged in the business of repairing, servicing, altering,
replacing, removing, monitoring or installing an alarm system shall carry on
his person, at all times while so engaged, a valid identification card and
shall display such card to any police officer on request, which identification
card shall be in the form prescribed for the chief and may be obtained from him
upon proof of payment of the required fee to the city's finance director. Upon
revocation of the license under which such identification card is issued or
termination of employment of any person holding such card from the business
described herein, the identification card shall be returned to the chief. It
shall be unlawful for any person to carry on his person, use, display or have
in his possession any such identification card containing any false or
fictitious information, or possess such card when he is not employed by any
person having a license under this chapter, or himself hold such license. (Ord.
2684 § 3, 2007: Ord. 2457 § 1, 2000)
5.12.040: EXEMPTIONS:
The provisions of sections
5.12.020 and
5.12.030 of this chapter shall not be applicable to:
   A.   Audible alarm affixed to automobiles, unless the vehicle alarm is
connected to a central monitoring system;
   B.   Subscribers and alarm users of alarm systems whose sole function is the
detecting of fire. (Ord. 2457 § 1, 2000)
5.12.050: REGISTRATION; PROCEDURE GENERALLY:
Every person engaged in the business covered by this chapter shall comply with
the registration requirements provided in sections
5.12.060 through
5.12.130 of this chapter. (Ord. 2457 § 1, 2000)
5.12.060: ALARM AGENT REGISTRATION; APPLICATION:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person, including the owner of an alarm
business, to engage directly in the selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing,
repairing, altering, replacing, moving or installing of an alarm system in or
on any building, place, or premises within the city without first having
registered and filed with the chief of police a copy of the city business
license and alarm agent registration card issued to such person by the state
director of consumer affairs pursuant to the provisions of section 7598.14 of
the California Business and Professional Code; provided, however, nothing in
this section shall require a person to so register in order to install,
service, repair, alter, replace or move an alarm system on the premises owned
or occupied by that person; and further provided, nothing in this chapter shall
require a person to so register who is merely a salesperson for any business
not required to obtain an alarm business permit under the provisions of said
section, if such salesperson does not engage in any other activities related to
alarm systems apart from selling.
   B.   Registration of the agent/owner shall be accomplished by furnishing
such information as may be required by the chief of police, including, but not
limited to:
      1.   Giving the full name of the applicant and business;
      2.   Giving the name and address of the applicant's employer, firm or
corporation and credentials showing the applicant's relationship;
      3.   Giving a brief description of the nature of the activity and the
services to be solicited or sold;
      4.   Giving his present address and his permanent address and the local
address from which sales will be made;
      5.   Giving the date the activity will commence within the city;
      6.   Giving the number of the license issued by the state director of
consumer affairs for the alarm business, city of Redlands business license, and
the name and business address of the manager of operations for the area which
includes the city;
      7.   Provide a complete list of all alarm agents that will conduct
business in the city. (Ord. 2457 § 1, 2000)
5.12.070: REGISTRATION; APPLICATION FEE NONREFUNDABLE:
At the time of making application for police registration, a nonrefundable
registration fee, as established by resolution of the city council, shall be
paid to the police department to cover the cost of investigation and
registration. (Ord. 2457 § 1, 2000)
5.12.080: REGISTRATION; INVESTIGATION AND IDENTIFICATION:
The completed and signed application for police registration shall be presented
by the applicant to the chief and such further information furnished as may be
required to enable the police department properly to investigate and evaluate
the applicant's record. At this time, such applicant shall be photographed,
unless he furnishes two (2) satisfactory photographs of himself, taken within
sixty (60) days immediately prior to the date of filing application with the
chief, which picture shall be two inches by two inches (2" x 2") showing the
head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishable manner; and
such photographs shall be made a part of the permanent registration record.
(Ord. 2457 § 1, 2000)
5.12.090: REGISTRATION; APPLICATION APPROVAL:
If, after causing investigation as he deems necessary, the chief is reasonably
satisfied that the applicant's character and business responsibility are such
that the applicant will not endanger the public safety, the chief may then
approve the application and register such applicant for the city. (Ord. 2457 §
1, 2000)
5.12.100: REGISTRATION; CERTIFICATE:
As evidence of compliance with the provisions of this chapter, the chief shall
issue to each applicant who complies and is registered a "certificate of
registration" which shall show the name and signature of the registrant, his
photograph and brief physical description. This certificate shall be dated,
countersigned, and show the expiration date of such registration. (Ord. 2457 §
1, 2000)
5.12.110: REGISTRATION; VALIDITY:
The certificate of registration issued pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter shall be valid for a period of twelve (12) months from the date of
issuance and the holder thereof must reregister at the end of each twelve (12)
month period thereafter. (Ord. 2457 § 1, 2000)
5.12.120: REGISTRATION; NOTIFICATION OF CHANGE AND/OR CORRECTION:
Any alarm business registered with the police department shall immediately
report to the chief any change of address or ownership of the business or the
name of business, address of the manager of operations for the area which
included the city. Any person registered with the police department as an alarm
agent shall immediately report to the chief any change of address. Whenever any
change occurs relating to the written information required by this section, the
permittee shall give written notice of such change to the chief within five (5)
calendar days. (Ord. 2457 § 1, 2000)
5.12.130: REGISTRATION; RENEWAL BY COUNCIL UPON REVOCATION:
No certificate of registration shall be issued to any person who has had a
certificate revoked pursuant to this chapter, except upon the applicant's
applying to the city council and the city council's authorizing the issuance of
the certificate. (Ord. 2457 § 1, 2000)
5.12.140: EMERGENCY SERVICE:
Every person, firm or corporation operating under a license issued under this
chapter shall maintain or have available at all hours a serviceman or agency
available to respond to emergency service calls at all hours of every day, and
which serviceman or agency shall render such emergency service at all hours of
the day if requested to do so by any member of the police or fire department or
other authorized city officials. (Ord. 2457 § 1, 2000)
5.12.150: NOTIFICATION POSTING:
Every person, firm or corporation maintaining an alarm system described in this
chapter shall either post on the premises of the alarm system or file with the
police department a notice containing the names and telephone numbers of the
persons to be notified in case of emergency or alarm activation or to render
service to the system during any hour of the day or night. The persons named
shall include the occupant of the premises, or the alarm business or agents
responsible for the maintenance of the system. If posted, such notice shall be
placed near the front door of the structure containing the alarm system or at
the front gate if the structure is fenced; and the notice shall be posted in
such a position as to be clearly legible from the ground level adjacent to the
structure or fence. It shall be the duty of the alarm user to maintain current
such a notice whether posted or filed with the police department. (Ord. 2457 §
1, 2000)
5.12.160: ALARM SYSTEM STANDARDS:
The city council may prescribe by resolution minimum standards for the
construction and maintenance and require inspection and approval of all alarm
systems, proprietor alarms and audible alarms installed within the city. (Ord.
2457 § 1, 2000)
5.12.170: REPORT OF FALSE ALARM REQUIRED:
Following police response to the actuation of an alarm which investigation by
the police department determines to be false and upon notification of such fact
by the police department, the alarm user shall file a written report with the
chief within seventy two (72) hours upon receipt of notice to do so from the
chief. Such report shall contain all information pertaining to the activation
of the alarm and planned corrective action, if any. Where the alarm system is
serviced by an alarm business, the report shall be made by such business and a
copy forwarded to the alarm user by the alarm business. The investigation of
any false alarm by any person other than members of the police department shall
also result in the notification to the alarm user that such an incident
occurred and shall not relieve the alarm user or alarm business of the formal
report responsibility provided for in this section. (Ord. 2457 § 1, 2000)
5.12.180: FALSE ALARM RESPONSE FEES:
   A.   A false burglary alarm response fee shall be paid to the police
department after three (3) false alarms have been received from any one source
or from any one alarm system within any consecutive three hundred sixty five
(365) day period. No fee shall be charged for false burglary alarms occurring
within thirty (30) days following initial installation of any new alarm
provided the system otherwise complies with the requirements of this chapter.
The false burglary alarm response fee shall be in such amount as established by
the city council. A higher false burglary alarm fee may be established for each
additional false burglary alarm during any consecutive three hundred sixty five
(365) day period.
   B.   A false robbery alarm response fee shall be paid to the police
department after two (2) false robbery alarms have been received from any one
source or from any one alarm system within any consecutive three hundred sixty
five (365) day period. The false robbery alarm fee shall be established by the
city council. A higher false robbery alarm fee may be established for each
additional false robbery alarm during any consecutive three hundred sixty five
(365) day period.
   C.   All fees established and/or levied by this section shall be paid to the
police department within thirty (30) days from the date of the invoice rendered
for said fee by the holder of the alarm user's permit or the owner of the
premises upon which the subject alarm system is located if no permit has been
issued for such system. (Ord. 2457 § 1, 2000)
5.12.190: AUDIBLE ALARM REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Every person maintaining an audible alarm which does not contain a
mechanical means to effect an automatic turnoff of the alarm within fifteen
(15) minutes after it is first activated, shall post a notice containing the
names and telephone numbers of persons to be notified to render repairs or
service during any hour of the day or night. Such notice shall be posted near
the alarm in such a position as to be legible from the ground level adjacent to
the building.
   B.   If service is unavailable, audible alarms which have emitted an alarm
signal in excess of thirty (30) minutes are declared to be nuisances, and the
police department may cause such alarm to be disconnected by a registered alarm
agent, with the full cost to be paid by the alarm user.
   C.   All audible alarms installed within the city shall be equipped with
mechanical means to effect an automatic turnoff and reset. (Ord. 2457 § 1,
2000)
5.12.200: ALARM SYSTEM INSPECTION:
Each alarm system shall be inspected annually. A report of such inspection
shall be submitted to the chief by the alarm business servicing or maintaining
such alarm system. Where a proprietor alarm is involved the report shall be
made by the permittee. The inspection report shall be submitted concurrent with
the application for renewal of license or permit or within sixty (60) days of
alarm system installation. (Ord. 2457 § 1, 2000)
5.12.210: MONITORING SERVICES:
Every alarm business which monitors an alarm system located within the city
shall maintain on file a current listing of all such alarm systems including
the alarm permit number and the name, address and telephone number of the
individual or individuals from whom entry to the premises may be obtained. This
information shall be available to the police department upon request of any
authorized representative thereof. The alarm permit number assigned to an alarm
system by the police department shall be given to the police dispatcher at the
time an alarm is reported to the police communications center by an alarm
company, a central monitoring station, a telephone answering service or any
other business that monitors and reports alarms. (Ord. 2457 § 1, 2000)
5.12.220: TELEPHONE DEVICES:
No person shall use or cause to be used any telephone device or telephone
attachment that is activated electronically to automatically dial a telephone
line of the city government and then emit a tone or prerecorded message to
report any emergency condition. (Ord. 2457 § 1, 2000)
5.12.230: USE OF PANIC BUTTON:
A burglary or robbery panic button shall only be used when there is a threat of
life or property. It is unlawful to use such panic button to merely summon the
police. (Ord. 2457 § 1, 2000)
5.12.240: ENFORCEMENT:
The conviction or punishment for violations of the provisions of this chapter,
or for failing to secure a permit as required by this chapter, shall not
relieve such person from paying the permit fee due and unpaid at the time of
such conviction, nor in the alternative shall the payment of any permit fee
prevent criminal prosecution for the violation of the provisions of this
chapter. All remedies shall be cumulative, and the use of one or more remedies
by the city shall not bar the use of any other remedy for the purpose of
enforcing the provisions of this chapter. The amount of any permit and alarm
fees shall be deemed a debt to the city. An action may be commenced in the name
of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction for the amount of any
delinquent fees. All permit and alarm fees shall be deemed delinquent thirty
(30) days after they are due and payable. (Ord. 2457 § 1, 2000)
5.12.250: NUISANCE ABATEMENT:
The chief may declare an alarm system at a specific location to be a nuisance
if such alarm system actuates excessive false alarms. The city council finds
and determines that four (4) false burglary alarms within one year (365 days)
or three (3) false robbery alarms within three hundred sixty five (365) days is
excessive and thereby constitutes a public nuisance. The chief shall not
consider any false alarm in this computation of nuisance alarms if such false
alarm was generated by an earthquake, high intensity wind, unusual act of
nature or general power outage. Nuisance alarms shall be considered those that
are the result of the negligence of the alarm user, the agents or employees of
the alarm user, or a defect in the alarm system. (Ord. 2457 § 1, 2000)
5.12.260: NONRESPONSE POLICY:
The chief shall have the authority to institute an immediate nonresponse policy
for any violation of sections contained in this chapter. Such policy shall
provide that the city's police personnel shall not respond to future alarms at
such premises. Such nonresponse policy shall be taken only after adequate
written notification has been given to the alarm user and any alarm company
involved. (Ord. 2457 § 1, 2000)
5.12.270: VERIFIED RESPONSE REQUIRED:
   A.   The police department will not respond to property alarms, intrusion
alarms, or burglar alarms unless they are verified alarms as defined by this
section. In reporting such an alarm to the police department, an alarm company
operator shall confirm that the alarm is a verified alarm. In the first
instance, it shall be presumed that an alarm company operator who reports an
alarm as a verified alarm has actually verified that alarm. Even if an alarm is
verified, exigent circumstances may arise that prevent the police department
from responding to verified alarm activations due to the availability of
resources. The police department is under no legal duty or obligation
whatsoever to respond to any property alarm, intrusion alarm, or burglary alarm
activation, and may respond in its discretion, as police resources allow and as
police department supervision and management deem appropriate.
   B.   An alarm company operator who reports a verified burglary alarm to the
police department is required to maintain the evidence it used to verify that
the burglary alarm activation, or a written report thereof, for not less than
twelve (12) months from the date of the alarm activation, except as to
recordings of remote audio or video surveillance, which must be maintained for
not less than sixty (60) days. Because the police department will accept the
alarm company operator's representation in the first instance that it verified
the alarm before reporting it to the police department as a verified alarm, the
police department shall have the right to audit the alarm company operator to
ensure that the alarm company operator is not misrepresenting that fact to the
police department. If the police department has probable cause to believe that
an alarm company operator has misrepresented an unverified alarm to be a
verified burglary alarm, it may send the alarm company operator written notice
of the date and time of the reported verified burglary alarm and request the
alarm company operator produce to the police department the evidence and/or
report substantiating the verification of that burglary alarm activation. The
alarm company operator shall produce the requested items to the police
department within fourteen (14) days of the mailing of notice. Should the alarm
company operator fail to maintain the evidence and/or report for the specified
period of time or fail to produce the requested items to the police department,
the alarm company operator will not be entitled to the presumption set forth in
section A above. Should the alarm company operator intentionally destroy, fail
to maintain for the time period specified above, or discard the evidence and/or
report, or intentionally fail to produce the requested items to the police
department that have been maintained and do exist, and in that event the alarm
company operator shall be presumed to have made a fraudulent verification. Such
presumption may be overcome by the alarm company operator producing evidence
that in requesting a police response to the burglary alarm in issue, it did not
know that the alarm was unverified.
   C.   Police department response to robbery alarms, panic alarms, and medic
alarms does not require a prior verified response. Exigent circumstances may
arise, however, that prevent the police department from responding to robbery,
panic, and medic alarm activations due to the availability of resources. The
police department is under no legal duty or obligation whatsoever to respond to
any robbery alarm, panic alarm or medic alarm activation and may respond, in
its discretion, as police resources allow and as police department supervision
and management deem appropriate. (Ord. 2915, 2020)
CHAPTER 5.16
BINGO
SECTION:
5.16.010: Definitions
5.16.020: License; Required
5.16.030: License; Fee
5.16.040: License; Application
5.16.050: License; Granting
5.16.060: License; Display
5.16.070: License; Nontransferability
5.16.080: License; Suspension Or Revocation
5.16.090: Disciplinary Action; Grounds
5.16.100: Suspension Or Revocation Of License Without Hearing
5.16.110: Hearing; Procedure
5.16.120: Effect Of Pending Revocation Or Suspension
5.16.130: Game Operation
5.16.140: Alcoholic Beverage Consumption Prohibited
5.16.150: Participation Of Intoxicated Person Prohibited
5.16.160: Financial Interest Limitation
5.16.170: Profit Accountability
5.16.180: Participation Limited To Those Present
5.16.190: Game To Be Open To Public
5.16.200: Value Of Prizes
5.16.210: Participation Of Minors Prohibited
5.16.220: Use Of Fictitious Name Or Address Prohibited
5.16.230: Violation; Penalty
5.16.010: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
   BINGO: A game of chance in which prizes are awarded on the basis of
designated numbers or symbols on a card which conform to numbers or symbols
selected at random, and shall include cards having numbers or symbols which are
concealed and preprinted in a manner providing for disbursement of prizes.
   MINORS: All persons defined as such by Civil Code section 25.1.
   NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION: An organization exempted from the payment of bank
and corporation tax by sections 23701a, 23701b, 23701d, 23701e, 23701f, 23701g,
and 237011 of the Revenue and Taxation Code.
   PRIZES: Cash, kind, or both for each separate game which is held. (Ord. 1916
§ 2, 1986: prior code § 51600)
5.16.020: LICENSE; REQUIRED:
No person other than a nonprofit organization may conduct bingo games. A
nonprofit organization may conduct bingo games only after having first obtained
a license from the city's finance director, or the director's designee,
pursuant to this chapter, and provided that the receipts of such games may be
used only for charitable purposes. (Ord. 2684 § 5, 2007: Ord. 1916 § 3, 1986:
prior code § 51601)
5.16.030: LICENSE; FEE:
A license fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) annually shall be payable upon the
filing of an application for license or for renewal of a license. If an
application for a license is denied, the applicant shall receive a refund of
twenty five dollars ($25.00). (Ord. 1916 § 4, 1986: prior code § 51602)
5.16.040: LICENSE; APPLICATION:
Applicants for bingo games shall file a written, signed, and acknowledged
application with the city's finance director, or the director's designee,
showing:
   A.   The name and address of applicant;
   B.   The dates, hours, and location where the bingo games will be operated;
   C.   The name or names of the person or persons having the management or
supervision of such games;
   D.   Such other reasonable information as may be required as to the identity
or character of the applicant, manager, members of the applicant operating such
games;
   E.   The maximum number of participants expected on the premises;
   F.   Proof by copy of exempt status issued by the California state franchise
tax board. (Ord. 2684 § 5, 2007: prior code § 51603)
5.16.050: LICENSE; GRANTING:
After making and filing the application, the city's finance director, or the
director's designee, shall refer the application to the planning department,
building and safety department, the fire chief, and the chief of police for
investigation. The planning department, the fire chief, and police chief shall
make reports on their findings, together with a recommendation as to whether or
not the applicant shall be granted a license to the city's finance director, or
the director's designee, within ten (10) working days after the application was
referred to them. The license shall be issued for not longer than one year and
shall specify maximum number of participants permitted on the premises. The
license may be renewed each succeeding year by filing application therefor at
least thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of the license period. (Ord.
2684 § 5, 2007: prior code § 51604)
5.16.060: LICENSE; DISPLAY:
Every licensee shall display the license issued by the city in a conspicuous
place on the premises where the bingo games are conducted. (Prior code § 51612)
5.16.070: LICENSE; NONTRANSFERABILITY:
Each license issued hereunder shall be issued to a specific nonprofit
organization and shall in no event be transferable from one organization to
another. (Prior code § 51613)
5.16.080: LICENSE; SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION:
The city council may, upon its own motion or upon the verified complaint in
writing of any person, investigate the actions of any licensee and may
temporarily suspend, for a period not exceeding one year, or revoke the permit
of any licensee which commits any one or more of the acts or omissions
constituting grounds for disciplinary action under this chapter. (Prior code §
51614)
5.16.090: DISCIPLINARY ACTION; GROUNDS:
It shall be a ground for denial, revocation, or other disciplinary action of
any applicant, licensee, the agent, or employee, or any person connected or
associated with the applicant or licensee as partner, director, officers,
stockholder, general manager, or person exercising managerial authority of or
on behalf of the licensee if such organization or person has:
   A.   Knowingly made any false, misleading, or fraudulent statement of a
material fact in an application for a license, or in any report or record
required to be filed with the city; or
   B.   Violated any provision of this chapter or of any statute relating to
the permitted activity; or
   C.   Been convicted of a felony or any crime involving moral turpitude; or
   D.   Committed any unlawful, false, fraudulent, deceptive, or dangerous act
while conducting permitted bingo games; or
   E.   Violated any rule or regulation adopted by the city council relating to
the licensed bingo games; or
   F.   Conducted the permitted bingo games in a manner contrary to the peace,
health, safety, and general welfare of the public; or
   G.   Failed to comply with zoning and building and safety regulations of the
city, the health department, and the fire chief or the police chief. (Ord. 1916
§ 8, 1986; prior code § 51615)
5.16.100: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE WITHOUT HEARING:
If any applicant, licensee, the agent or employee, or any person connected or
associated with the applicant or licensee as partner, director, officer,
stockholder, general manager, or person who is exercising managerial authority
on behalf of the licensee is convicted in any court of the violation of any law
regulating any activity at the licensee's business premises, the council may
revoke such license forthwith without any further action thereon other than
giving notice or revocation to the licensee. (Prior code § 51616)
5.16.110: HEARING; PROCEDURE:
An applicant or licensee may, within ten (10) days after service of a written
notice of denial of a license or suspension or revocation of his license, file
a request for a hearing with the city council. The request for a hearing shall
be in writing and signed by or on behalf of the applicant or licensee. It need
not be verified or follow any particular form. Failure to file such a request
for a hearing shall constitute a waiver of the licensee's right to a hearing.
(Prior code § 51617)
5.16.120: EFFECT OF PENDING REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION:
   A.   Continuing Operation Of Bingo Games: Pending the final determination of
a proceeding for revocation or suspension of a license, a licensee may continue
to operate bingo games for the period of his license or until the council makes
such final determination.
   B.   Renewal; Effect Of Pendency Or Proceeding To Suspend Or Revoke License:
A licensee may file an application for renewal of a license pursuant to section
5.16.050 of this chapter accompanied by the required fee. Renewal application
should be filed at least thirty (30) days prior to expiration of the license
period. In the event a renewal application is filed during the pendency of a
proceeding to suspend or revoke the license, such filing shall continue such
license in full force and effect until the entry of the final order by the city
council terminating proceedings. Failure of the council to revoke, suspend,
limit, or condition the license shall have the effect of granting such license.
The application for renewal shall become a part of the pending proceeding and
be subject to all evidence which has been or is thereafter presented. No
further notice to the applicant is required and the city council is authorized
to consider and make findings upon such application in accordance with this
chapter. (Prior code § 51618)
5.16.130: GAME OPERATION:
A bingo game shall be conducted only on property owned or leased by the
nonprofit organization, or property whose use is donated to the organization,
and which property is used for such organization for an office or for
performance of the purposes for which the organization is organized. The bingo
game shall be operated and staffed only by members of the nonprofit
organization which organized the game. Such members shall not receive a profit,
wage, or salary from any bingo game. Only the organization licensed to conduct
the bingo game shall do so. No bingo game may be conducted between the hours of
two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M., or may last more than five
(5) hours in any twenty four (24) hour period. The number of bingo sessions may
not exceed ten (10) such sessions in any calendar month. (Ord. 1916 § 5, 1986:
prior code § 51605)
5.16.140: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONSUMPTION PROHIBITED:
The consumption or possession of alcoholic beverages shall be prohibited in any
room being utilized to conduct the bingo game. (Ord. 1916 § 6, 1986: prior code
§ 51605.1)
5.16.150: PARTICIPATION OF INTOXICATED PERSON PROHIBITED:
No person who is obviously intoxicated shall be allowed to participate in any
bingo game. (Prior code § 51606.2)
5.16.160: FINANCIAL INTEREST LIMITATION:
No individual, corporation, partnership, nor other person or legal entity
except the organization licensed to conduct a bingo game shall hold a financial
interest in the conduct of the bingo game. However, this shall not preclude the
employment of security personnel who are not members of the licensed
organization at such game by the organization conducting the game. (Ord. 1916 §
7, 1986: prior code § 51606)
5.16.170: PROFIT ACCOUNTABILITY:
All profits derived from a bingo game shall be kept in a special fund or
account and shall not be commingled with any other fund or account. Records
required by this section shall be retained for a period of three (3) years. The
licensee shall maintain a record of all receipts derived from bingo games and
cash disbursement thereof including those disbursements awarded as prizes of
each game. The licensee's books and records shall be available for inspection
upon reasonable notice. No licensee may expend funds to publicize its bingo
games except for small signs or handbills. (Prior code § 51607)
5.16.180: PARTICIPATION LIMITED TO THOSE PRESENT:
No person shall be allowed to participate in a bingo game, unless the person is
physically present at the time and place in which the bingo game is being
conducted. (Prior code § 51608)
5.16.190: GAME TO BE OPEN TO PUBLIC:
All bingo games shall be open to the public, not just to the members of the
nonprofit charitable organization. (Prior code § 51609)
5.16.200: VALUE OF PRIZES:
The total value of prizes awarded during the conduct of any bingo game shall
not exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) in cash or kind, or both, for
each separate game which is held. (Prior code § 51610)
5.16.210: PARTICIPATION OF MINORS PROHIBITED:
No minor shall be allowed to participate in any bingo game. (Prior code §
51611)
5.16.220: USE OF FICTITIOUS NAME OR ADDRESS PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person or persons to sign a fictitious name or
fictitious address in connection with applications submitted pursuant to this
chapter. (Prior code § 51619)
5.16.230: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and subject to a fine of not more than five hundred dollars
($500.00) or both such fine and imprisonment; provided, however, pursuant to
subsections (b) and (c) of section 326.5 of the Penal Code, any person
receiving a profit, wage, or salary from any bingo game authorized by section
19 of article IV of the state constitution and this chapter shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed ten thousand
dollars ($10,000.00). (Prior code § 51620)
CHAPTER 5.18
REMOTE CALLER BINGO
SECTION:
5.18.010: Purpose
5.18.020: Remote Caller Bingo Authorized
5.18.030: Qualified Applicants; Applicants For Licensure
5.18.040: License Application; Verification
5.18.050: Annual Licenses
5.18.060: Conditions Of Licensure
5.18.010: PURPOSE:
This chapter is adopted pursuant to section 19 of article IV of the California
constitution, as implemented by sections 326.3 and 326.4 of the Penal Code.
(Ord. 2767, 2011)
5.18.020: REMOTE CALLER BINGO AUTHORIZED:
Remote caller bingo may be lawfully played in the city pursuant to the
provisions of sections 326.3 and 326.4 of the Penal Code, and this chapter, and
not otherwise. (Ord. 2767, 2011)
5.18.030: QUALIFIED APPLICANTS; APPLICANTS FOR LICENSURE:
   A.   The following organizations are qualified to apply to the city's
finance director for a license to operate a remote caller bingo game if the
receipts of those games are used only for charitable purposes:
      1.   An organization exempt from the payment of the bank and corporation
tax by section 23701, 23701a, 23701b, 23701d, 23701e, 23701f, 23701g, 23701k,
or 23701w of the Revenue And Taxation Code.
      2.   A mobilehome park association of a mobilehome park that is situated
in the city.
      3.   Senior citizen organizations.
      4.   Charitable organizations affiliated with a school district.
   B.   The application shall be in a form prescribed by the city's finance
director and shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable filing fee in an amount
determined by resolution of the city council. The following documentation shall
be attached to the application, as applicable:
      1.   A certificate issued by the franchise tax board certifying that the
applicant is exempt from the payment of the bank and corporation tax pursuant
to section 23701d of the Revenue And Taxation Code.
      2.   Other evidence as the city's finance director determines is
necessary to verify that the applicant is a duly organized mobilehome park
association of a mobilehome park situated in the city. (Ord. 2767, 2011)
5.18.040: LICENSE APPLICATION; VERIFICATION:
The license shall not be issued until the city's finance director has verified
the facts stated in the application and determined that the applicant is
qualified. (Ord. 2767, 2011)
5.18.050: ANNUAL LICENSES:
A license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be valid until the end of the
calendar year, at which time the license shall expire. A new license shall only
be obtained upon filing a new application and payment of the license fee. The
fact that a license has been issued to an applicant creates no vested right on
the part of the licensee to continue to offer bingo for play. If this chapter
is repealed, all licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall cease to be
effective for any purpose on the effective date of the repealing ordinance.
(Ord. 2767, 2011)
5.18.060: CONDITIONS OF LICENSURE:
   A.   Any license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to the
conditions contained in sections 326.3 and 326.4 of the Penal Code, and each
licensee shall comply with the requirements of those provisions.
   B.   Each license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to the
following additional conditions:
      1.   Remote bingo games shall not be conducted by any licensee on more
than two (2) days during any week, except that a licensee may hold one
additional game, at its election, in each calendar quarter.
      2.   The licensed organization is responsible for ensuring that the
conditions of this chapter and sections 326.3 and 326.4 of the Penal Code are
complied with by the organization and its officers and members. A violation of
any one or more of those conditions or provisions shall constitute cause for
the revocation of the organization's license. At the request of the
organization, the city council shall hold a public hearing before revoking any
license issued pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 2767, 2011)
CHAPTER 5.20
FORTUNE TELLING, PALMISTRY, ETC.
SECTION:
5.20.010: License; Required
5.20.020: License; Application
5.20.030: License; Application Investigation
5.20.040: License; Approval
5.20.050: License; Issuance, Bonding
5.20.060: Annual Fee
5.20.070: Permitted Zones
5.20.010: LICENSE; REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person, in exchange for any fee or consideration, to
practice the art or business of fortune telling, predicting or foretelling the
future, or to furnish any information not otherwise obtainable by the ordinary
process of knowledge, by means of analyzing any animate or inanimate objects
including, but not limited to, celestial bodies, crystal balls, tea leaves, or
playing or other cards, or through the exercise of any purported psychic,
mediumistic, prophetic, occult, clairvoyant, or supernatural powers without
having first applied for and received the city license as provided in this
chapter. (Ord. 1935 § 1, 1986: prior code § 2391)
5.20.020: LICENSE; APPLICATION:
Each license to practice or engage in the conduct described in section
5.20.010 of this chapter shall be applied for by permit which contains the
following information:
   A.   The business name and address, mailing address, and home and business
telephone numbers of the applicant;
   B.   The record of conviction for violations of the law, excluding minor
traffic violations;
   C.   The fingerprints of the applicant on a form provided by the police
department;
   D.   The address, city and state, and the approximate dates where and when
the applicant practiced a similar business, either alone or in conjunction with
others;
   E.   The type of ownership of the business and the owners or principal
officers of the business;
   F.   The estimated gross receipts of the business through the end of the
calendar year. (Ord. 1935 § 1, 1986: prior code § 2392)
5.20.030: LICENSE; APPLICATION INVESTIGATION:
Upon filing, the application shall be referred to the police department for
investigation to verify the facts contained in the application and any
supporting data. The police department shall report its findings to the city's
finance director or the director's designee and shall recommend approval or
denial of the license. A report recommending denial shall set forth the grounds
for the recommendation, and a copy shall be provided to the applicant. (Ord.
2718 § 12, 2009)
5.20.040: LICENSE; APPROVAL:
The city's finance director, or the director's designee, shall approve the
business license upon the determination that:
   A.   All of the information contained in the application and supporting data
is true;
   B.   The applicant has not, within the previous two (2) years, been
convicted of any violation of this chapter or any law relating to fraud or
moral turpitude. (Ord. 2684 § 6, 2007: Ord. 1935 § 1, 1986: prior code § 2394)
5.20.050: LICENSE; ISSUANCE, BONDING:
An approved business license shall be issued to the applicant upon payment of
the first annual license fee and posting of a bond in the principal amount of
fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00), executed by the applicant as principal and
by a good and sufficient corporate surety authorized to do business in
California, in a form approved by the city attorney. The bond shall ensure good
faith and fair dealing by the applicant and shall provide a guarantee of
indemnity for any and all loss, damage or deprivation suffered by any patron of
the applicant in the conduct of his business. (Ord. 1935 § 1, 1986: prior code
§ 2395)
5.20.060: ANNUAL FEE:
The applicant shall pay an annual business license fee for practicing fortune
telling and related activities as described herein in the amount of one hundred
dollars ($100.00) per year. (Ord. 1935 § 1, 1986: prior code § 2396)
5.20.070: PERMITTED ZONES:
Fortune telling and related activities as described in this chapter may be
conducted only within the C-3, C-4, C-M, M-P, M-1, I-P, and M-2 zones of the
city. (Ord. 1935 § 1, 1986: prior code § 2397)
CHAPTER 5.24
HOTELS AND LODGING HOUSES
SECTION:
5.24.010: Register; Required
5.24.020: Register; Use; Lighting Of Premises
5.24.010: REGISTER; REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to keep or carry on in the city any hotel,
lodging, boarding or rooming house without keeping a register wherein all
persons upon securing lodging, rooms or board in any such place shall be
required to inscribe their names and place of residence, together with the date
of registration and the number of the room or rooms occupied by such person.
(Prior code § 2331)
5.24.020: REGISTER; USE; LIGHTING OF PREMISES:
Such register shall be kept in a conspicuous place in the hotel, lodging or
boarding house, and shall at all times be kept open for inspection; and all
halls, stairs, and exits used in any such place shall be kept lighted between
the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. of the
following morning. (Prior code § 2332)
CHAPTER 5.28
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
SECTION:
5.28.010: Purpose And Intent
5.28.020: Definitions
5.28.030: Administration
5.28.040: Certifications Required
5.28.050: Massage Establishment Owner Background Check Required
5.28.060: Additional Requirements
5.28.070: Display Of Permit
5.28.080: Massage Technician Certificates Required
5.28.090: Prohibited Conduct
5.28.100: Facilities And Operations
5.28.110: Exceptions
5.28.120: Public Nuisance Abatement
5.28.130: Revocation
5.28.140: Appeal
5.28.150: Violation
5.28.010: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
   A.   This chapter establishes new permitting standards intended to comply
with California law and establish health and safety guidelines for massage
establishments.
   B.   This chapter is not intended to be exclusive and compliance will not
excuse noncompliance with any state or local laws or regulations that are
uniformly applied to other professional or personal services businesses
including, without limitation, all zoning applications; business license
regulations; building, fire, electrical, and plumbing codes; and Health And
Safety Code laws and regulations applicable to professional or personal
services businesses.
   C.   This chapter establishes a local regulatory system that allows only
state certified massage therapists and massage practitioners to operate within
the city in accordance with this code. (Ord. 2824, 2015)
5.28.020: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the
following definitions govern the construction of the words and phrases used in
this chapter. Words and phrases not defined by this chapter have the meaning
set forth elsewhere in this code, the Business And Professions Code, or the
Government Code.
   CALIFORNIA MASSAGE THERAPY COUNCIL (CAMTC): The California massage therapy
council created pursuant to Business And Professions Code section 4600.5(a).
   CERTIFIED MASSAGE PRACTITIONER: A person who is currently certified as a
massage practitioner by the CAMTC, and who administers massage for
compensation.
   CERTIFIED MASSAGE THERAPIST: A person who is currently certified as a
massage therapist by the CAMTC, and who administers massage for compensation.
   CHIEF: The city's chief of police, or his or her designee, or such other
city director designated by the city manager.
   CITY: The city of Redlands.
   MASSAGE: Any method of pressure on, or friction against, or stroking,
kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating or stimulating the external
parts of the human body with the hands or with the aid of any mechanical or
electrical apparatus, or other appliance or devices, with or without such
supplementary aids such as rubbing alcohol, liniment, antiseptic, oil, powder,
cream, lotion, ointment or other similar preparations.
   MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT: Means and includes any massage establishment, parlor,
or any room, place or institution where massage is given or administered by a
massage technician as the primary service of the business establishment.
   MASSAGE TECHNICIAN: Any person, who gives, performs or administers to
another person a massage for any form of consideration.
   MEDICAL MASSAGE THERAPY: Massage establishment with a minimum of eighty
percent (80%) of the establishment's clients from referrals by state licensed
healthcare providers. The establishment's records are kept on the premises and
made accessible to the city upon request for compliance.
   PERSON: Means and includes persons, firms, corporations, partnerships,
associations or other forms of business organization or group.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: Means and includes any of the following human
anatomical areas: genitals, pubic regions, anuses or female breasts below a
point immediately above the top of the areola.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: Means and includes all of the following:
   A.   Fondling or other erotic touching of specified anatomical areas;
   B.   Sex acts including, without limitation, intercourse, oral copulation,
or sodomy;
   C.   Masturbation; or
   D.   Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any specified
sexual activity listed in this definition. (Ord. 2824, 2015)
5.28.030: ADMINISTRATION:
The chief is authorized to administer this chapter and to promulgate
administrative policies and procedures required to implement the regulations
set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 2824, 2015)
5.28.040: CERTIFICATIONS REQUIRED:
   A.   Massage Establishment: It is unlawful for any person to own, operate or
maintain a massage establishment unless all massage technicians employed by the
massage establishment hold a current, valid certification from CAMTC as a
massage practitioner or massage therapist.
   B.   Massage Technician: It is unlawful for any person to engage in, or
carry on the business or activities of a massage technician without a
certification from the CAMTC as a massage practitioner or massage therapist.
   C.   Off Premises Massage Service: It is unlawful for any person to own,
operate, or maintain an off premises massage service in the city unless all
massage technicians employed by the off premises massage service hold a
current, valid certification from the CAMTC as a certified massage practitioner
or certified massage therapist. (Ord. 2824, 2015)
5.28.050: MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT OWNER BACKGROUND CHECK REQUIRED:
   A.   Except for massage establishment owners who possess a current and valid
CAMTC certification, any person, association, partnership, or corporation who
owns more than five percent (5%) of a massage establishment and desires to
operate that massage establishment must make an application to the chief for an
investigation of the applicant's background and history. A nonrefundable fee,
in an amount set by resolution of the city council, must accompany the
submission of each application to defray the cost of investigation, inspection
and enforcement of this chapter. An annual nonrefundable renewal fee will also
be charged to defray associated costs of investigation, inspection and
enforcement.
   B.   Each applicant for background check must submit the following
information:
      1.   The full true name and any other names used by the applicant.
      2.   The present address and telephone number of the applicant.
      3.   Driver's license number and social security number.
      4.   The proposed address of the massage establishment.
      5.   Each residence and business address of the applicant for the three
(3) years immediately preceding the date of the application, and the inclusive
dates for such address.
      6.   Written proof that the applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of
age.
      7.   Applicant's height, weight, and color of eyes and hair.
      8.   Two (2) photographs of the applicant at least two inches by two
inches (2" x 2") taken within four (4) months preceding the date of the
application.
      9.   Applicant's business, occupation and employment history for the five
(5) years immediately preceding the date of application.
      10.   The business license or permit history of the applicant, including
whether such applicant has ever had any license or permit issued by any agency
or board, city, county or state revoked or suspended, or has had any
professional or vocational license or permit revoked or suspended and the
reasons for the revocation.
      11.   All criminal convictions for any of the offenses set forth in this
chapter, and a statement of the dates and places of such convictions.
      12.   If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation must
be set forth exactly as shown in the articles of incorporation or charter,
together with the state and date of incorporation and names and residence
addresses of each of its current officers and directors, and each stockholder
holding more than five percent (5%) of the stock of the corporation. If the
applicant is a partnership, the application must set forth the names and
residence addresses of each of the partners, including the limited partners. If
the applicant is a limited partnership, it must furnish a copy of its
certificate of limited partnership filed with the county clerk. If one or more
partners is a corporation, the provisions of this section pertaining to
corporate applicants may apply. The applicant corporation or partnership must
designate one of its officers or general partners to act as its responsible
managing officer. Such person must complete and sign all application forms
required of any individual applicant under this chapter, but only one
application fee will be charged.
      13.   The name and address of the owner and lessor of the real property
upon or in which the massage establishment is to be operated, and a copy of the
lease or rental agreement. If the applicant is not the legal owner of the
property, a notarized acknowledgment from the owner of the property that a
massage establishment will be located on his or her property is required for
each massage establishment permit location.
      14.   The full true names and other names used, the present addresses and
telephone numbers, driver's license numbers, and social security numbers, and
state certificates from the CAMTC for all massage technicians who will be
working as employees or independent contractors at each massage establishment
permit location. The applicant must provide the chief with any changes in the
massage technicians that work at the massage establishment during the permit
period within ten (10) working days of each change.
      15.   The chief may require the applicant to furnish fingerprints when
needed for the purpose of verifying identification.
      16.   Such other identification and information as may be required by the
chief in order to verify the information to be included in the application.
   C.   The city is allowed a reasonable time, not to exceed sixty (60) days
from receipt of a completed application, in which to investigate the
information on the application. During the investigation of the background
information, a city representative including, without limitation, a member of
the police department, fire department, building and safety division, planning
division, or any authorized representative thereof, may inspect, with or
without the notice during regular business hours, the proposed place of
business to determine whether it conforms to the requirements of this chapter.
Upon completion of the inspection, the city representative must inform the
chief in writing of the findings of the inspection.
      1.   Background clearance will be issued, within sixty (60) days of
receipt of a completed application, to any applicant who has furnished all of
the information required by this section in the application for such license,
provided:
         a.   The applicant has not made a material false statement in the
application and that all massage technicians who will be working as employees
or independent contractors at each massage establishment permit location
possesses certification from the CAMTC as a massage practitioner or massage
therapist;
         b.   The applicant, if an individual, or in the case of an applicant
which is a corporation or partnership, any of its officers, directors, holders
of five percent (5%) or more of the corporation's stock, has not, within five
(5) years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application been
convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of any of the following
offenses: Penal Code sections 243.4; 261; 266a through 266j; 267; 314 to 316;
318; or 647 (a, b, d); any offenses requiring registration under Penal Code
section 290 or Health And Safety Code section 11590; or any felony offense
involving the possession, possession for sale, sale, transportation,
furnishing, or giving away of a controlled substance specified in Health And
Safety Code sections 11054 to 11058, as amended; or any offense in another
state in which, if committed in California, would have been punishable as one
or more of heretofore mentioned offenses; or any offense involving the use of
force or violence upon the person of another; or any offense involving theft,
embezzlement or moral turpitude;
         c.   The applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of age; and
         d.   The applicant has not had a massage technician, massage
establishment, escort service, nude entertainment, nude photo studio or similar
type of license or permit suspended within one year or revoked within three (3)
years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application, unless
the applicant can show a material change in circumstances or that mitigating
circumstances exist since the revocation or suspension. (Ord. 2824, 2015)
5.28.060: ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS:
Before operating a massage establishment in the city, massage establishment
owners must comply with all applicable codes adopted by the city, including,
without limitation, the building, electrical, and plumbing codes. (Ord. 2824,
2015)
5.28.070: DISPLAY OF PERMIT:
Any owner of a massage establishment or off premises massage service must
display the CAMTC certificates for all massage technicians prominently in a
conspicuous place, capable of being viewed by customers or city
representatives, at every location where massage is performed or conducted. For
off premises massage services, massage workers must also carry a copy of their
CAMTC certificate and display it to customers upon request. (Ord. 2824, 2015)
5.28.080: MASSAGE TECHNICIAN CERTIFICATES REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for owners of massage establishments or off site massage
services to allow any person to perform massage that is not a CAMTC certified
massage therapist or certified massage practitioner. (Ord. 2824, 2015)
5.28.090: PROHIBITED CONDUCT:
It is unlawful for owners of massage establishments or off premises massage
services, or massage technicians to conduct or allow any of the following
activities:
   A.   It is unlawful for any massage technician or any other employee working
in a massage establishment or for an off premises massage service, or
customers, patrons, or guests of the establishment or service, to engage in any
specified sexual activities upon the premises of the massage establishment or
the off premises massage location.
   B.   It is unlawful for any massage technician or other employee of a
massage establishment to expose specified anatomical areas in the presence of
any patron, customer or guest.
   C.   In the course of administering the massage, it is unlawful for any
massage technician or other massage establishment employee to make intentional
physical contact with the specified anatomical areas of any customer, patron or
guest. (Ord. 2824, 2015)
5.28.100: FACILITIES AND OPERATIONS:
It is unlawful for any massage establishment to operate unless the massage
establishment premises and operation comply with the following minimum
requirements:
   A.   Zoning Regulations: Notwithstanding the provisions contained herein,
all massage establishments shall operate in accordance with the applicable
provisions of title 18 of this code.
   B.   Signs: A readable sign must be posted at the main entrance identifying
the establishment as a massage establishment, provided, however, that all such
signs must otherwise comply with the sign requirements of this code.
   C.   Lighting: Minimal lighting must be provided in accordance with the
California building code, as adopted by this code, and, in addition, at least
one unobstructed artificial light of not less than nine hundred (900) lumens
must be provided in each enclosed room or booth where massage services are
being performed on a patron.
   D.   Ventilation: Minimum ventilation must be provided in accordance with
the California building code, as adopted by this code.
   E.   Disinfection Of Instruments: Instruments used for massage must be
disinfected before each use. Where instruments for massage are employed,
adequate quantities of supplies for disinfection must be available during all
hours of operation.
   F.   Water: Hot and cold running water must be provided at all times.
   G.   Linen Storage: Closed cabinets must be utilized for the storage of
clean towels and linen. After use, towels and linen must be removed and stored
in a separate container until laundered.
   H.   Dressing And Toilet Facilities: For massage establishments consisting
of one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet or more, or having more than
four (4) employees, separate dressing and toilet facilities must be provided
for male and female patrons. This condition does not apply to massage
establishment that offer foot massage services and provide other form of
massage services or other type of activity regulated by this chapter.
   I.   Sanitary Conditions: All walls, ceilings, floors, steam and vapor
rooms, and all other physical facilities for the massage establishment must be
kept in good repair and be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition.
   J.   Clean Linen: Clean and sanitary towels and linens must be provided for
patrons receiving massage services. No common use of towels or linens is
permitted.
   K.   Compliance With Laws: The premises to be used must at all times comply
with all applicable state and local laws and regulations.
   L.   Rooms Not To Be Used For Sleeping: Any room in which a massage
establishment provides massage services may not be used for residential
sleeping purposes.
   M.   Register: A register of all individuals employed as massage
technicians, and copies of their current CAMTC certifications and massage
technician business licenses, must be maintained and available for inspection
at all times during regular business hours.
   N.   Restricted Areas: Each person present in any area of the massage
establishment outside the waiting area or other areas open to any member of the
public must be a certified massage practitioner or certified massage therapist
or the massage establishment owner.
   O.   Display Of Permits And Certifications: The permits and certifications
required by this chapter must be displayed in an open and conspicuous public
place on the premises. (Ord. 2824, 2015)
5.28.110: EXCEPTIONS:
This chapter does not apply to the following classes of individuals, and no
CAMTC certification is required of such persons, while engaged in the
performance of the duties of their respective professions:
   A.   Acupuncturists who are duly certified to practice their profession in
the state of California.
   B.   Barbers, beauticians, and cosmetologists with respect to scalp massage,
who are duly permitted pursuant to Business And Professions Code section 7301
et seq., in accordance with the limitations of their permits.
   C.   Nurses who are registered as such under the laws of the state of
California.
   D.   Physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths, or physical therapists
who are duly permitted to practice their respective professions in the state of
California, or provide professional services in lawful compliance with
Corporations Code section 13401(a). (Ord. 2824, 2015)
5.28.120: PUBLIC NUISANCE ABATEMENT:
Any massage establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the
provisions of this chapter is unlawful and a public nuisance. The city attorney
is authorized, in addition to or in lieu of any other legal or criminal
proceedings, to commence an action or proceeding for abatement, removal or
enjoinment of such massage establishment in the manner provided by law. The
city attorney may seek a court order to grant such relief to abate or remove
such massage establishments and restrain and enjoin any person from operating,
conducting or maintaining such an establishment contrary to the provisions of
this chapter. (Ord. 2824, 2015)
5.28.130: REVOCATION:
The chief may revoke any approval issued under this chapter for one or more of
the following grounds:
   A.   Fraud Or Deceit: That the applicant practiced fraud or deceit in
obtaining an approval under this chapter;
   B.   Violation Of Chapter: That the massage establishment owner, operator,
massage technician, or its employee violated a provision or provisions of this
chapter;
   C.   Criminal Conviction: That the massage establishment owner, operator,
massage technician, or its employee has been convicted in a court of competent
jurisdiction of any offense described in this chapter;
   D.   Improperly Maintained Facilities: That the facilities and operations of
the massage establishment are not kept in compliance with this chapter, and
that the owner or operator has failed to promptly remedy deficiency of which
they have been notified. For purposes of this subsection, "notice" means notice
given personally or by leaving notice at the massage establishment premises, or
by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the address designated by the massage
technician or establishment in accordance with this chapter;
   E.   Employment Of Uncertified Technicians: That the massage establishment
has employed, allowed or permitted an uncertified person to perform massage in
the massage establishment;
   F.   Error: That the approval was issued in error;
   G.   Prohibited Conduct: A massage establishment owner, operator, massage
technician, or its employee or agent has been found to have engaged in
prohibited conduct in violation of this chapter.
Upon a determination on the grounds to revoke an approval under this chapter,
the chief must cause a notice of revocation to be mailed by first class,
postage prepaid mail, to the address designated by the massage technician or
establishment pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 2824, 2015)
5.28.140: APPEAL:
Any person denied an approval under this chapter or a massage establishment
owner or operator whose approval has been revoked may appeal the denial or
revocation in writing pursuant to the appeal procedures provided in title 1,
chapter 1.06 of this code. Such appeal must be in writing and must be filed
with the city clerk not more than fifteen (15) days following the chief's
deposit into the mail of the notice of denial or revocation sent to the
applicant or massage establishment owner or operator to the address listed by
the applicant or massage establishment owner or operator pursuant to this
chapter. Any successful appeal will result in approval or reinstatement of an
approval and refund of any fines collected by the city. (Ord. 2824, 2015)
5.28.150: VIOLATION:
In addition to any other penalties provided for in this chapter, any person who
violates, or causes or permits the violation of, any provision of this chapter
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, or at the discretion of the city
attorney, may be deemed guilty of an infraction, as the interests of justice
warrant. (Ord. 2824, 2015)
CHAPTER 5.32
MOTORBUSES
SECTION:
5.32.010: Defined
5.32.020: Permit Required
5.32.030: Permit; Application, Filing
5.32.040: Permit Issuance
5.32.050: Permit; Insurance Required
5.32.060: Permit; Construction
5.32.070: Permit; Rights Conferred
5.32.080: Permit; Materiality Of Conditions
5.32.090: Permit; Breach
5.32.100: Permit; Approval Required For Assignment
5.32.110: Permit; Nontransferability
5.32.120: Permit; Rights Reserved To City
5.32.130: Permit; Reservation Deemed Cumulative
5.32.140: Permit; Franchise Not Exclusive
5.32.150: Permit; Acceptance
5.32.160: Indemnification; Nonliability Of City
5.32.170: Indemnification; Bond Required
5.32.180: Indemnification; Bond Conditions
5.32.190: Indemnification; Bond Withdrawal
5.32.200: Royalties; City Percentage
5.32.210: Royalties; Due Date, Computation
5.32.220: Royalties; Accounting
5.32.230: Royalties; Statement Filing
5.32.240: Royalties; Statement Verification
5.32.250: Royalties; Records Inspection
5.32.260: Vehicles; Design
5.32.270: Vehicles; Inspection And Maintenance
5.32.280: Vehicles; Retirement Of Unfit Equipment
5.32.290: Service; Schedule, Proposed Equipment And Tariff Submittal
5.32.300: Service; Approval Of Schedule, Equipment And Tariff
5.32.310: Service; Conformance
5.32.320: Service; Noncompliance; Excuses
5.32.330: Service; Change, Waiver Of Schedules, Fares
5.32.340: Service; Schedule Publication
5.32.350: Service; Temporary Routes
5.32.360: Service; Conformance To Traffic Rules
5.32.010: DEFINED:
"Motorbus" means every automobile or motor driven vehicle by means of which
passengers are transported for compensation upon the streets of the city,
excepting automobiles for hire and taxicabs. (Prior code § 65000)
5.32.020: PERMIT REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation operating any motorbus for
the transportation of passengers for hire, to transport or carry any passenger
from one place in the city to any other place within the city unless such
person, firm or corporation, so operating such motorbus, shall have first
obtained a permit to engage in, conduct and carry on the business of, or
operate, a motorbus over, along and upon the streets of the city in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter. (Prior code § 65100)
5.32.030: PERMIT; APPLICATION, FILING:
No permit shall be issued, save and except upon the filing by the applicant
therefor with the city clerk of the city a verified application addressed to
the city council of the city setting forth the name, age and place of residence
of applicant, and the kind and number of motor vehicle to be used pursuant to
such permit, and a statement that the applicant will comply with all the
provisions of this chapter. (Prior code § 65101)
5.32.040: PERMIT ISSUANCE:
The application shall immediately thereafter be presented to the council; and
the council may examine the applicant and all persons interested therein; and,
if the council shall determine the public interest, convenience and necessity
require the issuance of the permit applied for, it may by resolution order the
city clerk to issue a permit in accordance with such application, subject to
the filing and approval of the undertaking as herein provided. (Prior code §
65102)
5.32.050: PERMIT; INSURANCE REQUIRED:
Before a permit shall be issued by the city clerk, the applicant shall provide
proof of ability to respond in damages as required by chapter 4 of division 7
of the California Vehicle Code. (Ord. 1916 § 11, 1986: prior code § 65103)
5.32.060: PERMIT; CONSTRUCTION:
This permit is granted upon each and every covenant, condition, restriction and
limitation herein contained and shall ever be strictly construed against the
licensee. (Prior code § 65600)
5.32.070: PERMIT; RIGHTS CONFERRED:
Nothing shall pass thereby unless it be granted in plain and unambiguous terms.
(Prior code § 65601)
5.32.080: PERMIT; MATERIALITY OF CONDITIONS:
Each of such conditions is a material and essential condition to the granting
of this permit. (Prior code § 65602)
5.32.090: PERMIT; BREACH:
Upon failure to correct any infraction of the terms and conditions of the
permit, or refusal to comply with any of the conditions thereof, after a thirty
(30) day written notice by the council, such legislative body may thereupon
declare a breach of the permit, and upon such declaration, such permit and the
rights and privileges enjoyed thereunder shall immediately and ipso facto
terminate, and the performance bond and hereinafter provided for shall
thereupon be forfeited to such city, and all rights and privileges of the
licensee pursuant to the provisions of the permit shall thereupon be at an end,
and the licensee shall thereupon and immediately surrender all rights nd
privileges in and to such permit. (Prior code § 65603)
5.32.100: PERMIT; APPROVAL REQUIRED FOR ASSIGNMENT:
Licensee shall not sell, lease, assign or transfer any of the rights or
privileges herein granted to it, unless such sale, lease, assignment or
transfer shall have been approved by the city, by resolution of the council,
duly adopted. (Prior code § 65604)
5.32.110: PERMIT; NONTRANSFERABILITY:
Any purported or attempted sale, lease, assignment or transfer thereof, without
such approval by the council shall be void and of no effect, and shall transfer
none of the rights or privileges hereby granted. (Prior code § 65605)
5.32.120: PERMIT; RIGHTS RESERVED TO CITY:
In addition to all the powers herein granted or reserved unto the city, the
city shall have the following rights:
   A.   Repeal Of Permit: To repeal the permit, by ordinance at any time for
misuse or nonuse, or for failure to comply with the terms prescribed;
   B.   Closing Of Streets: To temporarily close any or all of the streets,
highways, alleys, boulevards, avenues, roads or other public places embraced
within the permit for paving or repairing, or laying sewer pipe, gas pipe, or
water pipe therein, or for other purposes;
   C.   Modification Of Equipment, Service: To require proper and adequate
additions or modifications of equipment, schedules and service and to require
proper and adequate extensions, reroutings of existing routes, and
establishment of new routes, and to require maintenance of licensee's plant and
equipment at the highest practicable standard of efficiency, all in accordance
with the orders of the city council; public hearing and thirty (30) day notice
to comply with such orders;
   D.   Standards Of Service; Discrimination: To establish reasonable standards
of service; and to prevent unjust discrimination in service or rates;
   E.   Other Regulations: To impose such other regulations as may be conducive
to the safety, welfare and accommodation of the public. (Prior code § 65606)
5.32.130: PERMIT; RESERVATION DEEMED CUMULATIVE:
No reservation herein contained shall ever be construed as limiting, because
not herein specified, any right which the city would have in law to regulate or
curtail the operations of licensee if the permit had not been granted. (Prior
code § 65607)
5.32.140: PERMIT; FRANCHISE NOT EXCLUSIVE:
The franchise shall not be understood or construed to be exclusive in the
rights and privileges granted herein, except that it is the policy of the
council that no permit shall be granted upon competitive routes, where the
licensee has satisfactorily complied with such permit. (Prior code § 65608)
5.32.150: PERMIT; ACCEPTANCE:
The filing by the licensee of the performance bond herein provided for shall be
deemed to be the acceptance of the permit by such licensee; and by such
acceptance such licensee shall become obligated to render service contemplated
by the provisions of the permit for the term thereof but subject nevertheless,
to all the covenants, conditions, restrictions and limitations elsewhere
contained herein. (Prior code § 65609)
5.32.160: INDEMNIFICATION; NONLIABILITY OF CITY:
The licensee on the permit shall indemnify and save free and harmless the city
against and from all damages, judgments, decrees, costs and expenditures which
the city may suffer or which may be recovered from or obtained against the city
during the term hereof for or by reason of acts done by licensee during such
terms or growing out of or resulting from the exercise by such licensee of any
or all of the rights and privileges granted by this permit, or any act, or acts
of the servants or agents thereof, under or by virtue of the provisions of the
permit. (Prior code § 65700)
5.32.170: INDEMNIFICATION; BOND REQUIRED:
The licensee hereof, within ten (10) days after the passage of the ordinance
codified herein, and as a condition precedent to the exercise of any of the
rights herein granted, shall make and execute and deliver unto the city, and
shall, at all times during the life of the permit, maintain in full force and
effect a good and sufficient cash bond in the principle sum of one hundred
dollars ($100.00). (Prior code § 65701)
5.32.180: INDEMNIFICATION; BOND CONDITIONS:
The cash bond shall be conditioned that licensee shall well and truly observe
and faithfully perform each and every term, covenant and condition contained in
the permit, which are to be kept and performed by the licensee, and that in the
event a breach is made in such conditions of the permit, then and in that
event, the whole amount thereof shall be forfeited to the city. (Prior code §
65702)
5.32.190: INDEMNIFICATION; BOND WITHDRAWAL:
The licensee may cancel the permit and cease operating the motorbuses by giving
thirty (30) days' written notice so to do, to the city; and in that event such
cash bond may be withdrawn upon the expiration of such period, provided the
licensee has fully and faithfully performed all the terms and conditions of
such permit, otherwise such bond or bonds or money shall remain in full force
and effect. (Prior code § 65703)
5.32.200: ROYALTIES; CITY PERCENTAGE:
Any person, firm or corporation so engaged in conducting or carrying on the
business of transporting passengers for hire as provided under this chapter
shall pay to the city a sum of money equal to one and one-fourth percent
(1.25%) of the gross receipts that shall be derived from all of the operations
of such business within the city. (Prior code § 65300)
5.32.210: ROYALTIES; DUE DATE, COMPUTATION:
Payment of such one and one-fourth percent (1.25%) of the gross receipts shall
be made in lawful money of the United States of America and shall be made
monthly on or before the twentieth day of the calendar months based or computed
on the gross receipts for the preceding calendar month. (Prior code § 65301)
5.32.220: ROYALTIES; ACCOUNTING:
Each payment shall be accompanied by a full, true and correct accounting
showing by items all gross receipts of the licensee and the source from which
derived during such preceding month. (Prior code § 65302)
5.32.230: ROYALTIES; STATEMENT FILING:
All such accounting statements shall be filed in duplicate with the city clerk.
(Prior code § 65303)
5.32.240: ROYALTIES; STATEMENT VERIFICATION:
Such statements shall be verified by a proper officer of the licensee. (Prior
code § 65304)
5.32.250: ROYALTIES; RECORDS INSPECTION:
For the purpose of verifying such accounting, the city shall have the privilege
of inspecting the books and records of such licensee at any and all reasonable
times during office hours, together with such rights of visitation as may be
necessary. (Prior code § 65305)
5.32.260: VEHICLES; DESIGN:
All motorbuses placed or maintained in service shall be neat and attractive in
design and passenger accommodation, modern and up to date in all respects,
including motive power, of safe construction and reasonably suited to
operations contemplated by such permit. (Prior code § 65400)
5.32.270: VEHICLES; INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE:
All equipment shall be subject to the constant inspection by the council or its
duly authorized representative, and shall be kept in the highest practicable
working order by the licensee at all times. (Prior code § 65401)
5.32.280: VEHICLES; RETIREMENT OF UNFIT EQUIPMENT:
All equipment that is now or hereafter shall become unsafe, unserviceable or
inadequate, including equipment now being used, shall be retired from regular
service upon the order of the city council determining such unsafe condition or
such inadequacy or unserviceability. (Prior code § 65402)
5.32.290: SERVICE; SCHEDULE, PROPOSED EQUIPMENT AND TARIFF SUBMITTAL:
The applicant for a permit under this chapter shall submit to the city council
his proposed schedule of bus service, the number of buses to be used and the
description of the same, and the proposed fares to be charged for passenger
service within the city. (Prior code § 65500)
5.32.300: SERVICE; APPROVAL OF SCHEDULE, EQUIPMENT AND TARIFF:
The schedules, equipment and fares and/or rates must be approved by the council
before the issuance to applicant of such permit. (Prior code § 65501)
5.32.310: SERVICE; CONFORMANCE:
Upon the issuance of a permit to the applicant and his acceptance of the same,
such licensee is bound to perform the bus services according to the schedules,
equipment, fares and conditions which were submitted by him to the city council
and approved by that body. (Prior code § 65502)
5.32.320: SERVICE; NONCOMPLIANCE; EXCUSES:
The licensee shall operate its motorbuses in accordance with the agreed
schedules, providing that such schedules need not be operated if the licensee
be prevented from complying therewith by the elements, riots, strikes, court
order or by other causes beyond the control of the licensee. (Prior code §
65503)
5.32.330: SERVICE; CHANGE, WAIVER OF SCHEDULES, FARES:
Such schedules and fares may be altered, waived or changed by the licensee by
and with the consent or at the direction of the council. (Prior code § 65504)
5.32.340: SERVICE; SCHEDULE PUBLICATION:
All such schedules shall be made known to the public. (Prior code § 65505)
5.32.350: SERVICE; TEMPORARY ROUTES:
In the event that any street, highway, alley, boulevard, avenue, road or other
public place may be closed, or may, for any other reason be impassable,
motorbuses may make detours around the portions so closed or impassable using
the nearest possible parallel streets or avenues therefor. (Prior code § 65506)
5.32.360: SERVICE; CONFORMANCE TO TRAFFIC RULES:
All motorbuses operating under the terms of the permit shall at all times be
operated in accordance with the traffic laws of the state, and in accordance
with the lawful traffic ordinances of the city. (Prior code § 65507)
CHAPTER 5.36
PEDDLING, SOLICITATION AND DISTRIBUTION OF ADVERTISING
SECTION:
5.36.010: Short Title
5.36.020: Purpose And Intent
5.36.030: Manner Of Distribution In Public Place
5.36.040: Permission Required To Place On Automobile
5.36.050: Distribution On Private Property
5.36.060: Filing Of Objections To Distribution On Property
5.36.070: Distributors Required To Use List Of Objectors
5.36.080: Permission Required To Solicit On Premises (Rep. by Ord. 2551 § 1,
2003)
5.36.090: Littering Prohibited
5.36.100: Distribution Of Sample Medicines Prohibited
5.36.110: Method Of Distribution
5.36.120: Violation; Penalty
5.36.010: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the PEDDLING, SOLICITATION AND DISTRIBUTION OF
ADVERTISING ORDINANCE OF THE CITY. (Prior code § 41501)
5.36.020: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The city council of Redlands does find, determine and declare:
   A.   The distribution of commercial advertising material upon residential
property without their permission in the city creates widespread litter which
is unsightly; inadvertently advertises the absence of occupants of the property
to the dissolute or criminal elements of society, thereby increasing the
possibility of criminal activity and the resulting police problems to the city,
and places an unnecessary burden upon the residents and city to properly
dispose of the commercial advertising materials;
   B.   Door to door commercial solicitation of unwilling recipients by
salesmen of goods and services jeopardizes the right of residents in the city
to enjoy the privacy of their homes and serious public offenses have been
committed by purported solicitors;
   C.   The practice of distributing, depositing, placing, throwing,
scattering, and casting advertising matter in or upon motor vehicles and in or
upon the public streets and in public places, except to persons who are willing
to receive the same, creates a serious police problem and a threat to the
public safety in that such material is permitted to fall and is thrown upon
parking areas, public streets and public places, and is blown about and
accumulated as trash and creates fire hazards and unsightly conditions, and
requires extra expense to remove such trash;
   D.   Such practices are injurious and inimical to the public health, safety
and welfare of residents of the city and such problems are becoming
increasingly direct and substantial;
   E.   Such practices are, therefore, declared to be a public nuisance;
   F.   Such practices should be prohibited to protect the public health,
safety and general welfare of the residents of the city. (Prior code § 41502)
5.36.030: MANNER OF DISTRIBUTION IN PUBLIC PLACE:
No person shall throw, cast, distribute, scatter, deposit, or place upon any
public place within the city, including, but not limited to, streets, alleys,
public parks, and school grounds, any handbill, dodger, circular, newspaper,
paper, booklet, poster, or any other printed matter or advertising literature
of any kind; provided, however, the same may be personally delivered to persons
who are willing to accept the same. (Prior code § 41503)
5.36.040: PERMISSION REQUIRED TO PLACE ON AUTOMOBILE:
No person shall throw, distribute, or place in or on any automobile or other
vehicle in the city any handbill, dodger, circular, newspaper, paper, booklet,
poster, or any other printed matter, or advertising literature without first
having obtained the permission of the owner or person in possession thereof.
(Prior code § 41504)
5.36.050: DISTRIBUTION ON PRIVATE PROPERTY:
No person may distribute, circulate, or deliver any newspaper, written
handbill, circular, advertising literature or materials upon any private
premises if the owner or occupant thereof has filed with the city clerk a
written objection to such distribution in accordance with the provisions of
section
5.36.060 of this chapter. (Prior code § 41505)
5.36.060: FILING OF OBJECTIONS TO DISTRIBUTION ON PROPERTY:
   A.   Each resident or owner of any private property or any business,
corporation, or enterprise of the city who wishes to object to the distribution
upon his premises of any newspaper, or other matter referred to in section
5.36.050 of this chapter, may file with the city clerk a written declaration of
such objection which shall include his name, the address where no distributions
are to be made, the declarant's capacity to make such objection, and the name
of the distribution to which he objects;
   B.   The city clerk shall maintain on file all objections by residents to
the distribution of any newspaper, or other matter referred to in section
5.36.050 of this chapter, and shall have available on the first Monday of each
month, for the benefit of all licensed distributors, a list of addresses of
those persons having filed objections. Such list shall contain the name of the
specific newspaper, or other matter referred to in section
5.36.050 of this chapter, objected to and the address where no such
distributions are to be made. (Prior code § 41506)
5.36.070: DISTRIBUTORS REQUIRED TO USE LIST OF OBJECTORS:
It shall be the duty of each and every distributor of a newspaper or other
matter referred to in section
5.36.050 of this chapter, to secure the monthly list of those objecting to its
distribution and shall be held to have notice of such list as of the date such
list is made available. (Prior code § 41507)
5.36.080: PERMISSION REQUIRED TO SOLICIT ON PREMISES:
(Rep. by Ord. 2551 § 1, 2003)
5.36.090: LITTERING PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful to throw, cast or scatter any printed or written material of any
type whatsoever in or onto any public place; into, or upon any automobile,
vehicle, or conveyance; or in, into or on the yard or grounds or on the
doorstep, porch or vestibule of any residence, apartment or dwelling; or upon
any vacant lot or other private property within the city. (Prior code § 41509)
5.36.100: DISTRIBUTION OF SAMPLE MEDICINES PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person within the city to distribute any patent
medicine, or any medicinal preparation or compound, or any medicines, drugs,
herbs, or samples thereof within the city, except to physicians and druggists.
(Prior code § 41510)
5.36.110: METHOD OF DISTRIBUTION:
Any printed or written material which may be passed out, given away, circulated
or delivered in the city, pursuant to law, shall be:
   A.   Placed in the hand of the intended recipient; or
   B.   Bound, folded or weighted in such a manner that the material cannot be
blown away, scattered, or fragmented by the action of the elements and/or
normal pedestrian or vehicular traffic; or
   C.   Affixed to the premises for which it is intended by being tied to or
slipped over a doorknob or other protrusion. (Prior code § 41511)
5.36.120: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a
fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment for a
period of not more than six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(Prior code § 41513)
CHAPTER 5.40
POOLROOMS, CIGAR STORES, ETC.
(Rep. by Ord. 2718 § 15, 2009)
CHAPTER 5.44
REGULATED SALES
SECTION:
Article I. Bankruptcy Sales
5.44.010: Purpose; Interpretation
5.44.020: Statement And Inventory; Filing Required
5.44.030: Statement And License; Required
5.44.040: False Statement
5.44.050: Inventory; Contents
5.44.060: Purchase For Regulated Sale Prohibited
5.44.070: Addition Of Goods To Stock Prohibited
5.44.080: Sale Of Goods Not Inventoried Prohibited
5.44.090: Exempt Sales
5.44.100: License Tax; Initial Term
5.44.110: License; Continuation
5.44.120: License Tax; Exemption For Business Termination Or Removal
5.44.130: License Tax; Hardship Waiver
5.44.140: Hardship Appeal; Grounds
5.44.150: Hardship Appeal; Hearing
5.44.160: Hardship Appeal; Council Decision Final
5.44.170: License; Scope
5.44.180: License; Cancellation Authority
Article II. Itinerant Vendor Or Transient Merchant
5.44.190: Defined
5.44.200: Association With Local Dealer
5.44.210: License Tax; Exemption
5.44.220: License Tax; Initial Term
5.44.230: License; Continuation
5.44.240: Compliance With Article I Of This Chapter; Exception
5.44.250: Enforcement
ARTICLE I. BANKRUPTCY SALES
5.44.010: PURPOSE; INTERPRETATION:
This chapter shall be deemed an exercise of the police power of the state of
California, and of the city of Redlands for the public safety, comfort and
convenience; and all of its provisions shall be literally construed for the
accomplishment of that purpose. (Prior code § 2341)
5.44.020: STATEMENT AND INVENTORY; FILING REQUIRED:
Every person who advertises, promotes, holds out to or who conducts and carries
on a "regulated sale", defined as any sale of goods, wares and merchandise as
an auction sale, insurance, bankruptcy, mortgage, insolvent, assignees,
executors, administrators, receivers, trustees, removal, adjusters,
wholesalers, jobbers, manufacturers sale, closing out sale or sale of goods
damaged by fire, smoke, water or otherwise or as a sale conducted by a
merchants' association, board of trade or other claimant or creditor, shall
file with the city's finance director or the director's designee a statement
under oath stating the name of the person or persons, from whom the goods were
obtained, whether the same are to be sold under an order of court and if so,
the name of the court and proceeding in which such order was made, and an
inventory shall be filed no less than ten (10) days prior to such regulated
sale. (Ord. 2718 § 16, 2009)
5.44.030: STATEMENT AND LICENSE; REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to advertise or conduct any such sale without
having first filed the statement under oath as in this chapter provided and
without having applied for and received the city license provided for in this
chapter. (Prior code § 2342.1)
5.44.040: FALSE STATEMENT:
It is unlawful for any person to make any false statement of fact in the
verified statement filed with the city's finance director or the director's
designee as required in this chapter. (Prior code § 2342.2)
5.44.050: INVENTORY; CONTENTS:
The inventory shall describe all goods, wares and merchandise in detail,
including the manufacturer's name and lot number, the number of each article so
numbered, colors, sizes and other characteristics, in order that the identity
of such goods with the goods listed on such inventory may be readily
determined. The inventory provided for in this chapter shall hereinafter be
referred to as inventory. (Prior code § 2343)
5.44.060: PURCHASE FOR REGULATED SALE PROHIBITED:
No person shall order any goods, wares or merchandise for the purpose of
selling them at a regulated sale. Any unusual purchase or additions to the
stock of such goods, wares or merchandise within sixty (60) days before filing
the statement required in section
5.44.020 of this chapter shall be presumed to have been made in contemplation
of such sale and for the purpose of such sale and shall not appear on the
inventory. (Prior code § 2343.1)
5.44.070: ADDITION OF GOODS TO STOCK PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful to sell, offer or display for sale, advertise for sale, or to
include in the inventory any goods, wares or merchandise which are not part of
the original stock of goods of the applicant; and it is unlawful to make any
replenishment or additions to such stock for the purpose of such sale. (Prior
code § 2343.2)
5.44.080: SALE OF GOODS NOT INVENTORIED PROHIBITED:
No person at any such sale shall sell any goods, wares or merchandise not
specifically described in the inventory and statement provided in this chapter.
(Prior code § 2343.3)
5.44.090: EXEMPT SALES:
No provision of this chapter shall be applicable to trustees in bankruptcy,
executors, administrators, receivers or public officials acting under judicial
process, nor to the sale of household goods, farm implements or personal
effects at the home of the owner. (Prior code § 2344)
5.44.100: LICENSE TAX; INITIAL TERM:
Every person, firm or corporation conducting or carrying on or attempting to
conduct or carry on or who advertises to carry on any of the sales defined in
section
5.44.020 of this chapter shall be required to and shall pay a license tax to
the city in the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00), which license tax shall
be for an initial period of thirty (30) days or any fraction thereof. No more
than one license for the conduct of a regulated sale shall be issued to the
same person, firm or corporation within twelve (12) months of the completion of
a prior regulated sale. (Prior code § 2345)
5.44.110: LICENSE; CONTINUATION:
If such person, firm or corporation continues to conduct or carry on a
regulated sale for longer than thirty (30) days, a license tax of one hundred
dollars ($100.00) shall be paid for a continuing period of thirty (30) days,
but for no less than thirty (30) days. Notice of intent to continue a regulated
sale must be filed with the city's finance director or the director's designee
not less than five (5) days before expiration of the license. In no event shall
any regulated sale be permitted to continue in excess of sixty (60) days. (Ord.
2718 § 17, 2009)
5.44.120: LICENSE TAX; EXEMPTION FOR BUSINESS TERMINATION OR REMOVAL:
The license tax shall not be assessed for the termination or removal of a
business under the same ownership for the immediately prior three (3)
consecutive years. (Prior code § 2345.2)
5.44.130: LICENSE TAX; HARDSHIP WAIVER:
Any person, firm or corporation aggrieved by the imposition of the license tax
on the basis that payment of the tax would create an undue hardship shall have
the right to appeal to the city council of the city for waiver of the tax. Such
appeal shall be taken by filing with the city clerk a written statement of
grounds for the appeal. (Prior code § 2345.3)
5.44.140: HARDSHIP APPEAL; GROUNDS:
Grounds for appeal as a hardship may include, but not be limited to:
   A.   Prolonged illness of principal owner;
   B.   Principal owner being called for military service;
   C.   Acts of God; earthquake, flood, etc. (Prior code § 2345.4)
5.44.150: HARDSHIP APPEAL; HEARING:
The council shall set the time and place for hearing such appeal. Notice of
such hearing shall be mailed by the city clerk, postage prepaid, to the signer
of the statement at the address given at least ten (10) days prior to date set
for the hearing. (Prior code § 2345.5)
5.44.160: HARDSHIP APPEAL; COUNCIL DECISION FINAL:
The decision of the council of the city on such appeal shall be final. (Prior
code § 2345.6)
5.44.170: LICENSE; SCOPE:
The license as provided for herein shall be valid only for a sale of goods,
wares and merchandise, inventoried and described in the statement filed with
the city's finance director or the director's designee as provided in section
5.44.020 of this chapter. (Ord. 2718 § 18, 2009)
5.44.180: LICENSE; CANCELLATION AUTHORITY:
The city's finance director or the director's designee is authorized to cancel
the license to conduct any sale in the event that inspection discloses goods,
wares or merchandise to be found in stock or on sale which have not been
included in such inventory or which have been falsely advertised, or that the
licensee has in any other respect violated the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 2718 § 19, 2009)
ARTICLE II. ITINERANT VENDOR OR TRANSIENT MERCHANT
5.44.190: DEFINED:
The words "itinerant vendor" and/or "transient merchant" shall be construed to
mean and include all persons, both principal and agent, who engage in a
temporary and transient business in the city selling goods, wares or
merchandise from a location on the public streets or on a vacant lot or in a
storeroom, store building or structure where such goods, wares or merchandise
are on display for a period of not more than ninety (90) days or a place where
temporary desk room is used and/or any temporary expedient is resorted to for
temporary purposes as distinguished from a continuing or permanent business in
the city. (Prior code § 2346)
5.44.200: ASSOCIATION WITH LOCAL DEALER:
The person, firm or corporation so engaged shall not be relieved from the
provisions of section
5.44.220 of this chapter by reason of associating temporarily with any local
dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer or by continuing such temporary,
transient business in connection with or as a part of or in the name of any
local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer. (Prior code § 2346.1)
5.44.210: LICENSE TAX; EXEMPTION:
The provisions of section
5.44.220 of this chapter shall not be applied to commercial travelers or
selling agents selling goods to dealers, whether selling for present or future
delivery, by sample or otherwise, nor to persons selling fruits, vegetables,
butter, eggs or other farm or ranch products. (Prior code § 2346.2)
5.44.220: LICENSE TAX; INITIAL TERM:
Every "itinerant vendor" and/or "transient merchant" as defined in section
 5.44.190 of this chapter shall be required to and shall pay a license tax to
the city in the sum of ten dollars ($10.00) per day, which license tax shall be
initially paid for a period of thirty (30) days. (Prior code § 2347)
5.44.230: LICENSE; CONTINUATION:
If such itinerant vendor and/or transient merchant continues in business for a
longer period than thirty (30) days, then a license tax at the rate of ten
dollars ($10.00) per day shall be paid for continuing periods of thirty (30)
days each, but for no less a period of time than thirty (30) days. (Prior code
§ 2347.1)
5.44.240: COMPLIANCE WITH ARTICLE I OF THIS CHAPTER; EXCEPTION:
Every itinerant vendor and/or transient merchant shall comply with all of the
provisions contained in this chapter excepting sections
5.44.100 and
5.44.110 of this chapter. (Prior code § 2347.2)
5.44.250: ENFORCEMENT:
Authority is vested in the city's finance director or the director's designee
and any police officer of the city, to enter upon the premises where any of the
sales herein provided for are being conducted, and to inspect, investigate and
make an inventory of all merchandise being displayed, shown and offered for
sale, and to inspect, examine and audit the books and accounts of the licensee
insofar as they pertain to such sale and the goods so offered for sale; and any
refusal, delay or failure by the licensee, his agents or employees or anyone
acting for or on behalf of such licensee, to furnish all necessary information
and opportunity to the officers, the finance director or the director's
designee to make a thorough inspection, inventory, examination and/or audit,
shall constitute a misdemeanor. (Ord. 2718 § 20, 2009)
CHAPTER 5.48
RENT STABILIZATION FOR MOBILEHOME PARKS
SECTION:
5.48.010: Purpose And Intent
5.48.020: Definitions
5.48.030: Exemptions
5.48.040: Commission; Powers And Duties
5.48.050: Legality Of Space Rent Increases
5.48.060: Determination Of Base Rent And Formula Rent Adjustment
5.48.070: Application For Discretionary Rent Increase
5.48.080: Arbitration
5.48.090: Mediation
5.48.100: Application For Discretionary Rent Decrease
5.48.110: Vacancies
5.48.120: Retaliatory Eviction
5.48.010: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
   A.   On December 15, 1981, the city council of the city of Redlands
determined that a serious shortage of mobilehome rental spaces within the city
had created a virtual monopoly in the rental of mobilehome park spaces. In
response to this lack of available rental space, the city declared it necessary
to protect the owner-occupants of mobilehomes from unreasonable rent increases
while recognizing the need for mobilehome park owners to receive a just and
reasonable return on their property. Accordingly, this chapter was adopted to
provide for mobilehome park rent stabilization within the city.
   B.   Mobilehome owner-occupants, unlike apartment renters or residents of
other rental stock, are in a unique position of having made a substantial
investment to purchase a mobilehome for which they must rent a space in a
mobilehome park. They also make investments in maintaining and improving their
homes as well as in landscaping the rental space. Alternative sites for the
relocation of mobilehomes are difficult to find due to the shortage of vacant
spaces, restrictions on age, size or style of mobilehomes permitted in many
parks and the requirements related to the installation of mobilehomes,
including permits, landscaping and site preparation. Additionally, the cost of
moving a mobilehome is substantial and the risk of damage is significant. Thus,
moving a mobilehome is rarely a feasible option if the rent for a mobilehome
park space becomes excessive. The result of these conditions is the creation of
a captive market of mobilehome owner-occupants. The immobility of mobilehomes
and the shortage of rental spaces, in turn, creates an imbalance in the
bargaining relationship between mobilehome park owners and mobilehome owner-
occupants. Because mobilehomes are often owned by senior citizens, persons on
fixed incomes and persons of low and moderate income, excessive rent increases
fall upon those individuals with particular harshness. (Ord. 2458 § 1, 2000:
Ord. 2207 § 1, 1993)
5.48.020: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter the following words shall have the meaning ascribed to
them:
   ADJUSTED CPI: The percent of the CPI used for determining rent increases or
decreases pursuant to subsection
5.48.060B of this chapter.
   ARBITRATOR: A professional arbitrator by virtue of his or her training or
experience or combination of such training and experience.
   CPI OR CONSUMER PRICE INDEX: The index commonly known as the "consumer price
index for all urban wage consumers for the Los Angeles-Anaheim-Riverside area"
(base year 1982–1984), published by the United States department of labor,
bureau of labor statistics.
   COMMISSION: The city planning commission established by title 2,
chapter 2.36 of this code (sometimes herein called the "commission").
   DISCRETIONARY RENT DECREASE: A rent decrease granted pursuant to section
5.48.100 of this chapter.
   DISCRETIONARY RENT INCREASE: A rent increase granted pursuant to sections
5.48.070 and
5.48.080 of this chapter.
   FORMULA RENT ADJUSTMENT: A rent adjustment granted pursuant to subsection
5.48.060B of this chapter.
   MOBILEHOME: A structure designed for human habitation as defined in
California Civil Code section 798.3. Structures defined in California Civil
Code section 799.24 are not mobilehomes.
   MOBILEHOME OWNER-OCCUPANT: Any person who owns a mobilehome and occupies
that mobilehome as his or her principal residence within a mobilehome park
located within the city.
   MOBILEHOME PARK: An area of land where two (2) or more mobilehome spaces are
rented or held out for rent to accommodate mobilehomes used as human
habitation.
   MOBILEHOME PARK OWNER: The owner, lessor, operator or manager of a
mobilehome park located in the city.
   PARK FACILITY: A facility or amenity which provides for the recreation or
convenience of any mobilehome tenant.
   SPACE RENT: The consideration, including any security deposits, bonuses,
benefits or gratuities, demanded or received in connection with the use and
occupancy of a mobilehome space in a mobilehome park, but exclusive of any
amount paid for the use of a mobilehome dwelling unit.
   TRAILER: A structure eight feet by forty feet (8' x 40') or less designed to
be drawn by a motor vehicle and to be used for human habitation or for carrying
persons and property, including a trailer coach or house trailer. (Ord. 2751,
2011: Ord. 2532 § 1, 2003: Ord. 2458 § 2, 2000: Ord. 2243 § 1, 1994: Ord. 2207
§ 1, 1993)
5.48.030: EXEMPTIONS:
This chapter shall not apply to the following tenancies in mobilehome parks
located in the city:
   A.   Mobilehome park spaces rented for nonresidential uses;
   B.   Mobilehome parks constructed after October 1, 1981. For the purpose of
this subsection, the term "constructed" means the initial erection of
structures;
   C.   Tenancies which do not exceed an occupancy of twenty (20) days and
which do not contemplate an occupancy of more than twenty (20) days;
   D.   Tenancies for which any federal or state law or regulation specifically
prohibits rent regulations;
   E.   Trailer parks which are occupied by less than fifteen (15) mobilehomes;
   F.   Tenancies covered by leases or contracts which provide for more than a
month to month tenancy. However, upon the expiration or other termination of
any such lease or contract, the monthly space rent or its equivalent provided
in such lease or contract shall become the base rent for such space. Any
increase or decrease in the monthly space rent shall be determined in
accordance with this chapter, provided that any increase in monthly space rent
which had been allowed under the expired or terminated lease during the
preceding twelve (12) months, when added to any monthly rent adjustments
permitted under this chapter, shall not exceed the increases permitted under
section
5.48.060 of this chapter; provided further that nothing in this subsection is
intended to require a reduction in rent below that charged under the expired or
terminated lease;
   G.   Mobilehome parks which sell lots for factory built or manufactured
housing, or which provide condominium ownership of such lots, even if one or
more homes in the development are rented or leased out;
   H.   Any mobilehome not occupied by a mobilehome owner-occupant. (Ord. 2532
§ 2, 2003: Ord. 2458 § 3, 2000: Ord. 2207 § 1, 1993)
5.48.040: COMMISSION; POWERS AND DUTIES:
Within the limitations provided by law, the commission shall have the following
powers and duties:
   A.   To receive evidence and testimony, investigate, conduct meetings and
public hearings and pass upon the issues relating to mobilehome park rent
stabilization as set forth in this chapter;
   B.   To make or conduct such independent hearings or investigations as may
be appropriate to obtain such information as is necessary to carry out its
duties;
   C.   To render, at least annually, a written report to the city council
concerning its activities, holdings, actions, results of hearings and all other
matters pertinent to this chapter which may be of interest to the city council;
   D.   To recommend administrative rules to the city council to effectuate the
purposes and policies of this chapter;
   E.   To assist the arbitrator in arbitrating an application for a
discretionary rent adjustment, as set forth in this chapter;
   F.   To assist the park owner and the mobilehome owners-occupants of a
mobilehome park in negotiating a lease agreement as provided for in this
chapter;
   G.   Except as otherwise provided for in this chapter, to review and approve
any application for a rent adjustment, whether it be from a mobilehome park
owner or a mobilehome owner-occupant. (Ord. 2532 § 4, 2003: Ord. 2458 § 5,
2000: Ord. 2207 § 1, 1993)
5.48.050: LEGALITY OF SPACE RENT INCREASES:
No adjustment in space rents in a mobilehome park shall be effective unless
authorized as set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 2532 § 5, 2003: Ord. 2207 § 1,
1993)
5.48.060: DETERMINATION OF BASE RENT AND FORMULA RENT ADJUSTMENT:
   A.   The base rent for purposes of this chapter shall be the last space rent
approved pursuant to ordinance 1783 of the city. Base rent or space rent may be
adjusted no more than once each year, and the effective date of the adjustment
may not be sooner than twelve (12) months after the effective date of
previously approved rent adjustment. Except as hereinafter provided, no park
owner shall demand, accept or retain rent for a mobilehome space exceeding the
base rent in effect for such space.
   B.   Each year, a mobilehome park owner, or a majority of mobilehome owners
and mobilehome owner-occupants within a mobilehome park and represented by
signed petitions, may submit an application on the city's form for an
adjustment in space rent in an amount equal to the proportional increase or
decrease in the CPI The CPI shall cover the period of time beginning on the
first day of the month which is five (5) months prior to the effective date of
the last rent adjustment and ending on the last day of the month which is five
(5) full months prior to the month of the date noticed for the requested rent
adjustment; provided, however, that such increase or decrease shall be limited
to three-fourths (3/4) of any percentage in excess of four percent (4%) through
nine percent (9%) and twenty five percent (25%) of any percentage in excess of
nine percent (9%). Each such application must be accompanied by evidence that
notice of the proposed adjustment has been served to each affected mobilehome
owner-occupant at least sixty (60) days prior to the proposed effective date.
This subsection shall not be construed to relieve the mobilehome park owner of
the duty to provide notice of a rent increase or to perform any other duty
imposed by state law.
   C.   City staff shall calculate and approve the formula rent adjustment in
the amount requested, not to exceed the amount authorized herein.
   D.   For the purpose of consolidating anniversary dates for rent increases
permitted under this chapter for leases expiring pursuant to subsection
5.48.030F of this chapter, the mobilehome park owner may file a petition with
the commission to increase rents in accordance with the following table:
Number Of Months Since Last Rent Allowable Rent Increase (Percent Of Base
Increase                         Rent)
Number Of Months Since Last Rent Allowable Rent Increase (Percent Of Base
Increase                         Rent)
12                               100 percent of adjusted CPI
13                               108 percent of adjusted CPI
14                               117 percent of adjusted CPI
15                               125 percent of adjusted CPI
16                               133 percent of adjusted CPI
17                               142 percent of adjusted CPI
18                               150 percent of adjusted CPI
19                               158 percent of adjusted CPI
20                               166 percent of adjusted CPI
21                               175 percent of adjusted CPI
22                               183 percent of adjusted CPI
23                               191 percent of adjusted CPI
 
The burden of proof to show that the rent increases set out above for the
purposes of consolidating anniversary dates and the number of months since the
last rent increase is accurate shall be upon the mobilehome park owner and
shall be filed on the city's forms. Where there is an anniversary date for at
least twenty five percent (25%) of the spaces in an affected park, the
mobilehome park owner shall consolidate all leases expiring after January 1,
1993, to that date within twenty four (24) months of the expiration of the
lease. For determining whether twenty five percent (25%) of the spaces share an
anniversary date, only those spaces subject to this chapter shall be counted.
(Ord. 2532 § 6, 2003: Ord. 2458 § 6, 2000: Ord. 2243 § 2, 1994: Ord. 2207 § 1,
1993)
5.48.070: APPLICATION FOR DISCRETIONARY RENT INCREASE:
   A.   An owner who seeks a rent increase not authorized in subsection
 5.48.060B of this chapter shall submit an application for a discretionary rent
increase on the city's form, together with such supporting documentation as the
commission may require, within fifteen (15) days after serving notice of the
proposed discretionary rent increase to all affected mobilehome owner-
occupants. The notice for each mobilehome owner-occupant shall indicate the new
rent proposed for his or her space, shall advise the mobilehome owner-occupant
that an application for a discretionary rent increase has been filed with the
city, and shall state that a copy of the application and all supporting
documentation is on file at the owners office in the affected park and may be
photocopied at the mobilehome owner-occupants expense. The application for a
discretionary rent increase will not be effective unless accompanied by proof
satisfactory to the commission that the mobilehome park owner has, within the
preceding fifteen (15) days, served each affected mobilehome owner-occupant,
either personally or by mail, with the notice required herein. If approved, the
discretionary rent increase shall take effect no sooner than one year after the
date of the last rent increase within the mobilehome park.
   B.   Upon the filing of an application for a discretionary rent increase
which satisfies the requirements of this chapter, the commission shall conduct
a public meeting within thirty (30) days. At that meeting, if the commission is
persuaded upon the testimony of any affected mobilehome owner-occupant that the
mobilehome owner-occupant has been refused the opportunity to review and
photocopy background documentation which the mobilehome park owner intends to
submit in support of the application, the commission shall adjourn the meeting
for a reasonable period of time, not to exceed thirty (30) days, and instruct
the mobilehome park owner to permit full review and reproduction of the
documentation as required by this chapter. At any such meeting, if the
commission is persuaded upon written proof or oral testimony that the majority
of the affected mobilehome owner-occupants in the park agree to the proposed
discretionary increase, the commission shall authorize the increase as proposed
and such determination shall be final.
   C.   In the event the commission determines that an application for a
discretionary rent increase shall be submitted to arbitration pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter, the applicant for the discretionary rent increase
shall, within ten (10) days of the commissions determination, pay to the city
the sum of three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) as a deposit towards the city's
actual costs in retaining an arbitrator and holding the arbitration
proceedings. The deposit shall be replenished, from time to time, as deemed
necessary by city staff to ensure that the city's actual ongoing costs are
paid. In the event payment of the deposit is not made, or the applicant for the
discretionary rent increase fails to make a required replenishment of the
deposit, the city may, in its sole discretion, cease the arbitration
proceedings and have no further obligation or any liability to the applicant
for the discretionary rent increase. (Ord. 2532 § 6, 2003: Ord. 2458 § 7, 2000:
Ord. 2420 § 1, 1999: Ord. 2207 § 1, 1993)
5.48.080: ARBITRATION:
   A.   Upon considering an application for a discretionary rent increase, if
the commission is persuaded that a majority of the tenants do not agree to the
proposed increase, the commission shall within ten (10) days select an
arbitrator from a list of arbitrators approved by the city council to conduct
arbitration of the disputed application for a discretionary rent increase. If
possible, the commission should select from the list a retired judge to serve
as arbitrator, but the commission shall not be bound to do so.
   B.   Upon selecting an arbitrator, the commission or its designee shall
transmit copies of the application for a discretionary rent increase and any
other supporting documentation filed by the mobilehome park owner to the
arbitrator for his or her review, and shall mail notice of the selection of an
arbitrator to all affected parties as set forth in the application. The owner
shall produce, at the request of the arbitrator, any additional records,
receipts, or other documents that the arbitrator may deem necessary for a
decision on the disputed application. The owner shall supply duplicate copies
of such documents to the city, shall keep copies at the owner's office within
the park for review and duplication by the affected tenants, and shall provide
notice to each affected tenant that the copies are available for review and
reproduction at the tenant's expense.
   C.   Upon receipt of the application and all requested documentation, the
arbitrator shall schedule a hearing on the application within sixty (60) days.
The commission or its designee shall send notice of the time, date and place of
the hearing to all affected parties at least thirty (30) days prior to the
hearing. The notice shall state that copies of the application and supporting
documentation are on file with the city and are available for review by any
affected party, and that responding parties may submit written statements or
documents to the arbitrator no later than ten (10) days before the hearing. All
statements or documents submitted by responding parties shall be signed and
verified under penalty of perjury, and duplicate copies thereof shall be filed
with the city for review by any affected party.
   D.   At the hearing, the mobilehome park owner and any affected party may
offer any testimony that the arbitrator deems relevant to the requested rent
adjustment. The owner shall produce any records, receipts, or other documents
that the arbitrator may deem necessary to approve the requested adjustment. The
owner and affected parties may offer documents, written declarations, or other
written evidence for the first time at the hearing only if good cause is shown
why such evidence was not filed prior to the hearing. Formal rules shall not be
applicable to such proceedings. In addition, members of the rent review
commission shall be available as required by the arbitrator for testimony
regarding previous rent adjustments in the park. Within fifteen (15) days after
close of the hearing, the arbitrator shall make his or her determination,
pursuant to the standards hereinafter set forth, approving or disapproving a
rent adjustment for the mobilehome spaces specified in the application for a
discretionary rent adjustment.
   E.   The arbitrator shall approve such rent adjustment as he or she
determines to be just, fair, and reasonable, while assuring the park owner a
just and reasonable return on his or her property. Such rent adjustment may be
either below or above the proportional change in the consumer price index. The
arbitrator shall consider, but not be limited to, the following factors in
making such determinations:
      1.   Changes in the CPI;
      2.   The rent lawfully charged for comparable mobilehome spaces in the
city and surrounding areas;
      3.   The history and pattern of all prior rent adjustment of the park,
and any prior arbitration proceedings;
      4.   The completion of any capital improvements or rehabilitation work
related to the mobilehome spaces specified in the application, and the cost
thereof, including the cost of materials, labor, construction interest, permit
fees, and such other items as the arbitrator deems appropriate;
      5.   Changes in property taxes and other taxes related to the park;
      6.   Changes in master land or facilities lease rent, or mortgage
payments incurred in financing the purchase or improvement of the park or
incurred in an involuntary refinancing;
      7.   Changes in the utility charges for the park and the extent, if any,
of reimbursement from the tenants;
      8.   Changes in reasonable operating and maintenance expenses;
      9.   The amount and quality of services provided by the owner to each
affected tenant;
      10.   The need for rehabilitation work;
      11.   Employee and incidental expenses.
   F.   Pursuant to its determination, the arbitrator may order any adjustment
in rent which he or she deems appropriate or consistent with this chapter, and
such order shall be final. There shall be no appeal to the city council. The
arbitrator may also order an adjustment for a limited time only when it is
apparent that capital expenses or any other relevant factor will change after a
determined period of time.
   G.   The total cost of the arbitration and the city's administrative costs
shall be borne by the owner if the arbitrator approves a rent adjustment equal
to or below the formula rent adjustment authorized by section
5.48.060 of this chapter. The total cost of arbitration and the city's
administrative costs shall be borne by the affected tenants if the arbitrator
approves a rent adjustment equal to the amount requested by the owner as a
discretionary adjustment. If the arbitrator approves an adjustment which is
less than the requested discretionary adjustment, the owner and tenants shall
share the total costs in accordance with the ratios set out in table 5.48.080
(G) of this section.
TABLE 5.48.080(G)
 
Owner's share of total  1 - Rent approved by arbitrator - Formula adjusted rent
cost =
                            Rent requested by owner     - Formula adjusted rent
Tenant's share of total     Rent approved by arbitrator - Formula adjusted rent
cost =
                            Rent requested by owner     - Formula adjusted rent
 
For the purpose of these ratios, the formula adjusted rent shall be based on a
time period beginning on the month of the effective date of the last rent
adjustment and ending on the date of the first available release of the
consumer price index which has been received by the city prior to the
application for a discretionary adjustment. The city shall establish fees based
on an hourly basis to provide for its administrative costs. (Ord. 2532 § 7,
2003: Ord. 2207 § 1, 1993)
5.48.090: MEDIATION:
   A.   Upon request by both a mobilehome park owner and at least fifty percent
(50%) of the tenants of an affected park, the commission shall act as mediator
in the negotiation of any lease having a term of at least one year. However,
the failure to successfully negotiate such a lease shall not deprive any person
of any remedy or recourse set forth in this chapter.
   B.   No owner shall force a tenant to sign a lease in an attempt to avoid
the provisions of this chapter relating to amounts that may be charged for
space rent. (Ord. 2532 § 8, 2003: Ord. 2207 § 1, 1993)
5.48.100: APPLICATION FOR DISCRETIONARY RENT DECREASE:
   A.   The majority of affected mobilehome owner-occupants in a park may, by
signed petition, submit an application to the city to request a discretionary
decrease in space rents to compensate for an alleged reduction in services,
provided that the reduction of services has occurred within one hundred twenty
(120) days prior to the date of submittal of the discretionary rent decrease
application; or to compensate mobilehome owner-occupants for utility charges
which are billed to them separately after having previously been included in
space rents.
   B.   The application for a discretionary rent decrease shall be accompanied
by documentation which precisely describes the alleged reduction in services
and the date that such reduction occurred, along with the monetary value of the
reduction.
   C.   The application shall be accompanied by written evidence satisfactory
to the city that the mobilehome park owner was served with a copy of the
application in its completed form at least thirty (30) days prior to the date
of submittal of the discretionary rent decrease application to the city.
   D.   When an application for a discretionary rent decrease is received by
the city, the commission shall call a meeting for the purpose of mediating the
issue of the alleged reduction of services or separate billing of charges. The
mediation meeting shall be held no sooner than ten (10) days nor later than
thirty (30) days of the date the completed application is submitted to the
city, and the mobilehome park owner and the mobilehome owner- occupants filing
the application shall be notified of the time and place of the meeting. Nothing
in this chapter shall prevent the meeting from being held in an appropriate
location on the premises of the affected park.
   E.   At the mediation meeting, the commission will hear testimony relating
to the matters which are at issue. If the mobilehome park owner agrees to
restore an alleged reduction of services, the mediation meeting shall be
continued for an appropriate time period as approved by the commission. At the
date of the continued mediation meeting the commission will again consider the
issues and determine whether there has been a resumption of services. The
commission, after considering all evidence shall either approve, reject or
modify the proposed discretionary rent decrease request and shall, in
compliance with state law, base its decision upon the demonstrated value of any
verified reduction of services. Any rent reduction or accumulation of rent
reductions approved in accordance with this section shall also serve to reduce
space rents as subsequently adjusted by formula rent adjustments, until removed
by a discretionary rent increase or as hereafter set forth.
   F.   An application for a discretionary rent decrease shall be accompanied
by a seven hundred dollar ($700.00) deposit as a processing fee to pay the
city's actual costs of conducting the mediation meeting. The deposit shall be
replenished, from time to time, as deemed necessary by city staff to ensure
that the city's costs are covered. Upon conclusion of the hearing, the total
cost incurred by the city shall be paid by the mobilehome park owner if the
commission approves the requested rent decrease. However, if the commission
denies the request for a discretionary rent decrease, the costs incurred by the
city shall be paid by the mobilehome park owner-occupants.
   G.   An owner and any mobilehome owner-occupants in an affected park may
voluntarily agree to adjust rents downward for any reason including because of
a decrease of services. However, the commission shall be notified within thirty
(30) days of the agreement to provide a record of such change. (Ord. 2532 § 9,
2003: Ord. 2458 § 8, 2000: Ord. 2207 § 1, 1993)
5.48.110: VACANCIES:
A mobilehome park owner shall not increase the rental rate (the amount of rent
being paid by the seller of the mobilehome at the time of the sale) of a
mobilehome space to a subsequent mobilehome owner-occupant for that space;
provided, however, that nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a mobilehome
park owner from increasing the monthly space rent for a mobilehome park space
when the mobilehome has been removed from the park, where the mobilehome has
been abandoned by its owner, or when a legal eviction of a mobilehome owner-
occupant is effected by the property owner. (Ord. 2532 § 10, 2003; Ord. 2458 §
9, 2000: Ord. 2207 § 1, 1993)
5.48.120: RETALIATORY EVICTION:
   A.   No park owner or representative of an owner shall intimidate, threaten,
harm, retaliate, annoy, harass or otherwise interfere in any manner with any
mobilehome owner-occupant's exercise of any of the rights conferred by this
chapter or the constitutions of the United States and the state of California,
or that mobilehome owner-occupant's right to participate in any action or
proceeding brought by any interested party pursuant to this chapter, including
public participation and the signing of petitions. The city recognizes that
many residents in mobilehome parks are elderly and are easily intimidated by
threats. The city further recognizes the mobilehome owner-occupant's right to
participate, with others, in any matter for the mutual benefit of park
residents.
   B.   In any action brought to recover possession of a mobilehome space, the
court may consider as grounds for denial any violation of this chapter.
Further, the determination that the action was brought in retaliation for the
exercise of any rights conferred by this chapter shall be grounds for denial.
(Ord. 2532 § 10, 2003: Ord. 2458 § 10, 2000: Ord. 2207 § 1, 1993)
CHAPTER 5.52
SECONDHAND DEALERS
SECTION:
5.52.010: Records; Required
5.52.020: Records; Form
5.52.010: RECORDS; REQUIRED:
It is unlawful to buy or sell or otherwise deal as a business in secondhand
bicycles, diamonds, silverware, jewelry, old gold or silver, firearms or any of
such articles, without keeping a record of all such articles so purchased,
acquired and sold, which record shall at all times during business hours be
open to the inspection of the chief of police or any police officer of the
city. (Prior code § 2351)
5.52.020: RECORDS; FORM:
Such record shall be kept upon a blank to be furnished by the city and shall
show the name and address of the persons from whom the same was purchased or
acquired and to whom sold and the date of purchase and sale. (Prior code §
2352)
CHAPTER 5.56
SELF-SERVICE LAUNDRIES
(Rep. by Ord. 2718 § 21, 2009)
CHAPTER 5.60
SOLICITORS, PEDDLERS AND ITINERANT SALESMEN REGISTRATION
SECTION:
Article I. General Provisions
5.60.010: Itinerant Salesman Defined
5.60.020: Peddler Defined
5.60.030: Solicitor Defined
5.60.040: Registration With Police Required
Article II. Exemptions
5.60.050: Wholesale Salesmen And Agents
5.60.060: Growers Selling Own Produce
5.60.070: Vendors On Established Routes
5.60.080: Merchants With Fixed Locations
5.60.090: Newspaper Advertising Or Subscription Solicitation
Article III. Registration
5.60.100: Application With Finance Director
5.60.110: Application Fee Nonrefundable
5.60.120: Police Department Procedures
5.60.130: Application Approval
5.60.140: Certificate
5.60.150: Validity
5.60.160: Revocation; Reapplication
Article IV. Enforcement
5.60.170: Certificate Possession Required
5.60.180: Hours Of Operation
5.60.190: Chief Of Police Duty To Enforce
5.60.200: Use Of Certificate By Another Person Unlawful
5.60.210: Defenses
Article V. Revocation
5.60.220: Reasons For Revocation
5.60.230: Hearing; Notice
5.60.240: Right Of Appeal
5.60.250: Hearing; Time And Place
5.60.260: Council Decision Final
Article VI. Violation; Penalty
5.60.270: Continuing Violation
5.60.280: Violation; Penalty
ARTICLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS
5.60.010: ITINERANT SALESMAN DEFINED:
An "itinerant salesman", within the meaning of this chapter, is any person,
firm, or corporation that shall engage in, do, or transact any temporary
business at wholesale or retail for the sale of goods, wares, and merchandise,
and who for the purpose of carrying on such business shall have, use, or occupy
a building, car, vehicle, booth, boat, or room for the exhibition and sale of
such merchandise, whether such person, firm, or corporation be a principal,
agent, or employee. (Prior code § 41300:3)
5.60.020: PEDDLER DEFINED:
The word "peddler", as used in this chapter, includes any person, whether a
resident of the city or not, traveling by foot, wagon, automotive vehicle, or
any other type of conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, or from
street to street, carrying, conveying, or transporting goods, wares,
merchandise, meats, fish, vegetables, fruits, garden truck, farm products, or
provisions, offering and exposing the same for sale, or making sales and
delivering articles to purchasers, or who, without traveling from place to
place, shall sell or offer the same from a wagon, automotive vehicle, railroad
car, or other vehicle or conveyance, and, further provided, that one who
solicits orders and as a separate transaction makes deliveries to purchasers as
a part of a scheme or design to evade the provisions of this chapter shall be
deemed a peddler subject to the provisions of this chapter. The word "peddler"
includes the words "hawker" and "huckster". (Prior code § 41300:2)
5.60.030: SOLICITOR DEFINED:
The term "solicitor", as used in this chapter, includes any person, whether a
resident of the city or not, who goes, either as principal or agent, from house
to house or place to place, soliciting and taking or attempting to take orders
for sale of goods, wares, merchandise, or personal property of any nature
whatsoever for future delivery, or for services to be furnished or performed in
the future, including subscriptions to magazines, periodicals, or other
publications, or the distributing or offer to distribute any coupon,
certificate, ticket, card, or other token which is redeemable in goods,
discount, wares, merchandise, premium or services, whether he is collecting
advance payments on such sales or not, provided that such definition shall
include any person who, for himself, or for another person, firm, or
corporation, hires, leases, uses, or occupies any building, structure, tent,
railroad boxcar, boat, hotel room, lodging house, apartment, shop, or any other
place within the city for the sole purpose of exhibiting samples and taking
orders for future delivery. (Prior code § 41300:1)
5.60.040: REGISTRATION WITH POLICE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any solicitor, peddler, or itinerant salesman to commence or
carry on any lawful solicitation or peddling in the city without first having
procured a certificate of registration from the chief of police of the city of
Redlands and complying with the applicable provisions contained in chapters
5.04 and 5.08 of this title pertaining to this particular activity within the
city. (Prior code § 41301:1)
ARTICLE II. EXEMPTIONS
5.60.050: WHOLESALE SALESMEN AND AGENTS:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to salesmen or agents for
wholesale houses or firms who solicit orders from or sell to retail dealers for
resale or to manufacturers or processors for manufacturing or processing
purposes or to bidders for public works or supplies. (Prior code § 41302:1)
5.60.060: GROWERS SELLING OWN PRODUCE:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any farmer, poultryman,
vegetable gardener, or horticulturist selling, soliciting or peddling his own
produce. This exemption shall not apply to any farmer, poultryman, vegetable
gardener or horticulturist buying any goods, wares, or merchandise for resale.
(Prior code § 41302:2)
5.60.070: VENDORS ON ESTABLISHED ROUTES:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to vendors of milk, bakery
products, groceries, or ice or other vendors who distribute their products to
regular customers on established routes, nor shall it apply to newsboys. (Prior
code § 41302:2:1)
5.60.080: MERCHANTS WITH FIXED LOCATIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall not be held to include the acts of
merchants with fixed and permanent locations within the city nor to their
employees while delivering goods or doing services in the regular course of
business. (Prior code § 41302:2:2)
5.60.090: NEWSPAPER ADVERTISING OR SUBSCRIPTION SOLICITATION:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the solicitation or obtaining
of subscriptions or advertising for, or sale of newspapers, published for the
dissemination of local or telegraphic news and intelligence of a general
character and printed or published at regular intervals. (Prior code § 41302:2:
3)
ARTICLE III. REGISTRATION
5.60.100: APPLICATION WITH FINANCE DIRECTOR:
Every solicitor, peddler, and itinerant salesman shall make application for
police registration at the office of the city's finance director on a form
provided for that purpose and complying with the following provisions:
   A.   Giving the name of the applicant;
   B.   Giving the name and address of the person, employer, firm or
corporation the applicant is to represent and credentials showing the
applicant's relationship to his employer or principal;
   C.   Giving a brief description of the nature of the activity and the kind
of goods, wares, or services to be solicited, peddled or sold;
   D.   Giving the applicant's present address and the applicant's permanent
address and the local address from which sales will be made;
   E.   Giving the date the applicant proposes to start the applicant's
activity within the city. (Ord. 2718 § 22, 2009)
5.60.110: APPLICATION FEE NONREFUNDABLE:
At the time of making application for police registration, a nonreturnable fee
of five dollars ($5.00), in addition to the state costs for the processing of
noncriminal fingerprints, shall be paid to the office of the city's finance
director to cover the cost of investigation and registration. (Ord. 2718 § 23,
2009)
5.60.120: POLICE DEPARTMENT PROCEDURES:
The completed and signed application for police registration shall be presented
by the applicant to the chief of police and such further information furnished
as may be required to enable the police department properly to investigate and
evaluate the applicant's record. At this time, such applicant shall be
fingerprinted and photographed, unless the applicant furnishes two (2)
satisfactory photographs of the applicant, taken within sixty (60) days
immediately prior to the date of filing application with the city's finance
director or the director's designee, which picture shall be two inches by two
inches (2" x 2") showing the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and
distinguishable manner; and such photographs and fingerprints shall be made a
part of the permanent registration record. (Ord. 2718 § 24, 2009)
5.60.130: APPLICATION APPROVAL:
If, after causing investigation as he deems necessary, the chief of police is
reasonably satisfied that the applicant's character and business responsibility
are such that he will not endanger the public safety and that the proposed
activity does not include any element of trickery, fraud or deceit, he may then
approve the application and register such applicant for the city. (Prior code §
41303:5)
5.60.140: CERTIFICATE:
As evidence of compliance with the provisions of this chapter, the chief of
police shall issue to each applicant who complies and is registered, a
certificate of registration which shall show the name and signature of the
registrant, his photograph and a brief physical description. This certificate
shall be dated, countersigned and show the expiration date of such
registration. (Prior code § 41303:6)
5.60.150: VALIDITY:
The certificate of registration issued pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter shall be valid for a period of twelve (12) months from the date of
issuance and the holder thereof must reregister at the end of each twelve (12)
month period thereafter. (Prior code § 41303:7)
5.60.160: REVOCATION; REAPPLICATION:
No certificate of registration shall be issued to any person who has had a
certificate revoked pursuant to this chapter, except upon the applicant's
applying to the council of the city and the council's authorizing the issuance
of the certificate. (Prior code § 41303:8)
ARTICLE IV. ENFORCEMENT
5.60.170: CERTIFICATE POSSESSION REQUIRED:
Every solicitor, peddler, or itinerant salesman at all times while engaged in
peddling or soliciting shall have in his immediate possession the certificate
of registration issued to him under the provisions of article III of this
chapter and when so peddling or soliciting shall display the same upon demand
of any police officer of the city and upon demand of any person. (Prior code §
41305:1)
5.60.180: HOURS OF OPERATION:
It is unlawful for any solicitor, peddler or itinerant salesman to peddle or
solicit before the hour of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. of any day, or after the
hour of six o'clock (6:00) P.M. of any day; provided, that he may peddle or
solicit at other hours if in answer to a specific appointment previously made.
(Prior code § 41305:2)
5.60.190: CHIEF OF POLICE DUTY TO ENFORCE:
The chief of police is directed to carry into effect the provisions of this
chapter. (Prior code § 41305:3)
5.60.200: USE OF CERTIFICATE BY ANOTHER PERSON UNLAWFUL:
It is unlawful for any solicitor, peddler or itinerant salesman to transfer,
loan or permit the use by any other person of a certificate of registration
issued under provisions of this chapter. (Prior code § 41305:4)
5.60.210: DEFENSES:
Nothing in this chapter shall prevent a criminal prosecution for any violation
of the provisions of this chapter nor shall any legal action taken under the
provisions of this chapter prevent or preclude the collection of any fees or
taxes due under any other division, chapter, or article of this code. (Prior
code § 41305:5)
ARTICLE V. REVOCATION
5.60.220: REASONS FOR REVOCATION:
A certificate of registration issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter
may be revoked by the chief of police of the city, after notice and hearing,
for any of the following causes:
   A.   Fraud, misrepresentation or any false statement contained in the
application for registration or any other information furnished for the purpose
of registration;
   B.   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of the
applicant's soliciting, peddling, or operation as an itinerant salesman;
   C.   Any violation of this chapter;
   D.   Conviction of the registrant of any crime or misdemeanor, involving
moral turpitude;
   E.   Conducting the soliciting, peddling or operation as itinerant salesman
in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the
peace or a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the people of the
city. (Prior code § 41306:1)
5.60.230: HEARING; NOTICE:
Notice of the hearing for revocation of a certificate of registration shall be
given in writing, stating the grounds of the complaint and the time and place
of hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the registrant at
the permanent address given on the application for police registration, at
least ten (10) days prior to the date set for the hearing. (Prior code § 41306:
2)
5.60.240: RIGHT OF APPEAL:
Any person aggrieved by the denial or revocation of a certificate of
registration by the chief of police shall have the right to appeal to the city
council of the city of Redlands. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the
city clerk a written statement of the grounds for the appeal within fifteen
(15) days after notice of the action complained of has been mailed to such
person's permanent address, as such address is stated in the application.
(Prior code § 41306:3)
5.60.250: HEARING; TIME AND PLACE:
The council shall set the time and place for hearing such appeal, and notice of
such hearing shall be given by the city clerk in the manner hereinabove
provided for notice of hearing in section
5.60.230 of this article. (Prior code § 41306:4)
5.60.260: COUNCIL DECISION FINAL:
The decision of the council of the city on such appeal shall be final. (Prior
code § 41306:5)
ARTICLE VI. VIOLATION; PENALTY
5.60.270: CONTINUING VIOLATION:
Every violator of any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a separate
offense for every day of such violation, and shall be subject to the penalty
imposed for each and every separate offense. (Prior code § 41307:2)
5.60.280: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any solicitor, peddler or itinerant salesman who shall violate any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor; and upon
conviction thereof and, in addition to automatic revocation of his certificate
of registration, shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment in the city jail, or the county jail of the
county of San Bernardino, for a period of not more than six (6) months or by
both such fine and imprisonment. (Prior code § 41307:1)
CHAPTER 5.64
TAXICABS
SECTION:
5.64.010: Definitions
5.64.020: Permit Requirement
5.64.030: Application For Owner's Operating Permit
5.64.040: Investigation And Hearing On Owner's Operating Permit
5.64.050: Approval Or Denial Of Owner's Operating Permit
5.64.060: Application For Driver's Permit
5.64.070: Investigation And Approval Or Denial Of Application For Driver's
Permit
5.64.080: Appeal Of Denial Of Driver's Permit
5.64.090: Transfer Prohibited
5.64.100: Permit Fees
5.64.110: Issuance Of Taxicab Identification Decal
5.64.120: Operating Requirements
5.64.130: Equipment Requirements
5.64.140: Taxicab Stands
5.64.150: Suspension Of Permits
5.64.160: Revocation Of Permits
5.64.170: Grounds For Revocation Of Owner's Operating And/Or Driver's Permit
5.64.180: Exemptions
5.64.190: Penalty For Violation
5.64.010: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
   CHIEF: The chief of police or his or her designee.
   DRIVER: Any person in charge of operating a taxicab either as independent
contractor or owner or under the direction, employment, control or service of
the owner.
   OWNER/OPERATOR: Every person, firm or individual having control, whether
through ownership, lease or otherwise, of any taxicab.
   STAND: A parking place designated for the exclusive use of taxicabs while
awaiting employment.
   TAXICAB: Any vehicle designed to carry not more than eight (8) passengers,
excluding the driver, that is used for the transportation for hire of persons
over the streets of the city and not over a defined route, but under the
direction of the passengers.
   TAXICAB SERVICE: Any public passenger transportation service using a taxicab
and available for hire on call or demand over the streets of the city, where
the service is not provided over a defined route, but is between points and
over routes directed by the person hiring the taxicab, and irrespective of
whether the operations extend beyond the corporate limits of the city. The term
"taxicab service" includes the act of picking up any passenger in the city, but
does not include the sole act of delivering any passenger to a location within
the city. (Ord. 2434 § 1, 2000)
5.64.020: PERMIT REQUIREMENT:
It is unlawful for any person to operate, or cause to be operated, any taxicab
service within the city without having the appropriate permits issued pursuant
to this chapter. (Ord. 2434 § 1, 2000)
5.64.030: APPLICATION FOR OWNER'S OPERATING PERMIT:
Any person desiring to obtain or to renew an owner's operating permit to
operate a taxicab service shall complete an application in the form provided by
the city and submit the application to the chief. Each application shall be
accompanied by a fee in the amount established by resolution of the city
council. An incomplete application shall be returned to the applicant within
ten (10) business days along with written reasons on why the application has
been deemed incomplete. The application will be deemed abandoned if, within
fourteen (14) business days following the mailing of a notice of incomplete
application, an amended application correcting all identified deficiencies is
not received by the city.
The following information is required in an application:
   A.   The legal names, mailing and street addresses, and telephone numbers of
the applicant, and all owners, directors, officers and employees of the
proposed taxicab service. If the taxicab service is advertised to the public
and operates under a name other than the legal name of the applicant, that name
shall also be included. The application shall include all fictitious business
names used by the applicant in San Bernardino County in the five (5) years
preceding the calendar year in which the application is made. A post office
box, mailbox, message service or other similar device shall not be used as the
applicant's street address, but is acceptable as a mailing address.
      1.   Corporate Applicants: The corporate name shall be exactly as set
forth in the corporation's articles of incorporation. The names, mailing and
street addresses, and telephone numbers of all directors, every shareholder
holding ten percent (10%) or more of the shares of the corporation, corporate
officers and the designated agent for service of legal process shall be
included. A corporate applicant shall also provide a certificate of domestic
stock ownership and a current certificate of good standing issued by the
California secretary of state.
      2.   Partnership Applicants: The names, mailing and street addresses, and
telephone numbers of each general partner shall be stated. If one or more of
the general partners is a corporation, the provisions of this section
pertaining to a corporate applicant shall also apply. The name, mailing and
street addresses, and telephone number of a person authorized to accept service
of legal process shall also be included.
      3.   Other Businesses: If the applicant is a cooperative, member stock
type operation, service organization, or association, the application shall
include the names, mailing and street addresses, and telephone number of each
officer, director and each shareholder owning any share or portion of any share
in the organization or association. The name, mailing and street address, and
telephone number of a person authorized to accept service of legal process
shall also be included.
      4.   Sole Proprietorships: The name, mailing and street addresses and
telephone number of the owner and any person authorized to accept service of
legal process shall be included.
   B.   The street addresses from which the applicant conducts or will conduct
the taxicab service, where dispatch will be conducted, and each location at
which the business' vehicles will be garaged.
   C.   The number of taxicabs to be operated under the permit and the number
of taxicabs in the applicant's fleet.
   D.   The manufacturer, model year, vehicle type, vehicle identification
number ("VIN"), license plate number, company identification number, passenger
capacity and proof of commercial registration for each vehicle to be operated
in the city, together with evidence satisfactory to the chief that each taxicab
proposed to be operated under the permit has been safety inspected and
otherwise complies in all respects with all applicable laws, rules, and
regulations.
   E.   The proposed color scheme, insignia or other distinguishing
characteristics of the taxicab, including the style and legend of any
illuminated sign to be mounted on the top of the vehicle.
   F.   Proof that the applicant maintains insurance meeting the following
requirements:
      1.   Separate commercial automobile liability insurance for each vehicle
proposed to be operated within the city pursuant to the owner's operating
permit, with at least the following limits of liability:
         a.   Primary bodily injury and primary property damage with limits of
one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence and two million dollars
($2,000,000.00) in the aggregate.
      2.   The applicant shall be required to have worker's compensation and
employer's liability insurance in force throughout the duration of the permit
of at least one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence or an amount
which meets the statutory requirement with an insurance carrier acceptable to
the city.
      3.   Required insurance shall be issued by companies admitted to do
business in California, rated "B+" or better in the most recent edition of
Best's key rating guide, and of a financial category class VII or better.
      4.   The city, and its elected officials, officers and employees (each a
"city entity") shall be named as additional insureds under the automobile
liability policy. This insurance shall be primary and noncontributing to the
city's own policy of insurance or self insurance.
      5.   Each policy of required insurance shall contain a provision that no
termination, cancellation or change of coverage may occur without thirty (30)
days' prior written notice to the city.
      6.   The applicant shall provide certificates of insurance endorsements
to risk management prior to issuance of a permit.
   G.   As a condition of receiving an owner's operating permit, the applicant
shall execute a statement agreeing to indemnify, defend and hold harmless the
city entities from and against any and all claims, losses, liability, expenses,
including defense costs and legal fees, and claims for damages whatsoever,
including, but not limited to, those arising from bodily injury, death,
personal injury, property damage, loss of use, or property loss, however the
same may be caused, and regardless of the responsibility for negligence. The
obligation to indemnify, defend and hold harmless shall include, but not be
limited to, any liability or expense, including defense costs and legal fees,
arising from the negligent acts or omissions, or wilful misconduct of the
applicant, its officers, employees, agents, joint venturers, subcontractors or
vendors. In the event of a dispute between the applicant and the city as to
whether liability arises from the sole negligence of a city entity, the
applicant shall be obligated to pay for the city entity's defense until a final
judgment has been entered adjudicating the city entity as solely negligent. In
the event a final judgment is entered adjudicating a city entity as solely
negligent, the applicant shall not be entitled to reimbursement of any defense
costs, including, but not limited to, attorney fees, expert fees and costs of
litigation. This indemnity shall apply regardless of whether the city approved
an owner's operating or driver's permit or whether the city inspected or
approved any vehicle used in conjunction with a permit.
   H.   Legal and registered ownership of the vehicles to be used by the
applicant.
   I.   Prior experience of the applicant in a taxicab business, including the
details of any prior permit denial, revocation or suspension by any public
agency of any type of an owner's operating or driver's permit, license or
certificate.
   J.   The name and address of each driver who will operate a taxicab in the
city.
   K.   An affidavit that no driver currently employed, or an applicant for
employment by the owner/operator, has been convicted of driving under the
influence of alcohol or drugs within five (5) calendar years preceding the date
of application.
   L.   An affidavit that each driver has satisfied all state training
requirements for taxicab drivers.
   M.   An affidavit that applicant's drivers and dispatchers are proficient in
the English language and able to communicate effectively with the public.
   N.   A description of the required uniform, if any, its drivers will wear.
   O.   A copy of the owner/operator's vehicle maintenance program, including
preventative maintenance. The program shall be in accordance with the vehicle
manufacturer's warranty specifications and any applicable state and federal
laws.
   P.   A list of rates to be charged to the public throughout the term of the
owner/operator's permit.
   Q.   Satisfactory evidence establishing that the applicant has complied and
currently complies with the provisions of California Government Code section
53075.5(b)(3), or any successor provision, pertaining to preemployment and
periodic testing of drivers for controlled substances and alcohol, and with
provisions pertaining to payment for drug and alcohol testing programs and
related reporting requirements. The applicant shall also provide satisfactory
evidence that each driver who will operate a taxicab within the city has tested
negative for drugs and alcohol within the previous twelve (12) months.
   R.   The names, street addresses and telephone numbers of no less than two
(2) individuals who may be contacted twenty four (24) hours a day, seven (7)
days a week by the city in case of an emergency.
   S.   An explanation of how the taxicab service will provide service to
people with disabilities that make it difficult to use conventional taxicab
sedans.
   T.   A public convenience and necessity proposal containing the following
information:
      1.   A demonstration of the need for additional taxicab service in the
city; and
      2.   The history of the organization and the manner in which it is
organized, including, without limitation, the date of formation, the business
commencement date(s), and all business locations in California during the five
(5) calendar years preceding the year of application.
   U.   Submission of department of motor vehicles (DMV) pull notice program
requester code number, as defined in Vehicle Code section 1808.1, issued to the
applicant. As a condition of accepting an owner's operating permit, the owner/
operator is required to notify the chief immediately if it receives a DMV pull
notice on one of its drivers that would affect that person's driver's permit.
In the event a driver's DMV record indicates that a driver no longer qualifies
for a driver's permit, the owner/operator shall require the driver to surrender
the driver's permit to the chief. DMV pull notice records shall be made
available for review by the chief upon request.
   V.   Submission of records of any convictions in any court of any state of
the United States or in any United States court with respect to any of the
persons identified in subsection A of this section. (Ord. 2718 § 25, 2009: Ord.
2434 § 1, 2000)
5.64.040: INVESTIGATION AND HEARING ON OWNER'S OPERATING PERMIT:
Upon receipt of a complete application, the chief will conduct an investigation
of the applicant. Upon completion of the investigation, the chief will set a
date for public hearing on the application before the city council. A notice
specifying the time and place of the hearing and a copy of the investigatory
report will be mailed to the applicant and to all existing service operators
and will be made available to the public, at least ten (10) business days
before the date of the hearing. (Ord. 2434 § 1, 2000)
5.64.050: APPROVAL OR DENIAL OF OWNER'S OPERATING PERMIT:
The city council may approve, deny or conditionally approve an application for
an owner's operating permit. The city council may deny an application for an
owner's operating permit if, based on substantial evidence, the city council
finds any of the following:
   A.   The public convenience and necessity is not served;
   B.   The application contains any material misrepresentation;
   C.   The applicant is not financially responsible;
   D.   Any vehicle proposed to be operated lacks required equipment, is
improperly licensed, or unsafe;
   E.   The applicant's proposed color scheme, name, insignia, or monogram will
conflict with or imitate any color scheme, name, insignia or monogram used by
any other person operating any vehicle described in this chapter, in such a
manner as to be misleading to the public;
   F.   The applicant's proposed schedule of rates is unjust, unreasonable,
discriminatory or preferential;
   G.   Additional taxicab service will have a detrimental effect on traffic
and parking within the city, or will otherwise be contrary to the public
welfare;
   H.   The applicant has not otherwise complied with this chapter. (Ord. 2434
§ 1, 2000)
5.64.060: APPLICATION FOR DRIVER'S PERMIT:
Any person who wishes to obtain a driver's permit shall file an application
with the chief. Each application shall be accompanied by an application fee in
an amount to be set by resolution of the city council. An incomplete
application will be deemed abandoned if a corrected application is not received
by the chief within fourteen (14) business days following the date the chief
mailed the applicant notice of the deficiency.
The application shall be signed under penalty of perjury and shall include the
following:
   A.   The name, residence address, and age of the applicant;
   B.   Any convictions in any court of any state of the United States or in
any United States court;
   C.   The number and expiration date of the applicant's California driver's
license, and disclosure of whether any state driver's license or taxicab
driver's permit held by the applicant has ever been revoked or suspended;
   D.   The name and address of the owner/operator by whom the applicant is to
be employed as a driver, and the endorsement of that owner/operator;
   E.   The names and addresses of every person by whom the applicant has been
employed at any time during the five (5) calendar years preceding the year of
application;
   F.   The names and addresses of three (3) responsible persons, excluding
relatives of the applicant, who have known the applicant for at least three (3)
years;
   G.   Proof of insurance and agreement to maintain at all times in full force
and effect, insurance at levels required by subsection
5.64.030F of this chapter, if not already covered by insurance through the
owner/operator of the taxicab service;
   H.   Acceptance and execution of indemnification requirement as required by
subsection
5.64.030G of this chapter;
   I.   Submit to a background investigation and fingerprinting by the chief;
   J.   Two (2) copies of a one inch (1") square photograph of the applicant,
taken within ninety (90) days of the date of application. One photograph shall
be attached to the driver's permit certificate or identification card; the
other will be retained by the chief;
   K.   The identification number and expiration date of each taxicab driver's
permit issued by every other jurisdiction in which the applicant is licensed;
   L.   Compliance with the provisions of California Government Code section
53075.5(b)(3), or any successor provision, pertaining to preemployment and
periodic testing of drivers for controlled substances and alcohol, and
pertaining to payment for drug and alcohol testing programs and related
reporting requirements. (Ord. 2434 § 1, 2000)
5.64.070: INVESTIGATION AND APPROVAL OR DENIAL OF APPLICATION FOR DRIVER'S
PERMIT:
If an applicant holds a valid driver's permit issued by another jurisdiction
whose application process included an investigation and background check by a
law enforcement agency, the chief may immediately issue a driver's permit, upon
confirmation of the issuance and current validity of that prior permit. Any
driver's permit issued pursuant to this section shall immediately become void
and of no effect upon a driver's termination of employment.
The chief will conduct and complete an investigation of the applicant, within
thirty (30) business days after a completed application has been received. The
chief will approve or deny the application and notify the applicant by mail of
the approval or denial within seven (7) business days of the chief's action.
The chief shall specify the reasons for any denial.
The chief shall deny an application if the applicant has:
   A.   Falsified material information on the application;
   B.   Registered as a sex offender pursuant to California Penal Code section
290;
   C.   Served, or is on, formal probation or parole for any felony offense or
violation of law involving moral turpitude;
   D.   A conviction (or plea of guilty or nolo contendere) in any state for
any of the following: murder, robbery, pandering, pimping, crimes related to
the sale or transportation of controlled substances, crimes involving the use
of a weapon, or any other offense involving moral turpitude or any crime that
is substantially related to the qualifications, functions, or responsibilities
of a taxicab driver;
   E.   A conviction (or plea of guilty or nolo contendere) in any state for a
felony other than those listed in the previous subsection within eight (8)
years of the application;
   F.   Any conviction (or plea of guilty or nolo contendere) within five (5)
years of the application in any state or any final administrative determination
of a violation of any statute, ordinance or regulation reasonably and
rationally pertaining to the same or similar business operation which would
have resulted in suspension or revocation of a driver's permit under this
chapter;
   G.   Failure to comply with any requirement of this chapter. (Ord. 2434 § 1,
2000)
5.64.080: APPEAL OF DENIAL OF DRIVER'S PERMIT:
Any decision of the chief to deny a driver's permit may be appealed to the city
council. An appeal shall be filed with the city clerk, within ten (10) business
days following notice of denial, and shall state the grounds upon which review
is sought. The appeal hearing will be scheduled for hearing and the city
council will render a decision all within fourteen (14) days of the filing of
the appeal with the city clerk. (Ord. 2434 § 1, 2000)
5.64.090: TRANSFER PROHIBITED:
No permit issued under this chapter shall be sold, transferred, assigned,
mortgaged or otherwise conveyed without the prior consent of the city council.
Any sale, transfer, assignment, mortgage or otherwise conveying any such permit
without the prior consent of the city council will render the permit
automatically void. (Ord. 2434 § 1, 2000)
5.64.100: PERMIT FEES:
   A.   Every owner/operator shall pay an annual per vehicle operating permit
fee in an amount established by resolution of the city council. Required fees
shall be paid at the time an application for a permit or renewal is submitted.
   B.   Every driver permit issued under this chapter will terminate at the
expiration of three (3) years from the date of its issuance unless revoked
prior to said termination. Any renewal of a driver's permit issued under this
chapter will be pursuant to the same requirements, procedures, provisions and
regulations set forth in this chapter for an original permit. An owner/operator
may not drive a taxicab without also possessing a current taxicab driver's
permit and otherwise satisfying all requirements of this chapter pertaining to
city approval of taxicab drivers. Every owner/operator shall provide written
notification to the chief upon the termination or resignation from employment
of any person holding a driver's permit. (Ord. 2434 § 1, 2000)
5.64.110: ISSUANCE OF TAXICAB IDENTIFICATION DECAL:
The chief will issue an identification decal for each taxicab permitted to
operate in the city. (Ord. 2434 § 1, 2000)
5.64.120: OPERATING REQUIREMENTS:
Every taxicab driver and owner/operator will be jointly and severally
responsible for all of the following requirements. Each owner and driver shall:
   A.   Maintain, at all times in full force and effect, insurance as required
by subsection
5.64.030F of this chapter;
   B.   Maintain, at all times, valid business licenses for the city;
   C.   Display at all times on each taxicab operating within the city a valid
taxicab identification decal issued by the chief. The identification decal
shall be permanently affixed to the lower left corner of the rear windshield of
the vehicle so that it is clearly visible from the outside of the vehicle. If,
because of the presence of other stickers or decals required by law, the decal
cannot be affixed on the lower left corner of the rear windshield, the decal
shall be attached to the vehicle in a conspicuous location, as close as
possible to the lower left corner of the rear windshield;
   D.   Keep an accurate, legible record of all passengers carried, the pick up
and drop off points, and the date and time carried. This record shall be
available for up to one year for review by the chief;
   E.   Not, when otherwise available for hire, refuse to transport anyone
requesting a ride except under the following circumstances:
      1.   The transportation requested is such that the driver may not legally
accept such passenger,
      2.   The driver has reasonable cause to believe that the proposed
passenger will refuse to pay or cannot pay the fare,
      3.   The proposed passenger is disorderly, engaged in the commission of
any crime, or is otherwise unfit to be transported as a passenger;
   F.   Display a photo I.D. badge identifying the driver's association with
permitted taxicab service;
   G.   Keep the taxicab in good mechanical condition and in compliance with
any and all applicable rules and regulations;
   H.   Charge only those rates as submitted on the application or such rates
as have been approved by the chief;
   I.   Display in full view of passengers in both the front and the rear seat,
in letters and figures which are clearly legible and not less than one-fourth
inch (1/4") high: 1) a schedule of rates to be charged, and 2) a notice that a
schedule of customary rates from the city's major points of interest are
available upon request. The schedules shall have printed thereon the name of
the owner/operator under which the taxicab is permitted to operate and the
business address and telephone number where comments or complaints regarding
the taxicab service may be directed;
   J.   Keep the taxicab in a clean and sanitary condition;
   K.   Participate in periodic testing for controlled substances and alcohol,
and shall report the results thereof, as specified in Government Code section
53075.5(b)(3), and shall test negative for drugs and/or alcohol as required in
said code section, and shall carry in his or her vehicle a certificate of
compliance with the provisions described in this subsection;
   L.   Not permit any person to operate a taxicab unless such person is
authorized to operate a taxicab pursuant to this chapter;
   M.   Not stop for or accept any passenger except at such areas as may be
authorized by the city; or where the taxicab driver has driven a passenger to a
particular location and is waiting for that passenger; or when picking up a
passenger who has contacted the driver's owner operator and requested taxicab
service;
   N.   Drive passengers to their point of destination by the most direct
practical route, unless specifically directed otherwise by such passengers;
   O.   When engaged, provide current passengers with exclusive right to use of
the passenger compartment, without picking up additional passengers, unless
otherwise expressly permitted by the city;
   P.   Immediately report the fact of any revocation of any permit required to
operate a taxicab within the city;
   Q.   The owner/operator shall notify the chief upon the termination of
employment of a taxicab driver;
   R.   Surrender the taxicab driver's permit to the city if no longer employed
by a city permitted owner/operator;
   S.   Ensure that each driver operating within the city maintains a valid
California driver's license at all times;
   T.   Perform a yearly inspection of each vehicle operating within the city
as part of owner/operator's taxicab service. The inspection shall be made by a
certified mechanic or automotive repair dealer. Inspection records, signed by
the mechanic or repair dealer, shall be maintained in the business office of
the owner/operator attesting that the vehicle has been inspected and is in good
working order. (Ord. 2434 § 1, 2000)
5.64.130: EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS:
Every taxicab driver and owner/operator shall be jointly and severally
responsible for all of the following equipment requirements:
   A.   Taxicab Equipment:
      1.   A trunk device which shall permit the opening of the trunk lid from
the inside of the trunk,
      2.   A permanent fixture to display the taxicab driver's permit in
prominent view of the passengers,
      3.   Prominent signs giving the name and telephone number of the taxicab
permittee and the taxicab number on the sides of the vehicle. The taxicab
number shall also be conspicuously displayed on the rear portion and inside the
vehicle,
      4.   A prominent sign within the passenger area of each taxicab informing
passengers to call the city's business license division with comments or
complaints on the service provided,
      5.   No fewer than four (4) working doors, except that a handicapped
accessible minivan may be used,
      6.   A fire extinguisher,
      7.   Four (4) flares,
      8.   At least two (2) emergency reflectors,
      9.   Spare tire and jack,
      10.   Windows which patrons can open from inside,
      11.   Working headlights, taillights, turn signals, backup lights, and
brake lights, including the "cyclops" or third brake light, if the car has been
manufactured in 1988 or later;
   B.   Taxicab Communications Equipment: In addition to the equipment
requirements of subsection A of this section, every taxicab into which
passengers are accepted for transportation within the city shall have a two-way
radio with dispatch capability and a mobile display terminal capable of
communication with a dispatcher;
   C.   Prohibited Equipment: No taxicab may be equipped with a scanner or
other device that can be used to intercept radio signals and dispatches sent to
specific destinations. (Ord. 2434 § 1, 2000)
5.64.140: TAXICAB STANDS:
   A.   At its discretion, the city council may permit the chief in conjunction
with the public works director, to locate, designate, and approve taxicab
stands, which will be available for the exclusive use of city approved
taxicabs.
   B.   Established taxicab stands shall be in operation twenty four (24) hours
of every day, unless otherwise provided by the chief.
   C.   No taxicab will remain standing unless it is attended by a driver,
except when necessary to assist passengers in loading or unloading. (Ord. 2434
§ 1, 2000)
5.64.150: SUSPENSION OF PERMITS:
Any permit described under this chapter may be immediately suspended by the
city council if deemed necessary to remedy an immediate threat to the public
health, safety or welfare, or failure to maintain any insurance required by
this chapter. (Ord. 2434 § 1, 2000)
5.64.160: REVOCATION OF PERMITS:
   A.   In the event the city council has reasonable cause to believe that
grounds exist to revoke any permit issued pursuant to this chapter, a written
notice of intent to revoke will be served by the chief, by mail upon the permit
holder.
   B.   Any taxicab owner/operator or driver having a permit revoked will not
be eligible to apply for another permit for one year after the effective date
of revocation.
   C.   The city council may, instead of revocation, provide a permit holder
with an opportunity to cure certain violations, or may place certain conditions
on the permit where it finds that grounds for revocation of the permit exist or
that the permit holder's activities have been conducted in a manner detrimental
to the public health, safety or welfare. (Ord. 2434 § 1, 2000)
5.64.170: GROUNDS FOR REVOCATION OF OWNER'S OPERATING AND/OR DRIVER'S PERMIT:
An owner's operating permit or driver's permit may be denied or revoked by the
city council for any of the following reasons:
   A.   Failure to maintain vehicles in good and safe order and in compliance
with all laws;
   B.   Any false, misleading or fraudulent statement made on the application
for an owner's operating permit or driver's permit;
   C.   Failure to pay any fees required under this chapter;
   D.   Repeated and persistent violations by the owner/operator or the owner/
operator's drivers of the traffic and motor vehicle laws of the city, county or
state;
   E.   Employment of a driver who does not have a valid California driver's
license;
   F.   Poor safety record or a record of complaints with respect to the
operation of the taxicab service within the city or other operating areas
outside the city;
   G.   Charging rates in excess of the amounts stated in the permit
application;
   H.   Failure to procure, post or maintain in effect approved comprehensive
automobile liability insurance as required under subsection
5.64.030F of this chapter; a temporary lapse in insurance coverage will result
in immediate suspension pursuant to section
5.64.150 of this chapter;
   I.   Commission of a crime involving moral turpitude that is substantially
related to operation of a taxicab service, by the applicant, his or her agent
or employee, driver, or any person connected or associated with the applicant
as a partner, director, officer, stockholder, associate or manager;
   J.   Failure to comply with all applicable health, zoning, fire, building
and safety laws of the state of California and the city for buildings,
structures, premises and equipment located within the city and used to conduct
the taxicab service activity;
   K.   Detriment to the public health, safety or welfare due to the operation
of the taxicab service;
   L.   Violation by the owner/operator, or any of the owner/operator's
employees, drivers or agents, of any rule or regulation adopted by any
governmental entity with respect to the applicant's operation of a taxicab
service in other operating areas or within the city;
   M.   Determination that the permit is not justified by public convenience
and necessity. In making this determination, the chief of police may take into
account all facts which it deems pertinent and proper, including, but not
limited to, whether:
      1.   The applicant has complied with all of the provisions of this code,
      2.   The applicant is financially responsible,
      3.   The applicant has sufficient liability insurance coverage to operate
a taxicab or vehicle for hire service;
   N.   Failure to comply with the requirements of sections
 5.64.120 and
5.64.130 of this chapter;
   O.   Failure to satisfy, or violation of, any requirement of this chapter.
(Ord. 2434 § 1, 2000)
5.64.180: EXEMPTIONS:
This chapter does not apply to any public transportation service being
performed pursuant to a contract with the city or with any other public entity
in this state, or to a limousine business that provides service within the city
and that holds a certificate or permit issued by the California public
utilities commission pursuant to chapter 8, division 2 of the California Public
Utilities Code. (Ord. 2434 § 1, 2000)
5.64.190: PENALTY FOR VIOLATION:
It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision or to fail to comply
with any of the requirements of this chapter. Any person, firm, partnership, or
corporation violating any provision of this chapter or failing to comply with
any of its requirements will be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction thereof will be punished by fine not exceeding one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding six (6) months, or by both such
fine and imprisonment. Each such person, firm, partnership, or corporation will
be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or any portion
thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is
committed, continued or permitted by such person, firm, partnership, or
corporation, and will be deemed punishable therefor as provided in this
chapter. (Ord. 2434 § 1, 2000)
CHAPTER 5.68
YARD SALES
SECTION:
5.68.010: Defined
5.68.020: Permit; Required
5.68.030: Permit Fee
5.68.040: Exemptions
5.68.050: Frequency And Hours
5.68.060: Affidavit That Personal Property Only Is To Be Sold
5.68.070: Display Of Goods
5.68.080: Signs
5.68.090: Enforcement
5.68.100: Violation; Penalty
5.68.010: DEFINED:
The term "yard sale", as used in this chapter, includes any event where items
of personal property owned, utilized, or maintained by occupants of a premises
other than a licensed commercial business, are to be offered for sale to the
general public. This shall include garage, patio, rummage, and other similarly
conducted sales. (Prior code § 24001)
5.68.020: PERMIT; REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to conduct or carry on any
sales activity commonly described as a yard, garage, patio, rummage or similar
type sale within the city without first having obtained from the city's finance
director, or the director's designee, a permit to do so. (Ord. 2684 § 7, 2007:
prior code § 24002)
5.68.030: PERMIT FEE:
The fee for a "yard sale" permit shall be in the amount established by
resolution of the city council. (Ord. 2779, 2012)
5.68.040: EXEMPTIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to sales of personal property
made under court order or process. (Prior code § 24004)
5.68.050: FREQUENCY AND HOURS:
An individual or household shall be limited to three (3) such sales per twelve
(12) month period and each sale shall be limited to three (3) consecutive days
or two (2) consecutive weekends of two (2) days each. There shall be no
consecutive or concurrent sales. Such sales may be conducted only between the
hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. (Prior code §
24005)
5.68.060: AFFIDAVIT THAT PERSONAL PROPERTY ONLY IS TO BE SOLD:
Before a permit may be issued, an affidavit must be filed with the city's
finance director, or the director's designee, stating that all property to be
sold is the applicant's own personal property and has not been acquired or
consigned to him for the purpose of resale or benefit of other than the
occupants of the premises. (Ord. 2684 § 7, 2007: prior code § 24006)
5.68.070: DISPLAY OF GOODS:
Sale goods may not be displayed in the public right of way, and all sale goods
shall be arranged so that fire safety service and other officials may have
access for inspection at all times during the sale. Sale goods may only be
displayed on the days of and between the hours of sale as provided in this
chapter. (Prior code § 24007)
5.68.080: SIGNS:
No other signs shall be permitted, except two (2) double faced signs, not to
exceed four (4) square feet in area on any one side, which shall be permitted
only on the property where such sale is located. Such signs may be posted only
on the days of the sale on such property and shall be prohibited on all other
days. (Prior code § 24008)
5.68.090: ENFORCEMENT:
The director of building and safety is authorized and directed to enforce the
provisions of this chapter. He may delegate his powers and duties to his
assistants and safety personnel. (Prior code § 24009)
5.68.100: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of
an infraction and upon a first conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine
not exceeding twenty five dollars ($25.00), and for a second conviction within
a period of one year, by a fine not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00), and for a
third and any subsequent conviction within a period of one year, by a fine not
exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00). (Prior code § 24010)
CHAPTER 5.72
AMBULANCES
SECTION:
Article I. Definitions
5.72.010: Advanced Life Support (ALS) Or Limited Advanced Life Support (LALS)
5.72.020: Ambulance
5.72.030: Ambulance Service Operator
5.72.040: Basic Life Support (BLS) Ambulance
5.72.050: Level Of Service
5.72.060: Code 3
5.72.070: County
5.72.080: County Health Officer
5.72.090: EMT-1A
5.72.100: Emergency Call
5.72.110: Emergency Service
5.72.120: ICEMA
5.72.130: Mobile Intensive Care (MIC) Nurse
5.72.140: EMT Paramedic
5.72.150: Nonemergency Call
5.72.160: Patient
5.72.170: Permittee
5.72.180: Person
Article II. Permit Issuance Requirements
5.72.190: Permit; Required
5.72.200: Permit; Exceptions
5.72.210: Permit; Fees
5.72.220: Permit; Application; Contents; Renewal
5.72.230: Permit; Investigation
5.72.240: Permit; Issuance Or Denial
5.72.250: Bonding Requirements
5.72.260: Condition Of Issuance
5.72.270: Liability Insurance
5.72.280: Form And Contents
5.72.290: Amendment Of Conditions
5.72.300: Renewal Procedures
Article III. Rates
5.72.310: Ambulance Service Rate
5.72.320: Reasonably Borne Cost Elements
5.72.330: Review Procedures
Article IV. Emergency Service Requirements
5.72.340: Availability Of Service
5.72.350: Permit Mandatory For Operation
5.72.360: Dispatching Standards
5.72.370: Safety And Emergency Equipment Requirements
Article V. Ambulance Personnel
5.72.380: Training And Certification; Drivers
5.72.390: Training And Certification; Attendants
5.72.400: Staff Requirements
5.72.410: Conditions Prior To And During Employment
Article VI. Continuation Of Call
5.72.420: General Requirements
Article VII. Emergency And Disaster Operations
5.72.430: General Requirements
Article VIII. User Complaints
5.72.440: General Requirements
Article IX. Enforcement
5.72.450: Compliance With County Rules And Regulations
5.72.460: Inspections
Article X. Excused Performance
5.72.470: General Requirements
Article XI. Violation; Penalty
5.72.480: Violation; Penalty
Article XII. Civil Remedies
5.72.490: Civil Remedies Available
ARTICLE I. DEFINITIONS
5.72.010: ADVANCED LIFE SUPPORT (ALS) OR LIMITED ADVANCED LIFE SUPPORT (LALS):
"Advanced life support (ALS)" or "limited advanced life support (LALS)" means
an ambulance which has additional equipment and supplies as specified by the
local EMS agency. (Ord. 1987 § 1, 1987: prior code § 29000)
5.72.020: AMBULANCE:
"Ambulance" means any privately, or publicly owned vehicle specifically
designed, constructed, modified, equipped, arranged, maintained and operated
for the sole purpose of transporting sick, injured, wounded, invalid, expectant
mother, convalescent or otherwise incapacitated persons. (Ord. 1987 § 1, 1987:
prior code § 29001)
5.72.030: AMBULANCE SERVICE OPERATOR:
"Ambulance service operator" means the manager, director or officer who directs
an ambulance service. (Ord. 1987 § 1, 1987: prior code § 29002)
5.72.040: BASIC LIFE SUPPORT (BLS) AMBULANCE:
"Basic life support (BLS) ambulance" means an ambulance which has equipment and
supplies required by the California Administrative Code and by any other local
or state regulations applicable to the provision of basic life support level of
service. (Ord. 1987 § 1, 1987: prior code § 29003)
5.72.050: LEVEL OF SERVICE:
"Level of service" means the complexity of field emergency medical services
that may be provided by a permittee, and will be specified as basic life
support provided by EMT-1A personnel conforming to the provisions of the
California Health and Safety Code section 1797.170, full advanced life support
provided by California licensed physician or by paramedics and mobile intensive
care nurses certified by the medical director of the local EMS agency under
California Health and Safety Code section 1797.172 or limited advanced life
support provided by EMT-II personnel authorized under Health and Safety Code
section 1797.171. (Ord. 1987 § 1, 1987: prior code § 29004)
5.72.060: CODE 3:
"Code 3" means the period when an ambulance is traveling to or from a patient
pickup point as a result of an emergency call and during which such ambulance
is using red lights and siren. (Ord. 1987 § 1, 1987: prior code § 29005)
5.72.070: COUNTY:
"County" means the county of San Bernardino, California. (Ord. 1987 § 1, 1987:
prior code § 29006)
5.72.080: COUNTY HEALTH OFFICER:
"County health officer" means the person designated as such by the county of
San Bernardino. (Ord. 1987 § 1, 1987: prior code § 29007)
5.72.090: EMT-1A:
"EMT-1A" means emergency medical technician 1 ambulance. (Ord. 1987 § 1, 1987:
prior code § 29008)
5.72.100: EMERGENCY CALL:
"Emergency call" means a request for the dispatch of an ambulance to transport
or provide other assistance for a person who apparently has a sudden or
unforeseen need for emergency medical attention. (Ord. 1987 § 1, 1987: prior
code § 29009)
5.72.110: EMERGENCY SERVICE:
"Emergency service" means the functions performed in response to an emergency
call and includes the provision of BLS and/or ALS. (Ord. 1987 § 1, 1987: prior
code § 29010)
5.72.120: ICEMA:
"ICEMA" means inland counties emergency medical agency. (Ord. 1987 § 1, 1987:
prior code § 29011)
5.72.130: MOBILE INTENSIVE CARE (MIC) NURSE:
"Mobile intensive care (MIC) nurse" means a nurse who has been certified by the
county health officer as qualified in the provision of emergency cardiac and
noncardiac care and in the issuance of emergency instructions to MIC
paramedics. (Ord. 1987 § 1, 1987: prior code § 29012)
5.72.140: EMT PARAMEDIC:
"EMT paramedic (emergency medical technician-paramedic (EMT-P), paramedic or
mobile intensive care paramedic)" means a person specially trained and
certified to provide advanced life support according to standards prescribed by
division 2.5 of the Health and Safety Code. (Ord. 1987 § 1, 1987: prior code §
29013)
5.72.150: NONEMERGENCY CALL:
"Nonemergency call" means all requests for ambulance services which do not
required a code 3 response nor the provisions of emergency services as of the
time the call is made. (Ord. 1987 § 1, 1987: prior code § 29014)
5.72.160: PATIENT:
"Patient" means a sick, injured, wounded, invalid, expectant mother,
convalescent or otherwise incapacitated person. (Ord. 1987 § 1, 1987: prior
code § 29015)
5.72.170: PERMITTEE:
"Permittee" means any ambulance service which possesses a current permit to
provide ambulance service within the city of Redlands. (Ord. 1987 § 1, 1987:
prior code § 29016)
5.72.180: PERSON:
"Person" means and includes all natural persons, as well as any individual
partnership, firm, corporation, association governmental agency or other group
or combination acting as a unit. (Ord. 1987 § 1, 1987: prior code § 29017)
ARTICLE II. PERMIT ISSUANCE REQUIREMENTS
5.72.190: PERMIT; REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person, either as owner, employee or otherwise, to
operate an ambulance, or to engage in business as an ambulance service
operator, upon the streets or any public way or place in the city except in
conformance with a valid city permit to operate an ambulance service. (Ord.
1987 § 1, 1987: prior code § 29100)
5.72.200: PERMIT; EXCEPTIONS:
The equipment and personnel standards specified in this chapter shall apply to
all ambulance service operators; provided, however, that the licensing and
permit requirements shall not apply to:
   A.   Publicly owned ambulances;
   B.   Vehicles operated as ambulances at the request of local authorities
during wartime emergency, duly proclaimed state of emergency or local emergency
as defined in the California emergency services act (chapter 7 of division 1 of
title 2 of the Government Code), as amended; and
   C.   Ambulances passing through the city, which neither originate from the
city nor arrive to a call within the city. (Ord. 1987 § 1, 1987: prior code §
29101)
5.72.210: PERMIT; FEES:
Permit fees shall be those which are, from time to time, set by the city
council. All permits shall expire on June 30 of each year regardless of when
they are issued. The annual business tax for an ambulance service shall be
based on the gross receipts of the past calendar year, as set forth in this
title. (Ord. 1987 § 1, 1987: prior code § 29102)
5.72.220: PERMIT; APPLICATION; CONTENTS; RENEWAL:
Prior to the issuance of a permit or renewal of a permit, an applicant shall
file with the city manager an application in writing on a form to be furnished
by the city manager, which shall set forth the following:
   A.   Name and description of the applicant;
   B.   Business address and residence address of the applicant;
   C.   The name under which the ambulance service will do business;
   D.   If a corporation, joint venture, partnership or limited partnership,
the names of all partners, or the names of corporate officers, their residence
addresses and their percentage of participation in the business;
   E.   If the applicant is applying for a permit to provide emergency service,
a verification that the application is equipped to and will provide BLS service
at all times in the city;
   F.   Express warranty from applicant in all applications that the applicant
owns or controls the equipment required to adequately conduct an ambulance
service in the city, which meets the requirements established by the California
Vehicle Code, and that the applicant owns or has access to suitable and safe
facilities for maintaining his ambulance service in a clean and sanitary
condition. Both initial applications and renewal applications must contain a
statement that the applicant will maintain (station) at least two (2) BLS
equipped ambulances within the geographical boundaries of the city.
Additionally, the applicant must establish to the reasonable satisfaction of
the city manager that the applicant has adequate capability to back up or
augment such BLS equipped ambulance if it is not immediately available to
respond to a call therefor;
   G.   A complete description of each ambulance to be operated by the
applicant, including a list of the internal equipment carried by each
ambulance, the patient capacity thereof, and a copy of the applicant's current
ambulance inspection report issued by the California highway patrol for each
vehicle;
   H.   A statement by the applicant warranting that each permitted ambulance
and its appurtenances conform to all applicable provisions of this chapter, the
California Vehicle Code, the California Administrative Code and all other
state, county or city applicable rules or regulations;
   I.   If the applicant is applying for a permit to provide emergency service,
a statement that the applicant employs sufficient personnel adequately trained
and available to deliver emergency BLS and/or ALS ambulance services of good
quality at all times in the city;
   J.   A description of the level of training for each ambulance employee and
a copy of each current certificate or license, including driver's license,
issued by the state, county and the local emergency medical authority
establishing qualifications of such personnel to be employed in ambulance
operations;
   K.   A statement, in the initial application, that shows to the satisfaction
of the city manager that the issuance of a permit is in the public interest and
that there is a need for a permit to be issued;
   L.   A statement by the applicant that as a condition of the city issuing a
permit, applicant agrees to appear and defend all actions against the city
arising out of the exercise of permit, and shall indemnify and save the city,
its elected officials, employees and agents harmless from any and all claims,
demands, actions or causes of actions of every kind and description resulting
directly or indirectly, arising out of, or in any way connected with, the
exercise of the permit;
   M.   A schedule of rates to be charged by the applicant;
   N.   A statement whether applicant is seeking a permit to provide wheelchair
services, advanced life support (emergency) or basic life support
(nonemergency) level of service, or all three (3);
   O.   Such other information as may be required to satisfy the requirements
of the emergency medical services plan for the county, as amended from time to
time. (Ord. 1987 § 1, 1987: prior code § 29103)
5.72.230: PERMIT; INVESTIGATION:
Upon receipt of a complete initial (nonrenewal) application, the city manager
shall conduct an investigation to determine if the applicant has satisfied all
requirements of this chapter. Upon completion of his investigation, the city
manager shall recommend to the city council that a permit be granted or denied.
The determination of the city council shall be made after a duly noticed public
hearing. (Ord. 1987 § 1, 1987: prior code § 29104)
5.72.240: PERMIT; ISSUANCE OR DENIAL:
   A.   The city council may order the issuance of a new permit to conduct an
ambulance service in the city upon finding that the applicant meets all
requirements of this chapter. The city council may deny a new or renewed permit
if it finds any of the following conditions to be true:
      1.   That the application does not contain the information required by
the provisions of this chapter;
      2.   That the vehicles described in the application are inadequate or
unsafe for the purposes for which they are to be used;
      3.   That the color scheme, name, monogram or insignia to be used upon
such vehicles is in conflict with or imitates any color scheme, name, monogram
or insignia used by any person so as to be misleading or tending to mislead or
misrepresent material facts;
      4.   That there is insufficient need for such additional ambulance
service within the city; provided, that the sole fact there is an existing
provider or providers shall not constitute sufficient proof that the
insufficient need exists; or
      5.   That the applicant of the proposed ambulance operation does not meet
all requirements set forth in this chapter, those of the county health officer
or those set forth in the emergency medical service plan for the county as it
may be amended from time to time.
   B.   The city council may deny a permit if the applicant or any partner,
officer or director thereof:
      1.   Was previously the holder of any ambulance permit which permit was
revoked or suspended;
      2.   Has, within the preceding five (5) years committed any act, which,
if committed by a permittee, would be grounds for suspension or revocation of a
permit issued pursuant to this chapter;
      3.   Has committed any act involving dishonesty, fraud or deceit whereby
another is injured or where the applicant has benefited;
      4.   Has acted as an ambulance service operator in any city without
possessing a required permit therefor;
      5.   Has aided or abetted any person in violating any provision of this
chapter or any other ambulance ordinance; or
      6.   Has made any material misstatement of fact upon any application, or
during the course of any investigation, required or permitted by this chapter.
(Ord. 1987 § 1, 1987: prior code § 29105)
5.72.250: BONDING REQUIREMENTS:
Before any permit is issued under the provisions of this chapter, the city
council may require the applicant as a condition to the issuance of the permit
to post with the city clerk a cash bond in the sum of seven thousand five
hundred dollars ($7,500.00) or a surety bond in the same amount furnished by a
corporation authorized to do business in the state, payable to the city. The
bond shall be conditioned upon the full and faithful performance by the
permittee of his obligations under this chapter and shall be kept in full force
and effect by the permittee throughout the life of the permit and all renewals
thereof. (Ord. 1987 § 1, 1987: prior code § 29106)
5.72.260: CONDITION OF ISSUANCE:
As a condition of issuance of a permit to operate an ambulance, the permittee
shall hold harmless, indemnify and defend the city, its elected officials,
officers and employees from any and all claims and lawsuits for damage to
persons or property arising out of or in any way connected with the permittee's
ambulance operations or operations of permittee's officers, employees and
agents with respect to the provision of ambulance services, to the maximum
extent provided by law. (Ord. 1987 § 1, 1987: prior code § 29107)
5.72.270: LIABILITY INSURANCE:
The permittee shall obtain and keep in force during the term of the permit
public and bodily injury liability insurance issued by a company authorized to
do business in the state, insuring the ambulance service operator and his/her
employees against loss by reason of injury or damages to persons or property
arising from the operation or defective construction of an ambulance, or from
violation of this chapter or of any other law of the state or the United
States. The policy shall also name the city, its elected officials, officers
and employees as additional insured. The policy shall contain provisions
waiving the insurer's right of subrogation and making the policy primary and
noncontributing. It shall be in the sum of not less than five hundred thousand
dollars ($500,000.00) for personal injury to or death of any one person in any
single accident; and not less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00)
for damages to or destruction of property in any one accident. Workers'
compensation insurance shall be carried covering all employees of the
permittee. Copies of the policies or certificates evidencing such policies
shall be filed with the city clerk prior to the effective date of any permit
issued under this chapter. All policies shall contain a provision requiring
thirty (30) days' notice to be given to the city clerk prior to cancellation,
modification or reduction of limits, and coverage shall extend through the next
subsequent June 30. (Ord. 1987 § 1, 1987: prior code § 29108)
5.72.280: FORM AND CONTENTS:
The permit shall specify the dates of issuance and expiration, the license
number or vehicle identification number of each ambulance authorized
thereunder, number of ambulance vehicles to be used by the permittee, plus any
special conditions imposed as a condition precedent to the issuance of such
permit by the city council. (Ord. 1987 § 1, 1987: prior code § 29109)
5.72.290: AMENDMENT OF CONDITIONS:
Upon request by the permittee, the city manager may amend the conditions
specified in a permit if he finds such requested changes to be in substantial
compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Such amendment shall not affect
the expiration date of the existing permit, nor shall it authorize a change in
ownership from that specified in the original permit. (Ord. 1987 § 1, 1987:
prior code § 29110)
5.72.300: RENEWAL PROCEDURES:
   A.   Permits may be renewed annually by the city manager upon application of
the permit holder made at least sixty (60) days prior to expiration of the
current permit:
      1.   If the permit holder proposes no substantial change in the nature of
service to be rendered; and
      2.   If the city manager determines that the permit holder has, during
the period of the expiring permit operated in conformity with the provisions of
this chapter and the rules and regulations of the city, that he is capable of
continuing operation in conformity with the rules and regulations of the city,
and that all facts contained in the original and renewal application are still
true.
   B.   Unless good cause can be shown by the permittee, it shall be valid
basis for renewal of a permit if the permittee has not, during the preceding
permit period, had a code 3 response time to at least ninety five percent (95%)
of its emergency calls of ten (10) minutes or less. Such response time shall be
measured from the time the permittee received the request until the permittee's
ambulance actually arrived at the location for which the ambulance was
requested. (Ord. 1987 § 1, 1987: prior code § 29111)
ARTICLE III. RATES
5.72.310: AMBULANCE SERVICE RATE:
The city manager is delegated the authority and directed to adjust the
ambulance service rate to provide recovery of costs reasonably borne in
providing the services enumerated in this chapter and within the guidelines of
the county department of public health ambulance ordinance and adopted industry
wide rate structure. (Ord. 1987 § 1, 1987: prior code § 29200)
5.72.320: REASONABLY BORNE COST ELEMENTS:
Cost reasonably borne as used in this chapter are to consist of the following
elements:
   A.   All applicable direct costs including, but not limited to, salaries,
wages, fringe benefits, services and supplies, operation expenses, contracted
services, special supplies, and any other direct expense incurred.
   B.   All applicable indirect costs including, but not restricted to,
building maintenance and operations, equipment maintenance, communication,
printing and reproduction, and like expenses when distributed on a rational
proration system.
   C.   Fixed assets recovery expenses, consisting of depreciation of fixed
assets, and additional fixed asset expense recovery charges calculated on the
current estimated cost of replacement, divided by the approximate life
expectancy of the fixed asset. A further additional charge to make up the
depreciation not previously recovered and reserved in cash also shall be
calculated and considered a cost so as to recovery such unrecovered
depreciation over the remaining life of the asset. (Ord. 1987 § 1, 1987: prior
code § 29201)
5.72.330: REVIEW PROCEDURES:
   A.   The city manager, finance director and fire chief under the direction
of the city manager, shall review the rates proposed and listed below in the
section, and set the adjusted rates so as to recover the cost reasonably borne
necessary to provide any of the following listed services: Ambulance wages,
overhead, insurance, depreciation/lease, fuel and oil, vehicle maintenance,
ambulance supplies, radio expenses (parts and labor) that are reasonably borne
are to be recovered one hundred percent (100%).
   B.   If the adjusted rate would result in a change of revenue greater than
ten percent (10%), the city council shall determine the adjustment, by
considering the applications and recommendations of the city manager, but not
be bound by the same, and shall consider any relevant equitable consideration
in the interests of the permittee. (Ord. 1987 § 1, 1987: prior code § 29202)
ARTICLE IV. EMERGENCY SERVICE REQUIREMENTS
5.72.340: AVAILABILITY OF SERVICE:
Each emergency service permittee shall provide a minimum basic life support
ambulance service on a continuous twenty four (24) hours per day basis during
the entire term of the permit. (Ord. 1987 § 1, 1987: prior code § 29300)
5.72.350: PERMIT MANDATORY FOR OPERATION:
No ambulance operator shall provide ambulance service for ambulance calls
originating within the city unless he shall first have obtained a valid city
permit in accordance with this chapter. (Ord. 1987 § 1, 1987: prior code §
29301)
5.72.360: DISPATCHING STANDARDS:
Each emergency ambulance service receiving an emergency request shall dispatch
an ambulance in compliance with all city procedures and procedures required by
all applicable state and county codes. If an ambulance is not available for
immediate dispatch, the procedures required by all applicable state laws,
including the California Administrative Code, and any applicable county codes
shall apply.
   A.   The Redlands fire department and police department dispatch centers
shall be immediately notified by the permittee of any emergency ambulance
request or need.
   B.   All ambulance service operators shall maintain a log for a period of
three (3) years containing all dispatch and arrival times and locations, the
nature of the medical emergency, the critical need, the total amount charged
and the name of the recipient of such services, all made under penalty of
perjury and available for inspection by city representatives during office
hours. All nonemergency ambulance operators shall maintain a similar log.
   C.   No ambulance shall be dispatched without having first received a
legitimate request for such services. (Ord. 1987 § 1, 1987: prior code § 29302)
5.72.370: SAFETY AND EMERGENCY EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS:
Ambulances shall be maintained at all times in good mechanical repair, in a
clean and sanitary condition, and in full compliance with all applicable local
and state laws.
   A.   Minimum Equipment: All ambulances shall be equipped with two- way
radios and all other safety and BLS emergency equipment required for ambulances
by the California Vehicle Code and the California Administrative Code,
administrative rules of the county health officer as the same are now written,
or hereafter amended, and any other rules or regulations applicable to
ambulance services.
   B.   Emergency (ALS) Ambulance Equipment: In addition to the regular
ambulance equipment and supplies, all ALS ambulances shall also be equipped as
required by any other applicable state or local regulations.
   C.   Maintenance Of Emergency Equipment And Supplies: Dressings, bandaging,
instruments and other medical supplies used for care and treatment of patients
will be protected so they are sterile when ready for use. (Ord. 1987 § 1, 1987:
prior code § 29303)
ARTICLE V. AMBULANCE PERSONNEL
5.72.380: TRAINING AND CERTIFICATION; DRIVERS:
Every person who drives an ambulance within the city, while responding to
calls, shall comply with all applicable requirements of state law, including
those requirements set forth in the California Administrative Code for
ambulance drivers. The driver of an ambulance shall be trained and competent in
the proper use of all equipment required by this chapter or other applicable
law. The driver shall also hold a certificate of at least an EMT-1A. (Ord. 1987
§ 1, 1987: prior code § 29400)
5.72.390: TRAINING AND CERTIFICATION; ATTENDANTS:
All ambulance attendants shall be trained and competent in the proper use of
all equipment required by this chapter, or by other applicable law, and shall
hold the required certification of at least an EMT-1A. If the vehicle being
used is an emergency service (ALS) ambulance, at least one attendant shall hold
a current certificate as an EMT-paramedic (EMT-P) through the local emergency
medical authority. (Ord. 1987 § 1, 1987: prior code § 29401)
5.72.400: STAFF REQUIREMENTS:
Each ambulance being operated within the city, in response to an emergency
call, shall be staffed by both a driver and attendant holding EMT-1A
certification. When there is an MIC-paramedic responding with the ambulance to
an emergency call, the MIC-paramedic shall occupy the patient compartment while
transporting any person in apparent need of medical attention. In nonemergency
calls, the attendant must hold, at a minimum, a current EMT-1A certificate. An
ambulance driver or ambulance attendant who is a California licensed physician
or an MIC nurse currently certified, shall be exempt from the emergency medical
training requirement of this section. This section shall not apply during any
state of emergency or local emergency as defined in the Government Code of the
state. (Ord. 1987 § 1, 1987: prior code § 29402)
5.72.410: CONDITIONS PRIOR TO AND DURING EMPLOYMENT:
Drivers and attendants shall provide the following:
   A.   Prior to employment, all drivers and attendants must have a valid DMV
physical examination and TB skin test, and chest X-ray if skin test is
positive.
   B.   During employment, have on file with the fire department and police
department the following:
      1.   Fire department:
         a.   A copy of TB test:
            i.   If original TB skin test was positive, a yearly chest X-ray is
required.
            ii.   If original TB skin test is negative, a two (2) year TB skin
test is required.
         b.   A record of the level of training and a copy of each current
certificate or license, including driver's license, issued by the state, county
and local emergency medical authority establishing qualifications of such
personnel to be employed in ambulance operations.
      2.   Police department: A copy of fingerprints. (Ord. 1987 § 1, 1987:
prior code § 29403)
ARTICLE VI. CONTINUATION OF CALL
5.72.420: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
An ambulance based and properly licensed outside the city but not licensed by
the city shall be authorized to transport a patient to or through the city, but
shall not be authorized to transport patients originating in the city, except
in emergency situations when no other licensed emergency service provider is
reasonably available. In the discretion of the requesting agency, and subject
to subsequent review by the city, a noncity licensed ambulance may be utilized
in life and death situations when no licensed provider is reasonably available.
(Ord. 1987 § 1, 1987: prior code § 29500)
ARTICLE VII. EMERGENCY AND DISASTER OPERATIONS
5.72.430: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
During any state of war emergency, state of emergency or local emergency as
defined in the California emergency services act (chapter 7 of division 1 of
title 2 of the Government Code), as amended, each ambulance service operator
shall provide equipment, facilities and personnel as required by the city
manager. (Ord. 1987 § 1, 1987: prior code § 29600)
ARTICLE VIII. USER COMPLAINTS
5.72.440: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
Any user or subscriber to an ambulance service contending that he has been
required to pay an excessive charge for service or that he has received
unsatisfactory services may file a written complaint with the city manager
setting forth such allegations. The city manager shall notify the affected
permittee of such complaint, and shall investigate the matter to determine the
validity of the complaint. If the complaint is determined to be valid, the city
manager shall provide the county health officer with the documentation and
request reasonable and proper action to secure compliance with the conditions
of this chapter. (Ord. 1987 § 1, 1987: prior code § 29700)
ARTICLE IX. ENFORCEMENT
5.72.450: COMPLIANCE WITH COUNTY RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The city recognizes the San Bernardino County, department of public health
rules and regulations for enforcement pertaining to ambulances, ambulance
service operations, ambulance equipment, ambulance vehicles and ambulance
personnel for the effective and reasonable administration of this chapter.
(Ord. 1987 § 1, 1987: prior code § 29800)
5.72.460: INSPECTIONS:
The city manager, during office hours or otherwise upon reasonable notice,
shall be authorized by permittee to inspect the records, facilities, vehicles,
equipment and methods of operation whenever such inspections are deemed
necessary. (Ord. 1987 § 1, 1987: prior code § 29801)
ARTICLE X. EXCUSED PERFORMANCE
5.72.470: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
No operator shall be deemed to be in violation of its permit if it shall fail
to provide, either in whole or in part, the services otherwise required,
without fault of permittee, if such performance is prevented by any of the
following:
   A.   Acts of God;
   B.   Labor strikes and disputes;
   C.   Intervention of any government body; or
   D.   Any force reasonably beyond the control of the operator. (Ord. 1987 §
1, 1987: prior code § 29900)
ARTICLE XI. VIOLATION; PENALTY
5.72.480: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
It is unlawful for any person, firm, partnership or corporation to violate any
provision or to fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter.
Any person, firm, partnership or corporation violating any provision of this
chapter or failing to comply with any of its requirements shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor. Each such person, firm, partnership or corporation
shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or any
portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person, firm, partnership
or corporation, and shall be deemed punishable therefor as provided in this
chapter. (Ord. 1987 § 1, 1987: prior code § 291000)
ARTICLE XII. CIVIL REMEDIES
5.72.490: CIVIL REMEDIES AVAILABLE:
The violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a
nuisance and may be abated by the city through civil process by means of
restraining order, preliminary or permanent injunction or in any other manner
provided by law for the abatement of such nuisances. (Ord. 1987 § 1, 1987:
prior code § 291100)
CHAPTER 5.76
STATE VIDEO FRANCHISES
SECTION:
5.76.010: Title
5.76.020: Purpose
5.76.030: Definitions
5.76.040: Franchise Fee
5.76.050: Public, Educational And Government Channels
5.76.060: Audit Authority
5.76.070: Customer Service And Schedule Of Penalties
5.76.010: TITLE:
This chapter shall be referred to as the city's STATE VIDEO FRANCHISE
REGULATIONS. (Ord. 2771, 2012)
5.76.020: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate video service providers holding
state video franchises within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city as
specifically permitted by the digital infrastructure and video competition act
of 2006 ("DIVCA") and the rules of the California public utilities commission
promulgated thereunder. (Ord. 2771, 2012)
5.76.030: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
   CABLE SERVICE: Shall be ascribed the meaning set forth in section 5830 of
DIVCA.
   FRANCHISE: An initial authorization, or renewal of an authorization, issued
by a franchising entity, regardless of whether the authorization is designated
as a franchise, permit, license, resolution, contract, certificate, agreement,
or otherwise, that authorizes the construction and operation of any network in
the right of way capable of providing video service to subscribers.
   GROSS REVENUES: All revenue actually received by the holder of a state
franchise, as determined in accordance with generally accepted accounting
principles, that is derived from the operation of the holder's network to
provide cable or video service within the jurisdiction of the city, as more
particularly set forth in section 5860 of DIVCA.
   HOLDER: A person or group of persons that has been issued a state franchise
from the California public utilities commission pursuant to DIVCA.
   LOCALLY PRODUCED VIDEO PROGRAMMING: Shall be ascribed the meaning set forth
in section 58470(d) of DIVCA.
   MATERIAL BREACH: Any substantial and repeated failure of a video service
provider to comply with service quality and other standards specified in
section 5900(a) of DIVCA.
   STATE FRANCHISE: A franchise that is issued pursuant to DIVCA.
   SUBSCRIBER: A person who lawfully receives video service from the holder of
a state franchise for a fee.
   VIDEO SERVICE: Shall be ascribed the meaning set forth in section 5830 of
DIVCA.
   VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER: An entity providing video services. (Ord. 2771,
2012)
5.76.040: FRANCHISE FEE:
Every holder operating within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city shall
pay a franchise fee to the city in the amount of five percent (5%) of that
holder's gross revenues derived from the operation of its network to provide
cable services or video services within the city, which shall be remitted per
the provisions set forth in DIVCA. (Ord. 2771, 2012)
5.76.050: PUBLIC, EDUCATIONAL AND GOVERNMENT CHANNELS:
   A.   Upon request by the city, a holder shall initially activate and provide
up to three (3) public, educational and government channels, pursuant to the
provisions of DIVCA.
   B.   Every holder operation within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city
shall pay a public, educational and government channels fee to the city in the
amount of up to one percent (1%), as may be set by resolution of the city
council, of that holder's gross revenues derived from the operation of its
network to provide cable services or video services within the city to support
facilities for public, educational and government channels, as permitted by
DIVCA. (Ord. 2771, 2012)
5.76.060: AUDIT AUTHORITY:
Not more than once annually, the city manager, or the city manager's designee,
may examine and perform an audit of the business records of a holder of a state
video franchise to ensure compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 2771, 2012)
5.76.070: CUSTOMER SERVICE AND SCHEDULE OF PENALTIES:
   A.   A holder shall comply with sections 53055, 53055.1, 53055.2 and 53088.2
of the Government Code, and any other customer service standards pertaining to
the provision of video service established by federal law or regulation or
adopted by subsequent amendment by the state legislature. All customer service
and consumer protection standards under this section shall be interpreted and
applied to accommodate newer or different technologies while meeting or
exceeding the goals of the standards.
   B.   A holder shall comply with section 637.5 of the California Penal Code
and the privacy standards of section 551 of title 47 of the United States Code.
   C.   The city is authorized to enforce all customer service and protection
standards contained set forth in DIVCA, with respect to complaints received
from the residents within the city's jurisdiction. The city is authorized to
impose penalties for any material breach of any applicable customer service
standards, as set forth herein.
   D.   The city manager, or the city manager's designee, is authorized to
monitor the compliance of holders with respect to state and federal customer
service and protection standards, shall provide the holder with written notice
of any material breaches of applicable customer service standards, and allow
the holder thirty (30) days from the receipt of the notice to remedy the
specified material breach. No monetary penalties shall be assessed for a
material breach if the breach is out of the reasonable control of the holder.
Material breaches not remedied within the thirty (30) day time period will be
subject to the maximum penalties imposed by the city, as described in
subsection E of this section. A material breach for the purposes of assessing
penalties shall be deemed to have occurred for each day, following the
expiration of the above stated thirty (30) day cure period, in which any
material breach has not been remedied by the video service provider,
irrespective of the number of customers or subscribers affected. Any penalty
shall be provided to the city by the violating state franchise holder and the
city shall submit one-half (1/2) of the penalty to the digital divide account
established through section 280.5 of the Public Utilities Code.
   E.   The maximum monetary penalties set forth in California Public Utilities
Code section 5900 are hereby adopted and enacted as the applicable schedule of
penalties for the material breach of the applicable customer service standards
by a holder, as follows:
      1.   For the first occurrence of a material breach, the monetary penalty
shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each day of each material breach.
      2.   If a material breach has occurred and notice has been provided and a
fine or penalty has been assessed, for any subsequent material breach of the
same nature within twelve (12) months, the penalty shall be one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) for each day of each material breach, not to exceed three
thousand dollars ($3,000.00) for each occurrence of the material breach.
      3.   If a third or further material breach of the same nature occurs
within those same twelve (12) months, and notice has been provided and a fine
or penalty has been assessed, the penalty shall be two thousand five hundred
dollars ($2,500.00) for each day of each material breach, not to exceed seven
thousand five hundred dollars ($7,500.00) for each occurrence of the material
breach. (Ord. 2771, 2012)
CHAPTER 5.80
POLICE ROTATIONAL TOW REGULATIONS
SECTION:
5.80.010: Purpose And Intent
5.80.020: Regulation Authority
5.80.030: Vehicle Owner Rights
5.80.040: Assumption Of Responsibility For Vehicle
5.80.010: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The rules and regulations set out in this chapter govern the participation by
tow truck operators in the city's police department rotational tow program and
the operation of storage garages for impounded vehicles in the city. Any person
or entity desiring to participate in the city's rotational tow program shall
enter into a tow service agreement with the city. No person, firm, entity,
partnership, business or corporation shall be entitled to more than one tow
service agreement with the city in connection with its participation in the
city's rotational tow program. (Ord. 2353 § 1, 1997)
5.80.020: REGULATION AUTHORITY:
The city may regulate the operations of tow truck operators participating in
the city's rotational tow program by making reasonable orders respecting
character, extent, quality and standards of service governing tow truck
operators and storage garage operating procedures, fixing rates of operations,
and making such other rules and regulations as may be reasonably necessary to
facilitate tow services rendered to the public, including the establishment of
emergency standby lists of tow companies. (Ord. 2353 § 1, 1997)
5.80.030: VEHICLE OWNER RIGHTS:
The right of any vehicle owner involved in a traffic collision to call for tow
service of his or her own choice shall not be infringed upon by any tow truck
operator participating in the police rotational tow program provided the
removal of the vehicle may be made without undue delay. (Ord. 2353 § 1, 1997)
5.80.040: ASSUMPTION OF RESPONSIBILITY FOR VEHICLE:
Participants in the city's police rotational tow program, upon signing CHP form
180 (report of impounded vehicle), shall assume full responsibility for the
vehicle and the contents for each impounded vehicle. (Ord. 2353 § 1, 1997)
CHAPTER 5.84
ELECTRICITY FRANCHISE
SECTION:
5.84.010: Definitions
5.84.020: Grantee Designation
5.84.030: Term
5.84.040: Annual Payment
5.84.050: Statement Of Gross Receipts
5.84.060: Statutory Authority
5.84.010: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever in this chapter the words or phrases hereinafter in this section
defined are used, they shall have the respective meanings assigned to them in
the following definitions (unless, in the given instance, the context wherein
they are used shall clearly import a different meaning):
   CITY: The city of Redlands, a municipal corporation of the state of
California, in its present incorporated form or in any later reorganized,
consolidated, enlarged or reincorporated form.
   CONSTITUTIONAL FRANCHISE: The right acquired through acceptance by such
grantee or its predecessor in estate of the offer contained in the provisions
of section 19 of article XI of the constitution of the state of California, as
such section existed prior to its amendment on October 10, 1911, and now owned
by such grantee, which entitles it to use the public streets and thoroughfares
of the city for introducing and supplying such city and its inhabitants with
illuminating light.
   CONSTRUCT AND USE: To lay, construct, erect, install, operate, maintain,
use, repair or replace.
   GRANTEE: The corporation to which the franchise contemplated in this chapter
is granted and its lawful successors or assigns.
   POLES, WIRES, CONDUITS AND APPURTENANCES: Poles, towers, crossarms,
conduits, cables, wires, service wires, guywire, vaults, manholes, appliances,
attachments, appurtenances and any other property located, or to be located,
in, upon, along, across, under or over the streets of the city and used or
useful in the transmitting and/or distributing of electricity and electrical
energy.
   STREETS: The public streets, ways, alleys and places as the same now are or
may hereafter exist within the city. (Ord. 793 § 1, 1937)
5.84.020: GRANTEE DESIGNATION:
The franchise: a) to use, for transmitting and distributing electricity within
the city for any and all purposes other than those authorized under the
constitutional franchise, all poles, wires, conduits and appurtenances, which
are now or may hereafter by lawfully placed on, in or under the streets within
the city, and b) to construct and use in the streets, all poles, wires,
conduits and appurtenances necessary or proper for such purposes, is granted to
Southern California Edison Company Ltd., upon the terms and conditions set
forth in the franchise act of 1937. (Ord. 793 § 2, 1937)
5.84.030: TERM:
The franchise shall be indeterminate, that is to say, the franchise shall
endure in full force and effect until the same shall, with the consent of the
railroad commission of the state, be voluntarily surrendered or abandoned by
the possessor thereof, or until the state or some municipal or public
corporation thereunto duly authorized by law shall purchase by voluntary
agreement or shall condemn and take under the power of eminent domain, all
property actually used and useful in the exercise of the franchise and situate
in the territorial limits of the state, municipal or public corporation
purchasing or condemning such property, or until the franchise shall be
forfeited for noncompliance with its terms by the possessor thereof. (Ord. 793
§ 3, 1937)
5.84.040: ANNUAL PAYMENT:
The grantee of the franchise shall, during the term hereof, pay to the city,
during the life of the franchise, a sum annually which shall be equivalent to
two percent (2%) of the gross annual receipts of the grantee arising from the
use, operation or possession of the franchise; provided, however, that such
payment shall in no event be less than a sum which shall be equivalent to one-
half percent (0.5%) of the gross annual receipts derived by grantee from the
sale of electricity within the limits of such city under the franchise and such
constitutional franchise. (Ord. 793 § 4, 1937)
5.84.050: STATEMENT OF GROSS RECEIPTS:
The grantee hereof shall file with the city clerk of the city of Redlands,
within three (3) months after the expiration of the calendar year, or
fractional calendar year, following the date of the granting of the franchise,
and within three (3) months after the expiration of each and every calendar
year thereafter, a duly verified statement showing in detail the total gross
receipts of the grantee, its successors or assigns, during the preceding
calendar year, or such fractional calendar year, from the sale of the utility
service for which the franchise is granted. It shall be the duty of the grantee
to pay to the city within fifteen (15) days after the time for filing the
statement, in lawful money of the United States, the specified percentage of
its gross receipts for the calendar year, or such fractional calendar year,
covered by such statement. Any neglect, omission or refusal of the grantee to
file such verified statement, or to pay such percentage at the times or in the
manner hereinbefore provided, shall be grounds for the declaration of a
forfeiture of the franchise and of all rights hereunder. (Ord. 793 § 5, 1937)
5.84.060: STATUTORY AUTHORITY:
The franchise codified in this chapter is granted under and in accordance with
provisions of the franchise act of 1937. (Ord. 793 § 6, 1937)
CHAPTER 5.88
GAS FRANCHISE
SECTION:
5.88.010: Definitions
5.88.020: Grantee Designation
5.88.030: Annual Payment; Statement Of Gross Receipts
5.88.040: Nonexclusive Grant Of Franchise
5.88.050: Filing Of Written Acceptance
5.88.060: Right Of Eminent Domain
5.88.070: Bond
5.88.080: Franchisee Obligations; Generally
5.88.090: Laying Of Pipes And Appurtenances
5.88.100: Restoration Of Damaged Street
5.88.110: Forfeiture For Noncompliance
5.88.010: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever in this chapter the words or phrases hereinafter in this section
defined are used, they shall have the respective meanings assigned to them in
the following definitions (unless in the given instance, the context wherein
they are used shall clearly import a different meaning):
   CITY: The city of Redlands, a municipal corporation of the state of
California, in its present incorporated form or in any later reorganized,
consolidated or reincorporated form.
   ENGINEER: The engineer of the city.
   GAS: Natural or manufactured gas, or a mixture of natural and manufactured
gas.
   GRANTEE: The corporation to which the franchise contemplated in this chapter
is granted and its lawful successors or assigns.
   LAY AND USE: To lay, construct, erect, install, operate, maintain, use,
repair, replace, or remove.
   PIPES AND APPURTENANCES: Pipe, pipeline, main, service, trap, vent, vault,
manhole, meter, gauge, regulator, valve, conduit, appliance, attachment,
appurtenance and any other property located or to be located in, upon, along,
across, under or over the streets of the city, and used or useful in the
transmitting and/or distribution of gas.
   STREETS: The public streets, ways, alleys and places as the same now or may
hereafter exist within the city. (Ord. 825 § 1, 1941)
5.88.020: GRANTEE DESIGNATION:
The right, privilege and franchise, subject to each and all of the terms and
conditions contained in this chapter, and pursuant to the provisions of the
franchise act of 1937, is granted to Southern California Gas Company, a
corporation organized and existing under and by virtue of the laws of the
state, herein referred to as the grantee, to lay and use pipes and
appurtenances for transmitting and distributing gas for any and all purposes,
under, along, across or upon the streets, of the city, for an indeterminate
term or period from and after the effective date of the ordinance codified in
this chapter, that is to say, the franchise shall endure in full force and
effect until the same shall with the consent of the railroad commission of the
state, is voluntarily surrendered or abandoned by its possessor, or until the
state or some municipal or public corporation thereunto duly authorized by law
shall purchase by voluntary agreement or shall condemn and take under the power
of eminent domain, all property actually used and useful in the exercise of the
franchise, and situate within the territorial limits of the state, municipal or
public corporation purchasing or condemning such property, or until the
franchise shall be forfeited for noncompliance with its terms by the possessor
thereof. (Ord. 825 § 2, 1941)
5.88.030: ANNUAL PAYMENT; STATEMENT OF GROSS RECEIPTS:
   A.   The grantee shall pay to the city at the times specified in this
section, in lawful money of the United States, a sum annually which shall be
equivalent to two percent (2%) of the gross annual receipts of grantee arising
from the use, operation or possession of the franchise; provided, however, that
such payment shall in no event be less than one percent (1%) of the gross
annual receipts of the grantee derived from the sale of gas within the limits
of the city under the franchise.
   B.   The grantee of the franchise shall file with the clerk of the city
within three (3) months after the expiration of the calendar year, or
fractional calendar year, following the date of the grant of the franchise, and
within three (3) months after the expiration of each and every calendar year
thereafter, a duly verified statement showing in detail the total gross
receipts of the grantee, its successors or assigns, during the preceding
calendar year, or such fractional calendar year, from the sale of the utility
service within the city for which the franchise is granted. It shall be the
duty of the grantee to pay to the city within fifteen (15) days after the time
for filing such statement, in lawful money of the United States, the specified
percentage of its gross receipts for the calendar year, or such fractional
calendar year, covered by such statement. Any neglect, omission or refusal by
the grantee to file such verified statement, or to pay such percentage, at the
times or in the manner provided in this chapter, shall be grounds for the
declaration of a forfeiture of the franchise and of all rights thereunder.
(Ord. 825 § 3, 1941)
5.88.040: NONEXCLUSIVE GRANT OF FRANCHISE:
The grant is made in lieu of all other franchises, rights, or privileges owned
by the grantee, or by any successor of the grantee to any rights under the
franchise, for transmitting and distributing gas within the limits of the city,
as such limits now or may hereafter exist, and the acceptance of the franchise
granted shall operate as an abandonment of all such franchises, rights and
privileges within the limits of the city, as such limits now or may hereafter
exist, in lieu of which the franchise is granted. (Ord. 825 § 4, 1941)
5.88.050: FILING OF WRITTEN ACCEPTANCE:
The franchise granted hereunder shall not become effective until written
acceptance thereof shall have been filed by the grantee thereof with the clerk
of the city. When so filed, such acceptance shall constitute a continuing
agreement of the grantee that if and when the city shall thereafter annex or
consolidate with additional territory, any and all franchise rights and
privileges owned by the grantee therein, shall likewise be deemed to be
abandoned within the limits of such territory. (Ord. 825 § 5, 1941)
5.88.060: RIGHT OF EMINENT DOMAIN:
The franchise granted hereunder shall not in any way or to any extent impair or
affect the right of the city to acquire the property of the grantee hereof
either by purchase or through the exercise of the right of eminent domain, and
nothing herein contained shall be construed to contract away or to modify or
abridge, either for a term or in perpetuity, the city's right of eminent domain
in respect to the grantee or any public utility. Nor shall the franchise ever
be given any value before any court or other public authority in any proceeding
of any character in excess of the cost to the grantee of the necessary
publication and any other sum paid by it to the city therefor at the time of
the acquisition thereof. (Ord. 825 § 6, 1941)
5.88.070: BOND:
The grantee of the franchise shall file a bond, running to the city, with at
least two (2) good and sufficient sureties, to be approved by the legislative
body thereof, in a penal sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), conditioned
that the grantee shall well and truly observe, fulfill and perform each and
every term and condition of the franchise, and that in case of any breach of
condition of such bond, the whole amount of the penal sum therein named shall
be taken and deemed to be liquidated damages and shall be recoverable from the
principal and sureties upon the bond. The bond shall be filed with the
legislative body of the city within five (5) days after the date of the
granting the franchise; and in case the bond shall not be so filed, or shall
not receive the approval of the legislative body, the franchise shall be
forfeited and any money paid to the city in connection therewith shall likewise
be forfeited. (Ord. 825 § 7, 1941)
5.88.080: FRANCHISEE OBLIGATIONS; GENERALLY:
The grantee of the franchise shall:
   A.   Construct, install and maintain all pipes and appurtenances in
accordance with and in conformity with all of the ordinances, rules and
regulations heretofore or hereafter adopted by the legislative body of the city
in the exercise of its police powers and not in conflict with the paramount
authority of the state, and, as to state highways, subject to the provisions of
general laws relating to the location and maintenance of such facilities;
   B.   Pay to the city, on demand, the cost of all repairs to public property
made necessary by any operations of the grantee under the franchise;
   C.   Indemnify and hold harmless the city and its officers from any and all
liability for damages proximately resulting from any operations under the
franchise;
   D.   Remove or relocate, without expense to the city, any facilities
installed, used and maintained under the franchise if and when made necessary
by any lawful change of grade, alignment or width of any public street, way,
alley or place, including the construction of any subway or viaduct by the
city; and
   E.   File with the legislative body of the city within thirty (30) days
after any sale, transfer, assignment or lease of the franchise, or any part
thereof, or of any of the rights or privileges granted thereby, written
evidence of the same, certified thereto by the grantee or its duly authorized
officers. (Ord. 825 § 8, 1941)
5.88.090: LAYING OF PIPES AND APPURTENANCES:
   A.   The engineer shall have power to give the grantee such directions for
the location of any pipes and appurtenances as may be reasonably necessary to
avoid sewers, water pipes, conduits or other structures lawfully in or under
the streets; and before the work of constructing any pipes and appurtenances is
commenced, the grantee shall file with the engineer plans showing the location
thereof, which shall be subject to the approval of the engineer (such approval
not to be unreasonably withheld); and all such construction shall be subject to
the inspection of the engineer and done to his reasonable satisfaction. All
street coverings or openings, traps, vaults, and manholes shall at all times be
kept flush with the surface of the streets; provided, however, that vents for
underground traps, vaults and manholes may extend above the surface of the
streets when such vents are located in parkways, between the curb and the
property line.
   B.   Where it is necessary to lay any underground pipes through, under or
across any portion of a paved or macadamized street, the same, where
practicable and economically reasonable shall be done by a tunnel or bore, so
as not to disturb the foundation of such paved or macadamized street; and in
the event that the same cannot be so done, such work shall be done under a
permit to be granted by the engineer upon application therefor. (Ord. 825 § 9,
1941)
5.88.100: RESTORATION OF DAMAGED STREET:
If any portion of any street shall be damaged by reason of defects in any of
the pipes and appurtenances maintained or constructed under the grant, or by
reason of any other cause arising from the operation or existence of any pipes
and appurtenances constructed or maintained under the grant, the grantee shall,
at its own cost and expense, immediately repair any such damage and restore
such street, or portion of street, to as good a condition as existed before
such defect or other cause of damage occurred, such work to be done under the
direction of the engineer, and to his reasonable satisfaction. (Ord. 825 § 10,
1941)
5.88.110: FORFEITURE FOR NONCOMPLIANCE:
   A.   If the grantee of the franchise shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply
with any of the provisions or conditions hereof, and shall not, within ten (10)
days after written demand for compliance, begin the work of compliance, or
after such beginning shall not prosecute the same with due diligence to
completion, then the city, by its legislative body, may declare the franchise
forfeited.
   B.   The city may sue in its own name for the forfeiture of the franchise,
in the event of noncompliance by the grantee, its successors or assigns, with
any of the conditions thereof. (Ord. 825 § 11, 1941)
CHAPTER 5.92
LITTER ABATEMENT FEE
SECTION:
5.92.010: Established
5.92.020: Payment Of Litter Abatement Fee
5.92.030: Exceptions
5.92.040: Use Of Litter Abatement Fee
5.92.010: ESTABLISHED:
   A.   Except as provided in section
5.92.030 of this chapter, the litter abatement fee established by this chapter
shall be paid by all businesses (the subject businesses) which sell food and/or
drink for consumption off the premises of the business.
   B.   The litter abatement fee shall be in the amount of twenty five dollars
($25.00) for each subject business.
   C.   As used in this chapter, "food and drink" includes both food and drink
prepared on the premises and prepackaged food and drink. (Ord. 2168 § 1, 1991)
5.92.020: PAYMENT OF LITTER ABATEMENT FEE:
   A.   The litter abatement fee shall be paid at the same time and as a
condition of the receipt of a city business license issued pursuant to chapter
5.04 of this title.
   B.   The person or entity to whom a city business license is issued shall be
responsible for the payment of the litter abatement fee. (Ord. 2168 § 1, 1991)
5.92.030: EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   All businesses exempted from the business license fee under chapter
5.04 of this title shall be exempt from the litter abatement fee.
   B.   Any business not selling food or drink to its patrons shall be exempt
from the litter abatement fee. (Ord. 2168 § 1, 1991)
5.92.040: USE OF LITTER ABATEMENT FEE:
The litter abatement fee shall be used by the city to defray the cost of
collecting and removing litter from public places within the city. (Ord. 2168 §
1, 1991)
CHAPTER 5.96
STREET SWEEPING FEE
SECTION:
5.96.010: Imposed; Amounts
5.96.020: Collection Of Street Sweeping Fee
5.96.025: Due Date
5.96.030: Use Of Street Sweeping Fee
5.96.010: IMPOSED; AMOUNTS:
   A.   A street sweeping fee as provided in this chapter shall be paid by all
developed property within the city with frontage along a public street.
   B.   The street sweeping fee shall be in the following amounts:
      1.   Single-family residential: Thirteen dollars fifty six cents ($13.56)
per year per dwelling unit.
      2.   Multiple-family residential: Nine dollars twelve cents ($9.12) per
year per dwelling unit.
      3.   Nonresidential: Based on water meter size in accordance with the
following tables:
         a.   For nonresidential areas swept on a two (2) times per month
schedule:
 
Water Meter Size            Annual Rate
Up to 1 inch diameter       $13.56
1.5 inch to 3 inch diameter 24.36
4 inch to 10 inch diameter  79.08
 
         b.   For nonresidential areas swept on an eight (8) times per month
schedule:
 
Water Meter Size            Annual Rate
Up to 1 inch diameter       $ 54.24
1.5 inch to 3 inch diameter 97.44
4 inch to 10 inch diameter  316.32
 
(Ord. 2189 § 1, 1992)
5.96.020: COLLECTION OF STREET SWEEPING FEE:
The street sweeping fee shall be collected in the same manner as, and along
with, the city's monthly water service charges. (Ord. 2189 § 1, 1992)
5.96.025: DUE DATE:
   A.   Charges for street sweeping services are due and payable to the city on
the date the bill is mailed to the property owner or his agent as may be
designated and shall be delinquent fifteen (15) days thereafter. Water service
may be discontinued upon written notice, required by law, if payment of the
street sweeping charge is not made prior to the date such service charge
becomes delinquent. If such owner or agent pays for street sweeping service on
more than one piece of property or unit, water service may be discontinued on
all properties for failure to pay on any one property. Procedures and charges
for restoration of water service are set forth in section
13.12.050 of this code.
   B.   Failure to receive a bill does not relieve the consumer of liability.
Any amount due shall be deemed a debt to the city, and any person, firm or
corporation failing, neglecting or refusing to pay such indebtedness shall be
liable in a civil action brought by the city in any court of competent
jurisdiction for the amount thereof. (Ord. 2189 § 1, 1992)
5.96.030: USE OF STREET SWEEPING FEE:
The street sweeping fee shall be used by the city to defray the cost of street
sweeping, litter abatement and nonpoint source pollution control on public
streets and storm drain systems within the city. (Ord. 2189 § 1, 1992)
CHAPTER 5.98
PERMIT REQUIREMENTS FOR RENTAL DWELLING UNITS
SECTION:
5.98.010: Findings And Declarations
5.98.020: Definitions And Scope
5.98.030: Permit Required
5.98.040: Duration Of Permit
5.98.050: Permit Nontransferable
5.98.060: Application For Permit, Standards Of Operation, Permit Application
Fee And Renewal Of Permit
5.98.070: Issuance Or Renewal Of Permit
5.98.080: Permit Denial
5.98.090: Revocation Of Permit
5.98.100: Permit Revoked
5.98.110: Appeal Rights
5.98.120: Abatement
5.98.010: FINDINGS AND DECLARATIONS:
The city council finds and declares as follows:
   A.   There exists in the city substandard and unsanitary residential
buildings and dwelling units, the physical conditions and characteristics of
which render them unfit or unsafe for human occupancy and habitation and cause
such buildings and units to be detrimental to, or jeopardize, the health,
safety and welfare of their occupants and of the public.
   B.   The existence of such substandard buildings and dwelling units
threatens the physical, social and economic stability of sound residential
areas, and of their supporting neighborhood facilities and institutions;
necessitates disproportionate expenditures of public funds for law enforcement
and remedial action; impairs the efficient and economical exercise of
governmental powers and functions; and destroys the amenity of residential
areas and neighborhoods, and of the community as a whole.
   C.   The business of renting or leasing rental dwelling units, as defined
herein, has resulted in instances of absentee landlords and/or off site
managers, which, in turn, has increased the likelihood of instances of
substandard buildings and dwelling units, health violations and crime, all of
which are a public nuisance.
   D.   For the above stated reasons, it is hereby declared to be the policy of
the city that:
      1.   It is in the public interest of the residents of the city to protect
and promote the existence of sound and wholesome residential buildings,
dwelling units and neighborhoods by the adoption and enforcement of such
standards, regulations and procedures as will remedy the existence or prevent
the development or creation of dangerous, substandard or unsanitary and
deficient residential buildings and dwelling units; and
      2.   The provisions of this chapter related to the permitting of rental
dwelling units are to protect the best interests and the health, safety and
welfare of the residents of the city. (Ord. 2773, 2012)
5.98.020: DEFINITIONS AND SCOPE:
   A.   Definitions: For purposes of this chapter, the following terms,
phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings set forth herein.
Words used in the present tense include the future tense, plural words include
the singular and singular words include the plural. Words not specifically
defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning. The word "shall" is
mandatory and not merely directory.
   APPLICANT: The owner, or the owner's authorized representative, applying for
a permit pursuant to this chapter.
   DIRECTOR: The finance director of the city, or his or her designee.
   OWNER'S AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OR AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE OWNER:
Any person authorized by a writing signed by the owner to act on the owner's
behalf in regard to an owner's rental dwelling unit.
   PERMITTEE: The person issued a rental dwelling unit permit pursuant to this
chapter.
   PERSON: Any individual, firm, copartnership, corporation, company,
association, organization, joint stock association or body politic; and
includes any trustee, receiver, assignee or other similar representative
thereof.
   RENTAL DWELLING UNIT: Any structure or part of a structure, including, but
not limited to, a home, apartment, condominium and unit of a multiplex or
apartment building, which is used as a home, residence or sleeping place by one
or more persons and that is rented or leased, in whole or in part, for thirty
(30) consecutive days or greater in any consecutive twelve (12) month period.
   RENTAL DWELLING UNIT PERMIT: The permit issued pursuant to this chapter.
   SUBJECT PROPERTY: The real property where the rental dwelling unit is
located.
   B.   Scope: The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
      1.   Housing accommodations in any hospital, state licensed community
care facility, convent, monastery, or other facility occupied exclusively by
members of a religious order; extended medical care facility; asylum; on campus
fraternity or sorority houses; or on campus housing accommodations owned,
operated or managed by an institution of higher education, a high school, or an
elementary school for occupancy by its students.
      2.   Housing accommodations which a federal, state or local government
unit, agency or authority owns, operates or manages, or which are specifically
exempted from municipal regulation by state or federal law or administrative
regulation. This exception shall not apply after the governmental ownership,
operation, or management regulation is discontinued.
      3.   Mobilehomes, mobilehome parks, recreational vehicles as defined in
Health And Safety Code section 18010, or recreational vehicle parks.
      4.   Owner occupied single-family dwellings.
      5.   Housing projects having units available at affordable rents, as
defined in Health And Safety Code section 50053, which have received financial
assistance from the city or the city's former redevelopment agency. (Ord. 2773,
2012)
5.98.030: PERMIT REQUIRED:
On and after July 1, 2008, every person who owns a rental dwelling unit shall
procure and maintain a permit from the city, which permit shall authorize the
person to operate the rental dwelling unit at the subject property described in
the permit. Only one permit is required for a person that owns one or more
rental dwelling units in the city. (Ord. 2773, 2012)
5.98.040: DURATION OF PERMIT:
A rental dwelling unit permit issued or renewed under this chapter shall
terminate at the expiration of one year from the date of its issuance unless
revoked prior to said termination pursuant to section
5.98.090 of this chapter. (Ord. 2773, 2012)
5.98.050: PERMIT NONTRANSFERABLE:
All rental dwelling unit permits issued pursuant to this chapter are
nontransferable both as to the location and as to the person holding the
permit. When the owner of the rental dwelling unit procures such a permit, any
other person who conducts, manages or carries on such business as an authorized
representative of the owner, is not required to obtain an additional permit;
however, the authorized representative must verify that a valid permit has been
issued and is in effect at all times while operating the rental dwelling unit.
(Ord. 2773, 2012)
5.98.060: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT, STANDARDS OF OPERATION, PERMIT APPLICATION
FEE AND RENEWAL OF PERMIT:
   A.   Application For Permit: The applicant for an initial or renewed permit
to engage in the business of renting or leasing a rental dwelling unit shall
provide to the director, on a form prepared by the director, the following
information:
      1.   The name, address and telephone number of the owner of the rental
dwelling unit.
      2.   The name, address, and telephone number of the applicant, if the
applicant is an authorized representative of the owner and a copy of the
owner's written and signed authorization.
      3.   A telephone number to contact the owner and/or the authorized
representative, as provided in the standards of operation, as described in
subsection B of this section. A confidential/nonbusiness twenty four (24) hour
contact telephone number, designated by the owner and/or the authorized
representative as confidential, shall be treated as confidential by the city
and shall only be available to authorized representatives of the city.
      4.   The location and address of the subject property and all rental
dwelling units.
      5.   A description of the size and character of all rental dwelling
units, including, but not limited to, the type (home, apartment, condominium),
the number of units, total square feet, and the number of bedrooms/bathrooms of
the rental dwelling units.
      6.   A certification signed by the owner and any authorized
representative under penalty of perjury that to the best of their knowledge and
belief on the date of application, each rental dwelling unit identified in the
application complies with the standards of operation, as described in
subsection B of this section.
      7.   Any other information deemed necessary by the director in carrying
out the provisions of this chapter.
   B.   Standards Of Operation: As a condition to the issuance or renewal of a
rental dwelling unit permit, the owner, and the owner's authorized
representative (if any), shall be responsible for complying with the following
standards:
      1.   Each rental dwelling unit, and the subject property upon which each
rental dwelling unit is located, shall be in compliance with all applicable
state and local laws.
      2.   Each rental dwelling unit, and the subject property upon which each
rental dwelling unit is located, shall not be operated, conducted or maintained
so as to constitute a public nuisance.
      3.   The exterior of all rental dwelling units and the subject property
shall be subject to inspection by the city.
      4.   The owner or any authorized representatives of the owner shall be
available in person, by telephone, by telephone answering machine, or by other
electronic messaging device to authorized representatives of the city on a
twenty four (24) hour, seven (7) days a week basis to receive calls regarding
the condition and/or operation of all rental dwelling units and the subject
property. Failure to respond to calls in a timely and appropriate manner may
result in revocation of the permit. For purposes of this subsection, responding
in a timely and appropriate manner shall mean that:
         a.   A response to an initial call shall be made in a prompt and
timely manner for the purpose of acknowledging the call and communicating a
preliminary plan for any necessary corrective action; and
         b.   Within thirty (30) calendar days of the initial call, any
necessary corrective action to address any violation of this chapter shall be
completed, unless:
            (1)   Failure to complete the necessary corrective action may
jeopardize the health and safety of the occupants, in which case the corrective
action shall be completed as quickly as reasonably possible; and/or
            (2)   The director determines that additional time to complete the
corrective action was reasonable, based on the permittee's demonstration that
the delay was not caused by the permittee, and the delay was caused by
extraordinary circumstances that justify an extension of time to complete the
corrective action.
   C.   Permit Application Fee: The permit application fee, established by
resolution of the city council and in an amount that does not exceed the
reasonable costs incurred by the city for implementing and carrying out the
regulatory program established by this chapter, shall accompany all written
applications for a rental dwelling unit permit, including applications to renew
a rental dwelling unit permit.
   D.   Renewal Of Permit: Prior to the expiration of the permit, an applicant
shall renew a rental dwelling unit permit following the same procedures stated
in this section. To ensure city review of an application for renewal prior to
expiration of a permit, an application to renew must be provided to the
director at least thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of the permit.
However, no application for renewal of the rental dwelling unit permit shall be
accepted earlier than ninety (90) days prior to the expiration of the permit.
(Ord. 2773, 2012)
5.98.070: ISSUANCE OR RENEWAL OF PERMIT:
   A.   The director shall not issue or renew a rental dwelling unit permit
unless and until the director has received a correct and complete application,
payment of the applicable permit fee and certification from city code
enforcement staff that a rental dwelling unit and/or subject property upon
which the rental dwelling unit is located is in compliance with all provisions
of this chapter.
   B.   In the event that the application to issue or renew a rental dwelling
unit permit is denied by the city, the director shall cause a "notice of
denial" to be mailed by registered mail, postage prepaid, to the applicant at
the applicant's mailing address shown on the most recent application or
otherwise filed by the applicant with the director. Service may also be made by
personal service on the applicant or by leaving the notice at the applicant's
residence in the custody of a person over the age of eighteen (18) years of age
or older. (Ord. 2773, 2012)
5.98.080: PERMIT DENIAL:
Any person denied a permit pursuant to this chapter shall not operate a rental
dwelling unit within the city. An applicant may appeal the denial to the city
council as provided in section
5.98.110 of this chapter. (Ord. 2773, 2012)
5.98.090: REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
   A.   A rental dwelling unit permit shall be revoked by the director upon one
or more of the following grounds:
      1.   The permittee committed fraud or deceit in obtaining a permit under
this chapter.
      2.   The permittee violated any provision of this chapter.
      3.   A rental dwelling unit and/or subject property upon which a rental
dwelling unit is located is not in compliance with any provision of this
chapter.
      4.   The rental dwelling unit permit was issued in error.
   B.   In the event that a rental dwelling unit permit is revoked, the
director shall cause a "notice of revocation" to be mailed by registered mail,
postage prepaid, to the permittee at the permittee's mailing address shown on
the most recent application or otherwise filed by the permittee with the
director. Service may also be made by personal service on the permittee or by
leaving the notice at the permittee's residence in the custody of a person over
the age of eighteen (18) years of age or older. (Ord. 2773, 2012)
5.98.100: PERMIT REVOKED:
Any person whose permit is revoked pursuant to this chapter shall not operate a
rental dwelling unit within the city. A permittee may appeal the revocation to
the city council as provided in section
5.98.110 of this chapter. A permit shall remain revoked unless and until the
city council reinstates the permit through the appeal process, or the person
applies for and is issued a new permit. (Ord. 2773, 2012)
5.98.110: APPEAL RIGHTS:
Any person denied a permit under this chapter, or any person whose permit has
been revoked under this chapter, may appeal the director's determination to the
city council. Any such appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed with the
director not more than fifteen (15) days following the director's deposit into
the mail of the notice of denial or revocation pursuant to subsection
 5.98.070B or
5.98.090B of this chapter. The city council may hear appeals directly or, in
its sole discretion, may appoint a hearing officer to hear any appeal and make
a recommendation to the city council. All decisions of the city council shall
be final as to any appeal presented to it. (Ord. 2773, 2012)
5.98.120: ABATEMENT:
Any rental dwelling unit and/or subject property operated, conducted or
maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be, and the same is
hereby declared to be, unlawful and a public nuisance, and the city may, in
addition to, or in lieu of any other legal or criminal proceedings, commence an
action or actions, proceeding or proceedings, for the abatement, removal and/or
enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by law; and shall take such other
steps, and may apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant
such relief as will abate or remove the nuisance and restrain and enjoin any
person from operating, conducting or maintaining a rental dwelling unit and/or
subject property contrary to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2773, 2012)
TITLE 6
ANIMALS
CHAPTER 6.04
DOG REGULATIONS
SECTION:
6.04.010: Kennel; Defined
6.04.020: License; Required
6.04.030: License; Exemption
6.04.040: License; Renewal
6.04.050: License; Expiration
6.04.060: Kennel; License And Vaccination Exemption
6.04.080: License; Fee Payment Required
6.04.090: License; Delinquent Fee Payment
6.04.100: Tag; Issuance
6.04.110: Tag; False Or Counterfeit Unlawful
6.04.120: License; Prorated Fee
6.04.130: License Transfer And Tag Replacement
6.04.140: Vaccination; Required
6.04.150: Vaccination; Prerequisite To License
6.04.160: Enforcement; Right Of Entry
6.04.170: Running At Large Unlawful
6.04.180: Abandonment Unlawful
6.04.190: Quarantine For Dog Bite
6.04.210: Quarantined Premises; Posting
6.04.220: Violation; Penalty
6.04.010: KENNEL; DEFINED:
A "dog kennel", for purposes of this chapter, shall be any place, lot or
premises where more than three (3) dogs are kept for training, sale, boarding,
or breeding, or the keeping of the same for hire, or any place where such
facilities are maintained for the above purposes. (Ord. 2392 § 1, 1998: prior
code § 57102)
6.04.020: LICENSE; REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to own, harbor, possess or
have custody of any dog within the city, except as herein provided, without
securing a license therefor and complying with the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior code § 57100)
6.04.030: LICENSE; EXEMPTION:
No license shall be required for any dog before the dog reaches the age of four
(4) months. (Ord. 2392 § 2, 1998: prior code § 57101)
6.04.040: LICENSE; RENEWAL:
Licenses issued pursuant to the provisions of sections
6.04.020 through
6.04.130 of this chapter shall be renewed each year on or before the first date
of issuance. (Ord. 2392 § 3, 1998: prior code § 57103)
6.04.050: LICENSE; EXPIRATION:
Each official license tag shall be dated to show the date of expiration of the
license and shall be securely fastened to a dog collar by the owner or person
having custody or possession of the dog. The collar must at all times, when not
on the private property of the owner or custodian, be worn by such licensed
dog. (Prior code § 57104)
6.04.060: KENNEL; LICENSE AND VACCINATION EXEMPTION:
No license fee shall be charged against any dog in a commercial kennel, duly
licensed as a commercial business, having paid a business license tax. (Ord.
2392 § 4, 1998: prior code § 57105)
6.04.080: LICENSE; FEE PAYMENT REQUIRED:
Every person, firm, or corporation owning, harboring, possessing, or having
custody of a dog within the city shall, on or before the due date as defined in
this chapter, pay to the city a license fee as set by resolution of the city
council of the city. (Prior code § 57107)
6.04.090: LICENSE; DELINQUENT FEE PAYMENT:
All licenses shall be delinquent if the required fee is not paid within thirty
(30) days after the due date. The penalty for delinquency shall be the amount
equal to one-half (1/2) of such license fee. (Prior code § 57108)
6.04.100: TAG; ISSUANCE:
The city's finance director, or the director's designee, shall, upon receiving
payment of the proper fee and the display of the certificate required in
section
6.04.150 of this chapter, make the official record of the dog and the fee paid
and issue the official license tag. The records and files of dog licenses shall
be maintained in such a manner that the address of the recorded owner,
custodian, or person having possession of the dog may be readily ascertained.
(Ord. 2684 § 8, 2007: prior code § 57109)
6.04.110: TAG; FALSE OR COUNTERFEIT UNLAWFUL:
It is unlawful for any person to place upon or attach to a dog any false,
counterfeit or unauthorized tag for the purpose of evading the provisions of
sections
6.04.010 through
6.04.130 of this chapter. The transfer of an official license tag from one dog
to another is prohibited and any person so doing shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor. (Prior code § 57110)
6.04.120: LICENSE; PRORATED FEE:
A license which became due during the course of the year shall be subject to
all the provisions of sections
6.04.010 through
6.04.130 of this chapter except the fee prescribed in section
6.04.080 of this chapter may be prorated to a portion of the license fee. (Ord.
2392 § 6, 1998: prior code § 57111)
6.04.130: LICENSE TRANSFER AND TAG REPLACEMENT:
Upon presentation of proof, satisfactory to the city's finance director, or the
director's designee, that a valid license not to expire prior to June 30 has
been issued by any city, county, or city and county within the state so as to
comply with sections
6.04.140 and
6.04.150 of this chapter, a fee as set by resolution of the city council may be
accepted and an application receipt issued therefor. Upon request and after
verification that a current city license has been issued, the city's finance
director, or the director's designee, shall accept the fee and issue an
application receipt for the replacement of a lost, mutilated, or stolen tag.
When issuing a replacement tag, the city's finance director, or the director's
designee, shall cancel the original license and the tag authorized in
connection with it. (Ord. 2684 § 8, 2007: prior code § 57112)
6.04.140: VACCINATION; REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to own, have an interest in, harbor and feed or
have the care, charge, custody or possession of a dog, whether such dog is
confined or not, unless such dog has been vaccinated with canine rabies
vaccines licensed by USDA and approved by the department of health services for
use in the California rabies control program, by injection or other approved
method. The vaccine shall be used exclusively to vaccinate all dogs within the
city upon reaching four (4) months of age. All dogs under four (4) months of
age shall be confined to the owner's property until such time they are
vaccinated. Regardless of the age of an animal's primary immunization, a second
rabies vaccination shall be given one year later and the three (3) year booster
schedule followed thereafter. The vaccination shall be performed by any duly
qualified and licensed veterinarian. (Ord. 2392 § 7, 1998: prior code § 57200)
6.04.150: VACCINATION; PREREQUISITE TO LICENSE:
No application receipt for owning or harboring a dog, as provided in sections
6.04.010 through
6.04.130 of this chapter, shall be issued except on application to the city's
finance director or the director's designee and the display, at that time, of a
certificate of vaccination or letter certifying to the vaccination from a
licensed veterinarian showing that the dog has been vaccinated with canine
rabies vaccine. The certificate must be valid for a period equaling or
exceeding the life of the license being then applied for. (Ord. 2718 § 26,
2009)
6.04.160: ENFORCEMENT; RIGHT OF ENTRY:
It shall be the duty of the chief of police to enforce the provisions of this
chapter. To do so, the chief of police, poundmaster, and all police officers
and animal control officers of the city shall have the right to enter upon any
property located within the city, whether public or private. (Ord. 2392 § 8,
1998: Ord. 1926 § 1, 1986: prior code § 57300)
6.04.170: RUNNING AT LARGE UNLAWFUL:
Any person owning or having charge, custody, control or possession of any dog
shall not permit such animal to run at large, or to run loose or unrestrained
in, along, or upon any public street, sidewalk, or place. (Ord. 1926 § 2, 1986:
prior code § 57301)
6.04.180: ABANDONMENT UNLAWFUL:
It is unlawful for any person to deposit or abandon any dog in or upon any
building, enclosure, lane, square, or street, school ground, playground or any
public place within the city. (Ord. 2392 § 9, 1998: Ord. 1926 § 3, 1986: prior
code § 57305)
6.04.190: QUARANTINE FOR DOG BITE:
Whenever it is shown that any dog has bitten any person, the owner or person
having custody or possession of the dog shall, upon order of the chief of
police, quarantine the dog in strict confinement, upon private premises of the
owner, under restraint by leash, closed cage, or paddock for a period of ten
(10) days. If the owner or person having custody of said dog violates this
order, the dog shall be taken into custody by the animal control bureau for the
remainder of the quarantine period at the owner's expense. The chief of police
may cause a licensed veterinarian to make an inspection of the dog at any time
during such period. Any dog so quarantined shall not be removed from the
premises without permission of the chief of police. Any person in violation of
this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 2392 § 10, 1998: Ord. 1926
§ 4, 1986: prior code § 57309)
6.04.210: QUARANTINED PREMISES; POSTING:
The chief of police may post or cause to be posted an appropriate sign on any
premises where a dog has been quarantined pursuant to section
 6.04.190 of this chapter through this section to warn the public of the fact.
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove a sign posted pursuant to this
section without permission of the chief of police. (Prior code § 57311)
6.04.220: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Except where the violation is specifically declared to be a misdemeanor, any
person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of an
infraction. (Ord. 1926 § 6, 1986: prior code § 57313)
CHAPTER 6.05
VICIOUS AND POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOGS
Publisher's Note: This Chapter has been AMENDED by new legislation (Ord. 2988,
passed 1-20-2026). The text of the amendment will be incorporated below when
the ordinance is codified.
SECTION:
6.05.010: Potentially Dangerous Dog Defined
6.05.020: Vicious Dog Defined
6.05.030: Severe Injury Defined
6.05.040: Impounded Defined
6.05.050: Animal Control Board
6.05.060: Hearing On Declaration Of Dog As Potentially Dangerous Or Vicious
6.05.070: Determination And Orders; Notice; Compliance
6.05.080: Appeal
6.05.090: Seizure And Impoundment Pending Hearing
6.05.100: Circumstances Under Which Dogs May Not Be Declared Potentially
Dangerous Or Vicious
6.05.110: Potentially Dangerous Designation Maintained In Registration Records
6.05.120: Keeping And Controlling Potentially Dangerous Dogs
6.05.130: Death, Sale, Transfer Or Permanent Removal; Notice
6.05.140: Removal From List Of Potentially Dangerous Dogs
6.05.150: Destruction; Nondestruction; Conditions; Enclosures
6.05.160: Prohibition Of Owning, Possessing, Controlling Or Having Custody
6.05.170: Fines And Limits
6.05.180: Forms
6.05.010: POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG DEFINED:
"Potentially dangerous dog" means any of the following:
   A.   Any dog which, when unprovoked, on two (2) separate occasions within
the prior thirty six (36) month period, engaged in any behavior that required a
defensive action by any person to prevent bodily injury when the person and the
dog were off the property of the owner or keeper of the dog.
   B.   Any dog which, when unprovoked, bites a person causing a less severe
injury than as defined in section
6.05.030 of this chapter.
   C.   Any dog which, when unprovoked, on two (2) separate occasions within
the prior thirty six (36) month period, has seriously bitten, inflicted injury,
or otherwise caused injury attacking a domestic animal off the property of the
owner or keeper of the dog.
   D.   Any dog off the property of the owner or keeper of the dog, when
unprovoked, has killed a domestic animal. (Ord. 2695 § 1, 2008: Ord. 2135 § 2,
1990)
6.05.020: VICIOUS DOG DEFINED:
"Vicious dog" means any of the following:
   A.   Any dog seized under section 599aa of the California Penal Code and
upon the sustaining of a conviction of the owner or keeper under subdivision
(a), section 597.5 of the Penal Code;
   B.   Any dog which, when unprovoked, in an aggressive manner, inflicts
severe injury on or kills a human being;
   C.   Any dog previously determined to be and currently listed as a
potentially dangerous dog which, after its owner or keeper has been notified of
this determination, continues the behavior described in section
6.05.010 of this chapter or is maintained in violation of section
6.05.110,
6.05.120 or
6.05.130 of this chapter. (Ord. 2135 § 2, 1990)
6.05.030: SEVERE INJURY DEFINED:
"Severe injury" means any physical injury to a human being that results in
muscle tears or disfiguring lacerations or requires multiple sutures, or
corrective or cosmetic surgery. (Ord. 2135 § 2, 1990)
6.05.040: IMPOUNDED DEFINED:
"Impounded" means taken into the custody of the public pound or animal control
department or provider of animal control services to the city. (Ord. 2135 § 2,
1990)
6.05.050: ANIMAL CONTROL BOARD:
There is created an animal control board to administer the provisions of this
chapter. The board shall be made up of three (3) members, and include three (3)
city administrative managers designated by the city manager. (Ord. 2135 § 2,
1990)
6.05.060: HEARING ON DECLARATION OF DOG AS POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS OR VICIOUS:
   A.   If an animal control officer or a law enforcement officer determines
that probable cause exists to believe a dog is potentially dangerous or
vicious, the chief officer of the public pound or animal control department or
his or her immediate supervisor, or the chief of police, or his or her
designee, shall either: 1) on a form prescribed by the city, obtain the written
acknowledgment of the owner of the dog that such dog is potentially dangerous
or vicious as defined by this chapter, and the owner's written consent to
comply with the requirements of sections
 6.05.110 to
 6.05.160 of this chapter, and any conditions imposed by the city pursuant to
such sections, within ten (10) days of the date of the determination; or 2)
file a petition with the animal control board for a hearing to determine
whether or not the dog in question should be declared potentially dangerous or
vicious. Whenever possible, any complaint received from a member of the public
that a dog might be potentially dangerous or vicious shall be sworn to and
verified by the complainant and attached to the petition.
   B.   The animal control board shall notify the owner or keeper of the dog
that it will hold a hearing and that the owner or keeper may present evidence
at the hearing. The animal control board shall serve upon the owner or keeper
of the dog the notice of the hearing and a copy of the petition either
personally or by first class mail with return receipt requested.
The hearing shall be open to the public and held not less than five (5) working
days nor more than ten (10) working days after service of the notice upon the
owner or keeper of the dog. The animal control board may admit all relevant
evidence, including incident reports and affidavits of witnesses, limit the
scope of discovery, and may shorten the time to produce records or witnesses.
The animal control board may decide all issues even if the owner or keeper
fails to appear at the hearing. The animal control board may find, upon a
preponderance of the evidence, that the dog is potentially dangerous or vicious
and make other orders authorized by this chapter. (Ord. 2796, 2013)
6.05.070: DETERMINATION AND ORDERS; NOTICE; COMPLIANCE:
After the hearing conducted pursuant to section
 6.05.060 of this chapter, the animal control board shall, either personally or
by first class mail, postage prepaid, notify the owner or keeper of the dog in
writing of the determination and orders issued. If the board determines that
the dog is potentially dangerous or vicious, the owner or keeper shall comply
with sections
6.05.110 to
6.05.160 of this chapter within ten (10) days after the date of the
determination. (Ord. 2135 § 2, 1990)
6.05.080: APPEAL:
If any party contests the determination, that party may, within five (5) days
of the receipt of the notice of determination, appeal the animal control
board's decision to the superior court of the county of San Bernardino. The
person appealing the decision shall serve personally or by first class mail,
postage prepaid, notice of the appeal upon the other party. The appeal shall be
conducted pursuant to California Food And Agricultural Code sections 31622,
31623, and 31624. (Ord. 2596 § 1, 2005: Ord. 2135 § 2, 1990)
6.05.090: SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT PENDING HEARING:
If the animal control officer or law enforcement officer determines that
probable cause exists to believe the dog in question poses an immediate threat
to public safety, he or she may seize and impound the dog pending the hearings
held pursuant to this chapter. If the dog is later adjudicated potentially
dangerous or vicious, the owner or keeper of the dog will be liable for costs
and expenses of impounding the dog. If the chief animal control officer
determines that the impoundment is not contrary to public safety, he or she
shall permit the animal to be confined in a city approved kennel or veterinary
facility, at the owner's expense. (Ord. 2135 § 2, 1990)
6.05.100: CIRCUMSTANCES UNDER WHICH DOGS MAY NOT BE DECLARED POTENTIALLY
DANGEROUS OR VICIOUS:
   A.   The animal control board may not declare the dog potentially dangerous
or vicious if the dog inflicted injury or damage to a person committing a
wilful trespass or other tort upon the premises occupied by the owner or keeper
of the dog, or was teasing, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the dog, or was
committing or attempting to commit a crime. The dog may not be declared
potentially dangerous or vicious if it was protecting or defending a person
within the dog's immediate vicinity from an unjustified attack or assault. A
dog may not be declared potentially dangerous or vicious if the injury or
damage was sustained by a domestic animal which was teasing, tormenting,
abusing or assaulting the dog.
   B.   A dog may not be declared potentially dangerous or vicious if the
injury or damage to a domestic animal was sustained while the dog was working
as a hunting dog, herding dog, or predator control dog on the property of or
under the control of its owner or keeper, and the damage or injury was to a
type of domestic animal appropriate to the dog's work. (Ord. 2135 § 2, 1990)
6.05.110: POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DESIGNATION MAINTAINED IN REGISTRATION RECORDS:
Notwithstanding the provisions of chapter 6.04 of this title regarding
licensing and vaccination, all potentially dangerous dogs shall be properly
licensed and vaccinated. A dog determined to be potentially dangerous must have
that designation in its registration records. The city may charge a potentially
dangerous dog fee in addition to the regular licensing fee to provide for the
increased costs of maintaining the records of the dog. (Ord. 2135 § 2, 1990)
6.05.120: KEEPING AND CONTROLLING POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOGS:
The owner or keeper of a potentially dangerous dog must keep the dog indoors or
in a securely fenced yard from which the dog cannot escape and into which
children cannot trespass. A potentially dangerous dog may be off the owner's or
keeper's premises only if it is restrained by a substantial leash of
appropriate length and if it is under a responsible adult's control. (Ord. 2135
§ 2, 1990)
6.05.130: DEATH, SALE, TRANSFER OR PERMANENT REMOVAL; NOTICE:
The owner or keeper of a potentially dangerous dog shall notify the animal
control bureau, in writing within three (3) days of any change, if the
potentially dangerous dog dies, is sold, transferred, or permanently removed
from the city. (Ord. 2392 § 11, 1998: Ord. 2135 § 2, 1990)
6.05.140: REMOVAL FROM LIST OF POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOGS:
The animal control board shall remove a dog from the list of potentially
dangerous dogs if no additional instances of behavior described in section
6.05.010 of this chapter occur within a thirty six (36) month period from the
date of designation as a potentially dangerous dog. (Ord. 2135 § 2, 1990)
6.05.150: DESTRUCTION; NONDESTRUCTION; CONDITIONS; ENCLOSURES:
A vicious dog may be destroyed if the animal control board determines that the
release of the dog would create a significant threat to the public health,
safety and welfare. If the board determines that the vicious dog should not be
destroyed, it must impose conditions upon the dog's owner or keeper that will
protect the public health, safety and welfare. If one of the conditions is to
require that the vicious dog be confined in an enclosure, the enclosure must be
designed in order to prevent the animal from escaping and include a fence or
structure suitable to prevent young children from entering. (Ord. 2135 § 2,
1990)
6.05.160: PROHIBITION OF OWNING, POSSESSING, CONTROLLING OR HAVING CUSTODY:
The city of Redlands may prohibit the owner of a vicious dog from owning,
possessing, controlling or having custody of any dog for a period of up to
three (3) years when the animal control board finds, after proceedings
conducted under sections
6.05.060 to
 6.05.100 of this chapter that such ownership or possession would create a
significant threat to the public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 2135 § 2,
1990)
6.05.170: FINES AND LIMITS:
Any violation of this chapter involving a potentially dangerous dog shall be
punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). Any
violation of this chapter involving a vicious dog shall be punishable by a fine
not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). (Ord. 2135 § 2, 1990)
6.05.180: FORMS:
All forms prepared by the judicial counsel pursuant to California Food And
Agricultural Code section 31682 shall be used to give effect to this chapter.
(Ord. 2135 § 2, 1990)
CHAPTER 6.08
IMPOUNDING
SECTION:
6.08.010: Poundmaster; Office Established
6.08.020: Unrestrained Dogs
6.08.030: Confinement Of Captured Dog
6.08.040: Release Of Impounded Dogs
6.08.050: Disposal Of Small Animals On Owner's Request
6.08.060: Livestock
6.08.010: POUNDMASTER; OFFICE ESTABLISHED:
The office of poundmaster is established and the chief of police shall be ex
officio poundmaster. (Prior code § 56300)
6.08.020: UNRESTRAINED DOGS:
Any dog, whether licensed or not, found running loose or unrestrained may be
impounded by the poundmaster or any animal control officer, or by the chief of
police or any of his authorized officers, for a period of seventy two (72)
hours, and if the owner or possessor of such impounded dog does not, before the
expiration of such period, call for and claim the dog and pay pound fees plus a
fee for cost of apprehension, as set by the city, the poundmaster is empowered
to destroy and dispose of such dog, or cause such destruction and disposal.
(Ord. 1925 § 2, 1986: prior code § 56305)
6.08.030: CONFINEMENT OF CAPTURED DOG:
The officers or persons capturing a dog under the provisions of section
6.08.020 of this chapter shall confine such dog in some safe place and, if the
dog shows signs of rabies or other disease, shall submit the dog for
examination by a licensed veterinarian. (Ord. 1925 § 3, 1986: prior code §
56306)
6.08.040: RELEASE OF IMPOUNDED DOGS:
If any dog impounded under the provisions of this chapter has not been
vaccinated as provided in sections
 6.04.140 and 6.04.150 of this title, the owner or person entitled to custody
of the dog shall be issued a citation and pay an additional sum, as set by the
city, for the keeping of the dog, and shall provide to the poundmaster or his
representative, proof of compliance with the provisions of sections
 6.04.010 through
6.04.150 of this title within five (5) days of the date the dog was returned.
(Ord. 2392 § 12, 1998: Ord. 1925 § 4, 1986: prior code § 56307)
6.08.050: DISPOSAL OF SMALL ANIMALS ON OWNER'S REQUEST:
The owner of a small animal may request arrangements for the disposal of such
animal. The poundmaster shall endeavor to comply with such request, provided
that the animal is available for pick up or is delivered by the owner to a
place and at a time requested by the poundmaster or his representative. The
person requesting disposal of the animal shall pay a disposal fee as set by the
city. (Ord. 2392 § 13, 1998: Ord. 1925 § 5, 1986: prior code § 56308)
6.08.060: LIVESTOCK:
It is the duty of the poundmaster or his representative to take up, impound and
safely keep any livestock found running at large in the city, and to receive
and impound any such livestock taken up and delivered by any person. When any
such animal is so impounded, the poundmaster shall notify the owner thereof, if
known. If the owner is not known, advertisement shall be placed in a newspaper
of general circulation. The notice shall contain a description of the animal
and shall state that, unless reclaimed, the animal will be sold at public
auction at a time and place to be specified in the notice, which time shall not
be less than five (5) days from the date the notice is posted. If the animal is
not reclaimed before the expiration of the time specified in the notice, the
poundmaster may sell the animal at public auction to the highest bidder. If the
animal is reclaimed by its owner, the owner shall pay an impounding fee, as set
by the city, before taking possession of the animal. (Ord. 2392 § 14, 1998:
Ord. 1925 § 6, 1986: prior code § 56309)
CHAPTER 6.12
RABIES
SECTION:
6.12.010: Report Of Patient Bitten By Rabid Animal
6.12.020: Report By Parent
6.12.030: Reports Generally
6.12.040: Reporting And Confinement Of Rabid Animal
6.12.050: Rabid Bite; Confinement Of Animal Bitten
6.12.060: Observation Of Symptoms; Examination
6.12.070: Examination To Be Allowed By Owner
6.12.080: Access To Carcass
6.12.090: Quarantine; Duty Of Veterinarian
6.12.010: REPORT OF PATIENT BITTEN BY RABID ANIMAL:
It is the duty of every physician to report immediately to the animal control
supervisor or any of his officers the full name, age and address of any person
under his care or observation who has been bitten by an animal having or
suspected of having rabies. (Ord. 1924 § 1, 1986: prior code § 34700)
6.12.020: REPORT BY PARENT:
If no physician is in attendance and the person bitten is a child, it is the
duty of the parent or guardian to make such report immediately. (Ord. 1924 § 2,
1986: prior code § 34701)
6.12.030: REPORTS GENERALLY:
If the person bitten is an adult, such person shall make the report. If the
person bitten is incapacitated, the report shall be made by whomever is caring
for the person bitten. (Ord. 194 § 3, 1986: prior code § 34702)
6.12.040: REPORTING AND CONFINEMENT OF RABID ANIMAL:
It is the duty of every person having knowledge of the existence of an animal
apparently afflicted with rabies to report immediately to an animal control
officer or to the chief of police the existence and description of such animal,
the place where seen, the owner's name, if known, and the symptoms suggesting
rabies. Any rabid animal or clinically suspected rabid animal shall be isolated
in strict confinement under the proper care and under the observation of a
licensed veterinarian, in a pound, veterinary hospital, or other adequate
facility at the owner's expense. (Ord. 2392 § 15, 1998: Ord. 1924 § 4, 1986:
prior code § 34703)
6.12.050: RABID BITE; CONFINEMENT OF ANIMAL BITTEN:
Whenever any animal is bitten by another animal that has or is suspected of
having rabies, the owner or person having custody or possession of the animal
bitten shall either destroy the animal or confine it and keep it confined for a
period of six (6) months. If the owner or person having custody or possession
of the animal refuses or is unable to confine the animal, the poundmaster or
his representatives may quarantine the animal at the owner's expense until it
is determined whether the animal has contracted rabies. The poundmaster may
test and destroy the animal for rabies at the owner's expense. (Ord. 2392 § 16,
1998: Ord. 1924 § 5, 1986: prior code § 34703A)
6.12.060: OBSERVATION OF SYMPTOMS; EXAMINATION:
If it reasonably appears to any animal control officer that a dog or other
animal has rabies, said officer may hold such animal for examination by a
licensed veterinarian until it is determined that the animal is free of rabies.
The owner shall pay all costs associated with the examination, boarding fees
and/or euthanasia as determined by the city. (Ord. 2392 § 17, 1998: Ord. 1924 §
7, 1986: prior code § 34705A)
6.12.070: EXAMINATION TO BE ALLOWED BY OWNER:
The owner or person having custody or possession of any animal that shows
symptoms of rabies, or has acted in a manner which would lead to a reasonable
suspicion that it might have rabies, shall allow the poundmaster or his
representatives to make an inspection(s) or examination(s) of such animal until
it is established that the animal either has or does not have rabies. (Ord.
2392 § 18, 1998: Ord. 1924 § 8, 1986: prior code § 34706)
6.12.080: ACCESS TO CARCASS:
The owner or person having custody of an animal suspected of having rabies
shall surrender the carcass of the animal, or such portion of the carcass as
may be demanded by any animal control officer after the death of the animal.
(Ord. 1924 § 9, 1986: prior code § 34707)
6.12.090: QUARANTINE; DUTY OF VETERINARIAN:
It is the duty of all veterinarians to hold in quarantine any animal showing
symptoms of rabies, until the disposition of the animal by the animal control
supervisor or any of his officers. (Ord. 1924 § 10, 1986: prior code § 34708)
CHAPTER 6.16
WILD OR UNDOMESTICATED ANIMALS
SECTION:
6.16.010: Prohibited; Impoundment
6.16.020: Exemptions
6.16.010: PROHIBITED; IMPOUNDMENT:
No person shall offer for sale, give away, bring into or maintain within an
area coming within the jurisdiction of this chapter, any lion, tiger, bear,
wolf, wolf hybrids, cougar, ocelot, wildcat, skunk, venomous or dangerous snake
or other such wild animals (ferae naturae), irrespective of their actual or
asserted state of docility, tameness, or domesticity. The animal control bureau
may impound any such animal and release it to an agency suitable for
maintaining the animal or dispose of it in a humane manner after three (3)
working days to allow for legal restraining action by the owner. (Ord. 2392 §
19, 1998: prior code § 57400)
6.16.020: EXEMPTIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall not prohibit the keeping or maintaining of
wild animals within the city under the following conditions:
   A.   Legally operated zoos, circuses, carnivals, exhibits or shows, unless
the animal control department, the county veterinarian, or the health
department officer shall give forty eight (48) hours' advance notice that by
reason of inadequate caging or other means of protection of the public from
such animals or by a particular hazard connected with the animal or animals
involved, the public health and welfare will be endangered;
   B.   Wild animals in a bona fide, licensed veterinary hospital for
treatment;
   C.   Keeping of experimental animals or reptiles by a research laboratory,
hospital, or educational institution for experimental purposes;
   D.   A permit has been issued as outlined in section
6.24.010 of this title for the nondomestic animals. (Ord. 2392 § 20, 1998:
prior code § 57401)
CHAPTER 6.20
BEES
SECTION:
6.20.010: Definitions
6.20.020: Permit; Required
6.20.030: Location And Keeping Of Apiaries
6.20.040: Time Limit
6.20.050: Apiaries Of Ten Colonies Or Less Exempt
6.20.060: Water Supply
6.20.070: Identification Signs
6.20.080: Notice Of Violation
6.20.010: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms used herein are defined as
follows:
   APIARY: Includes bees, comb, hives, appliances or colonies wherever the same
are kept, located or found.
   APPLIANCE: Any implement or other device used in handling and manipulating
bees or their brood, or containers thereof.
   BEES: Honey producing insects of the species Apis mellifica and includes the
adults, eggs, larvae, pupae or other immature stages thereof, together with
such materials as are deposited into hives by their adults, except honey and
rendered beeswax.
   COLONY: One hive and its contents, including bees, comb and appliances.
   COMB: Includes all materials normally deposited into hives by bees except
extracted honey or royal jelly, trapped pollen, and processed beeswax.
   HIVE: Any receptacle or container, or part thereof, made or prepared for the
use of bees or inhabited by bees.
   LOCATION: Any premises upon which an apiary is located. (Prior code § 56201)
6.20.020: PERMIT; REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person within the city to keep or have control of any
stands of bees within the city without first obtaining a permit to do so as
outlined in section
6.24.010 of this title and subject to such conditions as may be from time to
time imposed by animal control. (Ord. 2392 § 21, 1998: prior code § 56200)
6.20.030: LOCATION AND KEEPING OF APIARIES:
   A.   All apiaries owned and kept within the city shall be kept and located
at a place at least one hundred feet (100') from all public roads (traveled
portion) unless there are natural barriers to prevent bees from causing a
nuisance or hazard to persons using the road.
   B.   All apiaries owned and kept within the city shall be kept and located
at a place at least six hundred feet (600') distant from the nearest house or
building inhabited as a dwelling and shall not be kept and maintained at a
lesser distance thereto unless the owner of such apiary first procures
permission from the occupant or person using such building or house as a
dwelling so to do.
   C.   All apiaries owned and kept within the city shall be arranged behind
barriers (natural or otherwise) near schoolyards or places where people
congregate to cause bees to fly at a high altitude over such schoolyard or
place where people congregate.
   D.   No apiary shall be kept or located upon the lands of another without
the owner or the person in possession of such apiary first procuring permission
of the owner of such lands to place such apiary thereon. (Prior code § 56202)
6.20.040: TIME LIMIT:
No apiary shall be located within the city before March 15 and not later than
May 20 of any year. (Prior code § 56203)
6.20.050: APIARIES OF TEN COLONIES OR LESS EXEMPT:
Subsection
 6.20.030B and section
6.20.040 of this chapter shall not apply to apiaries of ten (10) colonies or
less providing they do not become a public nuisance. (Prior code § 56204)
6.20.060: WATER SUPPLY:
An adequate water supply must be furnished and kept available to all apiaries
at all times. Such water supply must be available before or at the time such
apiaries are placed within the city, unless there is a stream or reservoir
closer than any other source. (Prior code § 56205)
6.20.070: IDENTIFICATION SIGNS:
Every person owning an apiary located on premises other than where he resides
shall identify such apiary by a sign prominently displayed on the entrance side
of the apiary stating in black letters the name of the owner or person in
possession of the apiary, his address and telephone number or if he has no
telephone, a message telephone number. (Ord. 2392 § 22, 1998: prior code §
56206)
6.20.080: NOTICE OF VIOLATION:
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter may be served with a
written notice to cease or remedy such violation by any law enforcement officer
of the county. The notice shall require that such person cease or remedy the
violation within forty eight (48) hours. Any person who fails to cease or
remedy the violation within such forty eight (48) hour period is guilty of a
misdemeanor. The notice required by this section shall be served personally on
such person, or, if he cannot be readily found, shall be served by mail (return
receipt requested) or, if he cannot be served by mail, then service shall be
accomplished by posting such notice on a conspicuous place on or near the
apiary where the violation occurred. The forty eight (48) hour period for which
such notice provides shall commence to run from the time on the day such notice
is served pursuant to this section. (Prior code § 56207)
CHAPTER 6.24
MISCELLANEOUS ANIMAL REGULATIONS
SECTION:
6.24.010: Permit Required For Keeping Livestock, Fowl, Or Other Nondomestic
Animals
6.24.020: Permit; Conditions And Inspections
6.24.030: Fowl And Rabbits
6.24.040: Revocation Of Permit
6.24.050: Burying Of Dead Animals
6.24.060: Rodent Infestations
6.24.070: Penal Provisions; Generally
6.24.080: Cattle Running At Large
6.24.090: Leaving Livestock Unattended On Street
6.24.100: Allowing Trespass By Animal Or Fierce Dog
6.24.110: Report Of Infected Animal To Health Officer Required
6.24.120: Noisy Animals; Prohibited
6.24.010: PERMIT REQUIRED FOR KEEPING LIVESTOCK, FOWL, OR OTHER NONDOMESTIC
ANIMALS:
It is unlawful to keep within the city any livestock, fowl, or any other
nondomestic animals without first obtaining a permit from the animal control
bureau or chief of police. (Ord. 2392 § 24, 1998: Ord. 1923 § 1, 1986: prior
code § 30600)
6.24.020: PERMIT; CONDITIONS AND INSPECTIONS:
   A.   The animal control bureau shall grant a permit only upon finding that:
1) the keeping of such animal(s) for which the permit is sought is not a
prohibited use in the zone in which the applicant's property lies; 2) the
keeping of such animals(s) will not be detrimental to the public health,
safety, or general welfare of the public, and 3) applicant has sufficient land
to sustain the animal(s) for which the permit is sought and this requirement
shall be determined adequate by the chief of police or his representative.
   B.   Each permit shall be renewed annually and conditioned upon the
applicant's compliance with all of the following provisions:
      1.   Animal(s) shall be confined to a cage or other enclosure of
sufficient size and strength to ensure animals are secured. Fencing materials
shall be of adequate height and strength to prevent escape.
      2.   Fencing, cages and other enclosures for larger animals shall be kept
at a distance of at least fifty feet (50') from all dwellings; and for each
additional large animal this distance shall be increased by an additional fifty
feet (50') up to a distance of two hundred feet (200'). Small animals shall be
kept at a distance of at least twenty five feet (25') from all dwellings.
      3.   Enclosures shall provide cover or shade to meet the need of and to
protect the animal(s).
      4.   Water shall be made available at all times and held in a suitable
container for the animal(s). Food shall be provided to meet the particular
needs of the animal(s).
      5.   The premises where such animals are kept shall be maintained in a
clean and sanitary condition at all times. (Ord. 2392 § 25, 1998: Ord. 1923 §
2, 1986: prior code § 30601)
6.24.030: FOWL AND RABBITS:
All fowl, rabbits and Belgian hares shall be kept at a distance of at least
twenty five feet (25') from all dwellings. (Ord. 1923 § 3, 1986: prior code §
30602)
6.24.040: REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
When the owner or person in possession of the animal(s) is not in compliance
with the conditions stated in section
 6.24.020 of this chapter, the chief of police or his representative, upon ten
(10) days' prior notice to the person keeping the animals, shall revoke the
permit under which such animals or fowl are kept. Once the permit is revoked,
the owner or person in possession of such animals shall remove the animals from
the property within fourteen (14) days. Animals not removed from the premises
within the fourteen (14) day period shall be removed by the animal control
bureau at the expense of the owner or person in possession of the animals.
(Ord. 2392 § 27, 1998)
6.24.050: BURYING OF DEAD ANIMALS:
No person shall bury the carcass of any dead animal in such manner that there
is less than three feet (3') of soil above such carcass. (Ord. 1923 § 5, 1986:
prior code § 30604)
6.24.060: RODENT INFESTATIONS:
Every person possessing any place that is infested with rodents, as soon as
their presence comes to his knowledge shall at once proceed and continue in
good faith to endeavor to exterminate and destroy the rodents, by poisoning,
trapping and other appropriate means. (Prior code § 30605)
6.24.070: PENAL PROVISIONS; GENERALLY:
It is unlawful for any person within the city to permit, cause or allow any of
the acts provided for in sections
6.24.080 through
6.24.110 of this chapter. (Prior code § 56000)
6.24.080: CATTLE RUNNING AT LARGE:
It is unlawful for any person within the city to permit any cattle to run at
large in the city. (Prior code §§ 56000, 56001)
6.24.090: LEAVING LIVESTOCK UNATTENDED ON STREET:
It is unlawful for any person within the city to leave any horse or other
riding or driving animal unattended upon any street without securely fastening
the same; or to tie or fasten any such animal or any livestock to any public
hydrant in the city, or within five feet (5') thereof, or to any tree, bush or
shrub growing upon any street, or to be so tied, or to stand upon any street so
that any such animal can injure any such tree, bush or shrub, or graze upon
such street. (Prior code §§ 56000, 56002)
6.24.100: ALLOWING TRESPASS BY ANIMAL OR FIERCE DOG:
It is unlawful for any person within the city to permit any fowl, dogs, sheep,
goats, horses, cows or other cattle of which he is the owner or over which he
has control, to run or go upon the premises of any other person, after written
notice from the owner or occupant of such premises to keep the same off of such
property; or to allow any fierce dog to run at large. (Prior code §§ 56000,
56003)
6.24.110: REPORT OF INFECTED ANIMAL TO HEALTH OFFICER REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person within the city to have under treatment or to own
or have possession or control of any animal infected with glanders, farcy,
tuberculosis, anthrax, or with any other infectious or contagious disease, to
fail, refuse or neglect to report in writing to the health officer of the city,
immediately upon obtaining information or knowledge that such animal is so
infected, giving the location of such animal, the name of the disease with
which the same is infected, if known, and the name and address of the owner
thereof, when known. (Prior code §§ 56000, 56004)
6.24.120: NOISY ANIMALS; PROHIBITED:
Publisher's Note: This Section has been AMENDED by new legislation (Ord. 2989,
passed 1-20-2026). The text of the amendment will be incorporated below when
the ordinance is codified.
   A.   No person shall own or keep any animal within the city which, by
frequent barking, howling, yelping, whining or the making of other noise,
disturbs the peace of the neighborhood or causes excessive discomfort to any
reasonable person of normal sensitivity residing in the area. It is unlawful
and shall be a public nuisance for any person to own or keep any animal in
violation of this chapter. A violation of this chapter shall be punishable as a
misdemeanor unless determined by the city attorney, in exercising his or her
prosecutorial discretion, to be punishable as an infraction.
   B.   The standards to be considered in determining whether a violation of
the provisions of this chapter exists include, but are not limited to, the
following:
      1.   The level of the noise made by the animal;
      2.   The level and intensity of background noise;
      3.   The proximity of the noise to residential sleeping areas;
      4.   The density of habitation within the area;
      5.   The time of day or night when the noise occurs; and
      6.   The duration of the noise.
   C.   As used in this chapter, a "neighborhood" means an area in which at
least three (3) single-family dwellings or one multiple- family dwelling are
located within two hundred feet (200') of the boundary line of the premises
upon which the animal allegedly causing noise is located.
   D.   If any animal persistently barks, howls, yelps, whines or makes noise,
and disturbs the peace of the neighborhood as provided in this chapter, the dog
or other animal may be declared a public nuisance pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter. It is unlawful for any person, after being informed in writing
pursuant to the provisions of this subsection that his or her animal has been
declared a public nuisance, to fail, refuse or neglect to take whatever steps,
or use whatever means are necessary, to assure that such animal does not
disturb residents in the vicinity in which the animal is kept. If within a
period of ten (10) days after the issuance of written notice to the person
owning, keeping, harboring or having in his or her care or custody said animal
has not been abated as a nuisance, such person shall be subject to prosecution
under this chapter.
   E.   When the animal control officer of the city is notified of a possible
noisy animal by a complaint from a complaining person, the animal control
officer shall issue a noisy animal warning notice. Such notice shall specify
that the animal is in violation of this chapter and that the noisy animal must
be abated to avoid further city action. The animal control officer shall meet
with the person keeping the alleged noisy animal, review the specifics of the
complaint and attempt to obtain a resolution of the alleged noisy animal
violation. A notice summarizing the outcome of the meeting and complaint shall
be mailed to the residence of the owner or keeper of the noisy animal who shall
have a period of ten (10) days in which to abate the nuisance.
   F.   When the animal control officer receives a second notice of a complaint
concerning the same noisy animal, the animal control officer shall send, if the
first warning went unheeded, a second notice of a complaint which constitutes
written notice of violation of this chapter. Such notice shall be mailed to the
owner or the keeper of the animal, postage prepaid first class mail with return
receipt requested. If delivery is refused, follow up by first class mail is
sufficient. If no action has been taken by the owner or the keeper of the
animal, and upon receiving a third complaint, the animal control officer shall
send to the complaining party a set of complaint forms, accompanied by a letter
with instructions to complete and return the forms within fourteen (14) days of
receipt. The complaining party shall be informed that further action may not be
warranted if the animal is controlled, but that in any case no further action
can be taken to control the animal until the completed complaint forms are
received by the animal control department.
   G.   Upon receipt of the completed complaint forms, the animal control
officer, or his or her supervisor, may file a petition requesting a hearing
before the animal control board to determine whether the animal should be
declared a public nuisance. All complaints received from the public and from
any complaining persons shall be attached to the petition. The animal control
board established pursuant to chapter 6.05 of this title shall administer the
provisions of this chapter.
   H.   The animal control board shall notify the owner or keeper of the animal
that a hearing has been scheduled and that the owner or keeper of such animal
may present evidence at the hearing. The animal control board shall serve upon
the owner or keeper of the animal notice of the hearing by postage prepaid
first class mail with return receipt requested and shall provide the owner or
keeper of the animal with a copy of the petition. If delivery is refused,
follow up by first class mail is sufficient.
   I.   The hearing before the animal control board shall be open to the public
and shall be held not less than ten (10) working days or more than thirty (30)
working days after service of the notice of hearing upon the owner or keeper of
the animal. The animal control board may admit all relevant evidence, including
incident reports and affidavits of witnesses; the board may limit the scope of
discovery and may shorten the time to produce records or witnesses. The board
may decide all issues even if the owner or keeper of the animal fails to appear
at the hearing. The board may find, upon a preponderance of the evidence, that
the noisy animal is a public nuisance.
   J.   After the hearing conducted pursuant to subsection I of this section,
the animal control board shall either personally or by postage prepaid first
class mail notify the owner or keeper of the animal of the board's
determination and any orders issued by the board. If the board determines that
the animal is a public nuisance, the owner or keeper of the animal shall comply
with the board's order within ten (10) days after the date of the
determination.
   K.   Any person who neglects or refuses to abate the condition within the
time specified in the written nuisance notice is guilty of a misdemeanor unless
determined by the city attorney, in exercising his or her prosecutorial
discretion, to be punishable as an infraction.
   L.   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the city attorney
from commencing a civil or criminal proceeding to abate a public nuisance under
this chapter or other applicable law.
   M.   If, at the time an animal is declared a public nuisance and in
violation of this chapter, no person is in possession of the premises upon
which the animal is located, any animal control officer or police officer may
enter the private property and remove the animal from the premises. An animal
so removed shall be impounded and may be returned to its owner upon payment of
impound and boarding fees. Written notice that an animal has been impounded
pursuant to this section shall be posted upon the premises and mailed to the
owner of the property first class, postage prepaid. (Ord. 2249 § 1, 1994: Ord.
2021 § 2, 1988)
TITLE 7
RESERVED
TITLE 8
HEALTH AND SAFETY
CHAPTER 8.02
UNIFORM ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH CODE
SECTION:
8.02.010: Uniform Environmental Health Code Adopted By Reference; Copy On File
8.02.020: Portions Deleted
8.02.030: Enforcement Agency; Unlawful Interference With Same
8.02.040: Violations; Penalty
8.02.050: Construction
8.02.010: UNIFORM ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE; COPY ON FILE:
Pursuant to sections 480 et seq., 500 et seq., and 1155.5 of the California
Health and Safety Code, title 17 of the California Administrative Code, and
other relevant state law, for the protection of the environmental public
health, there is adopted by the city of Redlands that certain code known as the
uniform environmental health code, consisting of title 3, division 3, chapters
1 through 11 of the San Bernardino County code. Pursuant to California
Government Code section 50022.6, a copy of such code is on file in the office
of the city clerk and, except as provided in section
8.02.020 of this chapter, the same is adopted and incorporated as fully as if
set out at length in this chapter. (Ord. 2013 § 1, 1988)
8.02.020: PORTIONS DELETED:
Portions of the uniform environmental health code are deleted as follows:
All of chapter 3, "Public Nuisance Abatement", is deleted.
Chapter 8, article 1, "Refuse Storage" is deleted.
Chapter 8, article 2, "Refuse Collection" is deleted.
Chapter 8, article 4, "Sewage Holding Tanks" is deleted.
Chapter 8, article 7, "Operation Of Multiple Ownership Septic Systems" is
deleted. (Ord. 2013 § 1, 1988)
8.02.030: ENFORCEMENT AGENCY; UNLAWFUL INTERFERENCE WITH SAME:
The city council designates the San Bernardino County department of
environmental health services (DEHS) as the enforcement agency for the purpose
of administering the uniform environmental health code and all state laws
pertaining to environmental health. It shall be unlawful for any person or
entity to deny access to, interfere with, prevent, restrict, obstruct or hinder
any DEHS employee or agent acting within the scope of his duty or agency. Any
person who offers any physical resistance to any authorized representative of
DEHS acting within the scope of his duty or agency is guilty of a misdemeanor
punishable by imprisonment in the county jail for not less than ten (10) days,
without the alternative of a fine. (Ord. 2013 § 1, 1988)
8.02.040: VIOLATIONS; PENALTY:
Except as otherwise specified in this section or under the provisions of any
state law, any person or entity who violates any provision of the uniform
environmental health code shall be guilty of an infraction and upon conviction
thereof shall be punished by a fine of not less than twenty five dollars
($25.00) but not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first
conviction, a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) for any second
conviction within the same year, and a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars
($500.00) for any third conviction within the same year. Any fourth or
subsequent conviction within the same year shall be a misdemeanor and shall be
punishable by a fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) nor
more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment in the county
jail for a term not exceeding six (6) months, or both, and such convicted
person or entity may in the discretion of the court be adjudged, in addition to
the above penalties, to be liable to DEHS for all necessary costs incurred in
investigation, discovery, analysis, inspection, cleanup and other actual costs
incurred by DEHS or its agents pertaining to the violation. As used in this
section, the term "year" means any consecutive twelve (12) month period.
Each day or portion thereof during which a violation of the uniform
environmental health code is committed or continued shall be considered a
separate and distinct offense. The owner, manager and operator of every
activity or facility subject to the provisions of the uniform environmental
health code shall be responsible for any violation by any employee of any of
its provisions. Payment of any penalty or serving any term of imprisonment as
provided in this chapter shall not relieve any person or entity from the
responsibility of correcting the condition constituting the violation.
In addition to criminal prosecution, civil action, and every other remedy or
penalty provided by law, a public nuisance as defined in the uniform
environmental health code may be abated or enjoined in an action brought by
DEHS, or under circumstances immediately dangerous to public health or safety
may be summarily abated by DEHS enforcement officers as provided in the uniform
environmental health code or otherwise in the manner provided by law for the
summary abatement of public nuisances. (Ord. 2013 § 1, 1988)
8.02.050: CONSTRUCTION:
In the event of a conflict between any of the provisions of the uniform
environmental health code and any other provision of this code, the provisions
of the uniform environmental health code shall prevail. The provisions of the
uniform environmental health code, insofar as they are substantially the same
as provisions of existing laws and ordinances of the city of Redlands shall be
construed as restatements, continuations and amendments thereof, and not as new
enactments. (Ord. 2013 § 1, 1988)
CHAPTER 8.04
NUISANCES
SECTION:
8.04.010: Definitions
8.04.020: Declaration Of Nuisances; Generally
8.04.030: Fire Hazard
8.04.040: Refuse And Waste
8.04.050: Polluted Water
8.04.060: Stagnant Water
8.04.070: Insects, Vermin
8.04.080: Unsanitary Animals
8.04.090: Fowl, Birds At Large
8.04.100: Diseased Animals
8.04.110: Sewage On Ground
8.04.120: Tree Trimmings
8.04.130: Infested Trees
8.04.140: Public Nuisances
8.04.150: Building Code Violations
8.04.160: Zoning Ordinance Violations
8.04.170: Signs On Public Property And Hazardous Signs
8.04.180: Obstructions To Water
8.04.190: Property Maintenance
8.04.200: Wrecked, Dismantled Or Inoperative Vehicles
8.04.210: Graffiti
8.04.220: Smoke And Soot
8.04.230: Internal Combustion Engines
8.04.240: Exceptions
8.04.250: Right Of Entry
8.04.260: Report Of Findings
8.04.270: Notice To Abate
8.04.280: Voluntary Abatement After Notice
8.04.290: Failure To Voluntarily Abate After Notice
8.04.300: Hearing; Notice
8.04.310: Service Of Notice; Persons To Be Served
8.04.320: Service Of Notice; Persons Not Found Within City Limits
8.04.330: Service Of Notice; Proof
8.04.340: Hearing On Abatement; Content Of Testimony
8.04.350: Hearing On Abatement; Procedure
8.04.360: Hearing On Abatement; Decision
8.04.370: Order To Abate
8.04.380: Summary Abatement
8.04.390: Recovery Of Attorney Fees
8.04.400: Treble Damages
8.04.410: Costs; Report
8.04.420: Costs; Notice Of Hearing
8.04.430: Collection Of Costs And Attorney Fees Prior To Hearing
8.04.440: Costs; Hearing
8.04.450: Special Assessments
8.04.460: Notice Of Lien
8.04.470: Collection Of Costs Of Abating The Nuisance
8.04.480: Unlawful Interference
8.04.490: Violation A Misdemeanor
8.04.500: Nonliability Of City
8.04.510: Violation; Penalty
8.04.010: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, unless the content would dictate otherwise, the
following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them:
   ABATEMENT: The demolition, removal, repair, maintenance, construction,
reconstruction, replacement, or reconditioning of structures, appliances or
equipment; or the removal, transportation, disposal and treatment of waste and
abandoned materials and equipment capable of harboring, breeding, or attracting
rodents or insects or producing odors or blight.
   CHIEF: The chief of the fire department of the city, or the chief's
authorized agents, assistants, deputies or representatives.
   CITY: The city of Redlands, California.
   CITY COUNCIL: The city council of the city of Redlands, California.
   DIRECTOR: The city's director of the quality of life department or the
director's authorized agents, assistants, deputies or representatives.
   HEALTH OFFICER: The official of the city or the county responsible for the
enforcement of laws, ordinances, rules and regulations of the state, county and
city relating to the public health, sanitation, food handling and environmental
health including his authorized agents, assistants, deputies or
representatives.
   HEARING OFFICER: The city may contract with the office of administrative
hearings to provide administrative law judges, contract annually for an
individual hearing officer, engage the services of a volunteer administrative
hearing officer, or the city manager may appoint a fair and impartial city
department director as a hearing officer or a fair and impartial member of the
public determined to be competent and qualified to hear the matter in the
discretion of the city manager. Except for volunteer administrative hearing
officers and department directors, no individual hearing officer shall be
retained for more than a one year term.
   MANAGER: The city manager of the city of Redlands, California, and, for all
provisions of this chapter, except section
8.04.380 of this chapter, includes his authorized agents, assistants, deputies
or representatives.
   NUISANCE: Any act or condition which poses a danger to health or safety or
is indecent or offensive to the senses, or an obstruction to the free use of
property, so as to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or
property, or which unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the
customary manner, of any public park, square, street, or highway. (Ord. 2812,
2015)
8.04.020: DECLARATION OF NUISANCES; GENERALLY:
Without limiting the general applicability of this chapter, the materials and
conditions as set out in sections
8.04.030 through
8.04.230 of this chapter are declared to be public nuisances. (Ord. 2812, 2015)
8.04.030: FIRE HAZARD:
All weeds, dry grasses, dead trees, combustible rubbish, or any material
growing upon the streets, sidewalks, or upon private property, which by reason
of their size, manner of growth and location constitute a fire hazard to any
building, improvements, crops or other property, and weeds and grasses which
when dry, will in reasonable probability constitute such a fire hazard, are
declared to be a public nuisance. (Ord. 2812, 2015)
8.04.040: REFUSE AND WASTE:
"Refuse and waste matter" are defined for the purpose of this code as unused or
discarded matter or material having no substantial market value, and which
consists of such matter and material as: rubbish, refuse, debris, and matter of
any kind, including, but not limited to, rubble, asphalt, concrete, plaster,
tile, rocks, bricks, soil, building materials, crates, cartons, containers,
boxes, machinery or parts thereof, scrap metal and other pieces of metal,
ferrous or nonferrous, furniture or parts thereof, trimmings from plants or
trees, cans, bottles and barrels. Refuse and waste matter as defined, which by
reason of its location and character is unsightly and interferes with the
reasonable enjoyment of property by neighbors, detrimentally affects property
values in the surrounding neighborhood or community, or which would materially
hamper or interfere with the prevention or suppression of fire upon the
premises is declared a public nuisance. (Ord. 2812, 2015)
8.04.050: POLLUTED WATER:
"Polluted water" is defined, for the purpose of this code, as water contained
in a swimming pool, pond, or other body of water, which contains organic matter
conducive to bacterial growth, including algae, remains of insects, remains of
deceased animals, reptiles, rubbish, refuse, debris, papers, and any other
foreign matter or material which, because of its nature or location,
constitutes an unhealthy, unsafe or unsightly condition. Any swimming pool,
pond or other body of water which is abandoned, unattended, unfiltered, or not
otherwise maintained, resulting in the water becoming polluted as defined,
shall constitute a public nuisance. (Ord. 2812, 2015)
8.04.060: STAGNANT WATER:
It is declared to be a nuisance, and it shall be unlawful, to maintain any
premises upon which there is stagnant or still water, or a marshy condition
which harbors and breeds mosquitoes or any other poisonous or objectionable
insect. (Ord. 2812, 2015)
8.04.070: INSECTS, VERMIN:
It is declared to be a nuisance, and it shall be unlawful, to maintain any
building, vacant lot, premises, vehicle, or place in such a manner as to permit
the breeding or harboring therein or thereon of flies, bedbugs, cockroaches,
black widow spiders, lice, fleas or any other vermin. (Ord. 2812, 2015)
8.04.080: UNSANITARY ANIMALS:
It is declared to be a nuisance, and it is unlawful, to keep or permit to be
kept on any premises any animals, fowl, or birds in foul, offensive, obnoxious,
filthy or unsanitary conditions. (Ord. 2812, 2015)
8.04.090: FOWL, BIRDS AT LARGE:
It is declared to be a nuisance, and it is unlawful, to allow or permit any
fowl, or birds, to run at large upon any public street, avenue, alley or place
or to allow or permit the same to run at large or trespass upon any private
property. (Ord. 2812, 2015)
8.04.100: DISEASED ANIMALS:
It is declared to be a nuisance, and it is unlawful, to allow or permit upon
any street, avenue, alley, public place or upon any unenclosed premises any
animal or fowl that shall be suspected of, or that shall be known to have, any
communicable disease. (Ord. 2812, 2015)
8.04.110: SEWAGE ON GROUND:
It is declared to be a nuisance, and it is unlawful, to permit any part of the
contents of any privy vault, cesspool, septic tank, water closet, urinal, pipe,
sewer line, or any sewage, slop water or any other filthy water, matter or
substance, to flow or discharge upon the ground or upon the surface of any lot
or premises, or in any public street or other public place. (Ord. 2812, 2015)
8.04.120: TREE TRIMMINGS:
Whereas accumulation of limbs, branches, prunings, trimmings, stumps and parts
of domestic or cultivated fruit trees, cut, removed, fallen or severed from
such trees are breeding places for fruit tree insect pests and diseases which
endanger fruit trees and the crops thereof, such accumulations are declared to
be public nuisances. (Ord. 2812, 2015)
8.04.130: INFESTED TREES:
Any commercially cultivated fruit tree or ornamental tree or shrub infested
with red, yellow, or black scale, mealy bug or other insect pests or diseases
detrimental to agricultural crops, as determined by the San Bernardino
agricultural commissioner, is declared to be a public nuisance. (Ord. 2812,
2015)
8.04.140: PUBLIC NUISANCES:
Any detrimental or hazardous conditions on any premises which constitute a
public nuisance as defined by California Civil Code sections 3479 and 3480; as
such sections may be amended from time to time. (Ord. 2812, 2015)
8.04.150: BUILDING CODE VIOLATIONS:
For building code violations, the procedures set forth in this chapter are not
exclusive and are in addition to procedures established by any other lawful
authority. All unsafe, substandard, and dangerous buildings, structures, or
appendages, as defined in this code and the uniform or state administrative
codes adopted by reference in this code including, but not limited to:
   A.   Buildings which are abandoned, boarded upon, partially destroyed or
left unreasonably in a state of partial construction; or
   B.   The failure to secure and maintain from public access all doorways,
windows and other openings into vacant structures; or
   C.   Deteriorated parking lots which have potholes, cracks and ridges; and
   D.   Fences in a state of disrepair or in a dilapidated condition. (Ord.
2812, 2015)
8.04.160: ZONING ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS:
Any building or structure set up, erected, constructed, altered, enlarged,
converted, moved or maintained contrary to the provisions of title 18 of this
code, as amended, and any use of land, building, or premises established,
conducted or operated or maintained contrary to the provisions of title 18 of
this code, as amended, shall be and the same is declared to be unlawful and a
public nuisance. (Ord. 2812, 2015)
8.04.170: SIGNS ON PUBLIC PROPERTY AND HAZARDOUS SIGNS:
Every sign or advertising structure unlawfully on public property or declared
to be hazardous or unsafe by the director or the director's designee is
declared to be a public nuisance. (Ord. 2812, 2015)
8.04.180: OBSTRUCTIONS TO WATER:
Any structure, fence, conduit, wall, tree, masonry, pipe, lumber, or other
material which obstructs or constitutes a hazard to the free flow of water
through a stream, drainage channel, or watercourse is declared to be a public
nuisance. (Ord. 2812, 2015)
8.04.190: PROPERTY MAINTENANCE:
Maintenance of property or premises so out of harmony or conformity with the
maintenance standards of adjacent properties as to cause substantial diminution
in the enjoyment, use or property values of such properties, shall constitute a
public nuisance. (Ord. 2812, 2015)
8.04.200: WRECKED, DISMANTLED OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLES:
Wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof on private or
public property, not including highways, are declared to be a public nuisance,
unless such vehicle or part thereof is completely enclosed within a building in
a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or
private property or is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property
in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle
dealer, or a junkyard. (Ord. 2812, 2015)
8.04.210: GRAFFITI:
Graffiti which is visible from adjacent properties or from a public street or
right of way is declared obnoxious and a public nuisance. (Ord. 2812, 2015)
8.04.220: SMOKE AND SOOT:
It is declared to be a nuisance, and it is unlawful, to allow or permit any
smoke, soot or cinders to be emitted from any engine, firebox, stove, furnace,
chimney or smokestack in a manner so as to annoy any resident of the
neighborhood, or to operate any engine or machinery using fuel oil, emitting
offensive odors, or smoke or soot which extends to dwelling houses in the
neighborhood to such an extent as to render their occupancy materially
uncomfortable, or to interfere with the use and comfortable enjoyment of
property. Orchard heaters are expressly exempt from the requirements of this
provision. (Ord. 2812, 2015)
8.04.230: INTERNAL COMBUSTION ENGINES:
It is declared to be a nuisance, and it is unlawful, to use, run or otherwise
operate any stationary internal combustion engine within three hundred feet
(300') of any private residence, rooming or lodging house without first
obtaining the consent of all persons residing within such distance; provided,
that such consent shall be unnecessary if the exhaust and noise therefrom is
muffled so as to prevent any excessive soot, smoke or noise from being emitted.
(Ord. 2812, 2015)
8.04.240: EXCEPTIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to abandoned vehicles, which are
governed by chapter 8.56 of this title. (Ord. 2812, 2015)
8.04.250: RIGHT OF ENTRY:
The chief, director, health officer and manager shall be entitled to enter
buildings or premises to determine whether any act or condition may constitute
a nuisance if they have reasonable cause to believe that such act or condition
may exist on the property. If the building or premises are occupied,
credentials shall be presented to the occupant and permission to enter must be
obtained. In the event that the building or premises are secured against entry,
a reasonable effort shall be made to locate the owner or other persons having
charge or control over the property for permission to enter. If entry is
refused, the chief, director, health officer, or manager shall obtain such
authorization as may be necessary under the circumstances to secure entry.
(Ord. 2812, 2015)
8.04.260: REPORT OF FINDINGS:
The chief, director, health officer, or manager, acting either in concert or
independently, may examine or cause to be examined, every building, structure,
yard or other premises reported as dangerous or damaged or which may constitute
a nuisance, and upon examination shall forthwith make a report setting forth
the condition of the same, and if necessary, their recommendation for abatement
thereof. The report shall remain available for review and inspection by the
legal or equitable owners of the property to which it relates. (Ord. 2812,
2015)
8.04.270: NOTICE TO ABATE:
Whenever the director finds that a "nuisance", as defined in this chapter,
exists on any property located within the city, the director shall, except in
the case of an immediate hazard, notify the property owner on which the
nuisance is located and direct that it be abated. The notification shall detail
the violations and establish a reasonable abatement period or schedule which
shall be at least ten (10) days for nuisances that do not involve a substandard
or dangerous building. When the nuisance involves a substandard or dangerous
building, the reasonable abatement period shall be at least thirty (30) days.
In addition, when the nuisance involves a substandard or dangerous building,
the notice shall also be sent by registered or certified mail to any mortgagees
or beneficiaries of deeds of trust on the property. When the nuisance
conditions cause a building to be untenable, tenants of each unit shall be
given notice by posting of a notice on each rental unit or by sending each
tenant or resident a copy of the notice by first class mail. (Ord. 2812, 2015)
8.04.280: VOLUNTARY ABATEMENT AFTER NOTICE:
The owner of any building, structure, or property alleged to be a nuisance
under this chapter may abate the nuisance at any time within the abatement
period specified in the city's notice. The owner shall subsequently provide
notice to the director of the abatement upon completion. Once so advised, the
director shall cause the property to be inspected to ensure the nuisance has
been abated. (Ord. 2812, 2015)
8.04.290: FAILURE TO VOLUNTARILY ABATE AFTER NOTICE:
If an alleged nuisance is not properly abated within the abatement period
specified in the city's notice, the property owner, if not notified of the
setting of a hearing date in such notice, shall be served with written notice
of the setting of a hearing on the abatement of the nuisance as provided for in
section
8.04.300 of this chapter. (Ord. 2812, 2015)
8.04.300: HEARING; NOTICE:
The director shall prepare a written notice stating in detail the conditions
which render the building, structure, premises or portion thereof a nuisance.
The notice shall set forth the street address, if applicable, or other
appropriate method of determining the location of the nuisance, and a
description sufficient for identification of the building, structure, premises
or portion thereof. Such notice shall be in substantially the following form:
   NOTICE OF HEARING TO ABATE NUISANCE
Notice is hereby given to all persons having any interest in the property known
and described as                 in the City of Redlands, that they should
appear before the Hearing Officer for the City of Redlands, as defined in
Chapter 8.04 of the Redlands Municipal Code, at a hearing to be held on the
         day of                ,         , in the City Civic Center, 35 Cajon
Street, at the hour of         , or soon thereafter as they may be heard, to
show cause, if any they have, why certain unsafe, dangerous, hazardous or
obnoxious conditions existing on said property shall not be declared a public
nuisance and said nuisance be abated by the removal or repair of said unsafe,
dangerous or hazardous conditions; otherwise the same will be removed and
repaired and the nuisance will be abated by the City of Redlands, in which case
the cost of such removal or repair shall be assessed upon the property on which
said unsafe, dangerous and hazardous conditions exist, and such cost will
constitute a lien upon such property until paid.
The conditions upon said premises which cause them to be a public nuisance are
as follows:
Dated: This day          day of                ,         .
      
Quality of Life Department director
   City of Redlands
(Ord. 2812, 2015)
8.04.310: SERVICE OF NOTICE; PERSONS TO BE SERVED:
   A.   The director shall cause copies of such notice to be served on each of
the following:
      1.   The person, or persons, if any, occupying or in real or apparent
charge and control of the premises involved;
      2.   The owner of the premises as shown on the most recent tax
assessment;
      3.   Any other person or persons known by the director to have an
ownership or leasehold interest in the premises.
      4.   In the case of proposed abatement by demolition of a building, any
mortgagees or beneficiaries of deeds of trust identifiable from the record of
title for the property.
   B.   Personal service upon the property owner shall be accomplished in the
same manner as a summons in a civil action. However, if the owner cannot be
found after a diligent search, service upon the property owner shall be
accomplished by posting notice in a conspicuous place on or in front of the
property in question at least ten (10) days before the time fixed for the
hearing before the hearing officer and by the publication thereof in a
newspaper of general circulation within the city, pursuant to Government Code
section 6062. (Ord. 2812, 2015)
8.04.320: SERVICE OF NOTICE; PERSONS NOT FOUND WITHIN CITY LIMITS:
If any person entitled to notice is not found within the city limits, service
shall be made by depositing a copy of such notice in the United States post
office, properly enclosed in a sealed envelope and with the postage thereon
fully prepaid. Such mail shall be registered or certified, return receipt
requested, and addressed to the person entitled thereto at the addresses of
such person as it appears on the last equalized assessment roll of the county
or as known to the director. If no address so appears or is known to the
director, then a copy shall be addressed to such person at the address of the
premises involved. Service by registered or certified mail shall be complete on
the day of its deposit in the mail. The failure of any owner or other persons
to receive such notice shall not affect in any manner the validity of any
proceedings taken pursuant to this chapter. One certified copy of the notice
shall also be conspicuously posted on the premises at least ten (10) days
before the time fixed for the hearing before the hearing officer. (Ord. 2812,
2015)
8.04.330: SERVICE OF NOTICE; PROOF:
Proof of service of the notice and posting thereof shall be documented at the
time of service by a declaration under penalty of perjury executed by the
person effecting service, declaring the time and manner in which such notice
was given and posted. Such declaration shall be filed in the director's office
and therewith any receipt card which may have been returned to him in
acknowledgment of the receipt of such notice by registered or certified mail.
(Ord. 2812, 2015)
8.04.340: HEARING ON ABATEMENT; CONTENT OF TESTIMONY:
The hearing officer shall, at the scheduled time as specified in the notice of
hearing to abate, proceed to hear and consider any relevant testimony or
evidence offered by the director, or other officials or employees of the city
and other qualified witnesses, as well as the owner, or a responsible person in
charge and control of the affected premises, or the owner's representatives, a
mortgagee or beneficiary under any trust deed, lessee, any other person having
any estate or interest in such premises, and any other competent person who may
be present and desire to testify respecting the condition of the affected
premises; the estimated cost of abating the alleged nuisance by repair or
removal; and any other matters which the hearing officer may deem pertinent.
The hearing officer may continue the hearing from time to time as it shall deem
advisable. (Ord. 2812, 2015)
8.04.350: HEARING ON ABATEMENT; PROCEDURE:
All hearings held pursuant to this chapter shall be recorded by a video or
audio recording device unless the city chooses to use a court reporter. The
hearing shall be conducted informally, and the technical rules of evidence
shall not apply, except that irrelevant and unduly repetitious evidence shall
be excluded. During the course of the hearing, the hearing officer may visit
and inspect any premises involved in the proceeding and may thereat receive
oral testimony of any sworn or unsworn witness. (Ord. 2812, 2015)
8.04.360: HEARING ON ABATEMENT; DECISION:
Upon conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall consider the evidence
presented and shall by written decision make findings of fact, based upon the
evidence, and by such decision make a determination and conclusion with respect
to the alleged public nuisance. The decision shall be issued by the hearing
officer within thirty (30) days of the close of such hearing, and copies
thereof shall be delivered to all interested parties. Failure of the owner or
other persons having any interest in the affected premises to appear at or be
represented at the hearing shall in no way affect the validity thereof. The
decision of the hearing officer on the determination of the nuisance is final.
Any appeal of the hearing officer's decision shall be governed by California
Code Of Civil Procedure section 1094.6, or such section as may be amended from
time to time. (Ord. 2812, 2015)
8.04.370: ORDER TO ABATE:
If, from the evidence received at the hearing, the hearing officer determines
that the premises or any portions thereof are unsafe or dangerous and a public
nuisance, then the hearing officer shall order the nuisance abated. The order
shall set forth the following:
   A.   A statement of the particulars which render the premises obnoxious or
unsafe and a public nuisance;
   B.   A statement of the things required to be done to abate the nuisance;
   C.   The time within which the work required to abate must be commenced,
which shall be not less than ten (10) days after the issuance of the hearing
officer's decision;
   D.   A reasonable time within which the required abatement shall be
completed;
   E.   That the occupant, lessee, or another person in possession or charge,
or any mortgagee, beneficiary under any deed of trust, or other person having
an interest or estate in such premises, may at his own risk, abate the
nuisance;
   F.   That if the nuisance is not abated, it may be removed and abated by the
city;
   G.   That the additional costs and expenses of removal and abatement by the
city, including any additional administrative and incidental expenses, together
with interest on the entire amount owing, will also be assessed and result in a
lien upon the premises until paid;
   H.   The director shall cause copies of the decision to be posted upon the
premises involved and served in the manner and upon the person prescribed in
sections
8.04.310 through
8.04.330 of this chapter;
   I.   For substandard or dangerous residential buildings, a statement
substantially as follows:
If this residential building is found to violate state law or local codes
relating to health, safety or buildings six months or more after you initially
received notice of these conditions, you will be prohibited from taking a tax
deduction for interest, taxes, depreciation, or amortization paid or incurred
on the building in the taxable year pursuant to California Revenue and Taxation
Code sections 17274 and 24436.5.
   J.   Whenever an order to abate a public nuisance upon premises, or any
portion thereof, has not been complied with within the time set by the hearing
officer, the hearing officer shall have the power, in addition to any other
remedy provided for in this chapter, to:
      1.   Cause the premises to be vacated until such time as the nuisance has
been abated,
      2.   Cause the nuisance upon the premises, or any portion thereof, to be
abated and the premises restored to a safe condition. Nothing herein shall
prevent the city from contracting with an independent contractor to perform
such work as may be necessary to abate the nuisance.
   K.   No building found to be a nuisance shall be ordered to be demolished if
it was built in accordance with the laws in effect at the time of construction,
unless it is found that, in fairness and in justice, there is no other
reasonable way other than demolition to correct such nuisance. (Ord. 2812,
2015)
8.04.380: SUMMARY ABATEMENT:
Any condition which poses an immediate hazard to public health and safety shall
be determined and declared by the city manager, director, police chief, or fire
chief, acting in concert or independently, to be an immediate hazard. In such
event, the city manager, director, police chief or fire chief may take
immediate action to abate the hazard, without notice to the owner, lessee,
person having custody or charge of the premises involved, or any other
interested person. However, such immediate action shall be limited to such
action as the city manager, director, police chief or fire chief deems
reasonably necessary in his discretion, to eliminate the immediate hazard or to
protect persons or property from immediate injury or damage. Any further action
to abate a nuisance which does not pose an immediate hazard to public health
and safety shall be taken only in accordance with the procedures set forth in
this chapter. The city may recover all costs it incurs in the abatement of such
a hazard as provided for in this chapter. (Ord. 2812, 2015)
8.04.390: RECOVERY OF ATTORNEY FEES:
In any action, administrative proceeding or special proceeding to abate a
nuisance, the prevailing party shall be entitled to recovery of attorney fees.
The recovery of attorney fees by the prevailing party shall be limited to those
individual actions or proceedings in which the city elects, at the initiation
of that individual action or proceeding, to seek recovery of its own attorney
fees. In no action, administrative proceeding, or special proceeding shall an
award of attorney fees to a prevailing party exceed the amount of reasonable
attorney fees incurred by the city in the action or proceeding. The city
attorney shall thereafter cause a report of the action and an accurate account
of costs to be filed with the city clerk. (Ord. 2812, 2015)
8.04.400: TREBLE DAMAGES:
Upon entry of a second or subsequent civil or criminal judgment within a two
(2) year period finding that an owner of premises is responsible for a
condition that may be abated in accordance with this chapter, except for
conditions abated pursuant to California Health And Safety Code section 17980
relating to substandard buildings, the court may order the owner to pay treble
the costs of abatement. (Ord. 2812, 2015)
8.04.410: COSTS; REPORT:
The director shall keep an account of the cost (including incidental expenses)
of abating any nuisance or immediate hazard on each separate lot or parcel of
land where the work has been done, and upon completion of the abatement,
including the filing of the report of attorney fees, if any, by the city
attorney with the city clerk, shall cause to be prepared and filed with the
city council an itemized report specifying the following:
   A.   The work performed;
   B.   The cost of the work, including any salvage value and incidental
expenses and attorney fees, if any;
   C.   A description of the real property upon which the nuisance or immediate
hazard was located;
   D.   The names and addresses of the persons entitled to notice pursuant to
the provisions of this chapter;
   E.   The assessment against each lot or parcel of land proposed to be levied
to pay the cost thereof. Any such report may include work performed on any
number of parcels of property, whether or not contiguous to each other. The
term "incidental expenses" includes, but is not limited to, the expenses and
costs of the city in the preparation of notices, specifications and contracts,
inspection of the work, reports of title search and the costs of printing,
mailing and serving papers required under this chapter. (Ord. 2812, 2015)
8.04.420: COSTS; NOTICE OF HEARING:
Upon filing of the report by the chief, director, health officer or city
manager with the city clerk, the city clerk shall transmit it to the city
council and the city council shall fix the day, hour, and place when it will
hear and pass upon the report, together with any objections or protests which
may be raised by any property owner liable to be assessed for the cost of such
abatement, and any other interested persons. At least ten (10) days before the
date set for hearing, the city clerk shall cause copies of the report and a
notice of the filing of the report, containing a description of the property
sufficient to enable the persons served to identify it and specifying the day,
hour and place when the city council will hear and pass upon the report, and
any objections or protests thereto, to be posted and served in the manner and
upon the persons set forth in sections
8.04.310 through
8.04.330 of this chapter. A copy of the notice shall be published once at least
ten (10) days prior to the date set for the hearing in a daily newspaper
published and circulated within the city. (Ord. 2812, 2015)
8.04.430: COLLECTION OF COSTS AND ATTORNEY FEES PRIOR TO HEARING:
The city's finance director or the finance director's designee may accept
payment of any amount due at any time prior to the city council hearing on the
reports and accounts. (Ord. 2812, 2015)
8.04.440: COSTS; HEARING:
Any person interested in and affected by the proposed assessment may file
written protests or objections with the city clerk at any time prior to the
hour and date set for the hearing on the report. Each such protest or objection
must contain a description of the property in which the signer thereof is
interested and the grounds of such protest or objection. Upon the day and hour
fixed for the hearing, the city council shall hear and pass upon the report,
together with any objections or protests which may be raised by any property
owner liable to be assessed for the cost of abatement, and any other interested
persons. The city council may make such correction, revision or modification in
the report as it may deem just, and when the city council is satisfied of the
correctness of the assessment, the report as submitted, or as revised,
corrected or modified, together with the assessment, shall be confirmed by
resolution. The decision of the city council on the report and the assessment
and on all protests or objections shall be final and conclusive. The city
council may adjourn the hearings from time to time. (Ord. 2812, 2015)
8.04.450: SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS:
The amount of the cost of abating the nuisance or the immediate hazard upon
each lot or parcel of land, including incidental expenses, as confirmed by the
city council, constitutes a special assessment against each such lot or parcel
of land, and as thus made and confirmed shall also become the personal
obligation of the owner of each such lot or parcel of land. Such assessment
shall be due and payable thirty (30) days from the date of confirmation
thereof, and thereafter shall bear interest at the legal rate of interest until
paid. Such confirmed special assessment shall also constitute a lien on such
property for the amount of such assessment until paid. (Ord. 2812, 2015)
8.04.460: NOTICE OF LIEN:
Immediately upon confirmation of the assessment, the city clerk shall cause to
be filed in the office of the county recorder of San Bernardino County, state
of California, a notice of lien in substantially the following form:
   Notice of Lien
Pursuant to the authority contained in Chapter 8.04 of the Redlands Municipal
Code, City of Redlands, California, did the following: 1) issued an abatement
order on the          day of             ,         ; 2) caused a nuisance to be
abated on the real property hereinafter described on the          day of
            ,         ; and 3) assessed the cost of such abatement upon the
real property hereinafter described by adopting Resolution No.      on the
         day of             ,         . Of such costs, there remains unpaid to
the City of Redlands the sum of          Dollars ($       ), and therefore the
City of Redlands hereby claims a lien upon the real property in the amount of
         Dollars ($        ), together with interest calculated thereon at the
legal rate of interest from the          day of             ,          until
the amount has been paid in full and this lien discharged of record.
The real property hereinbefore mentioned and upon which a lien is hereby
claimed is that certain real property situated in the City of Redlands, County
of San Bernardino, State of California, and more particularly described as
follows:
 
(Street Address)       
(Legal Description)       
(Assessor's Parcel Number)       
The name and address of the record owner of the parcel on which the lien is
imposed as follows:
(Owner's Name)       
(Owner's Address)       
Dated this          day of             ,         
Redlands, California
   By                  
      Mayor    
Attest:
                   
City Clerk
(Notarial Acknowledgment)
Notice of lien shall be mailed by certified mail to the property owner, if the
property owner's identity can be determined from the county assessor's or
county recorder's records. The notice shall be given at the time of imposing
the assessment and shall specify that the property may be sold after three (3)
years by the tax collector for unpaid delinquent assessments. The tax
collector's power of sale shall not be affected by the failure of the property
owner to receive notice.
The county auditor shall enter each assessment on the county tax roll upon the
parcel of land. The assessment may be collected at the same time and in the
same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected, and shall be subject to
the same penalties and procedure and sale in case of delinquency as is provided
for ordinary municipal taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection and
enforcement of municipal taxes shall be applicable to the special assessment.
However, if any real property to which the cost of abatement relates has been
transferred or conveyed to a bona fide purchaser for value, or if a lien of a
bona fide encumbrancer for value has been created and attached thereon, prior
to the date on which the first installment of the taxes would become
delinquent, then the cost of abatement shall not result in a lien against the
real property but instead shall be transferred to the unsecured roll for
collection. (Ord. 2812, 2015)
8.04.470: COLLECTION OF COSTS OF ABATING THE NUISANCE:
   A.   The cost of abating a nuisance and related administrative expenses may
be collected by either of the following means:
      1.   After the confirmation of such report of costs and assessment, a
certified copy of such confirmed special assessment, which remains unpaid,
shall be filed with the assessor and tax collector of San Bernardino County
acting for the city in order that such county officials may enter the amount of
the assessment on the appropriate assessment book opposite the description of
the particular property. Thereafter such amount shall be collected at the same
time and in the same manner as general city taxes are collected, and shall be
subject to the same penalties and interest, and the same procedure under
foreclosure and sale in case of delinquency, as provided by law for city taxes.
All laws and ordinances applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of
city taxes are made applicable to such special assessment.
      2.   After the confirmation of such report of costs and assessment, a
certified copy of the cost of abatement and related administrative expenses
shall be recorded in the grantor-grantee index of the county recorder's office
of San Bernardino County, which shall have the force, effect and priority of a
judgment lien. The lien may also be foreclosed by a judicial or other sale in
the manner and means provided for in Government Code section 38773.1 or
otherwise provided for by law. (Ord. 2812, 2015)
8.04.480: UNLAWFUL INTERFERENCE:
It is unlawful for any person to obstruct, impede or interfere with any
officer, agent or employee of the city or with any person who owns or holds any
estate or interest in any premises, or any portion thereof, upon which there is
a nuisance which has been ordered to be abated, or with any person to whom such
premises have been lawfully sold pursuant to the provisions of this chapter,
when any such officer, agent, employee, purchaser or person having an interest
or estate in such premises is engaged in abating a nuisance or immediate hazard
thereon, or in performing any necessary act preliminary to or incidental to
such work, or authorized or directed pursuant thereto. (Ord. 2812, 2015)
8.04.490: VIOLATION A MISDEMEANOR:
The owner or other person having charge and control over any premises
determined to be unsafe or dangerous and a public nuisance, or who fails to
comply with any order to abate any nuisance or immediate hazard thereon, is
guilty of a misdemeanor. The occupant or lessee in possession who fails to
comply with any order to vacate premises, or any portion thereof, in accordance
with any order given as provided for in this chapter, is guilty of a
misdemeanor. Any person who removes any notice posted, as required in this
chapter, is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 2812, 2015)
8.04.500: NONLIABILITY OF CITY:
The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to hold the city, any
employee thereof, or any hearing officer responsible for any damage to persons
or property by reason of the inspections authorized herein, by reason of the
determination that a nuisance or immediate hazard exists on any premises in
accordance with the provisions herein, or by reason of any of the procedures or
processes related to the actual abatement thereof. (Ord. 2812, 2015)
8.04.510: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine not
exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment for not exceeding
six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 2812, 2015)
CHAPTER 8.06
COMMUNITY NOISE CONTROL
SECTION:
8.06.010: Purpose
8.06.020: Definitions
8.06.030: General Noise Regulations
8.06.040: Enforcement Authority
8.06.050: Noise Measurement Procedure
8.06.060: Noise Measurement Methodology
8.06.070: Exterior Noise Limits
8.06.080: Interior Noise Standards
8.06.090: Noise Disturbances Prohibited
8.06.100: Residential Air Conditioning Or Air Handling Equipment
8.06.110: Tampering
8.06.120: Exemptions
8.06.130: Preexisting Noise Sources
8.06.140: Violation; Penalty
8.06.010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to implement the noise control provisions of the
Redlands general plan by establishing comprehensive regulations for the control
of noise within the city. (Ord. 2579 § 1, 2004)
8.06.020: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases shall have the meanings set out in this
section. All terminology used in this chapter, not defined below, shall be in
conformance with applicable publications of the American National Standards
Institute (ANSI) or its successor body.
A-WEIGHTED SOUND LEVEL: The sound level in decibels as measured on a sound
level meter using the A-weighting network. The level so read is designated dBA.
   AMBIENT NOISE LEVEL: The all encompassing noise level associated with a
given environment, being a composite of sounds from all sources, excluding the
alleged offensive noise, at the location and approximate time at which a
comparison with the alleged offensive noise is to be made.
   COMMERCIAL: Generally consisting of uses permitted in the commercial zones
as set forth in title 18 of this code or adopted specific plans.
   CONSTRUCTION: Any site preparation, grading, assembly, erection, substantial
repair, alteration and related material handling and disposition, or similar
activity, for or on public or private rights of way, structures, utilities or
public or private property.
   CUMULATIVE PERIOD: An additive period of time composed of individual time
segments that may be continuous or interrupted.
   DECIBEL: A unit for measuring the amplitude of a sound, equal to twenty (20)
times the logarithm to the base ten (10) of the ratio of the pressure of the
sound measured to the reference pressure, which is twenty (20) micropascals.
   DEMOLITION: Any dismantling, intentional destruction or removal of
structures, utilities, public or private right of way surfaces or similar
improvements on public or private property.
   EMERGENCY WORK: Any work performed for the purpose of preventing or
alleviating the physical trauma or property damage which requires immediate
mitigation.
   FIXED NOISE SOURCE: A stationary device which creates sounds while fixed or
motionless including, but not limited to, residential, agricultural, industrial
and commercial machinery and equipment, pumps, fans, compressors, air
conditioners or refrigeration equipment.
   INDUSTRIAL: Generally consisting of uses permitted in the industrial zones
as set forth in title 18 of this code or adopted specific plans.
   LICENSED: The possession of a license or a permit issued by the appropriate
jurisdictional authority; or, where no permits or licenses are issued, the
sanctioning of the activity by the jurisdiction as noted in public record.
   MOBILE NOISE SOURCE: Any noise source other than a fixed noise source.
   MOTOR VEHICLE: Shall include any and all self-propelled vehicles as defined
in the California Vehicle Code.
   MUFFLER OR SOUND DISSIPATIVE DEVICE: A device consisting of a series of
chambers or baffle plates, or other mechanical design, for the purpose of
receiving exhaust gas from an internal combustion engine and effective in
reducing noise.
   NOISE CONTROL OFFICER ("NCO"): The code enforcement division of the city or
such other employees of the city so designated by the city manager to enforce
this chapter.
   NOISE DISTURBANCE: Any sound not in compliance with the quantitative
standards as listed herein which either:
   A.   Endangers or injures the safety or health of human beings or animals;
   B.   Annoys or disturbs reasonable persons of normal sensitivities;
   C.   Endangers or injures personal or real property; or
   D.   Violates section
8.06.030 or
8.06.090 of this chapter.
   NOISE SENSITIVE ZONE: Any area designated as such pursuant to this chapter
for the purpose of ensuring exceptional quiet.
   NOISE ZONE: Any defined areas or regions of a generally consistent land use
wherein the ambient noise levels are within a range of five (5) dB.
   PERSON: Any individual, association, partnership or corporation, and
includes any officer, employee, department, agency or instrumentality of a
state or any political subdivision of a state.
   POWERED MODEL VEHICLE: Any self-propelled, airborne, waterborne or landborne
plane, vessel or vehicle which is not designed to carry persons including, but
not limited to, any model airplane, boat, car or rocket.
   PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY: Any street, avenue, boulevard, highway, sidewalk, alley
or similar place owned or controlled by a governmental entity.
   PUBLIC SPACE: Any real property or structure thereon which is owned or
controlled by a governmental entity.
   RESIDENTIAL: Generally consisting of uses as permitted in the residential
zones as set forth in title 18 of this code or adopted specific plans.
   SOUND AMPLIFYING EQUIPMENT: Any device for the amplification of the human
voice, music or any other sound, excluding standard automobile radios or stereo
systems when used and heard only by the occupants of the vehicle in which the
radio or stereo system is installed, excluding warning devices on authorized
emergency vehicles or horns or other warning devices on any vehicle used only
for traffic safety purposes.
   SOUND LEVEL METER: An instrument, including a microphone, amplifier, output
meter and frequency weighting networks for the measurement of sound levels
which meets or exceeds the requirements of the American National Standard
Institute's S1.4-1971, or the most recent revision thereof, for type 1 or type
2 sound level meters.
   SOUND TRUCK: Any motor vehicle regardless of motive power, whether in motion
or stationary, having mounted thereon or attached thereto, any sound amplifying
equipment.
   VIBRATION PERCEPTION THRESHOLD: The minimum ground or structure borne
vibrational motion necessary to cause a normal person to be aware of the
vibration by such direct means as, but not limited to, sensation by touch or
visual observation of moving objects. The perception threshold shall be
presumed to be a motion velocity of 0.01 inches per second over the range of
one to one hundred (100) Hz.
   WEEKDAY: Any day, Monday through Friday, which is not a legal holiday. (Ord.
2579 § 1, 2004)
8.06.030: GENERAL NOISE REGULATIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully or negligently make, or cause
to be made, any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise which disturbs the peace and
quiet of any neighborhood or which causes discomfort or annoyance to a
reasonable person of normal sensitivity in the area. The factors that may be
considered in determining whether a violation of this chapter exists include,
but are not limited to, the following:
   A.   The sound level of the objectionable noise;
   B.   The sound level of the ambient noise;
   C.   The proximity of the noise to residential living or sleeping
facilities;
   D.   The nature and zoning of the area within which the noise emanates;
   E.   The number of persons affected by the noise;
   F.   The time of day or night the noise occurs;
   G.   The duration of the noise;
   H.   The tonal, informational or musical content of the noise;
   I.   Whether the noise is continuous, recurrent or intermittent;
   J.   Whether the noise is produced by a commercial or noncommercial
activity;
   K.   Whether the nature of the noise is usual or unusual;
   L.   Whether the origin of the noise is natural or unnatural; and
   M.   Whether the noise occurs on a weekday, weekend or a holiday. (Ord. 2579
§ 1, 2004)
8.06.040: ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY:
   A.   The NCO and the NCO's duly authorized representatives may enforce the
provisions of this chapter.
   B.   The NCO and its authorized representatives shall have satisfactorily
completed an instructional program as recommended by the measuring instrument's
manufacturer.
   C.   No person shall interfere with, oppose or resist the NCO or any
authorized person charged with the enforcement of this chapter when such
persons are engaged in the performance of their duties. (Ord. 2579 § 1, 2004)
8.06.050: NOISE MEASUREMENT PROCEDURE:
The NCO, equipped with sound level measurement equipment satisfying the
requirements in section
8.06.020 of this chapter, may investigate any complaint relating to a violation
of this chapter. The investigation shall consist of a measurement and the
gathering of data to adequately define the noise problem and include, but not
be limited to, the following:
   A.   Type of noise source;
   B.   Location of noise source relative to the complainant's property;
   C.   Time period during which noise source is considered by complainant to
be intrusive;
   D.   Total duration of noise produced by noise source; and
   E.   Date and time of noise measurement survey. (Ord. 2579 § 1, 2004)
8.06.060: NOISE MEASUREMENT METHODOLOGY:
   A.   Utilizing the A-weighting scale of the sound level meter and the "slow"
meter response (use "fast" response for impulsive type sounds), the noise level
shall be measured at a position or positions at any point on the receiver's
property deemed appropriate to determine whether the noise level complies with
this chapter.
   B.   The microphone shall be located four (4) to five feet (5') above the
ground; ten feet (10') or more from the nearest reflective surface, where
possible. However, in those cases where another elevation is deemed
appropriate, the latter shall be utilized. If the noise complaint is related to
interior noise levels, interior noise measurements shall be made within the
affected residential building or unit. The measurements shall be made at a
point at least four feet (4') from the wall, ceiling or floor nearest the noise
source, with the windows closed.
   C.   Calibration of the measurement equipment, utilizing an acoustic
calibrator, shall be performed immediately prior to recording any noise data.
Standard maintenance of the measuring equipment shall be in accordance with the
manufacturer's recommendations.
   D.   No outdoor measurements shall be taken:
      1.   During periods when wind speeds (including gusts) exceed fifteen
(15) miles per hour;
      2.   Without a windscreen, as recommended by the measuring instrument's
manufacturer, properly attached to the measuring instrument;
      3.   Under any condition that allows the measuring instrument to become
wet (e.g., rain or condensation); or
      4.   When the ambient temperature is out of the range of the tolerance of
the measuring instrument. (Ord. 2579 § 1, 2004)
8.06.070: EXTERIOR NOISE LIMITS:
   A.   The noise standards for the categories of land uses identified in table
1 of this section shall, unless otherwise specifically indicated, apply to all
such property within a designated zone.
TABLE 1
MAXIMUM PERMISSIBLE SOUND LEVELS BY RECEIVING LAND USE
 
Receiving Land Use Category         Time Period            Noise Level - dBA
Single-family residential districts 10:00 P.M. – 7:00 A.M50
                                    7:00 A.M. – 10:00 P.M60
Multi-family residential districts; 10:00 P.M. – 7:00 A.M50
public space; institutional         7:00 A.M. – 10:00 P.M60
Commercial                          10:00 P.M. – 7:00 A.M60
                                    7:00 A.M. – 10:00 P.M65
Industrial                          Any time               75
 
   B.   No person shall operate, or cause to be operated, any source of sound
at any location within the city or allow the creation of any noise on property
owned, leased, occupied or otherwise controlled by such person which causes the
noise level when measured on any other property to exceed:
      1.   The noise standard for that land use specified in table 1 of this
section for a cumulative period of more than thirty (30) minutes in any hour;
or
      2.   The noise standard specified in table 1 of this section plus five
(5) dB for a cumulative period of more than fifteen (15) minutes in any hour;
or
      3.   The noise standard specified in table 1 of this section plus ten
(10) dB for a cumulative period of more than five (5) minutes in any hour; or
      4.   The noise standard specified in table 1 of this section plus fifteen
(15) dB for a cumulative period of more than one minute in any hour; or
      5.   The noise standard specified in table 1 of this section plus twenty
(20) dB or the maximum measured ambient level, for any period of time.
   C.   If the measured ambient level exceeds the allowable noise exposure
standard within any of the first four (4) noise limit categories above, the
allowable noise exposure standard shall be adjusted in five (5) dB increments
in each category as appropriate to encompass or reflect said ambient noise
level. In the event the ambient noise level exceeds the fifth noise limit
category, the maximum allowable noise level under this category shall be
increased to reflect the maximum ambient noise level.
   D.   The ambient noise shall be measured at the same location along the
property line utilized in subsection
8.06.060B of this chapter, with the alleged offending noise source inoperative.
If the alleged offending noise source cannot be shut down, the ambient noise
shall be estimated by performing a measurement in the same general area of the
source but at a sufficient distance that the noise from the source is at least
ten (10) dB below the ambient in order that only the ambient level be measured.
If the difference between the ambient and the noise source is five (5) to ten
(10) dB, then the level of the ambient itself can be reasonably determined by
subtracting a one decibel correction to account for the contribution of the
source.
   E.   In the event the alleged offensive noise contains a steady, audible
tone such as a whine, screech, hum, or is a repetitive noise such as hammering
or riveting, or contains music or speech conveying informational content, the
standard limits set forth in table 1 of this section shall be reduced by five
(5) dB. (Ord. 2579 § 1, 2004)
8.06.080: INTERIOR NOISE STANDARDS:
   A.   No person shall operate or cause to be operated any source of sound, or
allow the creation of any noise, which causes the noise level when measured
inside a neighboring receiving occupied building to exceed the following
standards:
      1.   The noise standard for that land use specified in table 2 of this
section for a cumulative period of more than five (5) minutes in any hour.
      2.   The noise standard for that land use specified in table 2 of this
section plus five (5) dB for a cumulative period of more than one minute in any
hour.
      3.   The noise standard for that land use specified in table 2 of this
section plus ten (10) dB for the maximum measured ambient noise level for any
period of time.
   B.   If the measured ambient level exceeds the allowable exterior noise
exposure standard in table 1 of this chapter, the allowable interior noise
exposure level shall be adjusted in five (5) dB increments as appropriate to
reflect the ambient noise level.
TABLE 2
MAXIMUM PERMISSIBLE INTERIOR SOUND LEVELS BY RECEIVING LAND USE
 
Receiving Land Use Category         Time Period Noise Level - dBA
Single-family residential districts Any time    45
Multi-family residential districts; Any time    45
institutional; hotels
Commercial                          Any time    50
Industrial                          Any time    60
 
(Ord. 2579 § 1, 2004)
8.06.090: NOISE DISTURBANCES PROHIBITED:
The following acts, and the causing or permitting thereof, are declared to be
in violation of this chapter:
   A.   Radio, Television Set, Etc.: Operating, playing, or permitting the
operation or playing of any radio, television set, phonograph, drum, musical
instrument or similar device which produces or reproduces sound:
      1.   Between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:
00) A.M. in such a manner as to create a noise disturbance across a residential
or commercial real property line or at any time to violate the provisions of
section
8.06.030 or
8.06.070 of this chapter.
      2.   In such a manner as to exceed the levels set forth for public space
in table 1 of this chapter, measured at a distance of at least fifty feet (50')
from such device operating on a public right of way or public space.
   B.   Loudspeaker Or Stereo Systems: Using or operating for any purpose any
loudspeaker, loudspeaker system, stereo system or similar device between the
hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M., such that the
sound therefrom creates a noise disturbance across a residential property line,
or at any time violates the provisions of section
8.06.030 or
8.06.070 of this chapter, except for noncommercial public speaking, public
assembly or activity for which an exemption has been provided for in either
this section or section
8.06.120 of this chapter.
   C.   Street Sales: Offering for sale, selling anything, or advertising by
shouting or outcry within the city except by permit issued by the city. This
subsection shall not be construed to prohibit the selling by outcry of
merchandise, food or beverages at licensed sporting events, parades, fairs,
circuses or other similar licensed public entertainment events.
   D.   Animals And Birds: Owning, possessing or harboring any animal or bird
which frequently, or for long duration, howls, barks, meows, squawks or makes
other sound which creates a noise disturbance across a residential or
commercial real property line or within a noise sensitive zone.
   E.   Loading And Unloading: Loading, unloading, opening, closing or other
handling of boxes, crates, containers, building materials, refuse containers or
similar objects between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and six o'clock
(6:00) A.M. in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance across a
residential real property line or at any time to violate section
8.06.030 of this chapter.
   F.   Construction And/Or Demolition: Operating or causing the operation of
any tools or equipment used in construction, drilling, repair, alteration or
demolition work between weekday hours of six o'clock (6:00) P.M. and seven
o'clock (7:00) A.M., including Saturdays, or at any time on Sundays or
holidays, such that the sound therefrom creates a noise disturbance across a
residential or commercial real property line, except for emergency work by
public service utilities, the city or another governmental entity. All mobile
or stationary internal combustion engine powered equipment or machinery shall
be equipped with exhaust and air intake silencers in proper working order, or
suitable to meet the standards set forth herein.
   G.   Vibration: Operating or permitting the operation of any device that
creates a vibration which is above the vibration perception threshold of an
individual at or beyond the property boundary of the source if on private
property or at one hundred fifty feet (150') from the source if on a public
space or public right of way.
   H.   Powered Model Vehicles: Operating or permitting the operation of
powered model vehicles:
      1.   Between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:
00) A.M. so as to create a noise disturbance across a residential or commercial
real property line or at any time in violation of section
8.06.030 of this chapter.
      2.   In such a manner as to exceed the levels set forth for public space
land use in table 1 of this chapter measured at a distance not less than one
hundred feet (100') from any point on the path of a vehicle operating on public
space or public right of way.
   I.   Stationary, Nonemergency Signaling Devices:
      1.   Sounding or permitting the sounding of any electronically amplified
signal from any stationary bell, chime, siren, whistle or similar device
intended primarily for nonemergency purposes, from any place for more than ten
(10) seconds in any hourly period.
      2.   Places of worship and public and private schools shall be exempt
from the operation of this subsection.
   J.   Emergency Signaling Devices:
      1.   Alarms, Sirens, Whistles: The intentional sounding or permitting the
sounding outdoors of any fire, burglar or civil defense alarm, siren, whistle
or similar stationary emergency signaling device, except for emergency purposes
or for testing as provided in subsection J2 of this section.
      2.   Testing:
         a.   Testing of a stationary emergency signaling device shall not
occur before seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. or after seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. Any
such testing shall use only the minimum cycle test time. In no case shall such
test time exceed sixty (60) seconds.
         b.   Testing of the complete emergency signaling system, including the
functioning of the signaling device, and the personnel response to the
signaling device, shall not occur more than once in each calendar month. Such
testing shall not occur before seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. or after ten o'clock
(10:00) P.M. The time limit specified in subsection J2a of this section shall
not apply to such complete system testing.
      3.   Burglar, Fire, Motor Vehicle Alarms: Sounding or permitting the
sounding of any exterior burglar or fire alarm or any motor vehicle burglar
alarm unless such alarm is terminated within five (5) minutes of activation.
   K.   Noise Sensitive Zones: Creating or causing the creation of any sound
within any noise sensitive zone, so as to exceed the specified land use noise
standards set forth in table 1 of this chapter and subsection
8.06.070B of this chapter, or so as to interfere with the functions of such
activity or annoy the occupants in the activity, provided that conspicuous
signs are displayed indicating the presence of the zone.
   L.   Domestic Power Tools And Machinery:
      1.   Operating or permitting the operation of any mechanically powered
saw, sander, drill, grinder, lawn or garden tool, or similar tool between ten
o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M., so as to create a noise
disturbance across a residential or commercial real property line.
      2.   Motor, machinery and pumps, such as swimming pool equipment, shall
be sufficiently enclosed or muffled and maintained so as not to create a noise
disturbance in accordance with table 1, section
8.06.070 of this chapter.
   M.   Places Of Public Entertainment: Operating or permitting the operation
or playing of any loudspeaker, musical instrument or other source of sound in
any place of public entertainment that exceeds ninety five (95) dBA as read on
the slow response of a sound level meter at any point normally occupied by a
customer, without a conspicuous and legible sign with minimum one inch (1")
letter height stating:
WARNING! SOUND LEVELS WITHIN MAY CAUSE HEARING IMPAIRMENT.
(Ord. 2579 § 1, 2004)
8.06.100: RESIDENTIAL AIR CONDITIONING OR AIR HANDLING EQUIPMENT:
It shall be unlawful to operate or permit the operation of any air conditioning
or air handling equipment in such a manner as to exceed the sound levels set
forth in table 1, section
8.06.070 of this chapter. (Ord. 2579 § 1, 2004)
8.06.110: TAMPERING:
The following acts or the causing thereof are prohibited:
   A.   The removal or rendering inoperative, other than for purposes of
maintenance, repair or replacement, of any noise control device or element
thereof of any product required to meet specified noise emission limits under
federal, state or local law.
   B.   The removal of any noise label from any product identified in
subsection A of this section.
   C.   The use of a product identified in subsection A of this section, which
has had a noise control device or element thereof or noise label removed or
rendered inoperative. (Ord. 2579 § 1, 2004)
8.06.120: EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   Emergency Exemption: This chapter shall not apply to:
      1.   The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the
existence of an emergency such as, but not limited to, loudspeakers, horns,
sirens, whistles or other similar devices which emit sound, only for the time
required to make notification of the emergency condition; or
      2.   The emission of sound in the performance of emergency work or the
temporary provision of essential services such as, but not limited to, utility
system repairs or upgrades, infrastructure repairs, structural repairs and
other unscheduled, infrequent and nonrecurring activities, required to protect
persons and property from physical harm or loss of essential services.
   B.   Warning Devices: This chapter shall not apply to warning devices
necessary for the protection of public safety. Police, fire and ambulance
sirens and train horns are exempt from this chapter.
   C.   Outdoor Activities: This chapter shall not apply to occasional outdoor
public gatherings, public dances, shows, and sporting and entertainment events
conducted within city parks and city owned facilities, including events
conducted at the Redlands Bowl, provided such events are conducted pursuant to
a permit or license issued by the city.
   D.   School Activities: This chapter shall not apply to activities and
operations conducted on the grounds of any public or private elementary,
intermediate or secondary school or colleges and universities.
   E.   Hospital: This chapter shall not apply to activities and operations
conducted within the grounds of the Redlands Community Hospital provided that
said activities and operations are in compliance with the acoustical provisions
of the hospital's conditional use permit.
   F.   Minor Maintenance Of Residential Property: This chapter shall not apply
to noise sources associated with the minor maintenance of residential property,
provided such activities take place between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00)
A.M. to eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. on weekdays, and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to
eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. on weekends and legal holidays, and provided that
such activities generate no more than ninety (90) dBA at or within the real
property line of the residential property. Activities covered under this
provision include, but are not limited to, maintenance of landscaping and minor
repair of residential dwellings or ancillary structures.
   G.   Construction Activity: This chapter shall not apply to noise sources
associated with new construction, remodeling, rehabilitation or grading of any
property provided such activities take place between the hours of seven o'clock
(7:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M. on weekdays, including Saturdays, with
no activities taking place at any time on Sundays or federal holidays. All
motorized equipment used in such activity shall be equipped with functioning
mufflers.
   H.   Agricultural Operations: This chapter shall not apply to mobile noise
sources associated with agricultural operations for use in maintenance,
cultivation, planting and harvesting of agricultural areas provided said
activities take place between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to eight
o'clock (8:00) P.M. on weekdays, including Saturdays, with no activities taking
place at any time on Sundays or federal holidays. All motorized equipment used
in such activity shall be equipped with functioning mufflers.
   I.   Chapter Application: This chapter shall not apply to any activity in
which state or federal law has preempted the regulation of such activity. (Ord.
2579 § 1, 2004)
8.06.130: PREEXISTING NOISE SOURCES:
Those commercial and industrial operations in existence prior to the date of
adoption hereof, if in compliance with the city's zoning laws, may be granted a
period from such date within which to comply with this chapter.
   A.   Such compliance period shall be based on the estimated cost to make the
equipment comply, as follows:
      1.   If the cost is one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or less, ninety (90)
days;
      2.   If the cost is one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) to five thousand
dollars ($5,000.00), one year;
      3.   If the cost is five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) to twenty thousand
dollars ($20,000.00), two (2) years; or
      4.   If the cost is greater than twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) or
more, three (3) years.
   B.   At the time of request for extended compliance periods in subsections
A2 through A4 of this section, any person requesting such extension shall
submit a plan for such compliance, including temporary mitigation of such noise
levels to within five (5) dBA of the complying level. Such extended period and
temporary mitigation shall not exceed one year beyond the initial compliance
period. If the compliance period is granted, mitigation measures included in
the plan must be completed within ninety (90) days from the date of approval of
the compliance period.
   C.   If, at the end of the compliance period, it is shown that compliance
with the provisions herein constitute a hardship in terms of technical and
economical feasibility, additional applications for exception may be granted on
an annual basis until such time as compliance may be effected, provided the
temporary mitigation remains in place.
   D.   Requests for extended compliance periods or exceptions shall be
submitted to the city's planning commission with the submittal of plans and
other information as required by the community development director. Such
applications shall be filed by the owner of the property affected thereby or
the owner's authorized agent, with the community development director, on forms
furnished by the director, which shall set forth fully the nature of the
proposed use, and the facts sufficient to justify the granting of the
compliance period in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   E.   The applicant shall furnish to the director an accurate list of the
names and addresses of all property owners to whom notice must be given as
provided in this chapter.
   F.   Each such application shall be accompanied by a filing and processing
fee in the amount established by resolution of the city council. Any applicant
may withdraw his application by filing a written request to do so at any time
prior to final action thereon, provided that there shall be no refund of fees.
(Ord. 2579 § 1, 2004)
8.06.140: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
   A.   It is illegal to use, occupy or maintain property in violation of this
chapter.
   B.   Violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor, but may be prosecuted
as either a misdemeanor or an infraction in the discretion of the city
attorney.
   C.   Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a
separate offense for each day, or portion thereof, during which the violation
continues.
   D.   Violation of this chapter that threatens to be continuing in nature is
a public nuisance which may be abated or enjoined in accordance with the law.
(Ord. 2579 § 1, 2004)
CHAPTER 8.08
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
SECTION:
8.08.010: Purpose
8.08.020: Definitions
8.08.030: Maintenance Requirements For Residences
8.08.040: Maintenance Requirements For Multi-Family Residential, Commercial,
Agricultural And Industrial Property
8.08.050: Enforcement; Penalty
8.08.010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish minimum maintenance standards for
single-family residences and multi-family residential, commercial and
industrial properties in order to protect and preserve neighborhood integrity
and property values. (Ord. 2679 § 1, 2008)
8.08.020: DEFINITIONS:
Except as otherwise defined in this chapter, all terms used in this chapter
which are defined by applicable state law, the uniform building code, or this
code, are used in this chapter as so defined, unless from the context it
clearly appears that a different meaning is intended:
   MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY: A parcel of property having five (5) or
more dwelling units located thereon.
   OWN: Having any legal or equitable interest in property.
   PERSON: An individual, partnership, corporation, association, organization,
or entity, or the agent of any of the foregoing.
   VISIBLE: Viewable from the public right of way or from any residence or
property in proximity. (Ord. 2679 § 1, 2008)
8.08.030: MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS FOR RESIDENCES:
Any person owning, renting, occupying or having charge of any single-family
residence, or any two (2) unit, three (3) unit or four (4) unit residence,
shall maintain such property in accordance with the following minimum
standards. Failure to comply with these minimum standards shall constitute a
violation of this chapter.
   A.   Exterior Requirements:
      1.   Front and visible side yards shall be landscaped (except for
improved surfaces including, but not limited to, walks and driveways) with
trees, shrubs, ground cover, decorative rock, redwood bark and/or lawn.
      2.   Trees, shrubs, lawns and other plantings shall be maintained through
regular irrigation, pruning of trees, trimming of shrubs and cutting of lawns.
      3.   Property shall be free of overgrown or dead vegetation, including,
but not limited to, weeds, trees and tree limbs. "Weeds" includes sagebrush,
dry grass, chaparral and any other brush or vegetation which has attained
excessive growth and become a fire hazard when dry. "Weeds" does not include
plants native to Redlands maintained in a landscaped setting. Nothing in this
section is intended to exclude drought tolerant landscaping or Xeriscaping.
      4.   Property shall be kept free of trash, litter, debris, packing boxes,
lumber, junk, salvage materials, appliances, machinery, equipment, furniture
(except for furniture specifically designed for outdoor use) and any other
personal property causing an unsightly appearance or nuisance.
      5.   All operable vehicles, recreational vehicles, motor homes, trailers,
campers or camper shells and boats shall be parked in a garage, carport or on
an improved surface. No persons shall reside in the foregoing while parked.
      6.   Property shall be free of inoperable or abandoned vehicles and parts
of vehicles unless they are stored in a garage or other enclosed storage area.
      7.   All improvements on property including, but not limited to,
buildings, garages, carports, porches, gates, fences, doors, windows, roofs and
gutters shall be painted or preserved, and/or maintained in good repair and
condition. Paint or preservatives shall not be worn, peeling or cracking.
      8.   Walkways on property, driveways and other improved surfaces shall be
maintained in good repair and in a safe condition.
      9.   Buildings, structures, sidewalks and driveways shall be free of
graffiti.
      10.   Property shall be free from infestation of termites, insects,
vermin and rodents.
      11.   Improved property shall be properly connected to a sewage disposal
system or sanitary sewer and be free from sewage seepage.
      12.   Pools shall be securely fenced and adequately maintained as
required by law.
   B.   Interior Requirements: The interiors of all buildings and structures on
the property, both existing and new, and all parts thereof, shall be maintained
in good repair and in a safe, sanitary condition in conformance with applicable
laws. (Ord. 2679 § 1, 2008)
8.08.040: MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS FOR MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL, COMMERCIAL,
AGRICULTURAL AND INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY:
Any person owning, renting, occupying, managing or otherwise having charge of
any multi-family residential, commercial, agricultural or industrial property
within the city shall maintain such property in accordance with the following
minimum standards. Failure to comply with these standards shall constitute a
violation of this chapter.
   A.   Exterior Requirements:
      1.   All required setbacks abutting a public right of way, all visible
side yards, all visible rear yards and all parking lots shall be landscaped
(except for walkways, driveways and improved surfaces) with trees, shrubs,
ground cover, decorative rock, redwood bark, and/or lawn, except for
agricultural property under cultivation. Where applicable, landscaping shall be
in accordance with city approved plans.
      2.   Trees, shrubs, ground covers, lawn and other plantings shall be
maintained through regular irrigation, pruning of trees, trimming of shrubs and
cutting of lawns.
      3.   Property shall be free of overgrown or dead vegetation, including,
but not limited to, weeds, trees and tree limbs. "Weeds" include sagebrush, dry
grass, chaparral and any other brush or vegetation which has attained excessive
growth and become a fire hazard when dry. "Weeds" does not include plants
native to Redlands maintained in a landscaped setting. Nothing in this section
is intended to exclude drought tolerant landscaping or Xeriscaping.
      4.   Property shall be free of trash, litter, debris, packing boxes, junk
and salvage materials (except where otherwise permitted by this code), broken
furniture, appliances, machinery, equipment and any other personal property
causing an unsightly appearance or nuisance.
      5.   All operable vehicles shall be parked on an improved surface.
Property shall be free of inoperable or abandoned vehicles and parts of
vehicles unless they are being stored by a licensed automobile dismantler or a
vehicle dealer.
      6.   Recreational vehicles, motor homes, trailers, campers or camper
shells and boats shall be stored in designated, screened areas on improved
surfaces. No person shall reside in any of the foregoing while stored.
      7.   All improvements on the property, including, but not limited to,
buildings, structures, storage areas, fences, windows, signs, roofs and gutters
shall be painted or preserved and/or maintained in good repair and condition.
Paint or preservative shall not be worn, peeling or cracking.
      8.   Walkways on property, driveways and all improved surfaces shall be
maintained in good repair and in a safe condition. Parking lot striping,
painted curbs and disabled parking markings shall be maintained in good
condition.
      9.   Buildings, structures, sidewalks, driveways and parking lots shall
be free of graffiti.
      10.   Property shall be free from infestation of termites, insects,
vermin and rodents.
      11.   Improved property shall be properly connected to a sewage disposal
system or sanitary sewer and be free from sewage seepage.
      12.   Pools shall be securely fenced and adequately maintained as
required by code.
   B.   Interior Requirements: The interiors of all buildings and structures on
the property, both existing and new, and all parts thereof, shall be maintained
in good repair and in a safe, sanitary condition in conformance with the
applicable laws. (Ord. 2679 § 1, 2008)
8.08.050: ENFORCEMENT; PENALTY:
   A.   Any person who violates, or causes or permits the violation of, any
provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, or at the
option of the city attorney, may be charged with an infraction, as the
interests of justice warrant.
   B.   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the city attorney
from commencing a civil action to abate a nuisance in addition to,
alternatively to, or in conjunction with any other proceedings; nor shall
anything in this chapter be deemed to prevent the city from commencing a
criminal action in addition to, alternatively to, or in conjunction with any
other ordinance, statute or state law.
   C.   Payment of any fine or service of any jail sentence shall not relieve
any person from the responsibility of correcting the condition causing the
violation. In addition to the above penalties, the court may order that the
guilty party reimburse the city for all of the city's costs of investigating,
analyzing and prosecuting the enforcement action against the guilty party; the
court shall fix the amount of any such reimbursement upon submission of proof
of such costs by the city. (Ord. 2679 § 1, 2008)
CHAPTER 8.10
ABANDONED RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY REGISTRATION
SECTION:
8.10.010: Title
8.10.020: Purpose And Intent
8.10.030: Definitions
8.10.040: Recordation Of Transfer Of Loan/Deed Of Trust/Assignment Of Rents
8.10.050: Registration
8.10.060: Maintenance Requirements
8.10.070: Security Requirements
8.10.080: Additional Authority
8.10.090: Violations And Penalties
8.10.010: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the ABANDONED RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY REGISTRATION
ORDINANCE. (Ord. 2709 § 1, 2009)
8.10.020: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to establish an abandoned
residential property registration program as a mechanism to protect residential
neighborhoods within the city from becoming blighted through the lack of
adequate maintenance and security of abandoned properties. (Ord. 2709 § 1,
2009)
8.10.030: DEFINITIONS:
The terms used in this chapter, or in any resolution or standard adopted by the
city council pursuant to this chapter, shall have the following meanings:
   ABANDONED: A property that is vacant and is under a current notice of
default, notice of trustee's sale, pending tax assessor's lien sale, or that
has been the subject of a foreclosure sale where the title was retained by the
beneficiary of a deed of trust involved in the foreclosure, or that is
transferred under a deed in lieu of foreclosure or sale.
   ACCESSIBLE PROPERTY: A property that is accessible through a compromised or
breached gate, fence, wall or other similar feature.
   ACCESSIBLE STRUCTURE: A structure or building that is unsecured or breached
in such a way as to allow access to the interior space by unauthorized persons.
   BENEFICIARY: A lender under a note secured by a deed of trust.
   BUYER: Any person, copartnership, association, corporation, entity or
fiduciary who agrees to transfer anything of value in consideration for
property described in an agreement of sale, as defined in this subsection.
   DANGEROUS BUILDING: Any building or structure that would constitute a
"dangerous building" as defined in section 302 of the uniform code for the
abatement of dangerous buildings or as prepared by the International Conference
of Building Officials and adopted in force within the city.
   DAYS: Consecutive calendar days.
   DEED IN LIEU OF FORECLOSURE OR SALE: A recorded document that transfers
ownership of a property from the trustor to the holder of a deed of trust upon
consent of the beneficiary of the deed of trust.
   DEED OF TRUST: An instrument by which title to real estate is transferred to
a third party trustee as security for a real estate loan. This definition
applies to any and all subsequent deeds of trust, including second trust deeds,
third trust deeds, and the like.
   DEFAULT: The failure to fulfill a contractual obligation, monetary or
conditional.
   DISTRESSED: A property that is under a current notice of default, or notice
of trustee's sale, or pending tax assessor's lien sale or has been foreclosed
upon by the trustee or has been conveyed to the beneficiary or trustee via a
deed in lieu of foreclosure or sale.
   EVIDENCE OF VACANCY: Any condition that on its own, or combined with other
conditions present, would lead a reasonable person to believe that the property
is vacant. Such conditions include, but are not limited to, overgrown or dead
vegetation, accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers or mail, past due
utility notices or disconnected utilities, accumulation of trash, junk or
debris, the absence of window coverings such as curtains, blinds or shutters,
the absence of furnishing or personal items consistent with residential
habitation, and statements by neighbors, passersby, delivery agents, or
government employees that the property is vacant.
   FORECLOSURE: The process by which a property, placed as security for a real
estate loan, is sold at auction to satisfy the debt if the trustor (borrower)
defaults.
   LOCAL: Within forty (40) road/driving miles distance of the subject
property.
   NOTICE OF DEFAULT: A recorded notice that a default has occurred under a
deed of trust and the beneficiary intends to proceed with a trustee's sale.
   OUT OF AREA: In excess of forty (40) road/driving miles distance of the
subject property.
   OWNER: Any person, copartnership, association, corporation, entity, or
fiduciary having a legal or equitable title or any interest in any real
property.
   OWNER OF RECORD: The person having recorded title to the property at any
given point in time the record is provided by the San Bernardino County
recorder's office.
   PROPERTY: Any unimproved or improved residential real property or portion
thereof, situated in the city and includes the buildings or structures located
on the property regardless of condition.
   RESIDENTIAL BUILDING: Any improved real property, or portion thereof,
situated in the city, designated or permitted to be used for dwelling purposes,
and shall include the buildings and structures located on such improved real
property. This includes any real property being offered for sale, trade,
transfer, or exchange as "residential" whether or not it is legally permitted
or zoned for such use.
   SECURING: Such measures as may be directed by the city's chief building
official, or the official's designee, that assist in rendering the property
inaccessible to unauthorized persons including, but not limited to, the
repairing of fences and walls, chaining or padlocking of gates, the repair or
boarding of door(s), window(s) or other openings. Boarding shall be completed
to a minimum of the current housing and urban development (HUD) securing
standards at the time the boarding is completed or required.
   TRUSTEE: The person, firm, corporation, or entity holding a deed of trust on
a property.
   TRUSTOR: A borrower under a deed of trust, who deeds property to a trustee
as security for the payment of a debt.
   VACANT: A building or structure that is not legally occupied. (Ord. 2709 §
1, 2009)
8.10.040: RECORDATION OF TRANSFER OF LOAN/DEED OF TRUST/ASSIGNMENT OF RENTS:
Within ten (10) days of the purchase or transfer of a loan or deed of trust
secured by residential property, the new beneficiary/trustee shall record with
the San Bernardino County recorder's office an assignment of rents or similar
document that lists the name of the corporation, entity, or individual and the
mailing address and contact phone number of the new beneficiary or trustee
responsible for receiving payments associated with the loan or deed of trust.
(Ord. 2709 § 1, 2009)
8.10.050: REGISTRATION:
   A.   Any beneficiary/trustee who holds a deed of trust on a property located
within the city shall perform an inspection of the property that is the
security for the deed of trust upon default by the trustor and prior to
recording a notice of default with the San Bernardino County recorder's office.
If the property is found to be vacant or shows evidence of vacancy, it is, by
this chapter, deemed abandoned and the beneficiary/trustee shall, within ten
(10) days of the inspection, register the property with the city's quality of
life director (the "director") or the director's designee, on forms provided by
the city.
   B.   If the property is occupied but remains in default, it shall be
inspected by the beneficiary/trustee or his designee monthly until:
      1.   The trustor or other party remedies the default, or
      2.   It is found to be vacant or shows evidence of vacancy, at which time
it is deemed abandoned and the trustee shall, within ten (10) days of that
inspection, register the property with the director or his or her designee on
forms provided by the city.
   C.   The registration required by this section shall contain the name of the
beneficiary/trustee (corporation, entity, or individual), the direct street
office mailing address of the beneficiary/trustee (no P.O. boxes), a direct
contact name and phone number for the beneficiary/trustee, and, in the case of
a corporation, entity, or out of area beneficiary/trustee, the local property
management company responsible for the security, maintenance, and marketing of
the property.
   D.   An annual registration fee, as established by resolution of the city
council, shall accompany the registration form. The fee and registration shall
be valid for the calendar year, or remaining portion of the calendar year, in
which the registration was initially required. Subsequent registrations and
fees are due January 1 of each year and must be received no later than January
31 of the year due.
   E.   This section shall also apply to properties that have been the subject
of a foreclosure sale where the title was transferred to the beneficiary of a
deed of trust involved in the foreclosure and any properties transferred under
a deed in lieu of foreclosure or sale.
   F.   Properties subject to this chapter shall remain under the annual
registration requirement and the security and maintenance standards of this
chapter as long as they remain vacant.
   G.   Any person, firm, corporation, or entity that has registered a property
under this chapter must report any change of information contained in the
registration within ten (10) days of the change. (Ord. 2709 § 1, 2009)
8.10.060: MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS:
In addition to the requirements of chapter 8.08 of this title, properties
subject to registration under section
 8.10.050 of this chapter shall comply with the following:
   A.   The property shall be kept free of weeds, dry brush, dead vegetation,
trash, junk, debris, building materials, and accumulation of newspapers,
circulars, flyers, notices, except those required by federal, state or local
law, discarded personal items including, but not limited to, furniture,
clothing, large and small appliances, printed material or any other items that
give the appearance that the property is abandoned.
   B.   The property shall be maintained free of graffiti, tagging, or similar
markings by removal or painting over with an exterior grade paint that matches
the color of the exterior of the structure.
   C.   All yards visible from the public right of way shall be landscaped and
maintained to the neighborhood standard at the time registration was required.
      1.   Landscape includes, but is not limited to, grass, ground covers,
bushes, shrubs, hedges or similar plantings, decorative rock or bark, or
artificial turf or sod designed specifically for residential installation.
      2.   Landscape does not include weeds, broken concrete, asphalt,
decomposed granite, plastic sheeting, mulch, indoor-outdoor carpet, or any
similar material.
      3.   Maintenance includes, but is not limited to, regular watering,
irrigation, cutting, pruning and mowing of required landscape, and removal of
all trimmings.
   D.   Pools and/or spas shall both be kept in working order and treated so
the water remains clear and free of pollutants, debris, and any kind of larvae
that would cause a health danger to the surrounding vicinity, or drained and
kept dry. In either case, properties with pools or spas must comply with the
minimum security fencing requirements of the state of California. (Ord. 2709 §
1, 2009)
8.10.070: SECURITY REQUIREMENTS:
In addition to the requirements of chapter 8.08 of this title, properties
subject to registration under section
8.10.050 of this chapter shall comply with the following:
   A.   The property shall be maintained in a secure manner so as not to be
accessible to unauthorized persons. Secure manner includes, but is not limited
to, the closure and locking of windows, doors (walk-through, sliding, and
garage), gates, and any other opening of such size that may allow a child to
access the interior of the property and/or structure(s). In the case of broken
windows, securing means the reglazing or boarding of the window.
   B.   If the property is owned by a corporation, entity, or out of area
beneficiary/trustee/owner:
      1.   A local property management company shall be contracted to perform,
at a minimum, monthly inspections to verify that the requirements of this
section, and any other applicable laws, are being met.
      2.   The property shall be posted with the name and twenty four (24) hour
contact phone number of the local property management company. The posting
shall be no less than eighteen inches by twenty four inches (18" x 24") and
shall be of a font that is legible from a distance of forty five feet (45') and
shall contain, along with the name and twenty four (24) hour contact number,
the words "THIS PROPERTY MANAGED BY" and "TO REPORT PROBLEMS OR CONCERNS CALL".
The posting shall be placed on the interior of a window facing the street to
the front of the property so that it is visible from the street, or secured to
the exterior of the building/structure facing the street to the front of the
property so it is visible from the street; if no such area exists, on a stake
of sufficient size to support the posting in a location that is visible from
the street to the front of the property but not readily accessible to vandals.
The exterior posting must be constructed of and printed with weather resistant
materials.
      3.   The local property management company shall inspect the property no
less than on a monthly basis to determine if the property is in compliance with
the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 2709 § 1, 2009)
8.10.080: ADDITIONAL AUTHORITY:
The chief of police and the fire chief, and their respective designees, shall
have the authority to require the beneficiary/trustee/owner and/or owner of
record of any property affected by this section to implement additional
maintenance and/or security measures including, but not limited to, securing
any/all door(s), window(s) or other openings, installing additional security
lighting, increasing on site inspection frequency, employment of an on site
security guard, or other measures as may be reasonably required to arrest the
decline of the property. (Ord. 2709 § 1, 2009)
8.10.090: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Violations of this chapter shall be treated as a strict liability offense
regardless of intent. Any individual or entity that violates any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Any person or
entity convicted of a misdemeanor under the provisions of this chapter shall be
punished by imprisonment in the county jail not exceeding six (6) months or by
fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or both. Except as
otherwise provided in this chapter, each person or entity shall be guilty of a
separate offense for each and every day during or on which any violation of any
provision of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person
or entity. (Ord. 2709 § 1, 2009)
CHAPTER 8.11
MAINTENANCE OF FORECLOSED RESIDENTIAL PROPERTIES
SECTION:
8.11.010: Purpose And Preemption
8.11.020: Maintenance Of Foreclosed Residential Properties And Notice Of
Violation
8.11.030: Notice Of Violation And Time To Cure
8.11.040: Penalty
8.11.050: Hearing To Contest Fine
8.11.060: Sunset Date
8.11.010: PURPOSE AND PREEMPTION:
This chapter is intended to carry out the provisions of California Civil Code
section 2929.3. Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted or implemented in
a manner that is inconsistent with state law. In the event there is a conflict
between the provisions of state law and this chapter, state law shall control.
(Ord. 2715 § 1, 2009)
8.11.020: MAINTENANCE OF FORECLOSED RESIDENTIAL PROPERTIES AND NOTICE OF
VIOLATION:
   A.   The legal owner of vacant residential property purchased by that owner
at a foreclosure sale, or acquired by that owner through foreclosure under a
mortgage or deed of trust, shall maintain that property in accordance with the
requirements of this code.
   B.   For purposes of this chapter, "failure to maintain" means the failure
to care for the exterior of the property in accordance with the provisions of
this title, including, but not limited to, permitting excessive foliage growth
that diminishes the value of surrounding properties, failing to take action to
prevent trespassers or squatters from remaining on the property, failing to
take action to prevent mosquito larvae from growing in standing water, or
permitting other conditions that create a public nuisance. (Ord. 2715 § 1,
2009)
8.11.030: NOTICE OF VIOLATION AND TIME TO CURE:
   A.   If the city intends to impose a fine pursuant to this section, the city
shall give notice of the alleged violation, including a description of the
conditions that gave rise to the allegation, and notice of the city's intent to
assess the civil fine if action to correct the violation is not started within
a period of not less than fourteen (14) days and completed within a period of
not less than thirty (30) days.
   B.   The city may provide less than thirty (30) days' notice to remedy a
condition if the city determines that a specific condition of the property
threatens public health or safety and provided that the notice of violation
states that there is a threat to public health and safety, and time for
compliance is given.
   C.   Subject to the provisions of this section, the city, through
administrative action approved by the city manager, may establish different
compliance periods for different conditions on the same property in the notice
of violation mailed to the legal owner.
   D.   Notice pursuant to this section shall be mailed to the address provided
in the deed or other instrument as specified in subdivision (a) of section
27321.5 of the Government Code, or if none, to the return address provided on
the deed or other instrument. (Ord. 2715 § 1, 2009)
8.11.040: PENALTY:
   A.   The city may impose a civil fine of up to one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) per day for each day that the owner fails to maintain the property,
commencing on the day following the expiration of the period to remedy the
violation.
   B.   In determining the amount of the fine, the city shall take into
consideration any timely and good faith efforts by the legal owner to remedy
the violation.
   C.   Fines and penalties collected pursuant to this section shall be
directed to the city's nuisance abatement programs.
   D.   The city may not impose fines on a legal owner under both Civil Code
section 2929.3 and another city ordinance. However, Civil Code section 2929.3
shall not preempt any city ordinance.
   E.   The rights and remedies provided in this section are cumulative and in
addition to any other rights and remedies provided by law. (Ord. 2715 § 1,
2009)
8.11.050: HEARING TO CONTEST FINE:
   A.   Request For Hearing: The legal owner may contest the fine imposed on
his/her property pursuant to this chapter. A request for a hearing must be
filed in writing with the city's quality of life department no later than ten
(10) days after the imposition of the fine. The request must state the grounds
for the appeal and include a nonrefundable appeals processing fee in the amount
established by resolution of the city council of the city. Failure to timely
request a hearing or to pay the appeals processing fee constitutes a waiver of
the right to appeal and a failure to exhaust administrative remedies.
   B.   Hearing Procedure:
      1.   The city manager or the city manager's designee shall designate a
hearing officer. The hearing officer may be the hearing officer used by the
city for conducting other code enforcement hearings.
      2.   The hearing shall be held not less than fifteen (15) days and not
more than sixty (60) days from the date that the request for hearing is filed.
The hearing may be continued from time to time as deemed necessary by the
hearing officer. Notice of the time, date and location of the hearing shall be
provided to the legal owner no later than ten (10) days before the hearing.
      3.   At the hearing, the party contesting the fine shall be given the
opportunity to testify and to present evidence or witnesses concerning the
violation.
      4.   The failure of the person contesting the violation to appear at the
hearing shall constitute a waiver of the hearing, a failure to exhaust
administrative remedies and agreement by the person contesting the fine to pay
the administrative fine.
      5.   The notice of violation, fine and any additional report submitted by
the person issuing the citation shall constitute prima facie evidence of the
respective facts contained in those documents. The burden of proof shall then
be on the person contesting the fine to refute such evidence.
      6.   Neither the rules of evidence as provided by California state law,
nor the provisions of the administrative procedures act apply to hearings under
this chapter.
   C.   Decision: After considering all of the testimony and evidence submitted
at the hearing, the hearing officer shall issue a written, final decision to
uphold or cancel the fine and shall state in the final decision the reasons for
that decision. A copy of the decision shall be served on the legal owner. The
decision of the hearing officer shall be final, except for judicial review.
   D.   Fine Payment Deadline: If the final decision of the hearing officer
affirms the issuance of the fine, the legal owner shall pay the fine to the
city within thirty (30) days after service of the decision. (Ord. 2715 § 1,
2009)
8.11.060: SUNSET DATE:
This chapter, similar to Civil Code section 2929.3, shall remain in effect
until January 1, 2013, and as of that date is repealed, unless the state of
California enacts a statute before January 1, 2013, that either deletes or
extends that date. (Ord. 2715 § 1, 2009)
CHAPTER 8.12
DISEASE CONTROL
SECTION:
Article I. Health Officer; Duties
8.12.010: Designated
8.12.020: Establishment Of Emergency Location
8.12.030: Quarantine Enforcement
8.12.040: Emergency; Water Purification
8.12.050: Milk Pasteurization
8.12.060: Destruction Of Tainted Or Injurious Substances
Article II. Disease Reports
8.12.070: Innkeeper Or Householder Report
8.12.080: Physician's Report
8.12.090: Report Of Employment As Food Handler Or School Worker
8.12.100: Duty Of Person In Attendance To Report
8.12.110: Isolation
8.12.120: Disease Of Unusual Character Or Prevalence
8.12.130: Disease Of Uncertain Diagnosis
8.12.140: Control Pending Diagnosis
8.12.150: Embalming Of Bodies Of Communicable Disease Victims
8.12.160: Duty Of Undertaker Or Embalmer To Report
Article III. Cooperation By Physician
8.12.170: Submittal Of Specimens For Laboratory Examination
8.12.180: Diseases Specified
8.12.190: Report By Health Officer
8.12.200: Cooperation In Disease Control; Immediate Isolation
8.12.210: Advice To Household
8.12.220: Immunization
8.12.230: Immediate Report On Botulism Required
8.12.240: Food Samples
Article IV. Tuberculosis
8.12.250: Report Required
8.12.260: Time For Report
8.12.270: Report Of Discharge Of Patient
8.12.280: Sanitary Disposal Of Excretions
8.12.290: Enforcement
Article V. Quarantine; Isolation
8.12.300: Posting
8.12.310: Effect Of Quarantine
8.12.320: Employed Members Of Family
8.12.330: Designation Of Quarantined Area
8.12.340: Deliveries
8.12.350: Interference With Placard Prohibited
8.12.360: Notice Of Placard Removal Required
8.12.370: Breaking Quarantine Unlawful
8.12.380: Access By Certain Persons
8.12.390: Permit; Revocation
8.12.400: Exclusion Of Schoolchildren
8.12.410: Conditions For School Attendance
8.12.420: Transportation Of Persons
8.12.430: Restriction Of Contacts
8.12.440: Quarantine Of Exposed Person
8.12.450: Isolation Of Indigents
8.12.460: Isolation Of Nonindigents
8.12.470: County Hospitalization Of Nonindigents
8.12.480: Violation; Penalty
Article VI. Articles On Contaminated Premises
Subdivision 1. Definitions
8.12.490: Cleaned
8.12.500: Concurrent Disinfection
8.12.510: Deloused
8.12.520: Disinfection
8.12.530: Disinfestation
8.12.540: Fumigation
8.12.550: Renovation
Subdivision 2. General Provisions
8.12.560: Disinfection Of Premises
8.12.570: Action After Removal Of Diseased
8.12.580: Duty To Carry Out Orders
8.12.590: Health Officer Instructions
8.12.600: Delousing
8.12.610: Fumigation; Renovation
8.12.620: Emergency Action
8.12.630: Destruction Of Bedding Or Other Articles
8.12.640: Removal Of Articles From Premises
8.12.650: Cleaning And Disinfection Of Sickroom; Procedure
8.12.660: Disinfection Procedure
ARTICLE I. HEALTH OFFICER; DUTIES
8.12.010: DESIGNATED:
It shall be the duty of the health officer, either personally or through a
qualified representative, within a reasonable time after the receipt of a
report of a case of communicable disease:
   A.   Seeking Source Of Infection; Verifying Diagnosis: To make such
investigation as the circumstances may require for the purpose of ascertaining
the source of infection and discovering contacts and unreported cases; to
examine all such cases necessary to verify the diagnosis.
   B.   Collection Of Specimens: To collect and submit (or cause to be
collected and submitted) such laboratory and other specimens as may be required
to supply necessary or desirable information in determining the diagnosis, the
source of infection and the possible infection of contacts.
   C.   Advice For Patient: To give to the patient, his attendants, members of
the household and contacts of the infected person, such instructions and advice
as may be necessary to prevent the spread of the disease.
   D.   Immunization Of Contacts: To take such measures as may be necessary to
secure the immunization of all contacts with persons suffering from
communicable diseases.
   E.   Quarantine; Posting Of Premises: To post and maintain at the entrance
of the premises, where a communicable disease exists, which is subject to
quarantine, due notice to the public that such premises are quarantined.
   F.   Guards: When necessary, to post guards at such places.
   G.   Removal To Isolation, Quarantine: To remove to a suitable place of
isolation or quarantine all patients affected with a communicable disease or
suspected of having such communicable disease when either the condition of the
patient or the proper protection of the public health demands such removal.
(Prior code §§ 34100–34107)
8.12.020: ESTABLISHMENT OF EMERGENCY LOCATION:
For such purpose, the health officer is authorized to establish and maintain in
an emergency a suitable place of treatment or isolation or quarantine at city
expense for the period of such emergency. (Prior code § 34108)
8.12.030: QUARANTINE ENFORCEMENT:
He may enforce such quarantine measures as may be necessary in the interest of
the general health of the community. (Prior code § 34110)
8.12.040: EMERGENCY; WATER PURIFICATION:
During emergencies, the health officer may take steps to purify the water
supply by appropriate disinfection. (Prior code § 34111)
8.12.050: MILK PASTEURIZATION:
When necessary for the protection of the public health, he shall have the
authority to pasteurize or order milk pasteurized when same is suspected of
carrying typhoid fever or other communicable diseases. (Prior code § 34112)
8.12.060: DESTRUCTION OF TAINTED OR INJURIOUS SUBSTANCES:
He shall have authority to destroy or render noninfectious any food, drink or
other substance threatening the public health. (Prior code § 34113)
ARTICLE II. DISEASE REPORTS
8.12.070: INNKEEPER OR HOUSEHOLDER REPORT:
It is the duty of every keeper of a hotel or boarding or lodging house, and of
every household, to report in writing to the health officer, at once, the name
of every person residing, lodging or boarding at his or her hotel, lodging or
boarding house, or other house, whom he or she shall have reason to believe to
be sick with any communicable disease, and every death occurring at his or her
hotel, lodging or boarding house, or other house from any communicable disease,
and in every case the nature of the disease, if known. (Prior code § 34200)
8.12.080: PHYSICIAN'S REPORT:
It is the duty of every physician or other person engaged in the treatment of
the sick to report to the health officer each such patient affected with
communicable disease, with his full name, age, sex, and address, together with
the name of the disease, if known, within twenty four (24) hours of the time
the case is first seen by him. (Prior code § 34201)
8.12.090: REPORT OF EMPLOYMENT AS FOOD HANDLER OR SCHOOL WORKER:
Such reports in the case of diphtheria, dysentery, paratyphoid fever, typhoid
fever, epidemic streptococcus sore throat, scarlet fever, or other communicable
disease carried by food or beverages, shall also state whether the patient or
any member of the patient's family household is engaged in the handling or sale
of milk or other foodstuffs for human consumption, or is engaged in teaching or
working in a school or in caring for children, other than those of his or her
own immediate family. (Prior code § 34202)
8.12.100: DUTY OF PERSON IN ATTENDANCE TO REPORT:
When no physician is in attendance, it shall be the duty of any midwife,
visiting nurse, school nurse, public health nurse, private duty nurse, the head
of any private household or the person in charge of any institution, hotel,
hospital, sanitarium, boarding house, or camp to report immediately to the
health officer the name and address of any person under his charge or in his
institution affected with any disease which presumably may be communicable.
(Prior code § 34203)
8.12.110: ISOLATION:
Until the health officer investigates such case and takes official action
regarding it, strict isolation shall be maintained. (Prior code § 34204)
8.12.120: DISEASE OF UNUSUAL CHARACTER OR PREVALENCE:
It is the duty of any physician, visiting nurse, public health nurse, and every
superintendent or other person in charge of any school, hospital, institution,
dispensary, laboratory, labor camp, or other camp, who shall have knowledge of
the occurrence of any disease which is unusual in character or prevalence, to
report the same to the health officer, whose duty it shall be to investigate
the same and endeavor to determine the cause or conditions responsible for it.
(Prior code § 34205)
8.12.130: DISEASE OF UNCERTAIN DIAGNOSIS:
In cases of doubt or disputed diagnosis where uncertainty exists as to the
nature of a suspected case of communicable disease, the health officer shall
enforce and control measures provided for the suspected disease and shall refer
the matter to the state director of public health. (Prior code § 34206)
8.12.140: CONTROL PENDING DIAGNOSIS:
Whenever a case of unrecognized illness shall be reported to the health
officer, which upon investigation presents symptoms of a communicable disease,
but in which, in the judgment of the health officer sufficient time has not
elapsed to render a positive diagnosis possible, the health officer shall
establish control measures applicable in actual cases of communicable disease
until such time as positive diagnosis can be established and if the disease
proves to be not communicable, the temporary control measures shall be
terminated at once. (Prior code § 34207)
8.12.150: EMBALMING OF BODIES OF COMMUNICABLE DISEASE VICTIMS:
It is the duty of all undertakers or embalmers before proceeding to the actual
embalming of any body in which the cause of death is suspected to be a
communicable disease to await the official approval of the health officer
before proceeding. (Prior code § 34208)
8.12.160: DUTY OF UNDERTAKER OR EMBALMER TO REPORT:
If the case was previously unreported to the health officer, it shall be the
duty of the undertaker or embalmer to make a report at once. (Prior code §
34209)
ARTICLE III. COOPERATION BY PHYSICIAN
8.12.170: SUBMITTAL OF SPECIMENS FOR LABORATORY EXAMINATION:
It is the duty of each and every physician who shall be in attendance on any
person suffering from any of the diseases specified in section
8.12.180 of this article to submit to the city laboratory or to a laboratory
accredited by the state board of health for examination, suitable specimens as
prescribed by the health officer to aid in establishing the diagnosis and
control of such diseases. (Prior code § 34300)
8.12.180: DISEASES SPECIFIED:
The following are included under this article: anthrax, diphtheria, epidemic
streptococcus sore throat, glanders, gonorrhea, malaria, meningococcus
meningitis, paratyphoid fever, syphilis, tuberculosis, tularemia, typhoid
fever, undulant fever and Vincent's angina, and such other diseases as the
health officer may from time to time require. (Prior code § 34301)
8.12.190: REPORT BY HEALTH OFFICER:
It shall be the duty of the health officer to render a report as quickly as
possible to such physician sending suitable specimens for diagnosis of
communicable diseases. (Prior code § 34302)
8.12.200: COOPERATION IN DISEASE CONTROL; IMMEDIATE ISOLATION:
It is the duty of the attending physician immediately upon discovering a case
of communicable disease to cause the patient to be isolated, pending official
action by the health officer. (Prior code § 34303)
8.12.210: ADVICE TO HOUSEHOLD:
Such physician shall also advise other members of the household regarding the
precautions to be taken to prevent further spread of the disease. (Prior code §
34304)
8.12.220: IMMUNIZATION:
He shall cooperate with the health officer in endeavoring to secure the
immunization or prompt treatment of such patient or contacts to render them
noninfectious. (Prior code § 34305)
8.12.230: IMMEDIATE REPORT ON BOTULISM REQUIRED:
Every physician, visiting nurse, public health nurse and every superintendent
or other person in charge of any hospital, sanitarium, institution, dispensary,
laboratory, camp or other place, who shall have knowledge of the occurrence of
a case of botulism or other severe or fatal illness believed to have been due
to the consumption of spoiled or poisonous food, shall report the same
immediately by telephone or messenger to the health officer. (Prior code §
34306)
8.12.240: FOOD SAMPLES:
Whenever possible, samples of the suspected food must also be sent to the
health officer at once. (Prior code § 34307)
ARTICLE IV. TUBERCULOSIS
8.12.250: REPORT REQUIRED:
It is the duty of every physician and of every person in charge of any
hospital, dispensary or other private or public institution in the county to
report in writing to the health officer and on the form provided for that
purpose by the state department of public health, the name, residence and such
other information as may be required, of every person having tuberculosis, who
comes under his or her observation. (Prior code § 34400)
8.12.260: TIME FOR REPORT:
Such reports shall show the stage of the disease and must be forwarded to the
health officer within twenty four (24) hours after the knowledge of the case
comes to such physician or person. (Prior code § 34401)
8.12.270: REPORT OF DISCHARGE OF PATIENT:
Whenever a patient with tuberculosis is discharged from any institution or
hospital or other public or private place, a report of such discharge, giving
the status of the disease, with the address to which the patient is going,
shall be forwarded to the health officer within twenty four (24) hours
thereafter. (Prior code § 34402)
8.12.280: SANITARY DISPOSAL OF EXCRETIONS:
No person having tuberculosis, shall dispose of his sputum, saliva, or other
bodily secretion or excretion so as to cause offense or danger to any person or
persons occupying the same room or apartment or house or part of a house.
(Prior code § 34403)
8.12.290: ENFORCEMENT:
In all cases of violation of section
 8.12.280 of this article, the health officer shall take such steps as he may
find necessary to protect the public health. (Prior code § 34404)
ARTICLE V. QUARANTINE; ISOLATION
8.12.300: POSTING:
The health officer, after satisfying himself that a quarantinable contagious
disease is present (or that it is strongly suggested that such a disease is
present) must establish quarantine of the premises by posting a suitable sign
at the entrance of the premises. (Prior code § 34500)
8.12.310: EFFECT OF QUARANTINE:
Until the removal of the sign is authorized by the health officer, no person
shall leave the premises or remove any article therefrom without the permission
of the health officer, nor shall any person not already confined within the
quarantined area enter the premises. (Prior code § 34501)
8.12.320: EMPLOYED MEMBERS OF FAMILY:
Where some member of the family not ill is gainfully employed in some
occupation, except teaching, food handling, or other work bringing them into
contact with children or food, the health officer, if he deems it without
possible danger to the public may permit such a person under conditions to
continue his work. (Prior code § 34502)
8.12.330: DESIGNATION OF QUARANTINED AREA:
The quarantined area includes the house and the yard, or the area immediately
surrounding the house. (Prior code § 34503)
8.12.340: DELIVERIES:
It is permissible for deliverymen of groceries, ice, mail, etc., to leave their
products on the porch or some designated spot outside of the house. But they
must not enter the house, nor come in contact with persons in the house. (Prior
code § 34504)
8.12.350: INTERFERENCE WITH PLACARD PROHIBITED:
No person shall interfere with or obstruct any health officer or his authorized
representative in the posting of any placard establishing quarantine in
accordance with law, in or on any place or premises, nor shall any person
conceal, mutilate or remove any such placard, except by permission of the
health officer. (Prior code § 34506)
8.12.360: NOTICE OF PLACARD REMOVAL REQUIRED:
In the event any such placard is concealed, mutilated or torn down, it shall be
the duty of the occupant of the premises whereupon such placard was posted to
notify the health officer of such fact immediately. (Prior code § 34507)
8.12.370: BREAKING QUARANTINE UNLAWFUL:
It is unlawful for any person residing or being in any place which is
quarantined by the health officer, to leave such place without the consent of
the health officer. (Prior code § 34508)
8.12.380: ACCESS BY CERTAIN PERSONS:
The physician in attendance, any registered nurse in attendance, the clergyman,
undertaker or any member of the health department in performance of their
duties, may have access to the quarantined household therein, under such
regulations as may be adopted from time to time by the health officer. (Prior
code § 34509)
8.12.390: PERMIT; REVOCATION:
Any permits issued under authority of sections
8.12.370 and
8.12.380 of this article may be revoked upon failure to comply with the
regulations governing the issuance of such permits. (Prior code § 34510)
8.12.400: EXCLUSION OF SCHOOLCHILDREN:
Schoolchildren affected with the following named diseases may be excluded by
the health officer from attendance at school, which list is supplementary to
the list of diseases prescribed by the state board of health: impetigo
contagiosa, pediculosis, ringworm, scabies and Vincent's infection. (Prior code
§ 34511)
8.12.410: CONDITIONS FOR SCHOOL ATTENDANCE:
The health officer shall prescribe conditions under which children affected
with these diseases may attend school. (Prior code § 34512)
8.12.420: TRANSPORTATION OF PERSONS:
No person shall without a written permit from the health officer transport,
carry or remove in any manner from one building or place to another, or from
any railway depot, or conveyance to any house or through any public street or
highway, any person afflicted with any communicable disease. (Prior code §
34513)
8.12.430: RESTRICTION OF CONTACTS:
No person who has attended upon or otherwise come in contact with any case of
communicable disease in such a manner or to such an extent as to render him or
her liable to contract such disease or to communicate such disease to others
shall go into any public place or assembly or mingle with other persons not
affected with such disease. (Prior code § 34514)
8.12.440: QUARANTINE OF EXPOSED PERSON:
The health officer may, when it is necessary, cause any person so exposed to be
quarantined in the manner herein provided until the danger of such person's
having or communicating such communicable disease has passed. (Prior code §
34515)
8.12.450: ISOLATION OF INDIGENTS:
The health officer shall isolate all indigent cases of communicable diseases
which, in his opinion, must be removed from their homes, such cases to be
committed to the superintendent of charities for care in county institutions.
(Prior code § 34516)
8.12.460: ISOLATION OF NONINDIGENTS:
In the cases of communicable diseases in persons other than indigents, the
health officer shall attempt to secure isolation and treatment if possible in
private institutions. (Prior code § 34517)
8.12.470: COUNTY HOSPITALIZATION OF NONINDIGENTS:
If private institutions are not found available and in his opinion hospital
isolation and care continues, such nonindigent contagious persons shall be
committed to the county hospital and the individual shall reimburse the county
hospital. (Prior code § 34518)
8.12.480: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Failure to comply with quarantine regulations is a misdemeanor and is
punishable by both fine and imprisonment. Anyone found guilty of violating
these regulations will be prosecuted. (Prior code § 34505)
ARTICLE VI. ARTICLES ON CONTAMINATED PREMISES
SUBDIVISION 1. DEFINITIONS
8.12.490: CLEANED:
"Cleaned" signifies the removal by scrubbing and washing with hot water, soap
and washing soda, of organic matter on which and in which bacteria may find
favorable conditions for prolonging life and virulence, and also the removal by
the same means of bacteria adherent to surfaces. (Prior code § 34600)
8.12.500: CONCURRENT DISINFECTION:
"Concurrent disinfection" indicates the application of disinfectant immediately
after the discharge of infectious material from the body of an infected person
or after the soiling of articles with such infectious discharges, all personal
contact with such discharges or articles being prevented prior to disinfection.
(Prior code § 34603)
8.12.510: DELOUSED:
"Deloused" means the process by which a person and his personal apparel are
treated so that neither the adults nor the eggs of the Pediculus corporis,
pediculusputis, or Pediculus capitis survive. (Prior code § 34601)
8.12.520: DISINFECTION:
"Disinfection" means the destroying of the vitality of the epathogenic
microorganisms or viruses by chemical or physical means. (Prior code § 34602)
8.12.530: DISINFESTATION:
"Disinfestation" means any process such as the use of dry or moist heat,
gaseous agents, poison food or trapping by which insects and animals known to
be capable of conveying or transmitting infection may be destroyed. (Prior code
§ 34604)
8.12.540: FUMIGATION:
"Fumigation" means a process by which the destruction of insects such as
mosquitoes and body lice, and animals such as rats, is accomplished by means of
gasoline agents. (Prior code § 34605)
8.12.550: RENOVATION:
"Renovation" means, in addition to cleansing, such treatment of the walls,
floors and ceilings or rooms of houses as may be necessary to place the
premises in a satisfactory sanitary condition as a habitation. (Prior code §
34606)
SUBDIVISION 2. GENERAL PROVISIONS
8.12.560: DISINFECTION OF PREMISES:
Upon the discovery of any person or animal or other thing affected or infected
with a communicable disease, the owner or manager thereof shall on demand cause
all houses, buildings, or premises, and all articles thereon which might harbor
germs or viruses, or carriers thereof, to be disinfected, disinfested,
deloused, renovated or cleaned, or fumigated under the supervision of the
health officer. (Prior code § 34607)
8.12.570: ACTION AFTER REMOVAL OF DISEASED:
Following the termination or death or removal of any case of communicable
disease from a house or other place the health officer shall determine what
means shall be followed in rendering such a place noninfectious. (Prior code §
34608)
8.12.580: DUTY TO CARRY OUT ORDERS:
It shall by the duty of all persons to carry out the orders of the health
officer in regard to cleaning such premises and to cooperate in any further
means of destroying the vitality of pathogenic microorganisms or viruses in
such place as may be adopted or ordered by the health officer. (Prior code §
34609)
8.12.590: HEALTH OFFICER INSTRUCTIONS:
Whenever quarantine is established by the health officer for any communicable
disease, the health officer shall instruct all persons on the quarantined
premises to take the necessary steps to bring about concurrent disinfection to
prevent the spread of the disease through infectious discharges; and it shall
be the duty of all persons to obey such instructions. (Prior code § 34610)
8.12.600: DELOUSING:
The health officer shall take such measures as may be necessary to delouse all
infected persons, or contacts with the infected individuals on such quarantined
premises; and all such persons shall obey the orders of the health officer in
relation thereto for the purpose of preventing the spread of disease. (Prior
code § 34611)
8.12.610: FUMIGATION; RENOVATION:
Whenever the health officer shall find any premises to be infested with vermin
or rats or to be in such unsanitary condition as to require fumigation or
renovation, the health officer shall serve notice of such condition on the
owner, agent or tenant of such premises; and such owner, agent, or tenant shall
fumigate or renovate such premises as directed. (Prior code § 34612)
8.12.620: EMERGENCY ACTION:
Whenever an emergency exists that requires immediate action for the protection
of the public health, the health officer shall at the expense of the city
proceed to render such house, building or premises free from all danger of the
spread of communicable disease. (Prior code § 34613)
8.12.630: DESTRUCTION OF BEDDING OR OTHER ARTICLES:
If it is necessary to destroy any clothing or bedding or other articles to
prevent the spread of communicable disease, then the same shall be destroyed by
the health officer or under his direction. (Prior code § 34614)
8.12.640: REMOVAL OF ARTICLES FROM PREMISES:
No person shall remove any article of clothing or bedding or other article by
which the germ of disease may be carried from any house, building or premises
in which there is or has been a case of communicable disease until such
articles have been thoroughly disinfected and the permission of the health
officer obtained for such removal. (Prior code § 34615)
8.12.650: CLEANING AND DISINFECTION OF SICKROOM; PROCEDURE:
The procedure for cleaning and disinfection of a sickroom shall be as follows:
   A.   Thoroughly dust room, using vacuum or moist cloth in order to prevent
dissemination of dust.
   B.   Scrub woodwork and floors with hot water and soap or soda.
   C.   Expose interior of rooms, as far as possible, to air and sunshine for
at least two (2) or three (3) days. (Prior code § 34616)
8.12.660: DISINFECTION PROCEDURE:
Disinfection procedure shall be as follows:
   A.   Burn objects grossly contaminated.
   B.   Prolonged airing and sunning of pillows, mattresses and furniture (2 or
3 days).
   C.   Soak bed linen, etc., in disinfectant solution; two (2) hours in a
creosote solution (Lysol) made as per directions on bottle; after soaking, boil
linen thirty (30) minutes. If sent to laundry, mark laundry bag "Infected".
   D.   Thoroughly dust room with cloths wrung out of disinfectant solution.
   E.   Scrub woodwork, dresser drawers, bathroom and cabinet with hot water
and soap to which has been added a creosote preparation as per direction on
bottle. (Prior code § 34617)
CHAPTER 8.16
HOSPITALS
(Rep. by Ord. 2679 § 2, 2008)
CHAPTER 8.20
TRAILERS, MOBILEHOMES, COMMERCIAL COACHES AND HOUSECARS
SECTION:
Article I. General Provisions
8.20.010: Applicability
8.20.020: Exempt Locations
Article II. Definitions
8.20.030: Camper
8.20.040: Commercial Coach
8.20.050: Housecar
8.20.060: Mobilehome
8.20.070: Mobilehome Park
8.20.080: Public Works
8.20.090: Temporary Buildings
8.20.100: Trailer
Article III. Residential Zones
8.20.110: Location
Article IV. Nonresidential Zones
8.20.120: Construction Use
8.20.130: Installation And Removal
8.20.140: Location
Article V. Subdivision Developments
8.20.150: Trailer Use
8.20.160: Sales Office Trailers
8.20.170: Location
8.20.180: Construction Buildings Or Vehicles; Installation And Removal
8.20.190: Sales Office; Installation And Removal
Article VI. Enforcement
8.20.200: Director To Enforce; Right Of Entry
8.20.210: Violation; Penalty
ARTICLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS
8.20.010: APPLICABILITY:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the use and parking of trailers,
commercial coaches, and housecars within the city. (Prior code § 66000)
8.20.020: EXEMPT LOCATIONS:
The provisions of this chapter do not apply to the parking of mobilehomes in a
mobilehome park nor does this chapter apply to mobilehomes placed on
residentially zoned lots when such installation has been approved by the
planning commission and city council; nor does it apply to trailers for
commercial coaches in nonresidential zones when such installation has been
specifically approved by the planning commission and city council; nor do the
provisions of this chapter apply to temporary buildings, trailers, or
commercial coaches used in conjunction with public works projects as defined in
section
8.20.080 of this chapter. (Prior code § 66001)
ARTICLE II. DEFINITIONS
8.20.030: CAMPER:
"Camper" means a structure designed to be mounted upon a motor vehicle and to
provide facilities for human habitation or camping purposes. (Prior code §
66100)
8.20.040: COMMERCIAL COACH:
"Commercial coach" means a vehicle with or without motive power, designed and
equipped for human occupancy for industrial, professional, or commercial
purposes. (Prior code § 66101)
8.20.050: HOUSECAR:
"Housecar" means a motor vehicle originally designed or permanently altered and
equipped for human habitation or to which a camper has been attached (either
permanently or temporarily). This would include motor homes. (Prior code §
66102)
8.20.060: MOBILEHOME:
"Mobilehome" means a structure transportable in one or two (2) sections
designed as a dwelling unit. (Prior code § 66103)
8.20.070: MOBILEHOME PARK:
"Mobilehome park" means an area consisting of approved mobilehome lots which
are rented or leased to accommodate mobilehomes. (Prior code § 66104)
8.20.080: PUBLIC WORKS:
"Public works" means construction, repair, or maintenance of public utilities,
public streets, public buildings, public parks, or any other property owned and
operated by a federal, state or local government. (Prior code § 66105)
8.20.090: TEMPORARY BUILDINGS:
"Temporary buildings" means a building moved to a site or constructed on a site
for the purpose of temporary use as an office, warehouse, toolshed, or shelter
of a night watchman. Such building shall not exceed twenty feet (20') in either
length or width. (Prior code § 66106)
8.20.100: TRAILER:
"Trailer" means a vehicle designed for carrying persons or property on its own
structure and for being drawn by a motor vehicle. A trailer includes commercial
coaches, boat trailers, travel trailers, mobilehomes, and similar vehicles.
(Prior code § 66107)
ARTICLE III. RESIDENTIAL ZONES
8.20.110: LOCATION:
The parking and storage of trailers, campers, mobilehomes, and housecars shall
comply with section
18.164.130 of this code; provided further, that there is compliance with each
of the following conditions:
   A.   The length shall not exceed thirty five feet (35') nor the width exceed
eight feet (8') for a mobilehome; fifteen feet (15') long for a utility
trailer, open or enclosed, and twenty five feet (25') long for a boat trailer;
   B.   Trailers and housecars parked in residential zones shall comply with
the current provisions of the vehicle code of the state of California and shall
be maintained in an operative condition at all times with tires maintained and
inflated to normal operating pressures;
   C.   A temporarily stored trailer, camper, or housecar shall have an
unimpeded access to a public way without need for the removal of any structure
or for any ground preparation or grading. Such access shall not pass through
nor encroach on any adjoining lot;
   D.   There shall be no human habitation or occupancy of such trailer,
mobilehome, camper, or housecar while being parked in accordance with section
18.164.130 of this code, nor shall such vehicle be connected to any utilities.
No electricity, fuel gases, sewer, or water shall be furnished or connected to
any such vehicle and no water or liquid waste shall be allowed to drain from
such vehicle when in storage. (Prior code § 66200)
ARTICLE IV. NONRESIDENTIAL ZONES
8.20.120: CONSTRUCTION USE:
A temporary building, trailer, or commercial coach may be parked on a
nonresidentially zoned site for use as an office, warehouse, toolshed, or
shelter for a night watchman only while such vehicle is being utilized for a
use related to a construction project on the same premises; provided, however,
such temporary building or trailer shall not be used as a dwelling. (Prior code
§ 66300)
8.20.130: INSTALLATION AND REMOVAL:
No trailer or commercial coach may be parked nor any temporary building erected
on any commercial premises for use as an office, warehouse, toolshed, or
shelter for a night watchman unless it will be utilized in connection with a
construction project which has been approved by the city and building permits
have been issued for the project. Such trailer or commercial coach shall be
removed within twenty four (24) hours after completion of the project. (Prior
code § 66301)
8.20.140: LOCATION:
A temporary building, trailer, or commercial coach shall be located at least
twenty five feet (25') from a street intersection, at least one hundred feet
(100') from any residence, and at least ten feet (10') from any property line
not abutting a street or alley. (Prior code § 66302)
ARTICLE V. SUBDIVISION DEVELOPMENTS
8.20.150: TRAILER USE:
A temporary building, or trailer, or commercial coach may be parked on a
construction site for use as an office, warehouse, toolshed, or shelter for a
night watchman while such temporary building or vehicle is being utilized in
conjunction with a construction project, provided it shall not be occupied as a
dwelling. (Prior code § 66400)
8.20.160: SALES OFFICE TRAILERS:
A trailer or commercial coach may be used as a sales office for residential
multiple developments of four (4) or more abutting dwelling units, provided
that the trailer is located within the boundaries of the property or
subdivision being constructed, and provided further that such trailer or
commercial coach complies with all applicable codes and ordinances. (Prior code
§ 66401)
8.20.170: LOCATION:
A temporary building, trailer, or commercial coach shall be located at least
twenty five feet (25') from any street intersection, five feet (5') from any
existing or proposed property line, including the property line abutting a
street, and one hundred feet (100') from any residence located outside the
subdivision boundary. (Prior code § 66402)
8.20.180: CONSTRUCTION BUILDINGS OR VEHICLES; INSTALLATION AND REMOVAL:
No trailer, commercial coach, nor temporary building may be parked as per
section
8.20.170 of this article on any subdivision premises for use as an office,
warehouse, toolshed, or shelter for a night watchman unless it will be utilized
in connection with a subdivision project which has been approved by the city
and building permits have been issued for the project. Such trailer, commercial
coach, or temporary building shall be removed within twenty four (24) hours of
the final inspection of the last dwelling in the subdivision. (Prior code §
66403)
8.20.190: SALES OFFICE; INSTALLATION AND REMOVAL:
A trailer or commercial coach which is used full or part time as a sales office
shall not be placed on a site as described in section
8.20.170 of this article until a building permit has been issued for one or
more residential units of the subdivision. Such trailer or commercial coach
shall be removed when eighty percent (80%) of the dwelling units have been sold
or by the time six (6) months has lapsed after the final inspection by the city
of the last residential unit in the subdivision. (Prior code § 66404)
ARTICLE VI. ENFORCEMENT
8.20.200: DIRECTOR TO ENFORCE; RIGHT OF ENTRY:
It is the duty of the director of the building and safety department to enforce
the provisions of this chapter, and for the purpose of enforcement, the
director of building and safety or his authorized representative, or the police
chief or his authorized representative, may enter upon any premises occupied by
any trailer, mobilehome, housecar, commercial coach, or similar vehicle or
temporary building for the purpose of making inspection and enforcing the
provisions of this chapter. (Prior code § 66500)
8.20.210: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be guilty of an infraction and upon a first conviction thereof
shall be punished by a fine not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00), and for a
second conviction within a period of one year, by a fine not exceeding one
hundred fifty dollars ($150.00), and for a third and any subsequent convictions
within a period of one year, by a fine not exceeding three hundred dollars
($300.00). (Prior code § 66501)
CHAPTER 8.26
INSPECTION GRADING OF FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS
SECTION:
8.26.010: Purpose, Intent And Scope
8.26.020: Adoption Of San Bernardino County Ordinance 3930
8.26.030: Enforcement Agency Designated
8.26.040: Schedule And Collection Of Fees
8.26.050: Violations; Penalty
8.26.010: PURPOSE, INTENT AND SCOPE:
The purpose and intent of this chapter is to protect the health, safety and
welfare of the public by providing consumers with important information
regarding health and sanitary conditions in food establishments. The provisions
of this chapter for the inspection grading of food establishments shall apply
at all times, or at those times herein specified, anywhere within the city that
any food and/or beverage products are sold or served. (Ord. 2609 § 1, 2005)
8.26.020: ADOPTION OF SAN BERNARDINO COUNTY ORDINANCE 3930:
   A.   The city adopts by reference, and makes a part of this chapter, by
reference, San Bernardino County ordinance 3930, attached as exhibit A to the
ordinance codified herein, entitled: "an ordinance of the county of San
Bernardino, state of California, adding chapter 14 to division 3 of title 3 and
adding subsection 16.0213B(b)(17) to chapter 2 of division 6 of title 1, all of
the San Bernardino County code, relating to inspection grading of food
establishments".
   B.   The aforementioned sections of the San Bernardino County code, adopted
by San Bernardino County ordinance 3930, are adopted as the inspection grading
of food establishments program of the city (the "program"). (Ord. 2609 § 1,
2005)
8.26.030: ENFORCEMENT AGENCY DESIGNATED:
The county of San Bernardino department of environmental health services is
designated as the enforcement agency for the city and is authorized to provide
the qualified personnel necessary to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 2609 § 1, 2005)
8.26.040: SCHEDULE AND COLLECTION OF FEES:
The schedule of fees contained within San Bernardino County ordinance 3930,
adopted herein by reference, is hereby adopted as the fees in effect in the
city, and shall be applicable within the city to provide for the costs of
administration and enforcement of this chapter. The city council of Redlands
finds and determines that the fees adopted herein are reasonably related to the
actual cost of administration and enforcement of the program. The San
Bernardino County department of environmental health services shall administer
and collect these fees for deposit with the county treasurer to offset the
costs incurred by the county in administering and enforcing this program for
and within the city. (Ord. 2609 § 1, 2005)
8.26.050: VIOLATIONS; PENALTY:
   A.   In accordance with section 33.1406(c) of the San Bernardino County
code, adopted by reference herein and applicable to this chapter, the letter
grade card posted in accordance with the program shall not be defaced, marred,
camouflaged, hidden or removed. It shall be unlawful to operate a food
establishment unless the letter grade is posted. Removal of the letter grade
card is a violation of this chapter and may result in the suspension or
revocation of the public health permit and shall be punishable as specified in
section 33.0112 of the San Bernardino County code, which is adopted by
reference herein and applicable to this chapter.
   B.   In addition, any violation of this section may be punishable in
accordance with chapter 1.20 of this code. (Ord. 2609 § 1, 2005)
CHAPTER 8.27
FOOD SHARING EVENTS
SECTION:
8.27.010: Purpose
8.27.020: Definitions
8.27.030: Permit Required
8.27.040: Permit Application Procedure
8.27.050: Event Regulations
8.27.060: Basis For Denying Permit
8.27.070: Revocation Of Permits
8.27.080: Administrative Appeals
8.27.090: Administrative Appeal Hearing Procedure
8.27.100: Exemptions
8.27.010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to: protect public health, safety and welfare by
requiring all persons or organizations that sponsor, promote or engage in food
sharing events on City-owned property to obtain a permit issued by the City
prior to engaging in such activity and requiring compliance with applicable San
Bernardino County regulations regarding food preparation and distribution; to
accommodate competing interests and uses for the limited park space when these
activities take place in City parks; and to ensure that events taking place on
City-owned property are consistent with the intended primary uses of the
property. (Ord. 2860, 2018)
8.27.020: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, certain words and phrases are defined, and
certain provisions shall be construed as herein set out, unless it shall be
apparent from their content that a different meaning is intended:
   CITY-OWNED PROPERTY: Includes Municipal parking lots, Municipal parking
structures, public sidewalks, public rights-of- way and City parks.
   CITY PARK: Means the City Hall Plaza and any public park or open space
within City limits. City Hall Plaza includes the pathways, green space and
rights-of-way located on the property bounded by Citrus Street to the north,
Sixth Street to the east, Cajon Street to the west, and Vine Street to the
south.
   FOOD SHARING EVENT: Means a non-social gathering that is planned, organized,
promoted or advertised where food is distributed or offered for charitable
purposes at no cost, or for a nominal charge, to any member of the public.
(Ord. 2860, 2018)
8.27.030: PERMIT REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any individual or organization to sponsor, promote or engage
in a food sharing event on City-owned property in violation of the provisions
of this chapter. Any enforcement officer identified in title 1, chapter 1.24 of
this Code may issue an administrative citation for a violation of this chapter.
Enforcement officers, in order to protect public health, safety and welfare,
are authorized to order immediate discontinuance of a food sharing event if the
sponsor cannot provide proof of compliance with the County of San Bernardino's
regulations concerning food preparation and distribution. (Ord. 2860, 2018)
8.27.040: PERMIT APPLICATION PROCEDURE:
Any person or organization sponsoring, promoting or engaging in a food sharing
event on City-owned property must obtain a permit issued by the City's Quality
of Life Department and comply with the following requirements:
   A.   Submit a permit application on a form provided by the City;
   B.   Submit a permit fee in an amount established by resolution of the City
Council;
   C.   Provide proof of compliance with all applicable County of San
Bernardino regulations relating to food preparation and distribution;
   D.   Provide proof of general liability insurance with coverage limits up to
one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence with the City of Redlands
named as an additional insured;
   E.   Agree to indemnify, hold harmless and defend the City from claims
arising from negligent acts, omissions or reckless or willful conduct of the
permittee or permittee's employees, agents or volunteers related to the
permittee's activities pursuant to the permit;
   F.   Provide a refundable deposit in the amount of five hundred dollars
($500.00) for maintenance and cleaning costs and agree to reimburse the City
for maintenance and cleaning costs in excess of the deposit. (Ord. 2860, 2018)
8.27.050: EVENT REGULATIONS:
A permittee must comply with the following regulations when conducting a food
sharing event:
   A.   Notify the City Manager's Office at least seventy two (72) hours prior
to an event, providing the location, date and time of the event.
   B.   Permittees shall be prepared to show proof of a valid permit issued
pursuant to this chapter upon request by any enforcement officer of the City.
   C.   Permittees shall be prepared to show proof of compliance with all
applicable County of San Bernardino regulations relating to food preparation,
handling and distribution upon request by any enforcement officer of the City.
   D.   Permittees shall not conduct an event in a manner that prevents normal
use of public streets, sidewalks or rights-of- way.
   E.   Permittees shall not conduct food sharing events in any Municipal
parking lot or parking structure.
   F.   Food sharing events shall not be conducted between the hours of sunset
and sunrise of the following day.
   G.   Permittees shall hold no more than one event per month, regardless of
location. No location will host more than one event per month.
   H.   No food sharing event shall be permitted to last more than three (3)
hours in duration. (Ord. 2860, 2018)
8.27.060: BASIS FOR DENYING PERMIT:
The City Manager or City Manager's designee shall issue a permit pursuant to
this chapter, unless:
   A.   The applicant fails or refuses to pay the required permit fee.
   B.   The applicant fails or refuses to sign an agreement indemnifying the
City for any claims that may arise from the permittee's activities in relation
to the permit.
   C.   The applicant fails or refuses to obtain appropriate insurance coverage
for the event.
   D.   The applicant fails to provide proof of compliance with the County of
San Bernardino's regulations applicable to food preparation, storage,
transportation, and distribution.
   E.   The applicant fails or refuses to provide the required deposit for
maintenance and cleaning costs. (Ord. 2860, 2018)
8.27.070: REVOCATION OF PERMITS:
Any permit granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may be revoked by
the City Manager or the City Manager's designee for any violation of this
chapter, any applicable provision of this Code or laws and regulations of the
County of San Bernardino, or State of California. Such revocation shall be made
only after written notice of the City's decision to revoke has been provided to
the permit holder and upon a hearing granted to the holder of the permit so
revoked as specified in this chapter. A permit holder may not sponsor, promote
or engage in a food sharing event once written notice of the permit revocation
has been issued. (Ord. 2860, 2018)
8.27.080: ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS:
An applicant or permit holder may appeal the denial of a permit application,
revocation of a permit, or issuance of an administrative citation by completing
a Request for Hearing form and returning it to the City within fifteen (15)
days from the date of being notified of the denial of the application,
revocation of the permit, or issuance of the administrative citation. The
applicant or permit holder shall be entitled to a hearing pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2860, 2018)
8.27.090: ADMINISTRATIVE APPEAL HEARING PROCEDURE:
   A.   Any hearing pursuant to this chapter shall be undertaken or held by a
person designated by the City Manager. The person to whom a matter is assigned
shall be deemed a "Hearing Officer". The Hearing Officer shall not be a City
employee. The employment, performance evaluation, compensation, and benefits of
the Hearing Officer, if any, shall not be directly or indirectly conditioned
upon the amount of fines upheld by the Hearing Officer or the outcome of any
appeal.
   B.   A hearing before the Hearing Officer shall be set for a date that is
not less than fifteen (15) and not more than thirty (30) days from the date
that the request for hearing is filed in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter. The person requesting the hearing shall be notified of the time and
place set for the hearing at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the
hearing.
   C.   In conducting such hearings the Hearing Officer shall not be bound in
the conduct thereof by the common law or statutory rules of evidence and
procedure, but inquiry shall be made in the matter, through oral testimony and
records, which is best calculated to ascertain the substantial rights of the
public and parties. The Hearing Officer shall ensure a record of the hearing is
made.
   D.   The Hearing Officer may continue the hearing and request additional
information from the parties prior to issuing a written decision.
   E.   After considering all of the testimony and evidence submitted at the
hearing, the Hearing Officer shall issue a written decision containing findings
of fact and an evaluation of the sufficiency of evidence to support the denial
of an application, revocation of a permit or finding of a violation. The
written decision shall be prepared and mailed to the appellant within ten (10)
days of the conclusion of the hearing and shall list in the decision the
reasons for that decision. The decision of the Hearing Officer shall be final.
   F.   If the Hearing Officer determines that an administrative citation
should be upheld, then the fine amount shall be paid to the City in accordance
with the provisions of title 1, chapter 1.22 of this Code.
   G.   If the Hearing Officer determines that a denial of an application for a
permit should be reversed, the Hearing Officer's written decision shall include
direction to City staff to issue a permit consistent with the Hearing Officer's
findings.
   H.   If the Hearing Officer determines that a revocation of a permit should
be reversed, the Hearing Officer's written decision shall include direction to
City staff to reinstate the permit consistent with the Hearing Officer's
findings. (Ord. 2860, 2018)
8.27.100: EXEMPTIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the City's Market Night, to
farmer's markets or events/activities where commercial food distribution takes
place. (Ord. 2860, 2018)
CHAPTER 8.28
PUBLIC EATING PLACES
(Rep. by Ord. 2679 § 3, 2008)
CHAPTER 8.32
SLAUGHTERING OF ANIMALS
(Rep. by Ord. 2679 § 4, 2008)
CHAPTER 8.36
SEWAGE AND REFUSE
SECTION:
8.36.010: Irrigation With Sewage Prohibited
8.36.020: Deposit Of Refuse
8.36.030: Privies And Cesspools; Maintenance
8.36.040: Privies And Cesspools; Cleaning
8.36.050: Privies And Cesspools; Transportation Of Contents
8.36.060: Right Of Entry
8.36.070: Interference Unlawful
8.36.080: Violation; Penalty
8.36.010: IRRIGATION WITH SEWAGE PROHIBITED:
No person, firm or corporation shall irrigate any strawberries, celery,
potatoes, lettuce, radishes, tomatoes, onions, or any vegetables or berries
eaten raw, in any manner with sewage effluent or water from any stream into
which sewage has been discharged. (Prior code § 30500)
8.36.020: DEPOSIT OF REFUSE:
No person shall permit the contents of any cesspool, septic tank, water closet,
sewer or sewage effluent, excrement, urine, slop water, butcher offal, market
refuse, garbage, rubbish, cans or any dead animal or any putrid or offensive
animal or vegetable matter, to remain or be deposited or discharged upon the
surface of the ground on any premises, lot, or upon the surface of the ground
on any premises, lot, or in any building, basement, or in any public street, or
into any standing water, or excavation or public place. (Prior code § 30501)
8.36.030: PRIVIES AND CESSPOOLS; MAINTENANCE:
No person shall erect, use or maintain any privy vault or cesspool for the
reception of human excrement or fecal matter upon any lot or premises in the
city abutting upon any street therein having a public sewer opposite such lot
or premises, or accessible thereto within a distance of one hundred fifty feet
(150') from the nearest point of such lot or premises to such sewer, unless the
same is connected to such sewer; and the use or maintenance of any such privy,
vault or cesspool not so connected is declared to be a public nuisance. (Prior
code § 36600)
8.36.040: PRIVIES AND CESSPOOLS; CLEANING:
No person shall fail or neglect to thoroughly clean any cesspool or privy upon
any property owned or occupied by him whenever the same becomes offensive or a
menace to health or likely to become so, or within forty eight (48) hours after
notice to do so by the health officer of the city, or fail or neglect to
thoroughly disinfect any privy, cesspool or premises whenever directed to do so
by the health officer. (Prior code § 36601)
8.36.050: PRIVIES AND CESSPOOLS; TRANSPORTATION OF CONTENTS:
No person shall carry through the streets, between the hours of six o'clock (6:
00) A.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) P.M., the contents of any cesspool or privy,
or use any vehicle for such purpose, or for the carrying of any swill or
garbage upon the street that is not sufficiently tight to prevent leakage
thereof and having a tightfitting wooden or metal cover; and such vehicle shall
be thoroughly cleaned immediately after use so that it shall be in a clean and
sanitary condition. (Prior code § 36602)
8.36.060: RIGHT OF ENTRY:
The disposal superintendent or the health officer of the city is specifically
required to enforce the provisions of this chapter, and shall have right to
inspect any and all premises for the purpose of determining the sanitary
condition thereof and whether the provisions of this chapter or other health
and sanitary requirements are being observed, and any person denying or
obstructing such inspection shall be subject to the penalty herein provided.
(Prior code § 36700)
8.36.070: INTERFERENCE UNLAWFUL:
It is unlawful for any person in any manner to interfere with or obstruct the
collection or disposal of refuse as herein provided for. (Prior code § 36701)
8.36.080: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter or wilfully
noncomplying with any of the terms, requirements or provisions contained
herein, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be
punishable by a fine not to exceed three hundred dollars ($300.00), or by
imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days, or
by both such fine and imprisonment. (Prior code § 36702)
CHAPTER 8.38
ONSITE WASTEWATER TREATMENT SYSTEMS
SECTION:
8.38.010: Purpose
8.38.020: Standards For Design And Operation
8.38.030: Charges
8.38.010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish standards for the approval,
installation, and operation of onsite wastewater treatment systems (OWTS)
within the City of Redlands, consistent with the appropriate California
Regional Water Quality Control Board (RWQCB) standards and basin plans. The
standards are adopted to prevent the creation of health hazards and nuisance
conditions and to protect surface and groundwater quality. The city has
prepared and adopted by resolution a Local Agency Management Program (LAMP) for
OWTS permitting and regulation throughout the city, and that program has been
approved by the California RWQCB for the Santa Ana Region. (Ord. 2909, 6-16-
2020)
8.38.020: STANDARDS FOR DESIGN AND OPERATION:
Any OWTS must be designed and operated in compliance with the provisions of the
current verison of the city’s adopted LAMP resolution, as approved by the
RWQCB. (Ord. 2909, 6-16-2020)
8.38.030: CHARGES:
A fee as established by resolution of the city council shall be paid upon
filing an application for review of the design of an OTWS, for inspection of
the construction of a new OTWS, and for oversight of the design review for an
OTWS permitted through the RWQCB. (Ord. 2909, 6-16-2020)
CHAPTER 8.40
ABATEMENT OF WEEDS AND RUBBISH
SECTION:
8.40.010: Fire Hazard Defined
8.40.020: Waste Matter Defined
8.40.030: Fire Chief; Duties
8.40.040: Exclusion Of Useful Grasses
8.40.050: Waste Matter Declared A Nuisance
8.40.060: Notice
8.40.070: Appeal
8.40.080: Abatement Procedure
8.40.090: Chemical Control
8.40.100: Violation; Penalty
8.40.010: FIRE HAZARD DEFINED:
All weeds, dry grasses, dead shrubs, dead trees, combustible rubbish, or any
material growing upon the streets, sidewalks or upon private property within
the city which bears seeds of a wingy or downy nature, which by reason of their
size, manner of growth and location constitute a fire hazard to any building,
improvements, crops, or other property, and weeds and grasses which, when dry,
will in reasonable probability constitute such a fire hazard, are declared to
be a public nuisance. (Prior code § 58101)
8.40.020: WASTE MATTER DEFINED:
"Waste matter" is defined for the purpose of this chapter as unused or
discarded matter, having no substantial market value, which is exposed to the
elements and is not enclosed in any structure or otherwise concealed from
public view, which possesses a substantial fire hazard to adjoining structures,
and which consists (without limitation or exclusion by enumeration) of such
matter and material as:
   A.   Combustible rubbish, crates, cartons;
   B.   Lumber not piled neatly, with proper access aisles.
If the fire chief or his authorized representative shall determine that it is
necessary to remove other discarded matter from the property so as to proceed
with the most practical method of abatement of the nuisance, removal of such
discarded matter is authorized. (Prior code § 58104)
8.40.030: FIRE CHIEF; DUTIES:
The fire chief or his authorized representative is the public officer
designated to perform the duties by this chapter. (Prior code § 58100)
8.40.040: EXCLUSION OF USEFUL GRASSES:
Cultivated and useful grasses and pastures shall not be declared a fire hazard.
However, if the fire chief or his authorized representative shall determine it
necessary to protect adjacent improved property from fire exposure, an adequate
fire break may be required. (Prior code § 58102)
8.40.050: WASTE MATTER DECLARED A NUISANCE:
Waste matter as herein defined, which by reason of its location and character
would materially hamper or interfere with the prevention or suppression of fire
upon the premises, is declared to be a public nuisance. (Prior code § 58103)
8.40.060: NOTICE:
   A.   If it is determined that a public nuisance, as herein defined, exists
on any lot or premises, or upon any sidewalk, parkway, or street adjacent to
such lot or premises, the chief of the fire department shall cause a notice to
be issued to abate such nuisance. Such notice shall be headed "NOTICE TO CLEAN
PREMISES" in letters not less than one inch (1") in height and shall, in
legible characters, direct the abatement of the nuisance as required by this
chapter. The notice shall provide that failure to abate the nuisance within
fourteen (14) days will result in abatement by the city, and the notice shall
further provide that a lien may be placed upon the property and that charges
may be collected with the taxes. Notices served by means other than posting as
provided by this chapter shall contain a description of the property in general
terms reasonably sufficient to identify the location of the nuisance.
   B.   The notice required by this chapter may be served in any one of the
following manners:
      1.   By personal service on the owner, occupant, or person in charge or
control of the property; or
      2.   By regular mail addressed to the owner or person in charge and
control of the property, at the address shown on the last available assessment
roll, or as otherwise known; or
      3.   By posting in a conspicuous place on the land or abutting public
right of way, or, in the alternative, insertion of a legal advertisement at
least once a week for the period of two (2) weeks in a newspaper of general
circulation in the city. The newspaper advertisement shall be a general notice
that property in the city has been posted in accordance with this chapter and
contain a general statement of the effect of such postings. The date of such
newspaper advertisement shall not be considered in computing the appeal periods
provided by this chapter. (Prior code § 58105)
8.40.070: APPEAL:
Within ten (10) days from the date of posting, mailing, or personal service of
the required notice, the owner or person occupying or controlling such lot or
premises affected may appeal to the city council of the city of Redlands.
   A.   At a regular meeting or regular adjourned meeting of the city council,
not more than twenty (20) days thereafter, it shall proceed to hear and pass
upon such appeal, and the decision of the city council thereupon shall be final
and conclusive.
   B.   It shall be the duty of the owner, the agent of the owner, or the
person in charge of any lot or premises in the city within ten (10) days from
the date of notification as provided herein, or in the case of an appeal to the
city council, within ten (10) days from the determination thereof, unless the
same is sustained, to remove the nuisance as stated. (Prior code § 58106)
8.40.080: ABATEMENT PROCEDURE:
If the owner fails or neglects to remove the nuisance as herein defined within
the time specified in this chapter, the chief of the fire department or his
authorized representative shall cause such nuisance to be abated. The abatement
work may be done by city crews or by private contractor. The fire department
shall send a demand for payment of the cost shown in the statement and paid by
the city, in addition to an administrative fee established by resolution of the
city council of the city, to the owner of the property by posting in the United
States mail, and may cause a statement of lien in the amount of the cost and
service charge to be filed with the recorder of San Bernardino County on each
separate affected property. Liens shall thereafter be released immediately upon
full payment to the city, or upon direction by the city council of the city.
   A.   A report of the proceedings and an account of the unreimbursed cost of
abating the nuisance on each separate property shall be filed with the city
clerk on or before July 10 following the abatement of the nuisance. The city
clerk shall thereupon set the report and accounts for hearing before the city
council at the second regular or an adjourned or a special meeting in the month
of July following the abatement of the nuisance; said report shall be available
for public inspection in the city clerk's office.
   B.   The city council shall consider the reports and accounts at the time
set for hearing, together with any objections or protests by interested
parties. Any owner of land or person interested therein may present a written
or oral protest or objections to the report and account. At the conclusion of
the hearing, the city council shall approve, correct, or modify the reports and
accounts. The city council shall adopt a resolution providing for the
collection of such amounts along with the taxes upon the respective parcels of
land as they are shown on the last available tax roll. If within five (5) days
after the hearing before the city council, payment is made by the property
owner of the amount due for the abatement of the nuisance, the amount shall not
be collected with the taxes and all liens shall be released.
   C.   Not less than five (5) days after the hearing before the city council,
but not after August 1 following the abatement of the nuisance, the city clerk
shall cause to be prepared and filed with the auditor of San Bernardino County
a certified copy of the resolution of the city council.
   D.   The provisions of sections 39580 to 39584, inclusive, of the Government
Code are incorporated by reference and made a part of this chapter. The county
auditor shall enter each assessment in the county tax roll opposite the parcel
of land. The amount of the assessment shall be collected at the time and in the
manner of ordinary municipal taxes; and if delinquent the amount is subject to
the same penalties and procedure of foreclosure and sale as is provided for
ordinary municipal taxes. (Ord. 2356 § 1, 1997: prior code § 58107)
8.40.090: CHEMICAL CONTROL:
The city council may, by resolution, find and declare that weeds on specified
parcels of property are seasonal and recurrent nuisances, that the efficient
and economical control of such nuisances requires preventive chemical control
of such nuisances upon those parcels. The resolution shall refer to street
addresses if such parcels front upon public streets, and if not, the resolution
shall refer to lot and block numbers according to a recorded subdivision or
parcel map. Thereafter, the city shall mail postcard notices to the owner of
the affected parcels, as they and their addresses appear on the county's
assessment roll. Each notice shall refer to and describe the property, state
that weeds thereon have been declared by resolution to be seasonal and
recurrent nuisances, and that the city will apply preventive chemical control
and may file a lien and recover the cost with the taxes unless the owner
supplies evidence of preventive chemical control already applied. If acceptable
evidence of preventive chemical control is not supplied by the owner, the city
may apply the preventive chemical control and recover costs pursuant to the
procedure applicable to weed abatement set forth in this chapter. (Prior code §
58108)
8.40.100: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
The owner, occupant, or agent of any lot or premises within the city who shall
permit or allow the existence of a public nuisance as defined in this chapter,
upon any lot or premises owned, occupied, or controlled by him, or who shall
violate any of the provisions of this chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to a fine of not more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00), or to imprisonment for a period not exceeding six
(6) months, or both such fine and imprisonment. (Prior code § 58109)
CHAPTER 8.42
GRAFFITI ABATEMENT PROCEDURE
SECTION:
8.42.010: Purpose And Intent
8.42.020: Definitions
8.42.030: Graffiti Prohibited
8.42.040: Notice
8.42.050: Service Of Notice
8.42.060: Appeal
8.42.070: Removal By City
8.42.080: Private Property Consent Forms
8.42.090: Public Property
8.42.100: Record Of Cost For Abatement
8.42.110: Report; Hearing And Proceedings
8.42.120: Assessment Of Costs Against Property
8.42.130: Limitation Of Filing Judicial Action
8.42.140: Common Utility Colors
8.42.150: Conditions On Encroachment Permits
8.42.160: Conditions On Discretionary Approvals
8.42.170: Reward
8.42.180: Violation; Penalty
8.42.010: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to provide a procedure for removal
of graffiti from walls and structures on both public and privately owned
property in order to reduce blight and deterioration within the city and to
protect the public safety.
The city finds and determines that graffiti is obnoxious and a public nuisance,
as defined in section
8.04.210 of this title, and must be abated to avoid the detrimental impact of
such graffiti on the city and its residents, and to prevent the further spread
of graffiti. (Ord. 2043 § 1, 1988)
8.42.020: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever the following terms are used in this chapter, they shall have the
meaning established by this section:
   GRAFFITI: The unauthorized spraying of paint or marking of ink, chalk, dye
or other similar substances on public and private buildings, structures and
places.
   GRAFFITI ABATEMENT PROCEDURE: An abatement procedure which identifies
graffiti, issues notice to the landowner to abate the graffiti, and cures in
absence of response.
   PRIVATE CONTRACTOR: Any person with whom the city shall have duly contracted
to remove graffiti. (Ord. 2043 § 1, 1988)
8.42.030: GRAFFITI PROHIBITED:
   A.   No person shall place graffiti or other writing upon any public or
privately owned permanent structure located on publicly or privately owned real
property within the city of Redlands.
   B.   No person owning or otherwise in control of any real property within
the city shall permit or allow any graffiti to be placed upon or remain on any
permanent structure located on such property when the graffiti is visible from
the street or other public or private property. (Ord. 2043 § 1, 1988)
8.42.040: NOTICE:
Whenever the city engineer determines that graffiti exists on any permanent
structure in the city of Redlands which is visible from the street or other
public or private property, the city engineer shall cause a notice to be issued
to abate such nuisance. The property owner shall have ten (10) days after the
date of the notice to remove the graffiti, or the property will be subject to
abatement by the city. (Ord. 2043 § 1, 1988)
8.42.050: SERVICE OF NOTICE:
   A.   The notice to abate graffiti pursuant to section
8.42.040 of this chapter shall cause a written notice to be served upon the
owner(s) of the affected premises, as such owner's name and address appears on
the last equalized property tax assessment rolls of the county of San
Bernardino. If there is no known address for the owner, the notice shall be
sent in care of the property address. The notice required by this chapter may
be served in any one of the following manners:
      1.   By personal service on the owner, occupant or person in charge or
control of the property;
      2.   By registered or certified mail addressed to the owner at the last
known address of the owner. If this address is unknown, the notice will be sent
to the property address.
   B.   The notice shall be substantially in the following form:
            NOTICE OF INTENT TO REMOVE GRAFFITI
Date:
NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that you are required by law at your expense to remove
or paint over the graffiti located on the property commonly known as
                 , Redlands, California, which is visible to public view,
within ten (10) days after the date of this notice; or, if you fail to do so,
City employees or private contractors employed by the City will enter upon your
property and abate the public nuisance by removal or painting over the
graffiti. The cost of the abatement by the City employees or its private
contractors will be assessed upon your property and such costs will constitute
a lien upon the land until paid.
All persons having any objection to, or interest in said matters are hereby
notified to submit any objections or comments to the City Engineer for the City
of Redlands or his/her designated representative within ten (10) days from the
date of this notice. At the conclusion of this ten (10) day period the City may
proceed with the abatement of the graffiti inscribed on your property at your
expense without further notice.
(Ord. 2043 § 1, 1988)
8.42.060: APPEAL:
Within ten (10) days from the mailing or personal service of the notice, the
owner or person occupying or controlling such premises or lot affected may
appeal to the city council of the city of Redlands. At a regular meeting or
regular adjourned meeting of the city council not more than twenty (20) days
thereafter, the council shall proceed to hear and pass upon such appeal. The
decision of the council thereupon shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 2043 §
1, 1988)
8.42.070: REMOVAL BY CITY:
Upon failure of persons to comply with the notice by the designated date, or
such continued date thereafter as the city engineer or his/her designated
representative approves, then the city engineer is authorized and directed to
cause the graffiti to be abated by city forces or private contract, and the
city or its private contractor is expressly authorized to enter upon the
premises for such purposes. All reasonable efforts to minimize damage from such
entry shall be taken by the city, and any paint used to obliterate graffiti
shall be as close as practicable to background color(s). (Ord. 2043 § 1, 1988)
8.42.080: PRIVATE PROPERTY CONSENT FORMS:
Property owners in the city of Redlands may consent in advance to city entry
onto private property for graffiti removal purposes. The city will make forms
for such consent available. (Ord. 2043 § 1, 1988)
8.42.090: PUBLIC PROPERTY:
Where a structure is owned by a public entity other than the city, the removal
of the graffiti may be authorized only after securing the consent of an
authorized representative of the public entity having jurisdiction over the
structure. (Ord. 2043 § 1, 1988)
8.42.100: RECORD OF COST FOR ABATEMENT:
The city engineer shall keep an account of costs (including incidental
expenses) of abating such nuisance on each separate parcel of land where the
work is done and shall render an itemized report in writing to the city council
showing the cost of abatement; provided, that before the report is submitted to
the council, a copy shall be served in accordance with the provisions of
section
8.42.040 of this chapter, together with a notice of time when the report shall
be heard by the council for confirmation.
   A.   The city council shall set the matter for hearing to determine the
correctness and reasonableness of such costs.
   B.   The term "incidental expenses" shall include, but not be limited to,
the actual expenses and costs of the city in the preparation of notices,
specifications and contracts and in inspecting the work, and the costs of
printing and mailing required hereunder. (Ord. 2043 § 1, 1988)
8.42.110: REPORT; HEARING AND PROCEEDINGS:
At the time and place fixed for receiving and considering the report, the city
council shall hear and pass upon the report of such costs of abatement,
together with any objections or protests. Thereupon, the city council may make
such revision, correction or modification in the report as it may deem just,
after which, by motion, the report as submitted or as revised, corrected or
modified shall be confirmed. The decision of the city council on all protests
and objections which may be made shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 2043 § 1,
1988)
8.42.120: ASSESSMENT OF COSTS AGAINST PROPERTY:
   A.   The total cost for abating such nuisance, as confirmed by the city
council, shall constitute a special assessment against the respective lot or
parcel of land to which it relates, and upon recordation in the office of the
San Bernardino County recorder of a notice of lien, as so made and confirmed,
shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of such assessment.
      1.   After such confirmation and recordation, a copy shall be filed with
the assessor and the tax collector of San Bernardino County, acting for the
city, in order that the county officials may add the amounts of the respective
assessments to the next regular tax bills levied against the respective lots
and parcels of land, and thereafter the amounts shall be collected at the same
time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected and shall
be subject to the same procedure under foreclosure and sale in case of
delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes; or
      2.   After such recordation, such lien may be foreclosed by judicial or
other sale in the manner and means provided by law.
   B.   Such notice of lien for recordation shall be in form substantially as
follows:
            NOTICE OF LIEN
            (Claim of City of Redlands)
Pursuant to the authority vested by the provisions of Section
8.42.070 of the Redlands Municipal Code, the City Engineer of the City of
Redlands did, on or about the           day of                , 19        ,
cause the painting over or removal of graffiti at the premises hereinafter
described in order to abate a public nuisance on said real property; and the
City Council of the City of Redlands did on the          day of
               , 19        , assess the cost of such abatement upon the real
property hereinafter described, and the same has not been paid nor any part
thereof; and that said City of Redlands does hereby claim a lien on such costs
of abatement in the amount of said assessment (the sum of $        ); and the
same shall be a lien upon said real property until the same has been paid in
full and discharged of record.
The real property hereinbefore mentioned, and upon which a lien is claimed, is
that certain parcel of land in the City of Redlands, County of San Bernardino,
State of California, and particularly described as follows:
         (Description)
DATED: This          day of                , 19        .
            
         City Clerk of the City
         of Redlands, California
(Ord. 2043 § 1, 1988)
8.42.130: LIMITATION OF FILING JUDICIAL ACTION:
Any owner, lessee, occupant, or other interested person having any objections
or feeling aggrieved at any proceeding taken on appeal by the city council in
ordering the abatement of any public nuisance under the provisions of this
chapter, must bring an action to contest such decision within thirty (30) days
after the date of such decision by the city council. Otherwise, all objections
to such decision shall be deemed waived. (Ord. 2261 § 3, 1995: Ord. 2043 § 1,
1988)
8.42.140: COMMON UTILITY COLORS:
Any gas, telephone, water, sewer, cable, electrical and other utility operating
in the city shall paint its freestanding, above surface metal fixtures which
are installed pursuant to city permit after the effective date hereof, with a
uniform paint type and color as directed by the city staff. (Ord. 2261 § 1,
1995)
8.42.150: CONDITIONS ON ENCROACHMENT PERMITS:
Encroachment permits issued by the city may, among other items, be conditioned
on: a) the permittee applying an antigraffiti material to the encroaching
object or structure of a type and nature which is acceptable to the city staff;
b) the immediate removal by the permittee of any graffiti; c) the right of the
city to remove graffiti or to paint the encroaching object or structure; d) the
permittee providing the city with sufficient matching paint and/or antigraffiti
material on demand for use in the painting of the encroaching object or
structure containing graffiti. (Ord. 2261 § 1, 1995)
8.42.160: CONDITIONS ON DISCRETIONARY APPROVALS:
When approving any subdivision map, conditional use permit, variance,
commission review and approval or other similar discretionary land use
entitlement, the city may impose graffiti removal requirements as follows:
   A.   The applicant may be required to apply an antigraffiti material or
provide a landscape design of a type and nature which is acceptable to the city
to such of the publicly viewable surfaces to be constructed on the site deemed
to be likely to attract graffiti (hereinafter "graffiti attracting surfaces");
   B.   The applicant may be requested to grant, in writing, a right of entry
over and access to the property subject to the entitlement, upon forty eight
(48) hours' written notice, by authorized city employees or agents for the
purpose of removing or "painting over" graffiti on graffiti attracting
surfaces. Such grant shall be made an express condition of approval and shall
be deemed to run with the land;
   C.   The applicant, and his or her successors in interest, shall for a
specified period of years after approval provide the city with sufficient
matching paint and/or antigraffiti material on demand for use in the painting
over or removal of designated graffiti attracting surfaces;
   D.   The applicant for a subdivision map shall, as part of any conditions,
covenants and restrictions, covenant in a form satisfactory to the city, that
the owners of the lots shall immediately remove any graffiti placed on publicly
viewable trees and structures thereon to the city's satisfaction. (Ord. 2261 §
1, 1995)
8.42.170: REWARD:
   A.   Pursuant to section 53069.5 of the California Government Code, the city
may offer a reward in an amount as may be set by resolution of the city council
for information leading to the arrest and conviction of any person for
violation, within the city, of California Penal Code section 594 or 594.3 by
the use of graffiti, Penal Code sections 640, 640.5, 640.6 or the provisions of
this chapter. In the event of multiple contributions of information, the reward
amount shall be divided by the city in the manner it deems appropriate. For the
purposes of this section, diversion of the violator to a community service
program, or a plea bargain to a lesser offense, shall constitute a conviction.
      1.   Claims for rewards under this section shall be filed with the city.
Each claim shall specifically identify the date, location and kind of property
damaged or destroyed, identify by name the person who was convicted and
identify the court and the date upon which the conviction occurred.
      2.   No claim for a reward shall be allowed by the city council unless
the city investigates and verifies the accuracy of the claim and determines
that the requirements of this section have been satisfied.
   B.   The person committing the graffiti vandalism, and if such person is an
unemancipated minor then the parent or lawful guardian of said minor, shall be
civilly liable for any reward paid pursuant to this section and the provisions
of California Government Code section 53069.5. (Ord. 2261 § 1, 1995)
8.42.180: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Whenever appropriate, the city intends to petition a sentencing court to impose
the following additional penalties upon conviction:
   A.   Litter or graffiti cleanup pursuant to California Vehicle Code section
42001.7, upon conviction of a violation of California Vehicle Code section
23111, 23112 or 23113(a);
   B.   Suspension or delay of issuance of a driver's license pursuant to
California Vehicle Code section 13202.6 upon a graffiti vandalism conviction;
   C.   Performance of community service, including graffiti removal service by
any minor determined to be a ward of the court as a result of committing a
vandalism related offense in the city of Redlands, as provided in California
Welfare and Institutions Code sections 728 and/or 729.6;
   D.   Performance of community service, including graffiti removal service of
up to one hundred (100) hours by any minor determined to be a ward of the court
as a result of committing a drug related offense in the city of Redlands, as
provided in California Welfare and Institutions Code section 729.8;
   E.   Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor upon conviction thereof unless, upon the exercise of
his or her prosecutorial discretion by the city attorney, such violation is
charged as an infraction;
   F.   Pursuant to California Civil Code section 1714.1, any parent or legal
guardian whose minor child is convicted of malicious mischief or vandalism
pursuant to California Penal Code section 594 et seq., or convicted of a lesser
crime that was related to or evolved directly from an act of graffiti
vandalism, shall be personally liable for any and all costs to any person or
business incurred in connection with the removal of graffiti caused by said
minor child, or by said graffiti implement, and for all law enforcement costs,
city staff costs, attorney fees and court costs incurred in connection with the
civil prosecution of any claims for damages or reimbursement up to the sum of
ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). (Ord. 2261 § 1, 1995)
CHAPTER 8.44
SALE OF AEROSOL PAINT CONTAINERS AND FELT TIP MARKER PENS
SECTION:
8.44.010: Inaccessibility To Public
8.44.020: Violation
8.44.010: INACCESSIBILITY TO PUBLIC:
Any person who owns, conducts, operates or manages a retail commercial
establishment selling aerosol paint containers, or marker pens with tips
exceeding three-eighths inch (3/8") in width, containing anything other than a
solution which can be removed with water after it dries, shall store or cause
such aerosol paint containers or marker pens to be stored in an area viewable
by, but not accessible to, the public in the regular course of business without
employee assistance, pending legal sale or disposition of the pens or aerosol
paint containers. (Ord. 2425 § 1, 1999)
8.44.020: VIOLATION:
Any person, firm, or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of
this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 2425 § 1, 1999)
CHAPTER 8.46
DISPLAY OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
SECTION:
8.46.010: Inaccessibility To Minors
8.46.020: Violation
8.46.010: INACCESSIBILITY TO MINORS:
Except as authorized by law, no person shall maintain or operate any place of
business in the city in which drug paraphernalia, as defined in Health and
Safety Code section 11364.5 or as amended, is kept, displayed, sold, furnished,
transferred, given away or offered in any manner unless such drug paraphernalia
is completely and wholly kept, displayed and offered within a separate room or
enclosure into which persons under eighteen (18) years of age, not accompanied
by a parent or legal guardian, are excluded. Each entrance to such room or
enclosure shall be posted with a sign, in reasonably visible and legible words,
notifying the public that drug paraphernalia is kept, displayed and offered in
such room or enclosure and that minors, unless accompanied by a parent or legal
guardian, are excluded. (Ord. 2553 § 1, 2003)
8.46.020: VIOLATION:
As provided by California Health and Safety Code section 11364.5 or as later
amended, and notwithstanding any other provision of law, violation of this
chapter shall not constitute a criminal offense, but operation of a business in
violation of the provision of this section shall be grounds for revocation or
nonrenewal of any license, permit, or other entitlements previously issued by
the city for the privilege of engaging in such business and shall be grounds
for denial of any future license, permit, or other entitlement authorized in
the conducting of such business or any other business, if the business includes
the sale of drug paraphernalia. (Ord. 2553 § 1, 2003)
CHAPTER 8.48
GAS SERVICE REGULATIONS
(Rep. by Ord. 2718 § 28, 2009)
CHAPTER 8.50
RETAIL SALE OR DISTRIBUTION OF NOVELTY LIGHTERS
SECTION:
8.50.010: Novelty Lighters; Prohibitions, Inapplicability
8.50.020: Novelty Lighter Defined
8.50.030: Exceptions
8.50.040: Enforcement
8.50.050: Violation; Penalty
8.50.010: NOVELTY LIGHTERS; PROHIBITIONS, INAPPLICABILITY:
The retail sale, offer of retail sale, gift or distribution of any novelty
lighter within the territorial jurisdiction of the city of Redlands is
prohibited. This prohibition is inapplicable to: a) novelty lighters which are
only being actively transported through the city; or b) novelty lighters
located in a warehouse or distribution center closed to the public for purposes
of retail sales. (Ord. 2673 § 1, 2007)
8.50.020: NOVELTY LIGHTER DEFINED:
"Novelty lighter" means a lighter which is especially attractive to children
ten (10) years or younger due to a toylike design or other features, such as
buttons or devices that initiate visual effects, flashing lights, or musical
sounds that might encourage a child to use the lighter. (Ord. 2673 § 1, 2007)
8.50.030: EXCEPTIONS:
The term "novelty lighter" excludes: a) any lighter manufactured prior to 1980;
and b) any lighter which lacks fuel or a device necessary to produce combustion
or a flame. (Ord. 2673 § 1, 2007)
8.50.040: ENFORCEMENT:
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the fire marshal, any
police officer, any code enforcement officer, and any other city official
authorized to enforce any provision of this code. (Ord. 2673 § 1, 2007)
8.50.050: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter is guilty of an infraction.
(Ord. 2673 § 1, 2007)
CHAPTER 8.52
AIR POLLUTION
SECTION:
8.52.010: Unlawful To Maintain Polluting Establishment
8.52.020: Mobile Source Air Pollution
8.52.010: UNLAWFUL TO MAINTAIN POLLUTING ESTABLISHMENT:
It is unlawful for any person to maintain or operate any factory, yard, or
establishment which generates into or pollutes the atmosphere with any
unwholesome gas, fumes, dust, smoke, or odors deleterious to the public health
or to allow offensive odors to be emitted from offal, garbage, or any animal or
vegetable matter which is used in any process of reduction or manufacturing.
(Prior code § 30400)
8.52.020: MOBILE SOURCE AIR POLLUTION:
   A.   Finding: The city, after careful consideration, finds and declares that
the imposition of the additional motor vehicle registration fee by the South
Coast air quality management district (SCAQMD) to finance mobile source air
pollution reduction programs is in the best interest of the city and promotes
the general welfare of Redlands citizens.
   B.   Intent: This section is intended to support the South Coast air quality
management district's imposition of the vehicle registration fee and to bring
the city into compliance with the requirements set forth in section 44243 of
the Health and Safety Code in order to receive fee revenues for the purpose of
implementing programs to reduce air pollution from motor vehicles.
   C.   Definitions: As applied in this section, the following words and terms
shall be defined as follows:
   CITY: The city of Redlands.
   MOBILE SOURCE AIR POLLUTION REDUCTION PROGRAM: Any program or project
implemented by the city to reduce air pollution from motor vehicles which it
determines will be consistent with the California clean air act of 1988 or the
plan proposed pursuant to article 5 (commencing with section 40460) of chapter
5.5 of part 3 of the California Health and Safety Code.
   D.   Administration Of Vehicle Registration Fee:
      1.   Receipt Of Fee: The additional vehicle registration fees disbursed
by the South Coast air quality management district and remitted to the city,
pursuant to this section, shall be accepted by the finance director.
      2.   Establishment Of Air Quality Improvement Trust Fund: The city's
finance director shall establish a separate interest bearing trust fund account
in a financial institution authorized to receive deposits of city funds.
      3.   Transfer Of Funds: Upon receipt of vehicle registration fees, the
finance director shall deposit such funds into the separate account established
pursuant to subsection D2 of this section. All interest earned by the trust
fund account shall be credited only to that account.
      4.   Expenditure Of Air Quality Trust Funds Revenues: All revenues
received from the South Coast air quality management district and deposited in
the trust fund account shall be exclusively expended on mobile source emissions
reduction programs as defined in subsection C of this section. Such revenues
and any interest earned on the revenues shall be expended within one year of
the completion of the programs.
      5.   Audits: The city consents to an audit of all programs and projects
funded by vehicle registration fee revenues received from the South Coast air
quality management district pursuant to section 44223 of the Health and Safety
Code. The audit shall be conducted by an independent auditor selected by the
South Coast air quality management district as provided in sections 44244 and
44244.1(a) of the Health and Safety Code.
   E.   Legal Construction: The provisions of this section shall be construed
as necessary to effectively carry out its purposes, which are found and
declared to be in furtherance of the public health, safety and welfare. (Ord.
2163 § 1, 1991)
CHAPTER 8.54
SMOKING PROHIBITIONS
SECTION:
8.54.010: Purpose And Findings
8.54.020: Definitions
8.54.030: Regulation Of Smoking In City Owned Facilities
8.54.035: Prohibition Of Smoking At City's Market Night
8.54.040: Prohibition Of Smoking In Certain Enclosed Places
8.54.050: Prohibition Of Smoking In Health Facilities
8.54.060: Regulation Of Smoking In Eating Establishments
8.54.070: Regulation Of Smoking In Places Of Employment
8.54.080: Smoking; Optional Areas
8.54.090: Posting Requirements
8.54.100: Enforcement
8.54.110: Penalties
8.54.120: Other Applicable Laws
8.54.130: Severability
8.54.140: Tobacco Vending Machines Prohibited
8.54.150: Notice
8.54.160: Signage; Photo ID
8.54.162: Vendor Assisted Sales
8.54.010: PURPOSE AND FINDINGS:
The city council of the city finds that:
   A.   Numerous studies have found that tobacco smoke is a major contributor
to indoor air pollution; and
   B.   Reliable studies have shown that breathing sidestream or secondhand
smoke is a significant health hazard for certain population groups, including
elderly people, individuals with cardiovascular disease, and individuals with
impaired respiratory function, including asthmatics and those with obstructive
airway disease; and
   C.   Health hazards induced by breathing sidestream or secondhand smoke
include lung cancer, respiratory infection, decreased exercise tolerance,
decreased respiratory function, broncho constriction, broncho spasm; and
   D.   Nonsmokers with allergies, respiratory disease and those who suffer
other ill effects of breathing sidestream or secondhand smoke may experience a
loss of job productivity or may be forced to take periodic sick leave because
of adverse reactions to same; and
   E.   The surgeon general of the United States has advised nonsmokers to
avoid exposure to tobacco smoke wherever possible, and, in particular, to
protect infants and children from this smoke; and
   F.   The smoking of tobacco, or any other weed or plant, is a proven danger
to health. Accordingly, the city council declares that the purpose of this
chapter is to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the residents
of, persons employed in, and persons who frequent the city who would benefit by
the regulation of smoking in designated enclosed places, including places of
employment. (Ord. 2015 § 1, 1988)
8.54.020: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this chapter, shall be
construed as hereafter set out, unless it is apparent from the context that
they have a different meaning:
   BAR: An area which is devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages and in
which the service of food is only incidental to the consumption of such
beverages.
   CONCOURSE: The open area of a bowling alley where people not participating
in the sport gather. This area does not include the area beyond the first step
to the lower level of a bowling alley extending forward through the bowling
lanes.
   EMPLOYEE: Any person who is employed by any employer in consideration for
direct or indirect monetary wages or profit.
   EMPLOYER: Any person, partnership, corporation, including municipal
corporation or public entities, who employ the services of more than three (3)
persons.
   ENCLOSED: Closed in by roof and four (4) walls with an appropriate opening
for ingress and egress.
   PERSON: Any individual, partnership, cooperative association, private
corporation, personal representative, receiver, trustee, assignee or any other
legal entity.
   PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT: Any enclosed area under the control of a public or
private employer which employees normally frequent during the course of
employment, including, but not limited to, work areas, employee lounges,
conference rooms and employee cafeterias.
   SMOKING: The carrying or holding of a lighted pipe, cigar or cigarette of
any kind, or any other lighted smoking equipment or the lighting or emitting or
exhaling of smoke of a pipe, cigar or cigarette of any kind.
   TOBACCO VENDING MACHINE: Any machine or device designated for or used for
the vending of cigarettes, cigars, tobacco, or tobacco products upon the
insertion of coins, bills, trade checks or slugs. (Ord. 2257 § 1, 1994: Ord.
2015 § 1, 1988)
8.54.030: REGULATION OF SMOKING IN CITY OWNED FACILITIES:
All enclosed facilities owned by the city shall be subject to the provisions of
this chapter. (Ord. 2015 § 1, 1988)
8.54.035: PROHIBITION OF SMOKING AT CITY'S MARKET NIGHT:
   A.   Smoking shall be prohibited in all publicly owned outdoor areas
comprising the city's sponsored Market Night. In addition, except which a
person is passing on the way to another destination, smoking shall be
prohibited on public property located within twenty feet (20') of all outdoor
areas comprising the city's Market Night. For purposes of this section, the
Market Night outdoor areas consist of State Street and the public right of way
for State Street between Orange Street and Ninth Street, and that portion of
Orange Street and the public right of way for Orange Street between Citrus
Avenue and Redlands Boulevard.
   B.   Signs shall be posted during the operation of Market Night informing
the public of the prohibition of smoking in accordance with the posting
requirements of section
8.54.090 of this chapter. (Ord. 2515 § 1, 2002)
8.54.040: PROHIBITION OF SMOKING IN CERTAIN ENCLOSED PLACES:
Except as provided in section
8.54.080 of this chapter, smoking shall be prohibited in the following places
within the city:
   A.   All enclosed areas available to and customarily used by the general
public, and all public areas within businesses patronized by the public,
including, but not limited to, retail stores, hotels and motels, pharmacies,
childcare facilities, banks and offices;
   B.   Elevators, public restrooms, indoor service lines, buses, taxicabs and
other means of public transit under the authority of the city, while within the
boundaries of the city, and in ticket, boarding and waiting areas of public
transit depots; provided, however, that this prohibition does not prevent:
      1.   The establishment of separate waiting areas for smokers and
nonsmokers, and
      2.   The establishment of at least fifty percent (50%) of given waiting
area as a nonsmoking area;
   C.   Public areas of museums, galleries and libraries;
   D.   Enclosed theaters, auditoriums and halls which are used for motion
pictures, stage dramas and musical performances, ballets or other exhibitions,
except when smoking is part of any such production;
   E.   Retail food marketing establishments, including grocery stores and
supermarkets, except those areas of such establishments set aside for the
purpose of serving food and drink, restrooms and offices, and areas thereof not
open to the public, which may be otherwise regulated by this chapter;
   F.   Hearing rooms, conference rooms, chambers and places of public assembly
in which public business is conducted, when the public business requires or
provides direct participation or observation by the general public;
   G.   Public schools and other public facilities under the control of another
public agency, which are available to the general public and are customarily
used by the general public, to the extent that the same area is subject to the
jurisdiction of the city;
   H.   Polling places;
   I.   Bowling establishments within the city, except the concourse, coffee
shop, game room, poolroom and cocktail lounge areas.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, any owner, operator,
manager or other person who controls any establishment described in this
section may declare that entire establishment or any specifically defined
portion thereof, as a nonsmoking establishment. (Ord. 2015 § 1, 1988)
8.54.050: PROHIBITION OF SMOKING IN HEALTH FACILITIES:
   A.   Smoking shall be prohibited in waiting rooms, hallways and other public
areas of health facilities, including, but not limited to, hospitals, clinics,
physical therapy facilities, doctors' offices and dentists' offices.
   B.   In bed space areas of health facilities used for two (2) or more
patients, smoking shall be prohibited, except the facility may, at its option,
permit smoking in a room; provided, that all patients within the room have made
a written request upon the health facility's admission form to be placed in a
room where smoking is permitted.
   C.   Health facilities shall also be subject to the provisions of section
8.54.070 of this chapter regulating smoking in places of employment. (Ord. 2015
§ 1, 1988)
8.54.060: REGULATION OF SMOKING IN EATING ESTABLISHMENTS:
Smoking is prohibited and is unlawful within all indoor eating establishments
serving food whose occupancy capacity is forty (40) or more persons; provided,
however, that this prohibition shall not apply to any such establishment
maintaining a contiguous no smoking area or separate no smoking rooms
containing at least fifty percent (50%) of the seating capacity of the
establishment. This prohibition shall not apply to any rooms which are being
used for eating establishment purposes for private functions. Any portion of an
indoor eating establishment used as a bar is excluded from the restrictions of
this section. (Ord. 2015 § 1, 1988)
8.54.070: REGULATION OF SMOKING IN PLACES OF EMPLOYMENT:
   A.   It shall be the responsibility of employers to provide smoke free areas
for nonsmokers within facilities to the maximum extent possible, but employers
are not required to incur any expense to make structural or other physical
modifications in providing these areas.
   B.   Within ninety (90) days of the effective date of this chapter, each
employer and each place of employment located within the city shall adopt,
implement, make known, maintain and provide access to a written smoking policy
which shall contain at a minimum the following regulations:
      1.   Prohibition of smoking in restrooms, hallways, elevators, employee
work areas, and in any space in use for employee conferences, meetings or
classes, except for a private enclosed office or a room occupied exclusively by
smokers;
      2.   Any employee in a place of employment shall have the right to
designate his or her immediate work area as a nonsmoking area and to post the
same with an appropriate sign or signs, to be provided by the employer. The
policy adopted by the employer shall include a reasonable definition of the
term "immediate work area";
      3.   In any dispute regarding the implementation of the employers smoking
policy, the health concerns of the nonsmoker shall be given preference;
      4.   Provision and maintenance of a separate and contiguous nonsmoking
area of not less than forty percent (40%) of the seating capacity and floor
space in cafeterias, lunchrooms and employee lounges;
      5.   Food service employees whose work area is a public dining area
cannot designate the work place as a nonsmoking area.
   C.   The smoking policy shall be communicated to new employees upon hiring.
The employer must communicate the smoking policy to all employees within sixty
(60) days of its adoption.
   D.   Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A of this section, every
employer shall have the right to designate any place of employment, or portion
thereof, as a nonsmoking area.
   E.   Employees whose work area is divided into a public area and a place of
employment which is off limits to the public, shall be allowed to smoke in the
place of employment at a reasonable distance from the public area, unless
otherwise designated by the employer. (Ord. 2015 § 1, 1988)
8.54.080: SMOKING; OPTIONAL AREAS:
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter to the contrary, the
following areas shall not be subject to the smoking restrictions of this
chapter:
   A.   Private residences, even when serving as a place of employment,
excepting a private residence when serving as a childcare facility;
   B.   Bars;
   C.   Hotel and motel rooms rented to guests;
   D.   Retail stores that deal exclusively in the sale of tobacco and smoking
paraphernalia;
   E.   Restaurants, hotel and motel conference or meeting rooms, and public
and private assembly rooms while these places are being used for private
functions;
   F.   A private enclosed place occupied exclusively by smokers, even though
such a place may be visited by nonsmokers, and a private enclosed office,
excepting places in which smoking is prohibited by the fire department or by
any other law, ordinance or regulation. (Ord. 2015 § 1, 1988)
8.54.090: POSTING REQUIREMENTS:
"Smoking" or "no smoking" signs, whichever are appropriate, preferably with
letters of not less than one inch (1") in height or the international "no
smoking" symbol (consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning
cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it), preferably citing
this chapter, shall be clearly, sufficiently and conspicuously posted in every
building or other place where smoking is controlled by this chapter, by the
owner, operator, manager or other person having control of such building or
other place.
Every restaurant and bowling establishment regulated by this chapter shall have
posted at their entrance a sign clearly stating that a nonsmoking section is
available. Restaurants which hire employees to seat patrons shall be required
to ask each patron his or her seating preference. (Ord. 2015 § 1, 1988)
8.54.100: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Administration of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be by
the city manager or his designees.
   B.   Any citizen who desires to register a complaint under this chapter may
initiate enforcement consideration with the city manager or his designees.
   C.   A violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a
public nuisance and may be abated by the city or by any affected employee or
resident of the city through civil process by means of a restraining order,
preliminary or permanent injunction or any other manner provided by law for the
abatement of such nuisance.
   D.   Any owner, manager, operator or employer of any establishment
controlled by this chapter may inform persons violating this chapter of the
appropriate provisions thereof.
   E.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, any person,
business, tobacco retailer or other entity who violates any provision of
section
8.54.140 of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor unless,
pursuant to the exercise of prosecutorial discretion by the city attorney, such
violation is reduced to an infraction. (Ord. 2257 § 2, 1994: Ord. 2015 § 1,
1988)
8.54.110: PENALTIES:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person who owns, manages, operates or otherwise
controls the use of any premises subject to the restrictions of this chapter to
fail to properly post signs required under this chapter, provide signs for the
use of employees in designating their nonsmoking areas, properly set aside "no
smoking" areas, adopt a smoking restriction policy, or comply with any other
requirements of this chapter.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in any area in which
smoking is prohibited by the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2257 § 4, 1994:
Ord. 2015 § 1, 1988)
8.54.120: OTHER APPLICABLE LAWS:
This chapter shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking where it
is otherwise restricted by law. (Ord. 2015 § 1, 1988)
8.54.130: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision, clause, sentence or paragraph of this chapter or the
application thereof to any person or circumstance is held to be
unconstitutional or to be otherwise invalid by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not affect other ordinance provisions or
clauses or applications thereof which can be implemented without the invalid
provision, or clause, or application, and to this end the provisions and
clauses of this chapter are declared to be severable. (Ord. 2015 § 1, 1988)
8.54.140: TOBACCO VENDING MACHINES PROHIBITED:
No cigarette or other tobacco product may be sold, offered for sale, or
distributed by or from a vending machine or any other device designed or used
for vending purposes. No person shall locate, install, keep, maintain or use,
or permit the location, installation, keeping, maintenance or use on his, her
or its premises any vending machine for the purpose of selling or distributing
any tobacco product. Any tobacco vending machine in use on the effective date
of the ordinance codified herein shall be removed within thirty (30) days
thereafter. (Ord. 2257 § 3, 1994)
8.54.150: NOTICE:
Written notice of the provisions of this chapter shall be given to all
applicants for a city business license. (Ord. 2257 § 3, 1994)
8.54.160: SIGNAGE; PHOTO ID:
   A.   Any person, business, tobacco retailer or other establishment subject
to the provisions of this chapter shall post plainly visible signs at the point
of purchase of tobacco products which state: "THE SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS TO
PERSONS UNDER EIGHTEEN YEARS OF AGE IS PROHIBITED BY LAW. PHOTO ID REQUIRED".
The letters of such signs shall be at least one-fourth inch (1/4") high.
   B.   No person, business, tobacco retailer, or owner, manager or operator of
any establishment subject to the provisions of this chapter shall sell, offer
to sell or permit to be sold any tobacco product to an individual without
requesting and examining identification establishing the purchaser's age as
eighteen (18) years or greater unless the seller has some reasonable basis for
determining the purchaser's age. (Ord. 2311 § 1, 1996)
8.54.162: VENDOR ASSISTED SALES:
   A.   Except for a retail tobacco store, as that term is defined in this
section, it is unlawful for any person or business to sell, permit to be sold
or offer for sale any tobacco product by means of self-service displays or by
any other means other than vendor assisted sales.
   B.   The term "retail tobacco store" shall mean a retail store utilized
primarily for the sale of tobacco products and accessories and in which the
sale of other products is merely incidental. For purposes of this subsection,
the term "incidental" shall mean that at least eighty percent (80%) of the
square footage of the available retail floor and shelf space is devoted to the
sale of tobacco related products and accessories. (Ord. 2311 § 2, 1996)
CHAPTER 8.56
VEHICLE ABATEMENT AND REMOVAL
SECTION:
8.56.010: Authority
8.56.020: Agreements For Vehicle Abatement Services
8.56.030: Definitions
8.56.040: Public Nuisances
8.56.050: Exceptions
8.56.060: Chapter Supplement To Existing Law
8.56.070: Prohibited Uses
8.56.080: Duty To Abate
8.56.090: Emergency Abatement And Other Services
8.56.100: Abatement Procedures For Vehicles Which Are A Public Nuisance
8.56.110: Payment For Abatement Of Vehicles Which Are A Public Nuisance
8.56.120: Appeal Of Abatement
8.56.130: Appeals Of Charges
8.56.140: Cancellation Of Charges
8.56.150: Procedure For Refund Of Payment
8.56.160: Payment For Abatement Of Abandoned Vehicles
8.56.170: Disposal Of Vehicles Which Are A Public Nuisance
8.56.180: Abatement Procedures For Abandoned Vehicles
8.56.190: Abatement Procedures For Abandoned Vehicles Valued At Greater Than
Three Hundred Dollars
8.56.200: Procedure For Redemption Of Vehicles
8.56.210: Authorization To Enforce Ordinances And Vehicle Code Provisions
8.56.220: Administration Of Chapter
8.56.230: Violation; Criminal Penalties
8.56.240: Injunction
8.56.250: Attorney Fees
8.56.260: Assessment
8.56.010: AUTHORITY:
   A.   Pursuant to the authority cited in this chapter, Vehicle Code sections
22660 and 22669, Government Code section 38773.5 and the authority granted by
the state and California constitution article XI, section 7, the city council
of the city of Redlands authorizes the community development director of the
city to enforce the provisions of this chapter within the city. This authority
includes the right to enter private or public property for the purposes
specified in this chapter, to examine a vehicle or parts thereof, to obtain
information as to the identity of a vehicle and remove or cause the removal of
a vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance. The authority granted
under this chapter shall extend to any person performing a franchise or
contract awarded by the city pursuant to Vehicle Code section 22710 after a
determination has been made by the community development director pursuant to
Vehicle Code section 22669.
   B.   Unless determined otherwise pursuant to the prosecutorial discretion of
the city attorney, any person interfering with or refusing entry to property to
any city or contracted service employee performing duties under this chapter
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon arrest and conviction, shall be
punished by a fine not in excess of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), and/or
imprisonment of not more than six (6) months. This includes all attempts to
retrieve, remove or relocate vehicles at the onset of, or during, the abatement
and removal process by the city and/or its contractors. (Ord. 2346 § 1, 1997)
8.56.020: AGREEMENTS FOR VEHICLE ABATEMENT SERVICES:
   A.   The city may enter into an agreement with San Bernardino County, a
vehicle abatement service authority, or others, as appropriate, for vehicle
abatement services provided that San Bernardino County, the vehicle abatement
service authority or others will enforce the provisions of this chapter. Any
such agreement shall be approved by the city council. If the city enters into
an agreement with San Bernardino County, a vehicle abatement service authority
or others for abatement services, all references in this chapter to the
responsibilities of the city in this chapter shall become the responsibility of
such contractor.
   B.   The city may also enter into a franchise or execute a contract for the
removal of abandoned vehicles in accordance with applicable law. Any such
agreement shall be approved by the city council. (Ord. 2346 § 1, 1997)
8.56.030: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context,
words used in this chapter are defined as follows:
   ABANDONED VEHICLE: A vehicle which is located on public or private property
without the express or implied consent of the property owner or person in
lawful possession or control of the property.
   DIRECTOR: The community development director of the city or his or her
designee.
   DISMANTLED: That integral component parts necessary to operate the vehicle
on a highway, roadway or public street have been removed from the vehicle.
   FEE: Any amount of money charged, fined or paid to the city relating to the
administration and/or enforcement costs incurred for the purpose of enforcing
this chapter.
   INOPERABLE: A vehicle that is absent a motor, transmission, wheels or any
other part of equipment necessary to operate safely on a highway, roadway or
public street, or to be moved under its own power.
   JUNKED: A vehicle which has been destroyed or damaged to such an extent that
it is nonrepairable.
   LICENSED DISMANTLER'S YARD: Premises used for dismantling or wrecking of
vehicles, where there is buying, selling or dealing in such vehicles, their
integral parts or component materials thereof, and the sale of dismantled,
partially dismantled, wrecked or inoperative vehicles.
   LIEN SALE: A sale of a vehicle to obtain legal ownership of a vehicle under
title or requiting registration under the Vehicle Code.
   OWNER: Any person or entity having legal title in any personal or real
property subject to the provisions of this chapter.
   OWNER OF THE VEHICLE: The last registered owner and legal owner of record.
   PERSON: A natural person, individual, firm, copartnership, association or
corporation.
   PRIVATE PROPERTY: Property owned by a person other than a public entity.
   PUBLIC PROPERTY: Property owned by a public entity.
   ROADWAY: That portion of a highway which is improved, designed or ordinarily
used for vehicular travel, including improved shoulders.
   UNATTENDED VEHICLE: A vehicle for which a licensed driver responsible for
the same is not within an audible distance and immediately available for moving
the vehicle.
   VEHICLE: Any device by which persons or property may be propelled, moved or
drawn upon a highway, and shall include all types of motor vehicles, but shall
exclude devices moved exclusively by human power or used exclusively upon
stationary rails or tracks.
   VEHICLE ABATEMENT APPEALS BOARD: A three (3) person body appointed by the
community development director to hear appeals under this chapter.
   WRECKED: A vehicle which has been damaged to such an extent that it is only
semirepairable and/or uneconomical to repair. (Ord. 2346 § 1, 1997)
8.56.040: PUBLIC NUISANCES:
Pursuant to the determination made, and the authority granted by the state
under sections 22660 et seq., of the Vehicle Code to abate and remove
abandoned, dismantled, inoperative, junked and wrecked vehicles, and/or parts
thereof as public nuisances, and in accordance with the city's police power
authority, the city council makes the following findings and declarations:
   A.   The accumulation or storage of dismantled, wrecked, inoperative,
junked, abandoned vehicles, or parts thereof, on private or public property is
found to create a condition tending to reduce the value of private and public
property, to promote blight and deterioration, invite plundering, to create
fire hazards, to constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the
health and safety of minors, to create a harborage for rodents and insects and
to be injurious to the health, safety and general welfare of the public.
   B.   Therefore, the presence of abandoned, dismantled, inoperative, junked
or wrecked vehicles, or parts thereof, on private or public property (other
than on streets, public roadways, alleys, right of way and highways) in the
city, except as expressly permitted in this chapter, is declared to constitute
a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter. (Ord. 2346 § 1, 1997)
8.56.050: EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   This chapter shall not apply to any vehicle, or parts thereof, which is
completely enclosed within a building consisting of four (4) walls and roof and
constructed in a lawful manner, where such vehicle is not visible from the
street or other public or private property or a vehicle, or parts thereof,
which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on property used in connection
with the business of a licensed dismantler, garage, vehicle dealer or junkyard.
   B.   This exception shall not authorize the maintenance of a public or
private nuisance as defined under the provisions of law other than this
chapter. (Ord. 2346 § 1, 1997)
8.56.060: CHAPTER SUPPLEMENT TO EXISTING LAW:
This chapter is not the exclusive means for the regulation of abandoned,
dismantled, inoperative, junked or wrecked vehicles, or parts thereof, or
public nuisances within the city. It shall supplement and be in addition to the
other regulatory codes, statutes and ordinances heretofore or hereafter enacted
by the city, the state or any other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction
over the same. (Ord. 2346 § 1, 1997)
8.56.070: PROHIBITED USES:
Any abandoned, dismantled, inoperative, junked or wrecked vehicles, or parts
thereof, or fully or partially disassembled vehicle (including vehicles without
hoods, fenders, engines, body panels, headlights, trunk lids, wheels, windows
or windshields) when placed or kept for more than seventy two (72) hours in
residential, commercial or industrial sites (except licensed vehicle impound
storage yards, garages, vehicle dealers, junkyards and/or dismantling yards)
and visible from outside the parcel of land upon which such is or are kept, is
prohibited and constitutes a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 2346 § 1, 1997)
8.56.080: DUTY TO ABATE:
   A.   No person shall cause, permit, maintain, conduct or otherwise allow an
abandoned, dismantled, inoperative, junked or wrecked vehicle, or parts
thereof, to be openly stored within the city.
   B.   It shall be the duty of every owner, and/or occupant, in control of any
land located within the city to remove, abate and prevent the recurrence of
open storage of such a vehicle. Any recurrence of such condition of a specific
vehicle on the same property may be deemed a continuation of the original
condition and additional notification requirements under sections
8.56.100 and
 8.56.210 of this chapter shall not be required. (Ord. 2346 § 1, 1997)
8.56.090: EMERGENCY ABATEMENT AND OTHER SERVICES:
   A.   Emergency Abatement: When a "vehicle" defined by this chapter as a
public nuisance constitutes an immediate hazard or threat of harm and the
situation calls for abatement sooner than the procedures in this chapter allow,
the director, the Redlands police department or the Redlands fire department
may take or cause emergency removal of such nuisance with such notice to
parties concerned, or without notice, as the particular circumstances
reasonably allow. Required notification procedures prior to disposal of such
vehicle(s) shall be followed.
   B.   Request For Service: If any member of the public, except self- storage
operators, requests the city, in writing, to remove abandoned, dismantled,
inoperative, junked or wrecked vehicles, or parts thereof, the director is
authorized to provide processing and removal for a fee which covers all city
costs. The city or its contractors may dispose of the removed abandoned,
dismantled, inoperative, junked or wrecked vehicles or parts thereof, through
transfer of title or lien sale process, or as otherwise authorized by law.
   C.   Complaints: The director shall investigate complaints associated with
abandoned, dismantled, inoperative, junked or wrecked vehicles or parts
thereof. The complaint may be made verbally, or in writing, and must have situs
address and/or assessor parcel number with a description of the violation. The
process referred to in section
8.56.100 of this chapter will be utilized for abatement if such is determined
to be appropriate. (Ord. 2346 § 1, 1997)
8.56.100: ABATEMENT PROCEDURES FOR VEHICLES WHICH ARE A PUBLIC NUISANCE:
   A.   A ten (10) day notice of intent to abate and remove shall be given to
the property owner to remove the vehicle or vehicles, or parts thereof, as a
public nuisance, unless the property owner and the owner of the vehicle have
signed releases authorizing removal and waiving further interest in the
vehicles or parts thereof. Notification shall be given either by personal
delivery or posting the property, and shall be mailed by registered or
certified mail addressed to the property owner's last known address or
residence addresses as the same appears in the public records or the last
equalized assessment roll, and to the last registered and/or legal owner of the
vehicle by registered or certified mail to the last address listed with the
department of motor vehicles. If such a vehicle is in such condition that
identification numbers are not available to determine ownership, notice need
not be given to the last registered and/or legal owner of the vehicle.
   B.   The notice shall be substantially as follows:
You are hereby notified to abate this public nuisance by removal of the vehicle
(s), or parts thereof, within ten (10) days from the date of mailing of this
notice. If you fail to do so, the public nuisance and such dismantled, wrecked,
junked, inoperative, abandoned vehicle(s), or parts thereof, may be abated and
removed by the City or its contractor and all the costs for abatement and
removal, together with administrative costs, may be assessed to the legal owner
of the land on which the public nuisance and such dismantled, junked,
abandoned, inoperative vehicles, or parts thereof, are located.
   C.   The ten (10) day notice shall also set forth the procedures and time
period for filing an appeal. The notice shall contain a statement of the
hearing rights of the owner of the property on which the vehicle is located and
of the owner of the vehicle. The statement shall include notice to the property
owner that the property owner may appear in person at a hearing or may submit a
sworn statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the
land, with the reasons for such denial, in lieu of appearing.
   D.   If the nuisance is not abated and a request for a hearing has not been
received within the time period given in the notice, the city, its authorized
agent, contractor or employee is authorized to abate the nuisance.
   E.   A notice of intent to abate and remove shall not be required for
removal of a vehicle, or parts thereof, which is inoperable due to the absence
of a motor, transmission or wheel and incapable of being towed; is valued at
less than two hundred dollars ($200.00); and is determined to be a public
nuisance presenting an immediate threat to public health or safety; provided
that the property owner has signed a release authorizing removal and waiving
further interest in the vehicle, or parts thereof. Pursuant to Vehicle Code
section 22661, notice of intent to dispose of the vehicle, or parts thereof,
shall be provided to the last registered and legal owner prior to final
disposition. If the vehicle, or parts thereof, are not claimed and removed
within twelve (12) days after the notice is mailed, the city, or its
contractor, may authorize disposal of the vehicle and parts thereof. The city
and its contractors shall not be liable for damage caused to a vehicle, or
parts thereof, by removal pursuant to this section. This section shall only
apply to inoperable vehicles located upon a parcel that: 1) is zoned for
agricultural use; or 2) is not improved with a residential structure containing
one or more dwelling units.
   F.   Notice shall be given to the department of motor vehicles within five
(5) days after the date of removal of vehicles under this section, identifying
the vehicle, or parts thereof, and any evidence of registration available,
including, but not limited to, the registration card, certificates of ownership
or license plates.
   G.   No vehicle which has been abated or removed as a public nuisance shall
thereafter be reconstructed or made operable unless it is a vehicle which
qualifies for either horseless carriage license plates or historical vehicle
license plates pursuant to Vehicle Code section 5004, in which case the vehicle
may be reconstructed or made operable.
   H.   The city, its employees and agents, and contract services shall not be
liable for damage caused to a vehicle, or parts thereof, by removal pursuant to
this chapter. (Ord. 2346 § 1, 1997)
8.56.110: PAYMENT FOR ABATEMENT OF VEHICLES WHICH ARE A PUBLIC NUISANCE:
   A.   When abatement has been completed, the director may render to the city
finance director an itemized statement covering work necessary for the
abatement. The finance director may present the property owner a demand for
payment by mail. If payment is not made on behalf of the property owner within
sixty (60) days after mailing of such bill, the director may file the necessary
documents to make the cost of the abatement of the nuisance a special
assessment against that parcel of land as provided in Government Code section
38773.5. The assessment may be collected at the same time and in the same
manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected and shall be subject to the
same penalties and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary
municipal taxes.
   B.   All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of
municipal taxes shall be applicable to the special assessment. However, if any
real property to which the cost of abatement relates has been transferred or
conveyed to a bona fide purchaser for value, or if a lien of a bona fide
encumbrancer of value has been created and attached thereon, prior to the date
on which the first installment of such taxes would become delinquent, then the
cost of abatement shall not result in a lien against the real property, but
instead, shall be transferred to the unsecured roll for collection.
   C.   Notices or instruments relating to abatement proceedings or special
assessment shall be entitled to recordation. Costs of removal and
administrative costs are a debt to the city from the owner of the property and/
or vehicle and may be enforced as such in any court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. 2346 § 1, 1997)
8.56.120: APPEAL OF ABATEMENT:
   A.   Upon written request by the legal owner of the vehicle under title or
requiring registration under the Vehicle Code, or the owner of the land on
which such vehicle is located, received by the city within ten (10) days after
mailing the notice of intent to abate and remove, or a sworn written statement
from the owner of the land claiming nonresponsibility for the vehicle(s), a
public hearing shall be held by the vehicle abatement appeals board on the
abatement and removal of such vehicle(s), and parts thereof, as a public
nuisance.
   B.   The sworn written statement shall be construed as a request for hearing
which does not require the presence of the owner submitting such a request. The
vehicle abatement appeals board shall hear and act on appeals within sixty (60)
days of filing and its determination shall be conclusive. The owner of the land
on which the vehicle is located may appear in person at the hearing, or present
a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the
vehicle on the land, with the reasons for such denial.
   C.   If it is determined at the hearing that the vehicle was placed on the
land without the consent of the landowner and that the property owner has not
subsequently acquiesced in its presence, then the city shall not assess the
costs of administration or removal of the vehicle against the property upon
which the vehicle is located or otherwise attempt to collect such cost from the
owner. If such a request is not received within such period as described in
this section, then the director shall have the authority to remove the vehicle.
(Ord. 2346 § 1, 1997)
8.56.130: APPEALS OF CHARGES:
Any appeal from charges for the cost of removal and abatement must be filed
within sixty (60) days from the date of billing or mailing of a bill which
shows abatement charges. The appeal shall be heard by the vehicle abatement
appeals board. (Ord. 2346 § 1, 1997)
8.56.140: CANCELLATION OF CHARGES:
All or any portion of any such special assessment, penalty, or costs heretofore
entered, shall on order of the vehicle abatement appeals board be canceled as
uncollected, or refunded by the city if collected, if it or they were entered,
charged or paid:
   A.   More than once;
   B.   Through clerical error;
   C.   Through the error or mistake of the vehicle abatement appeals board,
the director or the person designated by the board to give notice to abate
regarding any material fact relevant to the determination of a charge;
   D.   Illegally;
   E.   The owner of the land was not responsible for the vehicle(s);
   F.   On property acquired after the lien date by the state or by any county,
city, school district, or other political subdivision and because of this
public ownership, not subject to sale for delinquent taxes. (Ord. 2346 § 1,
1997)
8.56.150: PROCEDURE FOR REFUND OF PAYMENT:
No order for a refund under section
 8.56.140 of this chapter shall be made except on a claim verified by the
person who paid the special assessment, or his or her guardian, executor or
administrator and filed within three (3) years after making the payment sought
to be refunded. (Ord. 2346 § 1, 1997)
8.56.160: PAYMENT FOR ABATEMENT OF ABANDONED VEHICLES:
   A.   Abandonment of any vehicle on public or private property shall
constitute a prima facie presumption that the last registered owner of record
is responsible for the abandonment and is liable for the cost of removal and
disposition of the vehicle. When the abatement has been completed, the director
may render to the city finance director an itemized statement covering work
necessary for abatement and the finance director may present to the registered
owner of the vehicle a demand for payment of the costs required for removal and
disposition of the vehicle pursuant to Vehicle Code section 22669 and
appropriate provisions of this chapter, not to exceed those for towing and
seven (7) days of storage.
   B.   The limitation of this section shall not apply if the registered owner
or legal owner of the vehicle has completed and returned to the lien holder a
declaration of opposition form within the time specified in Vehicle Code
section 22851.8. (Ord. 2346 § 1, 1997)
8.56.170: DISPOSAL OF VEHICLES WHICH ARE A PUBLIC NUISANCE:
If a vehicle or part thereof is removed from a property as a public nuisance,
the vehicle or parts thereof may be disposed of by removal to a scrap yard,
licensed automobile dismantler's yard or any suitable site determined by the
city for processing as scrap. (Ord. 2346 § 1, 1997)
8.56.180: ABATEMENT PROCEDURES FOR ABANDONED VEHICLES:
   A.   If an abandoned vehicle and parts thereof are removed from a property,
and the estimated value of the vehicle is three hundred dollars ($300.00) or
less, a distinctive notice which states that the vehicle will be removed by the
city or its contractors shall be securely attached to the vehicle not less than
seventy two (72) hours before the vehicle is removed. Immediately after the
removal of the vehicle, the city shall notify the stolen vehicle system of the
department of justice in Sacramento of the removal.
   B.   Within forty eight (48) hours of the removal, excluding weekends and
holidays, a notice shall be sent to the registered and legal owners of the
vehicle by registered or certified first class mail to the last address listed
with the department of motor vehicles, and to any other person known to have an
interest in the vehicle. This notice shall include the following information:
      1.   The name, address and telephone number of the city;
      2.   The location of the place of storage and description of the vehicle
which shall include, if available, make, license plate number, vehicle
identification number, and mileage;
      3.   The authority and purpose for removing the vehicle;
      4.   A statement that the vehicle will be disposed of fifteen (15) days
from the date of the notice;
      5.   A statement that the owners and interested persons, or their agents,
have an opportunity for a poststorage hearing to determine the validity of the
storage, if the request is made in person, in writing, or by telephone within
ten (10) days from the date of the notice that, if the owner or interested
person or his/her agent, disagrees with the decision of the city the decision
may be reviewed pursuant to section 11523 of the Government Code, and that
during the time of the initial hearing or during the time the decision is being
reviewed pursuant to section 11523 of the Government Code, the vehicle in
question shall not be disposed of;
      6.   Any requested hearings shall be conducted within forty eight (48)
hours of the request, excluding weekends and holidays.
   C.   Failure of either the registered or legal owner or interested person or
their agent to request or to attend a scheduled hearing shall satisfy due
process poststorage validity hearing requirements.
   D.   If after fifteen (15) days from the notification date, the vehicle
remains unclaimed and the towing and storage fees have not been paid, and if no
request for a poststorage hearing was made or a poststorage hearing was not
attended, the city may authorize disposal of the vehicle on a form approved by
the department of motor vehicles. If the vehicle is claimed by the owner within
fifteen (15) days of the notice date, the lien holder which is storing the
vehicle may collect reasonable fees for services rendered, but may not collect
lien sale fees as provided for in Vehicle Code section 22851.12.
   E.   If the names and addresses of the registered and legal owners of the
vehicle are not available from the records of the department of motor vehicles,
the city may authorize disposal of the vehicle at any time after the removal.
   F.   Disposal of the vehicle may only be to a licensed dismantler or scrap
iron processor. A vehicle disposed of pursuant to this section shall not be
reconstructed or made operable, unless it is a vehicle which qualifies for
either horseless carriage or historical vehicle license plates. A copy of the
city's authorization for disposal shall be forwarded to the licensed dismantler
within five (5) days of the disposal to a licensed dismantler. A copy of the
city's authorization for disposal shall be retained by the lien holder who
stored the vehicle for a period of ninety (90) days if the vehicle is disposed
of to a scrap iron processor.
   G.   The city, or at the request of the city the lien holder, shall obtain a
copy of the names and addresses of all persons having an interest in the
vehicle, if any, from the department of motor vehicles either directly or by
use of the California law enforcement telecommunications system. This section
does not require the city or lien holder to obtain a copy of the actual record
on file at the department of motor vehicles. (Ord. 2346 § 1, 1997)
8.56.190: ABATEMENT PROCEDURES FOR ABANDONED VEHICLES VALUED AT GREATER THAN
THREE HUNDRED DOLLARS:
After the abatement and removal process has occurred, and the poststorage
notification requirements described in section
8.56.180 of this chapter have been met, a lien sale may be conducted on every
removed, abandoned vehicle with a value of over three hundred dollars ($300.00)
and such sale may be carried out if all fees and costs for the removal, storage
and application for lien sale have not been paid and the vehicle has not been
redeemed by the registered or legal owner of the vehicle. (Ord. 2346 § 1, 1997)
8.56.200: PROCEDURE FOR REDEMPTION OF VEHICLES:
   A.   A vehicle which is valued at three hundred dollars ($300.00) or less,
and which has been removed from a property by the city and/or its contract
services as an abandoned vehicle, may be redeemed by the registered or legal
owner of the vehicle after payment of reasonable removal and storage costs,
excluding lien sale costs, within fifteen (15) days of the mailing date of
notification of removal.
   B.   A vehicle which is valued at three hundred dollars ($300.00) or less,
and which has been removed from a property by the city and/or its contract
services as a public nuisance, may be redeemed by the registered or legal owner
of the vehicle after payment of reasonable removal, storage and any lien sale
costs within the time period provided in section
8.56.100 of this chapter.
   C.   A vehicle which is valued at greater than three hundred dollars
($300.00) and which has been removed from a property by the city and/or its
contact services, may be redeemed by the registered or legal owner of the
vehicle after payment of reasonable removal, storage and lien sale costs,
within the time period provided in section
8.56.100 of this chapter. (Ord. 2346 § 1, 1997)
8.56.210: AUTHORIZATION TO ENFORCE ORDINANCES AND VEHICLE CODE PROVISIONS:
   A.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the director is
authorized to remove abandoned and unattended vehicles pursuant to the
provisions of the law, including appropriate ordinances adopted by the city,
and abandoned vehicles pursuant to the provisions of Vehicle Code section
22669.
   B.   In exercising this authority, they shall follow all procedural and
legal requirements applicable to the sections. (Ord. 2346 § 1, 1997)
8.56.220: ADMINISTRATION OF CHAPTER:
   A.   This chapter shall be administered under the direction and control of
the city manager, who shall use only regularly employed and salaried officers
or other employees in the administration thereof, according to the requirements
of the law, except that, as authorized by the law, the removal of vehicles or
parts thereof from property may be by any other duly authorized person or agent
of the city.
   B.   Any such authorized person or agent may enter upon private property for
the purposes specified in the chapter to examine a vehicle, or parts thereof,
obtain information as to the identity of a vehicle and remove, or cause the
removal of a vehicle, or parts thereof, declared a public nuisance pursuant to
this chapter. (Ord. 2346 § 1, 1997)
8.56.230: VIOLATION; CRIMINAL PENALTIES:
   A.   Unless otherwise provided, any person, entity, agency, firm or
corporation violating any provision of this chapter, other than the provisions
of subsection
 8.56.010B of this chapter, shall be guilty of an infraction or misdemeanor,
dependent upon the prosecutorial discretion of the city attorney, and each day
or portion thereof such violation is in existence shall be a new and separate
offense.
   B.   Any person so convicted shall be:
      1.   Guilty of an infraction, punishable by a fine of not less than fifty
dollars ($50.00), but not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) as provided
in Vehicle Code section 22523, for a first violation;
      2.   Guilty of an infraction offense and punishable by a fine of not less
than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not exceeding two hundred dollars
($200.00) for a second violation;
      3.   The third and any additional violations shall constitute a
misdemeanor offense and shall be punished by a fine of one thousand dollars
($1,000.00), or by imprisonment in the county jail for a term not exceeding six
(6) months, or both.
   C.   Notwithstanding the above, a first or second offense may be charged and
prosecuted as a misdemeanor. In addition to the above penalties, such convicted
person, agency, firm, corporation or other entity may, in the discretion of the
court, be ordered to reimburse the city for all necessary costs incurred
through investigation, discovery, analysis, inspection, abatement and other
actual costs incurred by the city or its agents pertaining to the violation.
   D.   The court shall fix the amount of any such reimbursements upon
submission of proof of such costs by the city. Payment of any penalty herein
provided shall not relieve a person, firm, corporation or other entity from the
responsibility of correcting the condition resulting from the violation. (Ord.
2346 § 1, 1997)
8.56.240: INJUNCTION:
   A.   Any use of property contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be
and is declared to be unlawful. Upon request of the director, an action for
injunctive relief may be commenced for the abatement, removal and enjoinment
thereof in the manner provided by law.
   B.   Application shall be made to the court having jurisdiction to grant
such relief to abate or remove such use, and restrain and enjoin any person
from using any property contrary to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2346
§ 1, 1997)
8.56.250: ATTORNEY FEES:
   A.   Pursuant to Government Code section 38773.5, in the event any action,
administrative proceeding or special proceeding is commenced by the city to
abate a nuisance in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, and at the
initiation of such action or proceeding the city has elected to seek recovery
of its own attorney fees, the prevailing party in such action, administrative
proceeding or special proceeding shall be entitled to the recovery of its
reasonable attorney fees, in an amount not in excess of the reasonable attorney
fees incurred by the city in such action or proceeding.
   B.   In the event the city elects to seek recovery of its attorney fees in
any action or proceeding commenced to abate a nuisance pursuant to this
chapter, written notice of the same shall be sent to the owner of the property
constituting the alleged nuisance. (Ord. 2346 § 1, 1997)
8.56.260: ASSESSMENT:
The provisions of sections 38773.5 and 39580 to 39585 of the Government Code,
as they exist and as they may be subsequently amended, are incorporated herein
by this reference and made a part of this chapter. The county auditor and/or
assessor shall enter any assessment in charge imposed pursuant to this chapter
in the county tax role for the affected parcel of property. The amount of the
assessment or charge shall be collected at the time and in the manner as
ordinary municipal taxes; and if delinquent, the amount is subject to the same
penalties and procedures of foreclosure and sale as are provided for ordinary
municipal taxes. (Ord. 2346 § 1, 1997)
CHAPTER 8.58
REGULATION OF MOBILE BILLBOARD ADVERTISING DISPLAYS
SECTION:
8.58.010: Definitions
8.58.020: Mobile Billboard Advertising Displays Prohibited
8.58.030: Removal Of Mobile Billboard Advertising Displays Authorized
8.58.040: Poststorage Impound Hearing
8.58.050: Violations And Penalties
8.58.010: DEFINITIONS:
   MOBILE BILLBOARD ADVERTISING DISPLAY: An advertising display that is
attached to a mobile, nonmotorized vehicle, device, or bicycle that carries,
pulls, or transports a sign or billboard, and is for the primary purpose of
advertising, in accordance with section 395.5 of the California Vehicle Code,
and sections amendatory or supplementary thereto. (Ord. 2765, 2011)
8.58.020: MOBILE BILLBOARD ADVERTISING DISPLAYS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to park a mobile billboard advertising
display on any public street or city lands and rights of way. (Ord. 2765, 2011)
8.58.030: REMOVAL OF MOBILE BILLBOARD ADVERTISING DISPLAYS AUTHORIZED:
   A.   Pursuant to section 22651 of the California Vehicle Code, and sections
amendatory or supplementary thereto, any peace officer, or any regularly
employed and salaried employee of the city, who is engaged in directing traffic
or enforcing parking laws and regulations in which the mobile billboard
advertising display is located may remove the mobile billboard advertising
display located within the territorial limits of the city when the mobile
billboard advertising display is found upon any public street or city lands or
rights of way if all of the following requirements are satisfied:
      1.   When a vehicle is a mobile billboard advertising display and is
parked or left standing in violation of this code, if the registered owner of
the vehicle was previously issued a warning citation for the same offense.
      2.   A warning citation was issued to the registered owner of the vehicle
at least twenty four (24) hours prior to the removal of the vehicle. The city
is not required, pursuant to section 22651(v)(2) of the California Vehicle Code
and sections amendatory or supplementary thereto, to provide further notice for
a subsequent violation prior to enforcement; and
      3.   The warning citation advised the registered owner of the vehicle
that he or she may be subject to penalties upon a subsequent violation of this
chapter that may include the removal of the vehicle.
   B.   Alternatively, a mobile billboard advertising display may be removed
without prior issuance of a warning citation if the city has posted signs in
accordance with California Vehicle Code section 22507(a), giving notice that it
is unlawful to park, stand or otherwise allow to remain on any street, any
mobile billboard advertising display. (Ord. 2765, 2011)
8.58.040: POSTSTORAGE IMPOUND HEARING:
Section 22852 of the California Vehicle Code applies to this section with
respect to the removal of any mobile billboard advertising display vehicle.
Section 22852 is incorporated by reference as if set forth in full herein and
provides, in summary, that whenever an authorized member of a public agency
directs the storage of a vehicle, the public agency shall direct the storage
operator to provide the vehicle's registered and legal owner of record, or the
owner's agent, with the opportunity for a poststorage hearing to determine the
validity of the storage. Notice of the storage shall be mailed or personally
delivered to the registered and legal owner within forty eight (48) hours,
excluding weekends, as specifically provided for under section 22852 of the
California Vehicle Code. To receive a poststorage hearing, the owner of record,
or the owner's agent, must request a hearing in person, in writing, or by
telephone within ten (10) days of the date appearing on the notice. The city
may authorize its own officer or employee to conduct the hearing as long as the
hearing officer is not the same person who directed the storage of the vehicle.
(Ord. 2765, 2011)
8.58.050: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
After the initial warning citation, a subsequent offense of this chapter is a
misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00), or by imprisonment in jail for not more than six (6) months, or by
both fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 2765, 2011)
CHAPTER 8.60
OLD ICEBOXES AND REFRIGERATORS
SECTION:
8.60.010: Unlawful To Leave Outside And Accessible To Children
8.60.020: Removal Of Lock Or Door Required
8.60.010: UNLAWFUL TO LEAVE OUTSIDE AND ACCESSIBLE TO CHILDREN:
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to leave outside of any
building or dwelling in a place accessible to children any abandoned,
unattended, discarded, or not in use icebox, refrigerator or any other
container of any kind which has an airtight door or lid, or a door or lid
equipped with a lock which may not be released for opening from the inside of
such icebox, refrigerator or container. (Prior code § 53200)
8.60.020: REMOVAL OF LOCK OR DOOR REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to leave outside of any
building or dwelling in a place accessible to children any abandoned,
unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator or any other container of any kind
which has any door or lid equipped with an airtight snaplock or other similar
closing device thereon without first removing such snaplock or device, or door
or lid from such icebox, refrigerator or container. (Prior code § 53201)
CHAPTER 8.64
OUTDOOR FESTIVALS
SECTION:
8.64.010: Definition
8.64.020: License; Required
8.64.030: License; Application
8.64.040: Festival Plans
8.64.050: Application; Processing
8.64.060: Application; Council Consideration
8.64.070: License; Issuance; Fee
8.64.080: Inspection
8.64.090: Conditions Generally
8.64.100: Police Protection
8.64.110: Water Facilities
8.64.120: Food Concessions
8.64.130: Sanitation Facilities
8.64.140: Medical Facilities
8.64.150: Parking Areas
8.64.160: Access And Parking Control
8.64.170: Hours Of Operation
8.64.180: Illumination
8.64.190: Overnight Camping Facilities
8.64.200: Bonds
8.64.210: Fire Protection
8.64.220: Financial Statements
8.64.230: Communication System
8.64.240: Miscellaneous Requirements
8.64.250: Grounds For Denial Of License
8.64.260: Complaints
8.64.270: Revocation Of License
8.64.280: Notice Of Intent To Revoke License; Hearing
8.64.290: Violations; Penalty
8.64.010: DEFINITION:
"Outdoor festival" means any music festival, dance festival, "rock" festival or
similar musical activity, at which music is provided by paid or amateur
performers or by prerecorded means, which is held at any place other than in a
permanent building or permanent installation which has been constructed for the
purpose of conducting such activities or similar activities, and to which
members of the public are invited or admitted for a charge or free of cost.
(Ord. 1457 § 1, 1971)
8.64.020: LICENSE; REQUIRED:
No person shall operate, maintain, conduct, advertise, or sell or furnish
tickets for an outdoor festival in the city unless he shall first obtain a
license from the city to operate or conduct such festival. (Ord. 1457 § 2,
1971)
8.64.030: LICENSE; APPLICATION:
Application for a license to conduct an outdoor festival shall be made in
writing to the city clerk of the city at least sixty (60) days prior to the
time indicated for the commencement of the planned activity and shall be
accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00)
and shall contain the following information:
   A.   The name, age, residence and mailing address of the person making such
application. If the application is made by a partnership, the names and
addresses of the partners must appear. Where the applicant is a corporation,
the application must be signed by the president, vice president and secretary
thereof and must contain the addresses of such corporate officers; and a
certified copy of the articles of incorporation shall be submitted with the
application.
   B.   A statement of the kind, character, or type of festival which the
applicant proposes to conduct, operate or carry on.
   C.   The address or legal description of the place where the proposed
festival is to be conducted, operated or carried on. Additionally, the
applicant must submit proof of ownership of the place where the festival is to
be conducted or a notarized statement signed by the owner of the premises
indicating his consent that the site be used for the proposed festival.
   D.   The date or dates and the hours during which the festival is to be
conducted.
   E.   An estimate of the number of customers, spectators, participants and
other persons expected to attend the festival for each day it is conducted.
This will include the basis upon which the calculation was made.
   F.   The applicant shall provide names and addresses of anyone contributing,
investing or having a financial interest greater than five hundred dollars
($500.00) in producing the festival. (Ord. 1457 § 3, 1971)
8.64.040: FESTIVAL PLANS:
A detailed explanation of the applicant's plans to provide security and fire
protection, water supply and facilities, food supply and facilities, sanitation
facilities, medical facilities and services, vehicle parking space, vehicle
access and on site traffic control, and, if it is proposed or expected that
spectators or participants will remain at night or overnight, the arrangements
for illuminating the premises and for camping or similar facilities shall be
submitted. The applicant's plans shall include what provisions shall be made
for numbers of spectators in excess of the estimate, provisions for cleanup of
the premises and removal of rubbish after the event has concluded. A plot plan
showing arrangement of the facilities including those for parking, egress and
ingress shall be submitted with such application. (Ord. 1457 § 4, 1971)
8.64.050: APPLICATION; PROCESSING:
Upon receipt of a complete application and the application fee, the city clerk
of the city shall set the application for public hearing at a regular meeting
of the city council, not less than fifteen (15) days nor more than thirty (30)
days thereafter, and shall give not less than ten (10) days' written notice
thereof to the applicant. The city clerk shall promptly give notice of hearing
and copies of the application to the city manager, chief of police, fire chief,
director of public works, park superintendent, disposal superintendent, the
planning director, and the director of building and safety, who shall
investigate the application. The city manager shall report in writing to the
city council not later than the hearing, with appropriate recommendations as to
granting a license and conditions thereof. (Ord. 1457 § 5, 1971)
8.64.060: APPLICATION; COUNCIL CONSIDERATION:
Based upon the testimony of the witnesses and evidence presented at such
hearing, including the report of the city manager, the city council shall grant
the license, deny the license, or set conditions which must be met, or security
given that they will be met, before a license may be granted. If conditions are
imposed by the city council the applicant shall furnish or cause to be
furnished to the city clerk proof that all conditions have been met before the
license may be issued by the city clerk. (Ord. 1457 § 6, 1971)
8.64.070: LICENSE; ISSUANCE; FEE:
When the city manager, or the city manager's designee, certifies that all
conditions have been met, the city's finance director, or the director's
designee, shall issue the license specifying the name and address of the
licensee, the kind of festival licensed and the number of days of operation
authorized. The licensee shall keep such license posted in a conspicuous place
upon the premises at which the festival is conducted. No license issued
pursuant to this chapter shall be transferable or removed to another location.
(Ord. 2684 § 9, 2007: Ord. 2177 § 1, 1992: Ord. 1457 § 7(a), 1971)
8.64.080: INSPECTION:
After issuance of a license, the city manager is responsible to provide
inspection of the activity to ensure compliance with the terms of this chapter.
(Ord. 1457 § 7(b), 1971)
8.64.090: CONDITIONS GENERALLY:
At the hearing required under section
8.64.050 of this chapter, the city council may establish conditions which must
be met prior to the issuance of any license under this chapter, except that the
city council may take a matter under submission before determining which
conditions shall be imposed. Where the city council takes a matter under
submission, written notice of any conditions imposed as prerequisite to the
issuance of a license must be mailed to the applicant within fifteen (15) days
of the original hearing. The conditions which may be imposed by the city
council pursuant to the city's general police power for the protection of
health, safety and property of local residents and persons attending festivals
in the city are as set out in sections
 8.64.100 through
8.64.240 of this chapter. (Ord. 1457 § 8, 1971)
8.64.100: POLICE PROTECTION:
Every licensee shall employ, at his own expense, adequate police protection to
ensure the public safety. The number and type of officers shall be determined,
specified and approved by the city manager, based upon the recommendations of
the chief of police, fire chief, municipal utilities and engineering director
and other appropriate city directors to provide for the preservation of order
and protection of property in and around the place of the festival. Funds to
employ this specified number of law enforcement officers at the current hourly
salary rate for city police officers shall be deposited by the licensee with
the office of the city's finance director at least ten (10) days prior to the
specified date the activity is to occur.
Where the city manager determines that the employment of off duty peace
officers is necessary to meet the requirements of this chapter, the peace
officers shall be under the complete direction and control of the city manager.
The city manager must be satisfied that the requisite number of peace officers
will be provided at all times of operations, plus any specified time prior to
and following the event, before a license is issued. The licensee must also
furnish to the city manager, prior to issuance of the license, written
permission for city law enforcement officers or city officials to enter upon
the premises for the purpose of any inspections deemed necessary by the city
manager. (Ord. 2718 § 29, 2009)
8.64.110: WATER FACILITIES:
Every licensee shall provide from the city public works department an ample
supply of potable water for drinking and sanitation purposes on the premises of
the festival. Location of water facilities on the premises must be approved by
the director of public works prior to issuance of a license.
The minimum supply of water to the outdoor festival shall be fifteen (15)
gallons of water for each person in attendance per day. All water shall meet
U.S. public health service standards. Public and private flush type water
closets, lavatories and drinking facilities shall be required as determined by
the city director of public works. Sewage and drainage systems relating to such
facilities shall meet the requirements of and be subject to the prior approval
of the city director of public works and the director of building and safety.
(Ord. 1457 § 8(b), 1971)
8.64.120: FOOD CONCESSIONS:
Where the proposed festival is to be held a substantial distance from public
eating places, food handling places or like establishments, applicant shall be
required to demonstrate that food will be available at the premises for each
day of operation to adequately feed the number of persons expected to be in
attendance. Concessionaires must be licensed and operate under a valid county
health department permit pursuant to local ordinances and state laws. Every
licensee shall provide at least one flush type water closet and lavatory for
each sex in a closed facility for employees of each food concession or
operation within the enclosure area of such food operation unless otherwise
approved by the county health officer. Under no circumstances shall the health
officer allow such flush type water closets and lavatories to be located more
than fifty feet (50') from the food concession or operation. All lavatories
required in conjunction with food concessions and food operations shall be
provided with hot and cold water under pressure which shall be dispensed by an
approved type mixing faucet.
All sewage, sink waste and wastewater from water closets, lavatories, sinks
operated in connection with food concessions or food operations shall be
disposed of to a public sewer or a sewage disposal system approved by the
county health officer and the city director of public works. (Ord. 1457 § 8(c),
1971)
8.64.130: SANITATION FACILITIES:
   A.   Every licensee shall provide at least one enclosed flush type water
closet facility marked "Men" and one such facility marked "Women" on the
premises of a festival on the basis of one flush type water closet for each
forty (40) males and one for each forty (40) females expected to be in
attendance. Urinals may be substituted for the required flush type water
closets for men on the ratio of one urinal and one flush type water closet per
sixty (60) males.
   B.   Lavatories provided with cold water under pressure, soap and paper
towels shall be provided on the basis of one lavatory for each seventy five
(75) persons expected to be in attendance.
   C.   Where flush type water closets cannot be made available for the persons
in attendance, the city council may allow the use of portable chemical toilets.
Such chemical toilets must meet the approval of the county health officer
before any license may be issued. Chemical toilets shall be emptied and
recharged at the licensee's expense as necessary pursuant to procedures
established by the county health officer.
   D.   The requirement for flush type water closets for food concessions, food
operations and for the use of employees may not be waived.
   E.   Every licensee shall be required to furnish at least one trash can with
thirty six (36) gallon capacity with a tightfitting lid for each twenty five
(25) persons expected to be in attendance, an adequate supply of plastic bag
liners to fit the trash receptacles shall be provided and each container shall
at all times have a plastic bag liner inserted and when full it shall be tied,
removed and a new plastic bag liner inserted. The pick up and removal of
refuse, trash, garbage and rubbish shall be at least once a day and more often
if required by the city disposal superintendent. Removal of all trash and
refuse shall be at the licensee's expense, and will be done by the city
disposal department. The bond posted by the licensee may be charged for this
expense, if necessary. (Ord. 1457 § 8(d), 1971)
8.64.140: MEDICAL FACILITIES:
   A.   The applicant shall provide as required by the city manager emergency
treatment facilities on the premises of the festival.
   B.   The location of such facilities, number of doctors, psychiatrists,
psychologists, nurses and other aides needed to staff such facilities and the
quantity of medical supplies, drugs, ambulances, and other equipment that must
be on the site shall be approved by the city manager prior to the issuance of
any license under this chapter. The city manager shall calculate the need for
medical services, based on the number of persons expected to attend a festival,
their expected age group, the duration of events planned and the possibility of
exposure to inclement weather and outdoor elements.
   C.   Traffic lanes and other adequate space shall be designated and kept
open for access and travel for ambulance, helicopter, and other emergency
vehicles to transport patients, or staff to appropriate on site and off site
treatment facilities. (Ord. 1457 § 8(e), 1971)
8.64.150: PARKING AREAS:
Every licensee shall provide adequate parking space for persons attending the
festival. Persons desiring to operate or conduct a festival will be called upon
to provide a separate parking space for every three (3) persons expected to
attend the festival. Such individual parking spaces shall be clearly marked and
shall not be less than nine feet (9') wide and nineteen feet (19') long. The
planning director must approve an applicant's parking plan before a license
shall be issued. (Ord. 1457 § 8(f), 1971)
8.64.160: ACCESS AND PARKING CONTROL:
Every licensee shall provide adequate ingress and egress to festival premises
and parking areas therefor. Necessary roads, driveways and entranceways shall
exist to ensure orderly flow of traffic into the premises from a highway or
road which is a part of the city system of highways or which is a highway
maintained by the state. A special accessway for fire equipment, ambulances and
other emergency vehicles may be required. The director of public works must
approve the licensee's plan for ingress and egress before a license shall be
issued. Additionally, any applicant may be required to show that traffic guards
as approved by the chief of police, city of Redlands, are employed by him to
ensure orderly traffic movement and relieve traffic congestion in the vicinity
of the festival area. (Ord. 1457 § 8(g), 1971)
8.64.170: HOURS OF OPERATION:
All festivals which are subject to license under this chapter shall close and
cease operation continuously between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and
six o'clock (6:00) A.M. of each day, except that a festival site closer than
six hundred sixty feet (660') from any residential zone shall cease operation
between ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. (Ord. 1457 § 8(h),
1971)
8.64.180: ILLUMINATION:
   A.   Every licensee planning to conduct a festival after dark, or planning
to allow persons who attend the festival to remain on the premises after dark,
shall provide electrical illumination to ensure that those areas which are
occupied are lighted at all times. The director of public works must approve an
applicant's lighting plan as a prerequisite to issuance of a license hereunder.
   B.   A licensee may be required to illuminate specific areas on the premises
in accordance with the following scale of lighting intensity:
 
Illumination                       Watts Per Square Foot
Open areas reserved for spectators 0.50
Stage areas                        5.00
Parking and overnight areas        0.25
Restroom and concession areas      1.00
 
(Ord. 1457 § 8(i), 1971)
8.64.190: OVERNIGHT CAMPING FACILITIES:
Every licensee authorized to allow persons who attend the festival to remain on
the premises overnight shall provide camping facilities and overnight areas
that meet the requirements of the California Administrative Code title 25 for
mobilehome parks, special occupancy trailer parks and campgrounds including
travel trailer parks, recreational trailer parks, temporary trailer parks,
incidental camping areas and tent camps. Such areas and facilities shall be
approved by the director of building and safety prior to the issuance of any
license. (Ord. 1457 § 8(j), 1971)
8.64.200: BONDS:
Any licensee may be called upon to post an indemnity bond and/or a performance
bond in favor of the city in connection with the operation of a festival. Bonds
required by this chapter must be approved by the city attorney prior to the
issuance of a license. An applicant may be required to submit a surety bond
written by a corporate bonding company authorized to do business in the state
by the department of Insurance, in a penal amount determined by the city
council. Such bond shall indemnify the city, its agents, officers, servants and
employees and the city council against any and all loss, injury and damage of
any nature whatsoever arising out of, or in any way connected with, such
festival, and shall indemnify against loss, injury, and damage to both person
and property. Additionally, the city may demand that applicant provide a
corporate surety bond written by a corporate bonding company authorized to do
business in the state, indemnifying the city and the owners of property
adjoining the festival site for any costs necessitated for cleaning up and/or
removing debris, trash or other waste from, in, and around the premises. Such
bond shall be in an amount determined by the city council. (Ord. 1457 § 8(k),
1971)
8.64.210: FIRE PROTECTION:
Every licensee shall provide, at his own expense, adequate fire protection
equipment as determined by the city manager, with the recommendation of the
fire chief. If the event is located in a hazardous fire area as defined by the
fire chief, a suitable number of fire guards, as approved by the city manager,
shall be employed by the licensee. Flammable vegetation and other fire hazards
shall be removed in a manner and in such quantity as determined by the fire
chief. First aid and fire extinguishment equipment shall be provided as
directed by the city manager, based upon the recommendations of the fire chief,
police chief, public works director and other appropriate city department
heads. (Ord. 2177 § 3, 1992: Ord. 1457 § 8(l), 1971)
8.64.220: FINANCIAL STATEMENTS:
Each licensee shall be required to provide a financial statement to give
assurance of the ability of the promoters and/or applicants to meet the
conditions of the permit. (Ord. 1457 § 8(m), 1971)
8.64.230: COMMUNICATION SYSTEM:
Licensee shall be required to establish a communication system for public use
where ordinary communications are not available. (Ord. 1457 § 8(n), 1971)
8.64.240: MISCELLANEOUS REQUIREMENTS:
Any applicant may be required to meet any other condition prior to receiving a
license to conduct a festival which is reasonably calculated as necessary to
protect the health, welfare, and property of local residents and persons
attending a festival. (Ord. 1457 § 8(o), 1971)
8.64.250: GROUNDS FOR DENIAL OF LICENSE:
After holding the required public hearing, the city council may deny issuance
of license if it finds any of the following:
   A.   That the applicant fails to meet the conditions imposed pursuant to
this chapter;
   B.   That the proposed festival will be conducted in a manner and/or
location not meeting the health, zoning, fire or building and safety standards
established by the ordinances of the city or the laws of the state;
   C.   That the applicant has knowingly made a false, misleading or fraudulent
statement of material fact in the application for license, or in any other
document required pursuant to this chapter;
   D.   That the applicant, his employee, agent, or any person connected or
associated with the applicant as partner, director, officer, stockholder,
associate, or manager has previously conducted the type of festival being
applied for which resulted in the creation of a public or private nuisance;
   E.   That the applicant, his employee, agent, or any person associated with
applicant as partner, director, officer, stockholder, associate, or manager has
been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction, by final judgment of:
      1.   An offense involving the presentation, exhibition or performance of
an obscene production, motion picture or play, or of selling obscene matter, or
      2.   An offense involving lewd conduct, or
      3.   An offense involving the use of force and violence upon the person
of another, or
      4.   An offense involving misconduct with children, or
      5.   A felony offense.
Where the applicant is denied, the city clerk shall mail to the applicant
written notice of denial within fourteen (14) days of such action, which notice
shall include a statement of the reasons the application was denied. (Ord. 1457
§ 9, 1971)
8.64.260: COMPLAINTS:
Any person may file a complaint with the city clerk of the city or may petition
the city council to conduct a hearing concerning the revocation of the license
of any licensee. The city clerk of the city shall post notice of the complaint
or petition and set the date for hearing by the council. Such hearing shall
normally be set for the next regularly scheduled council meeting, but in no
event shall be set for less than ten (10) days from the date of filing of a
complaint or petition. (Ord. 1457 § 10, 1971)
8.64.270: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
The city council of the city shall have the power to revoke any license, or to
revoke and reinstate any license upon suitable conditions, when the following
causes exist:
   A.   The licensee fails, neglects or refuses to pay to the office of the
city's finance director the fee prescribed by this chapter;
   B.   The licensee, his employee or agent, fails, neglects, or refuses to
fulfill any or all of the conditions imposed pursuant to this chapter;
   C.   The licensee allows the festival to be conducted in a manner which
violates any law or regulation established by the ordinances of the city or the
laws of the state;
   D.   The licensee allows the festival to be conducted in a disorderly manner
or knowingly allows any person to remain on the premises of the festival while
under the influence of intoxicating liquor, or any narcotic or dangerous drug;
   E.   The licensee, his employee or agent, is convicted of any of the
offenses enumerated under section
 8.64.250 of this chapter. (Ord. 2718 § 30, 2009: Ord. 1457 § 11, 1971)
8.64.280: NOTICE OF INTENT TO REVOKE LICENSE; HEARING:
Notice of intent to revoke any license shall be given and the licensee shall be
entitled to a hearing. The city clerk of the city shall give notice, setting
forth the causes for revocation and shall state the time and place at which the
matter of revocation will be heard before the city council. Such notice shall
be mailed not later than ten (10) days prior to the date set for hearing. The
city council shall hear all interested parties and may revoke a license only
for one or more causes enumerated by section
8.64.270 of this chapter. (Ord. 1457 § 12, 1971)
8.64.290: VIOLATIONS; PENALTY:
   A.   It is unlawful for any licensee, employee, agent or person associated
with such licensee, to do any of the following:
      1.   Conduct or operate a festival without first procuring a license to
do so;
      2.   Sell tickets to a festival without a license first having been
obtained;
      3.   Operate, conduct or carry on any festival in such a manner as to
create a public or private nuisance;
      4.   Exhibit, show or conduct within such place or festival any obscene,
indecent, vulgar or lewd exhibition, show, play, entertainment or exhibit no
matter by what name designated;
      5.   Allow any person on the premises of the licensed festival to cause
or create a disturbance in, around, or near any place of the festival by
offensive or disorderly conduct;
      6.   Knowingly allow any person to consume, sell, or be in possession of
intoxicating liquor while in a place of a festival except where such
consumption or possession is expressly authorized under the terms of this
chapter and under the laws of the state;
      7.   Knowingly allow any person at the licensed festival to use, sell, or
be in possession of any narcotic or dangerous drug while in, around, or near a
place of the festival.
   B.   Any of the above enumerated violations shall constitute a criminal act
and shall be punishable pursuant to ordinances of the city and the laws of the
state. It is provided, however, that the city retains any and all civil
remedies, including the right of civil injunction for the prevention of such
violations and for the recovery of money damages therefor. (Ord. 1457 § 13,
1971)
CHAPTER 8.68
RIDING ACADEMIES
SECTION:
8.68.010: Riding Academy Permit
8.68.020: Violation; Penalty
8.68.010: RIDING ACADEMY PERMIT:
It is unlawful for any person or entity to operate or allow the operation of a
riding academy without an unrevoked operational permit issued by the department
of environmental health services of San Bernardino County pursuant to the
provisions of title 3, division 3, chapter 2 of the San Bernardino County code,
also known as the "uniform environmental health code". As used in this section,
"riding academy" means any place where horses are rented or held for rent to
the public. (Ord. 2013 § 5, 1988)
8.68.020: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
A violation of this chapter is punishable as provided in chapter 1, section
33.0112 of the Uniform Environmental Health Code adopted by reference in
chapter 8.02 of this title. (Ord. 2013 § 5, 1988)
CHAPTER 8.70
NEWSRACKS
SECTION:
8.70.010: Purpose
8.70.020: Definitions
8.70.030: Prohibitions
8.70.040: Registration Of Location/Permit
8.70.050: Standards For Installation, Maintenance And Operation
8.70.060: Newsracks Identification Required
8.70.070: Newsrack Violations
8.70.080: Display Of Harmful Material
8.70.090: Applicability To All Newsracks
8.70.100: Newsrack Violations; Infraction
8.70.110: Hold Harmless
8.70.120: Insurance
8.70.010: PURPOSE:
The city council finds that it is in the interest of public health, safety and
welfare of the citizens of Redlands to regulate the location, size and
appearance of newsracks within city limits. The city council further finds that
without such regulation, such newsracks may pose a hazard to public safety. The
city council finds that the regulation and registration of location, size and
appearance of newsracks will minimize any potential danger to the public
safety.
Further, the city council finds that it is in the interest of public health,
safety and welfare of the citizens of Redlands to protect minors from viewing
publicly displayed harmful matter, and that pursuant to Penal Code sections
313.1(d) and (e) the city is authorized to adopt ordinances which restrict the
display of harmful matter to minors by the use of blinder racks. The city
council also finds that there exists an increasing trend toward the display of
harmful matter, within the meaning of Penal Code section 313, within newsracks
within the city of Redlands, and that restriction of public display of such
harmful matter will keep the adverse impacts of such harmful matter upon minors
to a minimum. This chapter is enacted for the purposes of minimizing potential
dangers to public safety and reducing the adverse impacts of harmful matter
upon minors. (Ord. 2228 § 1, 1993)
8.70.020: DEFINITIONS:
Definitions as used in this chapter:
   NEWSRACK: Any self-service or coin operated box, container, storage unit or
other dispenser installed, used or maintained for the display and sale of
newspapers or news periodicals.
   PARKWAY: That area between the sidewalks and the curb of any street, and
where there is no sidewalk, that area between the edge of the roadway and the
property line adjacent thereto. Parkway shall also include any area within a
roadway which is not open to vehicular travel.
   ROADWAY: That portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for
vehicular travel.
   SIDEWALK: Any surface provided for the primary use of pedestrians.
   STREET: All that area dedicated to public use for public street purposes and
shall include, but not be limited to, roadways, parkways, alleys and sidewalks.
(Ord. 2228 § 1, 1993)
8.70.030: PROHIBITIONS:
   A.   No person shall install, use or maintain any newsrack or other
structure which projects onto, into or over any part of the roadway of any
public street, or which rests, wholly or in part, upon, along or over any
portion of the roadway of any public street.
   B.   No person shall install, use or maintain any newsrack which in whole or
in part rests upon, in or over any public sidewalk or parkway, when such
installation, use or maintenance endangers the safety of persons or property,
or when such site or location is used for public utility purposes, public
transportation purposes or other governmental use, or when such newsrack
unreasonably interferes with or impedes the flow of pedestrian or vehicular
traffic, including any legally parked or stopped vehicle, the ingress into or
egress from any residence or place of business, or the use of poles, posts,
traffic signs or signals, hydrants, mailboxes, or other objects permitted at or
near said location, or when such newsrack interferes with the cleaning of any
sidewalk by the use of mechanical sidewalk cleaning machinery. (Ord. 2228 § 1,
1993)
8.70.040: REGISTRATION OF LOCATION/PERMIT:
   A.   No person shall install or maintain any newsrack which in whole or in
part rests upon, in or over any public sidewalk or parkway without first
obtaining a permit from the director of community development or his designated
representative after providing the following:
      1.   A site plan/plot plan, which shows that the design, dimension,
materials and location of each newsrack to be installed or maintained in the
city under the application meet the standards in this chapter; and
      2.   The name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
   B.   No more than one notification shall be required per applicant,
regardless of the number of newsracks the applicant maintains in the city.
   C.   From the above information the director of community development or his
designated representative shall designate locations and shall be guided therein
solely by the standards and criteria set forth in section
8.70.050 of this chapter. Such application may be granted either in whole or in
part when more than one location is proposed by the applicant, and in any
event, when denial is solely as to location, it shall be without prejudice to
amend such application to state a different location or locations.
   D.   A registrant for a location or locations shall report immediately to
the director of community development or his designated representative, any
change of address of such registrant or any sale or transfer of ownership of
newsracks shall comply with the provisions of this section and the provisions
of section
8.70.060 of this chapter.
   E.   A permit shall be issued pursuant to this section without charge to the
applicant.
   F.   Any permit issued pursuant to this section is subject to revocation if
the newsrack installed does not comply with the site plan/plot plan and other
description in the application for the same. (Ord. 2228 § 1, 1993)
8.70.050: STANDARDS FOR INSTALLATION, MAINTENANCE AND OPERATION:
   A.   Any newsrack which in whole or in part rests upon, in or over any
public sidewalk or parkway shall comply with the following standards:
      1.   No newsrack shall exceed forty eight inches (48") in height, thirty
inches (30") in width, or two feet (2') in thickness.
      2.   All newsracks will be bolted to the sidewalk per city approval.
      3.   Newsracks shall only be placed pursuant to approval by the director
of community development or his designated representative near a curb or
adjacent to the wall of a building. Newsracks placed near the curb shall be
placed no less than eighteen inches (18") nor more than twenty four inches
(24") from the edge of the curb. Newsracks placed adjacent to the wall of a
building shall be placed parallel to such wall and not more than six inches
(6") from the wall. No newsrack shall be placed or maintained on the sidewalk
or parkway opposite a newsstand or another newsrack.
      4.   No newsrack shall be chained, or otherwise attached to any property
not owned by the owner of the newsrack or to any permanently fixed object
without the express permission of the owner of the property.
      5.   Newsracks may be chained or otherwise attached to one another;
however, no more than three (3) newsracks may be joined together in this
manner, and a space of no less than thirty six inches (36") shall separate each
group of three (3) newsracks so attached.
      6.   Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection B of this section, no
newsrack shall be placed, installed, used or maintained:
         a.   Within five feet (5') of any marked crosswalk;
         b.   Within fifteen feet (15') of the curb return of any unmarked
crosswalk;
         c.   Within five feet (5') of any fire hydrant, fire call box, police
call box or other emergency facility;
         d.   Within ten feet (10') of any driveway;
         e.   Within five feet (5') to the front, and twenty five feet (25') to
the rear of any sign marking a designated bus stop;
         f.   Within six feet (6') of any bus bench;
         g.   At any location where placement of a newsrack would impede the
passageway of pedestrians or where the clear space for the passageway of
pedestrians is reduced to less than four feet (4');
         h.   Within fifty feet (50') of any other newsrack containing the same
publication;
         i.   Within three feet (3') of any display window of any building
abutting the sidewalk or parking or in such a manner as to impede or interfere
with the reasonable use of such window for display purposes;
         j.   At any location which would interfere with the sight distance
standards for traffic as set in chapter 200 and section 405.1 of the "CalTrans
Highway Design Manual", January 1987 version.
      7.   No newsrack shall be used for advertising signs or publicity
purposes other than that dealing with the display, sale or purchase of the
newspaper or news periodical sold therein.
      8.   Each newsrack shall be maintained in a clean, neat and attractive
condition and in good repair at all times.
      9.   No more than eight (8) newsracks shall be located on any public
right of way within a space of two hundred feet (200') in any direction within
the same block of the same street; provided, however, that no more than sixteen
(16) newsracks shall be allowed on any one block. As used herein, "block" means
both sides of a street between two (2) consecutive intersecting streets.
   B.   In determining which newsracks shall be permitted to remain, the
director of community development, or his designated representative, shall be
guided solely by the following criteria:
      1.   First priority shall be given to newsracks used for the sale of
publications which have been adjudicated to be newspapers of general
circulation for San Bernardino County, pursuant to the procedures set forth in
section 6000 et seq., of the California Government Code.
      2.   Second priority shall be given to newsracks used for the sale of
daily publications (those published on 5 or more days in a calendar week) which
have not been adjudicated to be newspapers of general circulation for San
Bernardino County.
      3.   Third priority shall be given to newsracks used for the sale of
weekly publications (those published on at least 1 but less than 5 days in a
calendar week) which have not been adjudicated to be newspapers of general
circulation for San Bernardino County.
   C.   In the event that there is a conflict between newspapers within the
same priority seeking the same location, and there are insufficient newsracks
spaces remaining to accommodate the conflicting newspapers after first filling
as many spaces as possible by utilizing the criteria as set forth above, then
the director of community development or his designated representative shall
assign the space or spaces at random by placing the names of all applicants for
the remaining spaces at a location into a container from which the names shall
be drawn, one at a time until the remaining number of unfilled newsracks at
that particular location has been filled. Such drawing shall be open to the
public at a time and date designated by the director of community development
or his designated representative. (Ord. 2228 § 1, 1993)
8.70.060: NEWSRACKS IDENTIFICATION REQUIRED:
Every person or other entity which places or maintains a newsrack on the
streets of the city shall have his or its name, address and telephone number
affixed thereto in a place where such information may be easily seen. Prior to
the designation of a location by the director of community development or his
designated representative, the applicant shall present evidence of compliance
with this section. (Ord. 2228 § 1, 1993)
8.70.070: NEWSRACK VIOLATIONS:
   A.   Any newsrack installed, used or maintained in violation of the
provisions of this chapter shall be tagged with a "notice of violation" stating
the violation, date of tagging, notice of intention to remove the newsrack if
the violation is not corrected within ten (10) days, and procedure for
obtaining a hearing before the director of community development or his
designated representative, if desired. Such notice of violation shall also be
mailed by first class postage to the name and address of the registered owner
of the newsrack on file with the city.
   B.   Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, in the case of violations
of this chapter relative to restrictions upon attachments of newsracks to
property other than that owned by the owner of the newsrack, to fixed objects,
or to each other, and upon location of newsracks, the director of community
development or his designated representative may, as an alternative to tagging
such newsrack, move, align, remove such attachment, or otherwise move such rack
or racks in order to restore them to a legal condition.
   C.   Any newsrack which has been tagged, and which notice of violation has
been mailed to the registered owner on file with the city, which remains in
violation of the provisions stated on the tag after the ten (10) day correction
period has expired, provided no hearing has been requested by the registered
owner, such newsrack shall be removed by the director of community development
or his designated representative and stored in any convenient place. The
director of community development or his designated representative shall notify
the owner thereof by mailing a notice of removal to the last known address of
the owner on file with the city. Such notice shall state the date the newsrack
was removed, the reasons therefor, the location and procedure for claiming the
newsrack, and the procedure for obtaining a postremoval hearing before the
director of community development or his designated representative, if desired.
Any such newsrack removed and stored pursuant to these provisions shall be
released to the owner thereof if claimed within forty five (45) days after such
removal and upon the payment of reasonable charges of removal and storage
therefor. Upon failure of the owner to claim such newsrack and pay the
reasonable charges within forty five (45) days after the mailing of written
notice of removal, such newsracks shall be deemed to be unclaimed property in
possession of the department of public works and may be disposed of pursuant to
the provisions of this code.
Any newsrack in violation of the provisions of this chapter, and which by such
violation creates an immediate danger to the health, safety or welfare of the
public, provided such violation cannot be corrected by moving or otherwise
repositioning the newsrack, may be summarily removed and stored in a convenient
location so as to eliminate the danger to the health, safety and welfare of the
public. The director of community development or his designated representative
shall notify the owner thereof by mailing a notice of removal to the last known
address of the owner. Such notice shall state the date the newsrack was
removed, the reasons therefor, the location and procedure for claiming the
newsrack, and the procedure for obtaining a postremoval hearing before the
director of community development or his designated representative, if desired.
Any such newsrack removed and stored pursuant to this subsection shall be
released to the owner thereof if claimed within forty five (45) days after the
mailing of written notice of removal and upon the payment of reasonable charges
of removal and storage. (Ord. 2228 § 1, 1993)
8.70.080: DISPLAY OF HARMFUL MATERIAL:
Any newsrack which contains or offers for sale harmful matter shall place a
blinder rack in front of such harmful matter so as to obscure the lower two-
thirds (2/3) of any material displaying harmful matter. For purposes of this
section, a wrapper which obscures the lower two-thirds (2/3) of the material
and which is fastened securely to the material may be used in lieu of a blinder
rack. (Ord. 2228 § 1, 1993)
8.70.090: APPLICABILITY TO ALL NEWSRACKS:
   A.   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all newsracks whether
installed and maintained prior to or after the effective date of any of the
provisions herein. Those newsracks installed prior to the effective date of any
provision enacted hereunder shall be brought into compliance with such
provisions within ninety (90) days of the effective date hereof.
   B.   Any newsrack not brought into compliance within the aforementioned time
period shall be deemed to be in violation of this chapter. (Ord. 2228 § 1,
1993)
8.70.100: NEWSRACK VIOLATIONS; INFRACTION:
Any act which is prohibited or declared unlawful or the doing of any act which
is required, or the failure to do any act which is declared to be unlawful,
shall be an infraction, and any person convicted of such infraction is
punishable. (Ord. 2228 § 1, 1993)
8.70.110: HOLD HARMLESS:
Every person or other entity which places or maintains a newsrack on a public
sidewalk or parkway in the city shall file a written indemnification statement
with the director of community development or his designated representative
which contains the following language or words to that effect:
   Permittee shall indemnify, defend and hold harmless City, its elected
officials, officers, employees and agents against and will hold and save them,
and each of them, harmless from any and all actions, claims, penalties,
obligations, liabilities or damages to persons or property that may be asserted
or claimed by any person, firm, entity, corporation, political subdivision or
other organization arising out of or in connection with the installation, use
or maintenance of a newsrack or newsracks within the City of Redlands.
   (a)    The permittee will defend any action or actions filed in connection
with any of said claims, damages, penalties, obligations or liabilities and
will pay all costs and expenses, including attorney fees with an attorney of
City's own choosing, incurred in connection therewith.
   (b)    The permittee will promptly pay any judgment rendered against the
permittee and/or the City covering such claims, damages, penalties, obligations
and liabilities arising out of or in connection with the installation, use or
maintenance of a newsrack or newsracks within the City of Redlands; and the
permittee agrees to save and hold the City harmless therefrom.
   (c)    In the event City is made a party to any action or proceeding filed
or persecuted against the permittee for such damages or other claims arising
out of or in connection with the installation, use, or maintenance of a
newsrack or newsracks within the City of Redlands, the permittee agrees to pay
to the City any and all costs and expenses incurred by City in such actions or
proceedings, together with reasonable attorney fees for an attorney of City's
own choosing.
(Ord. 2228 § 1, 1993)
8.70.120: INSURANCE:
The city requires every person or other entity which places or maintains a
newsrack on a public sidewalk or parkway in the city to provide proof of
insurance as required by current city policy, rule and/or regulations. (Ord.
2228 § 1, 1993)
CHAPTER 8.72
ABANDONMENT OF SHOPPING CARTS
SECTION:
8.72.010: Declaration Of Public Nuisance
8.72.020: Definitions
8.72.030: Abandoned Cart
8.72.040: Administration And Enforcement
8.72.050: Shopping Cart Abatement
8.72.060: Assessments For Shopping Cart Removal; Hearings
8.72.070: Identification Of Shopping Carts
8.72.080: Removal From Premises Prohibited; Exceptions
8.72.090: Abandonment Prohibited
8.72.100: Owner's Responsibility To Prevent Littering
8.72.110: Unlawful Possession
8.72.010: DECLARATION OF PUBLIC NUISANCE:
The city council has determined that the accumulation and storage of wrecked,
dismantled or abandoned shopping carts, or parts thereof, on public or private
property creates a condition tending to reduce property values, promote blight
and deterioration, constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the
health and safety of minors, and be aesthetically detrimental to the community
and injurious to the health, safety and general welfare. Therefore, the
presence of wrecked, dismantled or abandoned shopping carts, or parts thereof,
on public or private property, is declared to constitute a public nuisance
which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 2266 § 1, 1995)
8.72.020: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply to this chapter:
   PARKWAY: That area between the sidewalks and the curb of any street, and
where there is no sidewalk, that area between the edge of the roadway and the
property line adjacent thereto. Parkway shall also include any area within a
roadway which is not open to vehicular travel.
   PUBLIC PROPERTY: Means and includes, but is not limited to, all areas
dedicated to public use for public street purposes, roadways, parkways, alleys,
sidewalks, flood control channels and any public right of way.
   SHOPPING CART: A basket which is mounted on wheels or a similar device
generally used in retail establishment by a customer for the purpose of
transporting goods of any kind. (Ord. 2266 § 1, 1995)
8.72.030: ABANDONED CART:
When a shopping cart is left standing on any public or private property, the
shopping cart shall be deemed to be abandoned and therefore a public nuisance
pursuant to this chapter. The provisions of this section shall not apply to
shopping carts left standing on private property (including the common areas of
shopping centers adjacent thereto) of the owner of the shopping cart according
to the name of such owner affixed thereto as required by section
8.72.070 of this chapter. In the event that a shopping cart is left standing on
any public or private property or, in the event the cart violates section
8.72.070 of this chapter, the owner thereof shall be responsible and liable for
the removal and disposition of the abandoned shopping cart as provided in this
chapter.
The city manager may exempt a shopping cart owner from the provisions of this
section if the cart owner has implemented a plan whereby employees provide cart
retrieval, or whereby the cart owner has entered into a contract with a cart
retrieval service and has provided the city with proof of such contract,
provided the frequency of cart retrieval service meets the city manager's
approval. (Ord. 2266 § 1, 1995)
8.72.040: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the provisions of this chapter
shall be administered and enforced by the city manager or his authorized
representative. In the enforcement of this chapter, the city manager or his
authorized representative may enter onto public or private property to examine
a shopping cart, or parts thereof, or to obtain information as to the identify
of a shopping cart and to remove, or cause the removal of, a shopping cart, or
parts thereof, declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 2266 §
1, 1995)
8.72.050: SHOPPING CART ABATEMENT:
Upon discovering the existence of a wrecked, dismantled or abandoned shopping
cart, or parts thereof, on public or private property within the city, the city
manager, or his authorized representative shall have the authority to cause the
abatement and removal thereof in accordance with the procedure described in
this chapter. (Ord. 2266 § 1, 1995)
8.72.060: ASSESSMENTS FOR SHOPPING CART REMOVAL; HEARINGS:
   A.   Upon the abatement and removal of any shopping cart located on public
or private property within the city, the city manager or his authorized
representative shall notify the owner thereof (if the same can be ascertained)
by mailing a notice of abatement to the last known address of the owner. Such
notice shall state the date the shopping cart was removed from public or
private property, the location and procedure for retrieval of the shopping
cart, and a statement that, in order to receive a hearing with regard to the
removal of the shopping cart, the owner or its agent shall submit a request for
such hearing either in person or in writing within ten (10) days of the date
appearing on the notice. Any such shopping cart removed and stored pursuant to
these provisions shall be released to the owner thereof if claimed within
thirty (30) days after such removal and upon the payment of reasonable
administrative fees. Such administrative fees shall be waived if, after a
hearing has been requested, a determination is made at such hearing that upon a
finding of good cause, the administrative fees shall be waived.
   B.   The administrative fees for the removal and storage of the shopping
cart shall be established or modified by resolution of the city council and
shall include the actual cost of removal and storage of any shopping cart, or
parts thereof, plus the proportional share of administrative costs in
connection therewith.
   C.   Any hearing which is requested shall be conducted within ten (10) days
of the receipt of the request for such hearing, excluding weekends and
holidays, by the city manager, or his designee, who shall serve as the hearing
officer. The failure of either the owner or its agent to request a hearing
shall satisfy the hearing requirement. If it is determined at a hearing that
reasonable grounds for the abatement and removal of a shopping cart are not
established, no fee for removal and storage of such shopping cart shall be
imposed. At the close of the hearing, the hearing officer shall determine
whether good cause was shown for the abatement or removal of the shopping cart
from public or private property. The decision of the hearing office shall be
deemed the final administrative determination. If good cause is shown for the
abatement and removal of the shopping cart, the owner or its agent shall have
fifteen (15) days from the date of the hearing to retrieve its shopping cart
upon payment of the administrative fee. If good cause is not shown for the
abatement and removal of the shopping cart from public or private property, the
administrative fee shall be waived and the owner or its agent shall have
fifteen (15) days to retrieve its shopping cart from the storage area.
   D.   Any shopping carts which are not retrieved by their owner within thirty
(30) days after the mailing of written notice of abatement when such owner has
not requested a hearing in accordance with this section, or within thirty (30)
days storage of the cart by the city in all other cases, shall be deemed to be
permanently abandoned and may be sold at public auction or otherwise disposed
of at the end of thirty (30) days following such notice.
   E.   At such time as shall be convenient to the city, the city shall
advertise for the sale of permanently abandoned (as provided in subsection D of
this section) shopping carts. Notice of such sale shall be posted in three (3)
conspicuous places located within the city. Ten (10) days after the posting of
such notice and the time and place fixed in the notice for said sale (or at
such times and places as the sale shall be reasonably continued) such shopping
cart may be sold along with other shopping carts, and delivered to the highest
bidder free and clear of the claims of the owner thereof.
   F.   The proceeds of such sale shall be disbursed to the city. (Ord. 2266 §
1, 1995)
8.72.070: IDENTIFICATION OF SHOPPING CARTS:
All shopping carts used in the city shall be properly identified by the owner
thereof, including the name of the local store in which such shopping cart is
to be used. All persons owning shopping carts within the city for use of their
customers to take outside of the buildings shall have firmly affixed thereto
the owner's identification. (Ord. 2266 § 1, 1995)
8.72.080: REMOVAL FROM PREMISES PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS:
No person shall remove from the immediate store or parking premises of any food
store, market or other mercantile establishment in the city, any shopping cart,
wagon or similar device, bearing a notification affixed thereto in a
conspicuous place thereon to the effect that such cart, wagon or device is not
to be removed from the owner's premises, unless such person is the owner or
owner's employee or agent. (Ord. 2266 § 1, 1995)
8.72.090: ABANDONMENT PROHIBITED:
No person shall abandon or leave any such cart, wagon or device which has been
removed from the owner's premises upon any public street, alley, sidewalk,
parkway or other public place, or upon any private property (except that of the
owner of the cart, wagon or device) not under the control of such person
abandoning or leaving such cart, wagon or device. (Ord. 2266 § 1, 1995)
8.72.100: OWNER'S RESPONSIBILITY TO PREVENT LITTERING:
The action of an owner or owner's agent or employee to permit any such cart,
wagon or device to be removed from the owner's premises shall be considered
littering. (Ord. 2266 § 1, 1995)
8.72.110: UNLAWFUL POSSESSION:
No person shall have in his possession any such cart, wagon or device which has
been removed from the owner's premises without authorization or which has been
abandoned or left on private properly under circumstances as described in
section
8.72.030 of this chapter unless such person so having possession has notified
the Redlands police department of the presence and location of such cart, wagon
or device. (Ord. 2266 § 1, 1995)
CHAPTER 8.76
ADULT ORIENTED BUSINESS PERMIT REGULATIONS
SECTION:
8.76.010: Purpose
8.76.020: Definitions
8.76.030: Permits Required
8.76.040: Adult Oriented Business Regulatory Permit Required
8.76.050: Applications
8.76.060: Investigation And Action On Application
8.76.070: Permit Denial
8.76.075: Permit Duration And Renewals
8.76.080: Transfer Of Adult Oriented Business Regulatory Permits
8.76.090: Adult Oriented Business Performer Permit
8.76.100: Investigation And Action On Application For Adult Oriented Business
Performer Permit
8.76.110: Suspension Or Revocation Of Adult Oriented Business Regulatory
Permits And Adult Oriented Business Performer Permits
8.76.120: Appeal Of Denial Of Initial Permit
8.76.130: Adult Oriented Business Development And Performance Standards
8.76.140: Register And Permit Number Of Employees
8.76.150: Display Of Permit And Identification Cards
8.76.160: Employment Of And Services Rendered To Persons Under The Age Of
Eighteen Years Prohibited
8.76.170: Inspection
8.76.180: Regulations Nonexclusive
8.76.190: Employment Of Persons Without Permit Unlawful
8.76.200: Time Limit For Filing Application For Permit
8.76.205: Monitoring And Enforcement Of Adult Requirements
8.76.210: Severability
8.76.010: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate adult oriented businesses to
promote the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Redlands and to
prevent communitywide adverse economic impacts, increased crime, decreased
property values and the deterioration of neighborhoods which can be brought
about by the concentration of adult oriented businesses in close proximity to
each other, or proximity to other incompatible uses such as schools for minors,
churches and residentially zoned districts. The city council of the city of
Redlands finds that it has been demonstrated in various communities that the
concentration of adult oriented businesses causes an increase in the number of
transients in the area and an increase in crime, and in addition to the effects
described above, can cause other businesses and residents to move elsewhere.
The provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing
a limitation or prohibition on the content of any communicative materials,
including adult oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect
of this chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to adult oriented
materials protected by the first amendment, or to deny access by the
distributors and exhibitors of adult oriented entertainment to their intended
market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this chapter to condone or
legitimize the distribution of obscene material. Rather it is, the purpose of
this chapter to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the
concentration of adult oriented businesses, or their close proximity to
incompatible uses, while permitting the location of adult oriented businesses
in certain areas. (Ord. 2455 § 1, 2000: Ord. 2345 § 2, 1997)
8.76.020: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
   ADULT LIVE ENTERTAINMENT: Any physical human body activity, whether
performed or engaged in, alone or with other persons, including, but not
limited to, singing, walking, speaking, dancing, acting, posing, simulating,
wrestling or pantomiming, in which the performer (including, but not limited
to, topless and/or bottomless dancers, go-go dancers, exotic dancers, strippers
or similar performers) exposes to public view, without opaque covering,
"specified anatomical areas", or relates to "specified sexual activities"
whether or not the specified anatomical areas are covered.
   ADULT ORIENTED BUSINESS: Any one of the following:
      Adult Arcade: An establishment where, for any form of consideration, one
or more still or motion picture projectors, or similar machines, for viewing by
an individual(s) are used to show films, computer generated images, motion
pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions, a regular
and substantial number of which are distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.
      Adult Bookstore: An establishment that has, on a regular basis, a
substantial amount of its stock in books, magazines, periodicals or other
printed matter, or of photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassettes,
slides, tapes, records or other form of visual or audio representations which
are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or
description of specified sexual activities and/or specified anatomical areas.
      Adult Business: A. A business establishment or concern that as a regular
and substantial course of conduct operates as an adult bookstore, adult motion
picture theater, adult arcade, adult cabaret, adult motel or hotel; or
         B.   A business establishment or concern which as a regular and
substantial course of conduct offers, sells or distributes materials, products,
merchandise, services or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matters
depicting, describing, or relating to "specified sexual activities" or
"specified anatomical areas" but not including those uses or activities which
are preempted by state law.
      Adult Cabaret: A nightclub, restaurant or similar business establishment
which: a) regularly features live performances which are distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis upon the display of specified anatomical areas or
specified sexual activities; and/or b) which regularly features persons who
appear seminude.
      Adult Hotel/Motel: A hotel or motel or similar business establishment
offering public accommodations for any form of consideration which: a) provides
a patron or patrons with closed circuit television transmissions, films,
computer generated images, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other
photographic reproductions, a regular and substantial number of which are
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description
of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and b) rents,
leases or lets any room for less than a six (6) hour period, or rents, leases
or lets any single room more than twice in a twenty four (24) hour period.
      Adult Motion Picture Theater: A business establishment where, for any
form of consideration, film, computer generated images, motion pictures,
videocassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions are shown, a
regular and substantial number of which are distinguished or characterized by
an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.
   ADULT ORIENTED BUSINESS OPERATOR ("OPERATOR"): A person who supervises,
manages, inspects, directs or controls the premises of an adult oriented
business or the conduct or activities occurring on the premises thereof.
   APPLICANT: A person who is required to file an application for a permit
under this chapter, including an individual owner, managing partner, officer of
a corporation or any other operator, manager, employee or agent of an adult
oriented business.
   BAR: Any commercial establishment licensed by the state department of
alcoholic beverage control to serve any alcoholic beverages on the premises.
   CHIEF OF POLICE: The chief of police of the city or the authorized
representatives thereof.
   CHURCH: A structure which is used primarily for religious worship and
related religious activities.
   ESTABLISHMENT OF AN ADULT ORIENTED BUSINESS: To "establish" an adult
oriented business means and includes any of the following:
   A.   The opening or commencement of any adult oriented business as a new
business;
   B.   The conversion of an existing business, whether or not an adult
oriented business, to any adult oriented business defined in this chapter;
   C.   The addition of any of the adult oriented businesses defined in this
chapter to any other existing adult oriented business; or
   D.   The relocation of any such adult oriented business.
   HEALTH OFFICER: The health officer of the county of San Bernardino or his/
her duly authorized representative.
   NOTICE: Written notice given by personal service upon the addressee, or
given by the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the person to be
notified at his or her last known address. Service of such notice shall be
effective upon the completion of personal service, or upon the placing the same
in the custody of the United States postal service.
   NUDITY OR A STATE OF NUDITY: The showing of the human male or female
genitals, pubic area or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering, the
showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part
of the nipple, or the showing of the covered male genitals in a discernible
turgid state.
   OPERATE AN ADULT ORIENTED BUSINESS: The supervising, managing, inspecting,
directing or controlling the conduct of activities of an adult oriented
business or activities within an adult oriented business.
   PERFORMER: A person who is an employee or independent contractor of an adult
business or any other person who, with or without any compensation or other
form of consideration, provides adult live entertainment for patrons of an
adult business.
   PERMITTEE: The person to whom an adult oriented business permit is issued.
   PERSON: Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, association, joint
stock company, corporation or combination of the above in whatever form or
character.
   SCHOOL: Any child or day care facility, or an institution of learning for
minors, whether public or private, offering instruction in those courses of
study required by the California Education Code and maintained pursuant to
standards set by the state board of education. This definition includes a
nursery school, kindergarten, elementary school, middle or junior high school,
senior high school, or any special institution of education, but it does not
include a vocation or professional institution of higher education, including a
community or junior college, college or university.
   SEMINUDE: A state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the
genitals, pubic region, buttocks, areola of the female breast, as well as
portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: Means and includes any of the following:
   A.   Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic
region, buttocks and female breast below a point immediately above the top of
the areola; and
   B.   Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if completely
and opaquely covered; and
   C.   Any device, costume or covering that simulates any of the body parts
included in subsection A or B of this definition.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: Means and includes any of the following:
   A.   The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks, anus or female breast;
   B.   Sex acts, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation
or sodomy;
   C.   Masturbation, actual or simulated;
   D.   Excretory functions, as part of or in connection with any of the other
activities described in subsections A through C of this definition.
   SUBSTANTIAL ENLARGEMENT OF AN ADULT ORIENTED BUSINESS: An increase in the
floor areas occupied by the business by more than fifteen percent (15%), as the
floor areas exist on the effective date of the ordinance establishing this
chapter. (Ord. 2455 § 2, 2000: Ord. 2424 § 2, 1999: Ord. 2345 § 2, 1997)
8.76.030: PERMITS REQUIRED:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct or carry on, or to
permit to be engaged in, conducted or carried on, in or upon any premises in
the city, the operation of an adult oriented business unless the person first
obtains and continues to maintain in full force and effect a permit from the
city herein required (adult oriented business regulatory permit).
   B.   It is unlawful for any person to engage in or participate in any live
performance depicting specified anatomical areas or involving specified sexual
activities in an adult oriented business unless the person first obtains and
continues in full force and effect a permit from the city. (Ord. 2455 § 3,
2000: Ord. 2345 § 2, 1997)
8.76.040: ADULT ORIENTED BUSINESS REGULATORY PERMIT REQUIRED:
Every person who proposes to maintain, operate or conduct an adult oriented
business in the city shall file an application with the chief of police upon a
form provided by the city and shall pay a filing fee, as established by
resolution adopted by the city council from time to time, which shall not be
refundable. Upon receipt, the chief of police shall forward a copy of the
application to the community development department. (Ord. 2455 § 4, 2000: Ord.
2345 § 2, 1997)
8.76.050: APPLICATIONS:
   A.   Adult oriented business regulatory permits are nontransferable, except
in accordance with section
8.76.080 of this chapter. All applications shall include the following
information:
      1.   a. If the applicant is an individual, the individual shall state his
or her legal name, including any aliases, address, and submit satisfactory
written proof that he or she is at least eighteen (18) years of age,
         b.   If the applicant is a partnership, the partners shall state the
partnership's complete name, address, the names of all partners, whether the
partnership is general or limited, and attach a copy of the partnership
agreement, if any,
         c.   If the applicant is a corporation, the corporation shall provide
its complete name, the date of its incorporation, evidence that the corporation
is in good standing under the laws of California, the names and capacity of all
officers and directors, the name of the registered corporate agent and the
address of the registered office for service of process;
      2.   If the applicant is an individual, he or she shall sign the
application. If the applicant is other than an individual, an officer of the
business entity or an individual with a ten percent (10%) or greater interest
in the business entity shall sign the application;
      3.   If the applicant intends to operate the adult oriented business
under a name other than that of the applicant, the applicant shall file the
fictitious name of the adult oriented business and show proof of registration
of the fictitious name;
      4.   A description of the type of adult oriented business for which the
permit is requested and the proposed address where the adult oriented business
will operate, plus the names and addresses of the owners and lessors of the
adult oriented business site;
      5.   The address to which notice of action on the application is to be
mailed;
      6.   The names of all employees, independent contractors, and other
persons who will perform at the adult oriented business, who are required by
section
8.76.090 of this chapter to obtain an adult oriented business performer permit;
      7.   A sketch or diagram showing the interior configuration of the
premises, including a statement of the total floor area occupied by the adult
oriented business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared,
but must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the
interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches (±6");
      8.   A certificate and straight line drawing prepared within thirty (30)
days prior to application depicting the building and the portion thereof to be
occupied by the adult oriented business, and: a) the property lines of any
other adult oriented business within five hundred feet (500') of the primary
entrance of the adult oriented business for which a permit is requested; and b)
the property lines of any church, school, park, residential zone within one
thousand feet (1,000') of the primary entrance of the adult oriented business;
      9.   A diagram of the off street parking areas and premises entries of
the adult oriented business showing the location of the lighting system
required by section
8.76.130 of this chapter.
   B.   If the chief of police determines that the applicant has completed the
application improperly, the chief of police shall, within two (2) business days
of the filing of the application, notify the applicant of such fact.
   C.   The fact that an applicant possesses other types of state or city
permits or licenses does not exempt the applicant from the requirement of
obtaining an adult oriented business regulatory permit. (Ord. 2455 § 5, 2000:
Ord. 2424 § 3, 1999: Ord. 2345 § 2, 1997)
8.76.060: INVESTIGATION AND ACTION ON APPLICATION:
   A.   Upon receipt of a completed application and payment of the application
and permit fees, the chief of police shall immediately stamp the application as
received and promptly investigate the information contained in the application
to determine whether the applicant shall be issued an adult oriented business
regulatory permit.
   B.   Within ten (10) business days of receipt of the completed application,
the chief of police shall complete the investigation, grant or deny the
application in accordance with the provisions of this section, and so notify
the applicant as follows:
      1.   The chief of police shall write or stamp "Granted" or "Denied" on
the application and date and sign such notation.
      2.   If the application is denied, the chief of police shall attach to
the application a statement of the reasons for denial.
      3.   If the application is granted, the chief of police shall attach to
the application an adult oriented business regulatory permit.
      4.   The application as granted or denied and the permit, if any, shall
be personally served or shall be placed in the United States mail, first class
postage prepaid, addressed to the applicant at the address stated in the
application.
   C.   The chief of police shall grant the application and issue the adult
oriented business regulatory permit upon findings that the proposed business
meets the locational criteria of section
18.226.030 of this code; and that the applicant has met all of the development
and performance standards and requirements of section
8.76.130 of this chapter, unless the application is denied for one or more of
the reasons set forth in section
8.76.070 of this chapter. The permittee shall post the permit conspicuously in
the adult oriented business premises.
   D.   If the chief of police grants the application or if the chief of police
neither grants nor denies the application within ten (10) business days after
it is stamped as received (except as provided in section
 8.76.050 of this chapter), the applicant may begin operating the adult
oriented business for which the permit was sought, subject to strict compliance
with the development and performance standards and requirements of section
8.76.130 of this chapter. (Ord. 2455 § 6, 2000: Ord. 2424 § 4, 1999: Ord. 2345
§ 2, 1997)
8.76.070: PERMIT DENIAL:
   A.   The chief of police shall deny the application for any of the following
reasons:
      1.   The building, structure, equipment, or location used by the business
for which an adult oriented business regulatory permit is required does not
comply with the requirements and standards of the health, zoning, fire and
safety laws of the city of Redlands and the state of California, or with the
locational or development and performance standards and requirements of these
regulations.
      2.   The applicant, or its employee, agent, partner, director, officer,
shareholder or manager has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent
statement of material fact in the application for an adult oriented business
regulatory permit.
      3.   An applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age.
      4.   The required application fee has not been paid.
      5.   The adult oriented business does not comply with the zoning
ordinance locational standards, sections
 18.226.030 through
18.226.050, inclusive, of this code. (Ord. 2424 § 5, 1999: Ord. 2345 § 2, 1997)
8.76.075: PERMIT DURATION AND RENEWALS:
   A.   An adult oriented business permit shall be valid for a period of one
year from the date of issuance.
   B.   An adult oriented business permit shall be renewed on a year to year
basis, provided that the permittee and the adult oriented business continue to
meet the requirements set forth in this chapter. A request for permit renewal
must be accompanied by a completed adult oriented business permit application.
If said application conforms to the previously approved application and the
adult oriented business has not changed, the permit shall be renewed by the
city's police chief for another year. A change or alteration in that nature or
operation of the adult oriented business will require the renewal to be
reviewed by the police chief in accordance with section
8.76.070 of this chapter. The renewal fee for an adult oriented business permit
shall be established by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 2424 § 6, 1999)
8.76.080: TRANSFER OF ADULT ORIENTED BUSINESS REGULATORY PERMITS:
   A.   A permittee shall not operate an adult oriented business under the
authority of an adult oriented business regulatory permit at any place other
than the address of the adult oriented business stated in the application for
the permit.
   B.   A permittee shall not transfer ownership or control of an adult
oriented business or transfer an adult oriented business regulatory permit to
another person unless and until the transferee obtains an amendment to the
permit from the chief of police stating that the transferee is now the
permittee. Such an amendment may be obtained only if the transferee files an
application with the chief of police in accordance with sections
8.76.040 and
8.76.050 of this chapter, accompanies the application with a transfer fee in an
amount set by resolution of the city council, and the chief of police
determines in accordance with section
8.76.060 of this chapter that the transferee would be entitled to the issuance
of an original permit.
   C.   No permit may be transferred when the chief of police has notified the
permittee that the permit has been or may be suspended or revoked.
   D.   Any attempt to transfer a permit either directly or indirectly in
violation of this section is hereby declared void, and the permit shall be
deemed revoked. (Ord. 2345 § 2, 1997)
8.76.090: ADULT ORIENTED BUSINESS PERFORMER PERMIT:
   A.   No person shall engage in or participate in any live performance
depicting specified anatomical areas or involving specified sexual activities
in an adult oriented business without a valid adult oriented business performer
permit issued by the city. All persons who have been issued an adult oriented
business regulatory permit shall promptly supplement the information provided
as part of the application for the permit required by section
8.76.040 of this chapter, with the names of all performers required to obtain
an adult oriented business performer permit, within thirty (30) days of any
change in the information originally submitted. Failure to submit such changes
shall be grounds for suspension of the adult oriented business regulatory
permit.
   B.   The chief of police shall grant, deny and renew adult oriented business
employee permits.
   C.   The application for a permit shall be made on a form provided by the
chief of police. An original and two (2) copies of the completed and sworn
permit application shall be filed with the chief of police.
   D.   The completed application shall contain the following information and
be accompanied by the following documents:
      1.   The applicant's legal name and any other names (including "stage
names" and aliases) used by the applicant;
      2.   Age, date and place of birth;
      3.   Height, weight, hair and eye color, tattoo descriptions and
locations;
      4.   Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of:
         a.   Any of the offenses set forth in sections 315, 316, 266a, 266b,
266c, 266e, 266g, 266h, 266i, 647(a), 647(b) and 647(D) of the California Penal
Code as those sections now exist or may hereafter be amended or renumbered,
         b.   The equivalent of the aforesaid offenses outside the state of
California;
      5.   State driver's license, social security number, or identification
number;
      6.   The applicant's fingerprints on a form provided by the police
department, and a color photograph clearly showing the applicant's face, taken
within the last six (6) months of the date of the permit application. Any fees
for the photographs and fingerprints shall be paid by the applicant;
      7.   If the application is made for the purpose of renewing a license,
the applicant shall attach a copy of the license to be renewed.
   E.   The completed application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable
application fee. The amount of the fee shall be set by resolution of the city
council.
   F.   Upon receipt of an application and payment of the application fees, the
chief of police shall immediately stamp the application as received and
promptly investigate the application.
   G.   If the chief of police determines that the applicant has an incomplete
or otherwise invalid application, the chief of police shall, within ten (10)
business days of the filing of the application, notify the applicant. (Ord.
2424 § 7, 1999: Ord. 2345 § 2, 1997)
8.76.100: INVESTIGATION AND ACTION ON APPLICATION FOR ADULT ORIENTED BUSINESS
PERFORMER PERMIT:
   A.   Within two (2) days after receipt of the properly completed
application, the chief of police shall grant or deny the application and so
notify the applicant as follows:
      1.   The chief of police shall write or stamp "Granted" or "Denied" on
the application and date and sign such notation.
      2.   If the application is denied, the chief of police shall attach to
the application a statement of the reasons for denial.
      3.   If the application is granted, the chief of police shall attach to
the application an adult oriented business performer permit.
      4.   The application as granted or denied and the permit, if any, shall
be placed in the United States mail, first class postage prepaid, addressed to
the applicant at the residence address stated in the application.
   B.   The chief of police shall grant the application and issue the permit
unless the application is denied for one or more of the reasons set forth in
subsection D of this section.
   C.   If the chief of police grants the application or if the chief of police
neither grants nor denies the application within two (2) days after it is
stamped as received (except as provided in section
8.76.050 of this chapter), the applicant may begin performing in the capacity
for which the license was sought.
   D.   The chief of police shall deny the application for any of the following
reasons:
      1.   The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading, or
fraudulent statement of a material fact in the application for a permit or in
any report or document required to be filed with the applications;
      2.   The applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age;
      3.   The adult oriented business employee permit is to be used for
performing in a business prohibited by state or city law;
      4.   The applicant has been registered in any state as a prostitute;
      5.   The applicant has been convicted of any of the offenses enumerated
in section
8.76.090 of this chapter, or convicted of an offense outside the state of
California that would have constituted any of the described offenses if
committed within the state of California. A permit may be issued to any person
convicted of the described crimes if the conviction occurred more than five (5)
years prior to the date of the application.
   E.   Each adult oriented business performer permit shall expire one year
from the date of issuance and may be renewed only by filing with the chief of
police a written request for renewal, accompanied by the application fee and a
copy of the permit to be renewed. The request for renewal shall be made at
least thirty (30) days before the expiration date of the permit. Applications
for renewal shall be acted on as provided herein for applications for permits.
(Ord. 2455 § 8, 2000: Ord. 2424 § 8, 1999: Ord. 2345 § 2, 1997)
8.76.110: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF ADULT ORIENTED BUSINESS REGULATORY
PERMITS AND ADULT ORIENTED BUSINESS PERFORMER PERMITS:
An adult oriented business regulatory permit or adult oriented business
performer permit may be suspended or revoked in accordance with the procedures
and standards of this section.
   A.   On determining that grounds for permit revocation exist, the chief of
police shall furnish written notice of the proposed suspension or revocation to
the permittee. Such notice shall set forth the time and place of a hearing, and
the ground or grounds upon which the hearing is based, the pertinent code
sections, and a brief statement of the factual matters in support thereof. The
notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, addressed to the last known address of
the permittee, or shall be delivered to the permittee personally, at least ten
(10) days prior to the hearing date. Hearings shall be conducted in accordance
with procedures established by the chief of police, but at a minimum shall
include the following:
      1.   All parties involved shall have a right to offer testimonial,
documentary, and tangible evidence bearing on the issues; may be represented by
counsel.
   B.   A permittee may be subject to suspension or revocation of a permit, or
be subject to other appropriate disciplinary action, for any of the following
causes arising from the acts or omissions of the permittee, or an employee,
agent, partner, director, stockholder or manager of an adult oriented business:
      1.   The permittee has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent
statement of material facts in the application for a permit, or in any report
or record required to be filed with the city;
      2.   The adult oriented business regulatory permittee, employee, agent,
partner, director, stockholder, or manager of an adult oriented business has
knowingly allowed or permitted, and has failed to make a reasonable effort to
prevent the occurrence of any of the following on the premises of the adult
oriented business, or in the case of an adult oriented business performer, the
permittee has engaged in one of the activities described below while on the
premises of an adult oriented business:
         a.   Any act of unlawful sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation,
or masturbation,
         b.   Use of the establishment as a place where unlawful solicitations
for sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, or masturbation openly occur,
         c.   Any conduct constituting a criminal offense which requires
registration under section 290 of the California Penal Code,
         d.   The occurrence of acts of lewdness, assignation, or prostitution,
including any conduct constituting violations of sections 315, 316, or 318 or
subdivision b of section 647 of the California Penal Code,
         e.   Any act constituting a violation of provisions in the California
Penal Code relating to obscene matter or distribution of harmful matter to
minors, including, but not limited to, sections 311 through 313.4,
         f.   Any conduct prohibited by this chapter;
      3.   Failure to abide by a disciplinary action previously imposed by an
appropriate city official.
   C.   After holding the hearing in accordance with the provisions of this
section, if the chief of police finds and determines that there are grounds for
disciplinary action, based upon the severity of the violation, the chief of
police shall impose one of the following:
      1.   Suspension of the permit for a specified period not to exceed six
(6) months;
      2.   Revocation of the permit. (Ord. 2455 § 9, 2000: Ord. 2345 § 2, 1997)
8.76.120: APPEAL OF DENIAL OF INITIAL PERMIT:
   A.   Appeal To City Council:
      1.   Any decision of the chief of police to issue or deny a permit may be
appealed to the city council. Any appeal shall be filed within ten (10)
business days following notice of denial, nonrenewal, suspension or revocation
by the chief of police and shall state the grounds upon which review is sought.
The appeal hearing will be scheduled for hearing and the city council will
render a decision all within fourteen (14) days of the filing of the appeal
with the city clerk. At the hearing, all parties shall have a right to offer
testimonial, documentation and tangible evidence on the issues and may be
represented by legal counsel. Any relevant evidence upon which reasonable
persons are accustomed to rely on in the conduct of serious matters may be
admitted.
      2.   All decisions made by the city council to issue or deny a permit
subject to this chapter shall immediately become final. After any final denial,
nonrenewal, suspension or revocation of a permit authorized by this chapter,
the applicant/permittee may seek prompt judicial review of such decision in any
court of competent jurisdiction as provided by law, pursuant to California Code
of Civil Procedure section 1094.5 et seq., and pursuant to the expedited
judicial review set forth in California Code of Civil Procedure section 1094.8.
   B.   Appeal Of Renewal, Suspension Or Revocation Of Permit:
      1.   Any decision of the chief of police to deny, renew, suspend or
revoke a permit may be appealed to the city council. Any appeal shall be filed
within ten (10) business days following notice of denial, nonrenewal,
suspension or revocation by the chief of police and shall state the grounds
upon which review is sought. The appeal hearing will be scheduled for hearing
and the city council will render a decision all within fourteen (14) days of
the filing of the appeal with the city clerk of the city. At the hearing, all
parties shall have a right to offer testimonial, documentation and tangible
evidence on the issues; and may be represented by legal counsel. Any relevant
evidence upon which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely on in the conduct
of serious matters may be admitted.
      2.   If the police chief denies a renewal permit, or if a permit has been
suspended or revoked, and the aggrieved applicant/permittee timely commences an
appeal to review the validity of the denial, suspension or revocation, upon
written request of the applicant/permittee, the city shall issue a temporary
permit pending the final determination on the appeal. The temporary permit
shall remain in effect throughout the administrative appeal process and for
ninety (90) days following the administrative determination. In the event the
city council upholds the police chief's decision, and the applicant/permittee
fails or refuses to seek judicial review within such ninety (90) days, the
temporary permit shall thereon expire without further notice and the applicant/
permittee shall cease all operations thereunder. Any temporary permit issued
pursuant to this section shall not grant any vested rights to the holder of the
temporary permit.
      3.   All decisions made by the city council to issue, renew, nonrenew,
suspend, revoke, or deny a permit subject to this chapter, shall immediately
become final. After any final denial, nonrenewal, suspension or revocation of a
permit authorized by this chapter, the applicant/permittee may seek prompt
judicial review of such decision in any court of competent jurisdiction as
provided by law, pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure section 1094.5
et seq., and pursuant to the expedited judicial review set forth in California
Code of Civil Procedure section 1094.8. (Ord. 2455 § 10, 2000: Ord. 2424 § 9,
1999)
8.76.130: ADULT ORIENTED BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT AND PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
Adult oriented businesses shall comply with the following development and
performance standards:
   A.   Maximum occupancy load, fire exits, aisles and fire equipment shall be
regulated, designed and provided in accordance with the fire department and
building regulations and standards adopted by the city of Redlands.
   B.   No adult oriented business shall be operated in any manner that permits
the observation of any material or activities depicting, describing or relating
to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas from any public
way or from any location outside the building or area of such establishment.
This provision shall apply to any display, decoration, sign, show window or
other opening. No exterior door or window on the premises shall be propped or
kept open at any time while the business is open, and any exterior windows
shall be covered with opaque covering at all times.
   C.   All off street parking area and premises entries of the sexually
oriented business shall be illuminated from dusk to closing hours of operation
with a lighting system which provides an average maintained horizontal
illumination of one foot-candle of light on the parking surface and/or
walkways. The required lighting level is established in order to provide
sufficient illumination of the parking areas and walkways serving the sexually
oriented business for the personal safety of patrons and employees and to
reduce the incidence of vandalism and criminal conduct. The lighting shall be
shown on the required sketch or diagram of the premises.
   D.   Except for those businesses also regulated by the California department
of alcoholic beverage control, an adult oriented business shall be open for
business only between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. and two o'clock (2:
00) A.M. of the following day.
   E.   The building entrance to an adult oriented business shall be clearly
and legibly posted with a notice indicating that persons under eighteen (18)
years of age are precluded from entering the premises. The notice shall be
constructed and posted to the satisfaction of the community development
director or his or her designee. No person under the age of eighteen (18) years
shall be permitted within the premises at any time.
   F.   All indoor areas of the adult oriented business within which patrons
are permitted, except restrooms, shall be open to view by the management at all
times.
   G.   Any adult oriented business which is also an "adult arcade", shall
comply with the following provisions:
      1.   The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner
that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of
the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding
restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If the
premises has two (2) or more manager's stations designated, then the interior
of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an
unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted
access for any purpose from at least one of the manager's stations. The view
required in this subsection must be direct line of sight from the manager's
station.
      2.   The view area specified in subsection G1 of this section shall
remain unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks, or other
materials at all times. No patron is permitted access to any area of the
premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be
permitted.
      3.   No viewing room may be occupied by more than one person at any one
time.
      4.   The walls or partitions between viewing rooms or booths shall be
maintained in good repair at all times, with no holes between any two (2) such
rooms such as would allow viewing from one booth into another or such as to
allow physical contact of any kind between the occupants of any two (2) such
booths or rooms.
      5.   Customers, patrons or visitors shall not be allowed to stand idly by
in the vicinity of any such video booths, or remaining in the common area of
such business, other than the restrooms, who are not actively engaged in
shopping for or reviewing the products available on display for purchaser
viewing. Signs prohibiting loitering shall be posted in prominent places in and
near the video booths.
      6.   The floors, seats, walls and other interior portions of all video
booths shall be maintained clean and free from waste and bodily secretions.
Presence of human excrement, urine, semen or saliva in any such booths shall be
evidence of improper maintenance and inadequate sanitary controls; repeated
instances of such conditions may justify suspension or revocation of the owner
and operator's license to conduct the adult oriented establishment.
   H.   All interior areas of the adult oriented business shall be illuminated
at a minimum of the following foot-candles, minimally maintained and evenly
distributed at ground level:
 
Area                            Foot-Candles
Bookstores and other retail     20
establishments
                                5 (except during performances, at which
Theaters and cabarets           times lighting shall be at least 1.25
                                foot-candles)
Arcades                         10
Motels/hotels (in public areas) 20
Modeling studios                20
 
   I.   The adult oriented business shall provide and maintain separate
restroom facilities for male patrons and employees, and female patrons and
employees. Male patrons and employees shall be prohibited from using the
restroom(s) for females, and female patrons and employees shall be prohibited
from using the restroom(s) for males, except to carry out duties of repair,
maintenance and cleaning of the restroom facilities. The restrooms shall be
free from any adult material. Restrooms shall not contain television monitors
or other motion picture or video projection, recording or reproduction
equipment. The foregoing provisions of this section shall not apply to an adult
oriented business which deals exclusively with sale or rental of adult material
which is not used or consumed on the premises, such as an adult bookstore or
adult video store, and which does not provide restroom facilities to its
patrons or the general public.
   J.   The following additional requirements shall pertain to adult oriented
businesses providing live entertainment depicting specified anatomical areas or
involving specified sexual activities. If the adult business is licensed to
sell alcoholic beverages, the permittee shall abide by the rules and
regulations set forth by the California department of alcohol beverage control
(ABC) and the regulations provided in this chapter, unless any regulation of
this chapter is preempted by the ABC, in which case the ABC's regulations shall
apply:
      1.   No person shall perform live entertainment for patrons of an adult
oriented business except upon a stage at least eighteen inches (18") above the
level of the floor which is separated by a distance of at least ten feet (10')
from the nearest area occupied by patrons, and no patron shall be permitted
within ten feet (10') of the stage while the stage is occupied by a
"performer", as defined in this chapter.
      2.   The adult oriented business shall provide separate dressing room
facilities for performers, which are exclusively dedicated to the performers'
use.
      3.   The adult oriented business shall provide an entrance/exit for
performers which is separate from the entrance/exit used by patrons.
      4.   The adult oriented business shall provide access for performers
between the stage and the dressing rooms which is completely separated from the
patrons. If such separate access is not physically feasible, the adult oriented
business shall provide a minimum three foot (3') wide walk aisle for
performers, between the dressing room area and the stage, with a railing, fence
or other barrier separating the patrons and the performers capable of (and
which actually results in) preventing any physical contact between patrons and
performers.
      5.   No performer, either before, during or after performances, shall
have physical contact with any patron and no patron shall have physical contact
with any performer either before, during or after performances by such
entertainer. This subsection shall only apply to physical contact on the
premises of the adult oriented business.
      6.   Fixed rail(s) at least thirty inches (30") in height shall be
maintained establishing the separations between performers and patrons required
by this subsection.
      7.   No patrons shall directly give any monetary consideration to any
adult entertainer and no adult entertainer shall accept any monetary
consideration directly from any patrons. Monetary considerations may be placed
in or on receptacles located at least ten feet (10') from adult entertainers.
      8.   No performer shall have physical contact with any patron, and no
patron shall have physical contact with any performer, while the performer is
performing on the premises. In addition, while on the premises, no performer
shall have physical contact with a patron and no patron shall have physical
contact with a performer, which physical contact involves the touching of the
clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks, cleft of the buttocks,
perineum, anal region, or female breast with any part or area of any other
person's body either before or after any adult live entertainment by such
performer. This prohibition does not extend to incidental touching. Patrons
shall be advised of the separation and no touching requirements by signs
conspicuously displayed and placed on the barrier between patrons and
performers and utilizing red or black printing of letters not less than one
inch (1") in size. And, if necessary, patrons shall also be advised of the
separation and no touching requirements by employees or independent contractors
of the establishment.
      9.   No owner or other person with managerial or supervisorial control
over an "adult oriented business" (as that term is defined in section
18.226.020 of this code and section
8.76.020 of this chapter) whether or not featuring "adult live entertainment"
(as that term is defined in section
8.76.020 of this chapter) shall permit any performer or person on the premises
of the adult oriented business to engage in exposure of the human male or
female genitals, pubic area or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering,
and/or the female breasts with less than a fully opaque covering over any part
of the nipple or areola and/or covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid
state. This provision may not be complied with by applying an opaque covering
simulating the appearance of the specified anatomical part required to be
covered.
      10.   No operator, entertainer or employee of an adult oriented business
shall encourage or permit a customer upon the premises to touch, caress or
fondle the breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals of any entertainer or employee
of the adult oriented business.
      11.   The adult oriented business shall not conduct any massage,
acupuncture, body wrapping, tattooing, acupressure, fortune telling or escort
services on the premises.
      12.   The adult oriented business shall provide a security system that
visually records and monitors all parking lot areas, at all times that the
business is open and occupied for business.
   K.   In order to maintain the public peace and safety, adult oriented
businesses featuring live entertainment shall provide at least one state
licensed security guard at all times while the business is open. If the
occupancy limit of the premises is greater than thirty five (35) persons, an
additional state licensed security guard shall be on duty.
   L.   Additional regulations that apply to this chapter and shall apply to
all adult oriented businesses as follows:
      1.   Motion Picture Theaters: The following additional requirements shall
apply to adult motion picture theaters:
         a.   If the theater contains a hall or auditorium area, the area shall
comply with each of the following provisions:
            (1)   Have individual, separate seats, not couches, benches, or the
like, to accommodate the maximum number of persons who may occupy the hall or
auditorium area,
            (2)   Have a continuous main aisle alongside the seating areas in
order that each person seated in the hall or auditorium area shall be visible
from the aisle at all times,
            (3)   Have a sign posted in a conspicuous place at or near each
entrance to the hall or auditorium area which lists the maximum number of
persons who may occupy the hall or auditorium area, which number shall not
exceed the number of seats within the hall or auditorium area; and
         b.   If an adult motion picture theater is designed to permit outdoor
viewing by patrons seated in automobiles, it shall have the motion picture
screen so situated, or the perimeter of the establishment so fenced, that the
material to be seen by those patrons may not be seen from any public right of
way, child daycare facility, public park, school, or religious institution or
any residentially zoned property occupied with a residence.
      2.   Sign Requirements: All adult businesses shall comply with the
following sign requirements, in addition to those of this code. Should a
conflict exist between the requirements of this code and this subsection, the
more restrictive shall prevail.
         a.   If an adult business does not serve alcohol, it shall post a
notice inside the establishment, within ten feet (10') of every entrance used
by customers for access to the establishment, stating that persons below the
age of eighteen (18) years of age are prohibited from entering onto the
premises or within the confines of the adult business. This notice shall be
posted on a wall in a place of prominence. The dimensions of the notice shall
be no less than six inches by six inches (6" x 6"), with a minimum typeface of
25-point. If the adult business serves alcohol, it shall comply with all notice
and posting requirements of the alcoholic beverage control department.
      3.   Manager: All adult businesses shall have a responsible person who
shall be at least eighteen (18) years of age and shall be on the premises to
act as manager at all times during which the business is open. No performer may
serve as the manager. The individual(s) designated as the on site manager shall
provide his/her name to the police chief to receive all complaints and be given
by the owner and/or operator the responsibility and duty to address and
immediately resolve all violations taking place on the premises. (Ord. 2455 §§
12–14, 2000: Ord. 2424 §§ 10–12, 1999: Ord. 2345 § 2, 1997)
8.76.140: REGISTER AND PERMIT NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES:
Every permittee of an adult oriented business which provides live entertainment
depicting specified anatomical areas or involving specified sexual activities
must maintain a register of all persons so performing on the premises and their
permit numbers. Such register shall be available for inspection during regular
business hours by any police officer or health officer of the city. (Ord. 2345
§ 2, 1997)
8.76.150: DISPLAY OF PERMIT AND IDENTIFICATION CARDS:
   A.   Every adult oriented business shall display at all times during
business hours the permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter for
such adult oriented business in a conspicuous place so that the same may be
readily seen by all persons entering the adult oriented business.
   B.   The chief of police shall provide each adult oriented business
performer required to have a permit pursuant to this chapter, with an
identification card containing the name, address, photograph and permit number
of such performer.
   C.   An adult oriented business performer shall have such card available for
inspection at all times during which such person is on the premises of the
adult oriented business. (Ord. 2345 § 2, 1997)
8.76.160: EMPLOYMENT OF AND SERVICES RENDERED TO PERSONS UNDER THE AGE OF
EIGHTEEN YEARS PROHIBITED:
   A.   It is unlawful for any permittee, operator, or other person in charge
of any adult oriented business to employ, or provide any service for which it
requires such permit, to any person who is not at least eighteen (18) years of
age.
   B.   It is unlawful for any permittee, operator or other person in charge of
any adult oriented business to permit to enter, or remain within the adult
oriented business, any person who is not at least eighteen (18) years of age.
(Ord. 2345 § 2, 1997)
8.76.170: INSPECTION:
An applicant or permittee shall permit representatives of the police
department, health department, fire department, community development
department or other city departments or agencies to inspect the premises of an
adult oriented business for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law and
the development and performance standards applicable to adult oriented
businesses, at any time it is occupied or opened for business. A person who
operates an adult oriented business or his or her agent or employee is in
violation of the provisions of this section if he or she refuses to permit such
lawful inspection of the premises at any time it is occupied or open for
business. Such inspections shall be conducted in reasonable manner. (Ord. 2424
§ 13, 1999: Ord. 2345 § 2, 1997)
8.76.180: REGULATIONS NONEXCLUSIVE:
The provisions of this chapter regulating adult oriented businesses are not
intended to be exclusive and compliance therewith shall not excuse
noncompliance with any other regulations pertaining to the operation of
businesses as adopted by the city council. (Ord. 2345 § 2, 1997)
8.76.190: EMPLOYMENT OF PERSONS WITHOUT PERMIT UNLAWFUL:
It is unlawful for any owner, operator, manager, or permittee in charge of or
in control of an adult oriented business which provides live entertainment
depicting specified anatomical areas or involving specified sexual activities
to allow any person to perform such entertainment who is not in possession of a
valid, unrevoked adult oriented business performer permit. (Ord. 2345 § 2,
1997)
8.76.200: TIME LIMIT FOR FILING APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
All persons who possess an outstanding business license heretofore issued for
the operation of an adult oriented business and all persons required by this
chapter to obtain an adult oriented business performer permit, must apply for
and obtain such a permit within ninety (90) days of the effective date hereof.
Failure to do so and continued operation of an adult oriented business, or the
continued performances depicting specified anatomical areas or specified sexual
activities in an adult oriented business after such time without a permit shall
constitute a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 2345 § 2, 1997)
8.76.205: MONITORING AND ENFORCEMENT OF ADULT REQUIREMENTS:
The chief of police shall be responsible for monitoring compliance with the
provisions of this chapter and recommending enforcement alternatives to the
city council. Nothing in this chapter shall have the effect of limiting the
remedies the city may pursue in enforcing the provisions of this chapter. (Ord.
2455 § 15, 2000)
8.76.210: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase
in this chapter or any part thereof is for any reason held to be
unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of
the remaining portions of this chapter or any part thereof. The city council
declares that it would have passed each section, subsection, subdivision,
paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that
any one or more subsection, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or
phrases be declared unconstitutional or invalid, or ineffective. (Ord. 2345 §
2, 1997)
TITLE 9
PUBLIC PEACE AND WELFARE
CHAPTER 9.04
OFFENSES BY OR AGAINST GOVERNMENT AND PUBLIC OFFICERS
SECTION:
9.04.010: False Reports To Police Unlawful
9.04.020: Injury, Defacement Of Public Property
9.04.030: Police Canines And Equines; Protection
9.04.040: Police Canines And Equines; Prohibited Conduct
9.04.050: Police Canines And Equines; Violation; Penalty
9.04.010: FALSE REPORTS TO POLICE UNLAWFUL:
No person shall wilfully make to the police department any false, misleading or
unfounded report, for the purpose of interfering with the operation of the
police department or with the intention of misleading any police officer.
(Prior code § 40201)
9.04.020: INJURY, DEFACEMENT OF PUBLIC PROPERTY:
It is unlawful for any person within the city to mar, injure or deface any part
of any public building, bench, settee or any other public property within the
city. (Prior code §§ 50000, 50004)
9.04.030: POLICE CANINES AND EQUINES; PROTECTION:
It is the intent of the city council of the city of Redlands to protect canines
and equines, utilized by the police department, from interference and harm
while such animals are in use in the performance of functions or duties of the
police department. (Ord. 1682 § 1, 1979)
9.04.040: POLICE CANINES AND EQUINES; PROHIBITED CONDUCT:
It is unlawful for any person to wilfully or maliciously tease, taunt, torment,
strike, kick, mutilate, disable, or otherwise injure, or kill, or to
unwarrantably interfere or meddle with any canine or equine while such animal
is being utilized by the police department, or any officer or employee thereof,
in the performance of any function or duty of such department, or of such
officer or employee. (Ord. 1682 § 2, 1979)
9.04.050: POLICE CANINES AND EQUINES; VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of sections
9.04.030 and
9.04.040 of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be fined in an amount not exceeding three hundred dollars
($300.00) or imprisoned in the county jail for a period not exceeding ninety
(90) days, or by being both so fined and imprisoned. (Ord. 1682 § 3, 1979)
CHAPTER 9.08
OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
SECTION:
9.08.010: Cutting Plants And Flowers
9.08.010: CUTTING PLANTS AND FLOWERS:
It is unlawful for any person to cut, break off or destroy or injure any
ornamental or flowering tree, shrub, vine or plant being or growing upon the
land of another, or to pick, cut, or take any flower, bud or fruit being or
growing upon such land, without the consent of the owner or the person in
charge of such land. (Prior code § 40601)
CHAPTER 9.10
PROHIBITION AGAINST AGGRESSIVE SOLICITATION
SECTION:
9.10.010: Purpose
9.10.020: Definitions
9.10.030: Aggressive Solicitation Prohibited
9.10.040: Solicitation Prohibited At Specified Locations
9.10.050: Violations; Penalty
9.10.060: Nonexclusivity
9.10.010: PURPOSE:
In order to protect and promote the rights of the general public to be free
from inappropriate conduct and from the potential physical confrontations
sometimes associated with panhandling, the city council of the city of Redlands
finds that there is a need to adopt regulations which impose reasonable and
specific time, place, and manner limitations on those forms of inappropriate
and unlawful conduct which may be associated with aggressive panhandling. At
the same time, the city council seeks to properly and duly recognize, as well
as fully protect to the full extent possible, the first amendment free speech
rights of all concerned. (Ord. 2747, 2011)
9.10.020: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings ascribed to them:
   PUBLIC PLACE: A place to which the public or a substantial group of persons
has access, and includes, but is not limited to, any street, highway, sidewalk,
parking lot, plaza, transportation facility, school, place of amusement, park,
playground, and any doorway, entrance, hallway, lobby, and other portion of any
business establishment, an apartment house or hotel not constituting a room or
apartment designed for actual residence.
   SOLICIT, ASK OR BEG: Using the spoken, written, or printed word, or bodily
gestures, signs or other means with the purpose of obtaining an immediate
donation of money or other thing of value, or soliciting the sale of goods and
services. (Ord. 2747, 2011)
9.10.030: AGGRESSIVE SOLICITATION PROHIBITED:
No person shall solicit, ask or beg in any aggressive manner in any public
place. "Aggressive manner" shall mean any of the following:
   A.   Approaching or speaking to a person, or following a person before,
during or after soliciting, asking, or begging, if that conduct is intended or
is likely to cause a reasonable person to:
      1.   Fear bodily harm to oneself or to another, damage to or loss of
property, or
      2.   Otherwise be intimidated into giving money or other thing of value;
   B.   Intentionally touching or causing physical contact with another person
or an occupied vehicle without that person's consent in the course of
soliciting, asking, or begging;
   C.   Intentionally blocking or interfering with the safe or free passage of
a pedestrian or vehicle by any means, including unreasonably causing a
pedestrian or vehicle operator to take evasive action to avoid physical
contact;
   D.   Using violent or threatening gestures toward a person solicited either
before, during or after soliciting, asking, or begging;
   E.   Persisting in closely following or approaching a person, after the
person solicited has been solicited and informed the solicitor by words or
conduct that such person does not want to be solicited or does not want to give
money or any other thing of value to the solicitor; or
   F.   Using profane, offensive, or abusive language which is inherently
likely to provoke an immediate violent reaction, either before, during, or
after solicitation. (Ord. 2747, 2011)
9.10.040: SOLICITATION PROHIBITED AT SPECIFIED LOCATIONS:
   A.   Banks And ATMs: No person shall solicit, ask, or beg within fifteen
feet (15') of any entrance or exit of any bank, savings and loan association,
credit union, or check cashing business during its business hours, or within
fifteen feet (15') of any automated teller machine during the time it is
available for customers' use. Provided, however, that when an automated teller
machine is located within an automated teller machine facility, such distance
shall be measured from the entrance or exit of the automated teller machine
facility. Provided further that no person shall solicit, ask, or beg within an
automated teller machine facility where a reasonable person would or should
know that he or she does not have the permission to do so from the owner or
other person lawfully in possession of such facility. Nothing in this section
shall be construed to prohibit the lawful vending of goods and services within
such areas.
      1.   Definitions: For purposes of this section:
         AUTOMATED TELLER MACHINE: Any electronic information processing device
which accepts or dispenses cash in connection with a credit, deposit, or
convenience account.
         AUTOMATED TELLER MACHINE FACILITY: The area comprised of one or more
automated teller machines, and any adjacent space which is made available to
banking customers after regular banking hours.
         BANK: Any member bank of the federal reserve system, and any bank,
banking association, trust company, savings bank, or other banking institution
organized or operated under the laws of the United States, and any bank, the
deposits of which are insured by the federal deposit insurance corporation.
         CHECK CASHING BUSINESS: Any person duly licensed as a check seller,
bill payer, or prorater pursuant to division 3 of the California Financial
Code, commencing with section 12000.
         CREDIT UNION: Any federal credit union and any state chartered credit
union, the accounts of which are insured by the administrator of the national
credit union administration.
         SAVINGS AND LOAN ASSOCIATION: Any federal savings and loan association
and any "insured institution" as defined in section 401 of the national housing
act, as amended, and any federal credit union as defined in section 2 of the
federal credit union act.
      2.   Exemptions: The provisions of this subsection A shall not apply to
any unenclosed automated teller machine located within any building, structure,
or space whose primary purpose or function is unrelated to banking activities,
including, but not limited to, supermarkets, airports, and school buildings;
provided that such automated teller machine shall be available for use only
during the regular hours of operation of the building, structure, or space in
which such machine is located.
   B.   Motor Vehicles And Parking Lots:
      1.   Motor Vehicles: It is unlawful to, or attempt to, solicit any person
entering or exiting any vehicle, so as to impede that person's movement, when
such vehicle is located within a public street, public or private driveway
leading to a public street, or public or private parking lot or structure.
      2.   Parking Lots: No person shall solicit, ask, or beg in any public
parking lot or structure between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. and
seven o'clock (7:00) A.M.
      3.   Exemptions: The provisions of this subsection B shall not apply to
any of the following:
         a.   To solicitation related to business which is being conducted on
the subject premises by the owner or lawful tenants;
         b.   To solicitation related to the lawful towing of a vehicle; or
         c.   To solicitation related to emergency repairs requested by the
operator or other occupant of a vehicle. (Ord. 2807, 2014)
9.10.050: VIOLATIONS; PENALTY:
A violation of this chapter is punishable as a misdemeanor or infraction,
chargeable at the city attorney's discretion. (Ord. 2747, 2011)
9.10.060: NONEXCLUSIVITY:
Nothing in this chapter shall limit or preclude the enforcement of other
applicable laws by the city. (Ord. 2747, 2011)
CHAPTER 9.12
OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE
SECTION:
9.12.010: Obstruction Or Interference With Passage
9.12.020: Violation; Penalty
9.12.010: OBSTRUCTION OR INTERFERENCE WITH PASSAGE:
   A.   No person shall sit or stand on or at the entrance of any church, hall,
theater or other place of public assembly in any manner so as to obstruct such
entrance.
   B.   No person shall wilfully block, impede or obstruct any aisle,
passageway, hallway, lobby, foyer, or stairway leading to or from any entrance
or exit required by law within any office building, public building, place of
business, hotel or other structure with the intent to prevent, delay, hinder or
interfere with the free use of such passageway by any other person who is
within, entering, occupying or leaving such premises. (Prior code § 44200)
9.12.020: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine
of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment for not more
than six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Prior code §
44300)
CHAPTER 9.14
MEDIAN ISLAND SAFETY
SECTION:
9.14.010: Declaration Of Purpose Of Median Islands
9.14.020: Definitions
9.14.030: Prohibition Of Lingering, Soliciting, Or Loitering On Median Island
9.14.040: Signs Or Other Objects Prohibited
9.14.050: Distribution Or Exchange Of Objects Prohibited
9.14.060: Exceptions
9.14.070: Violation
9.14.010: DECLARATION OF PURPOSE OF MEDIAN ISLANDS:
The city council hereby declares the purpose of median islands within city
streets is as follows:
   A.   To promote safety by separating vehicular traffic traveling in one
direction from vehicular traffic traveling in the opposite direction;
   B.   To promote safety by providing a place of safety and respite for
pedestrians while crossing city streets at intersections and other approved
crossings, particularly for the elderly and disabled who may need additional
time to safely cross city streets than traffic signals allow; and
   C.   To improve the visual appeal of city streets. (Ord. 2807, 2014)
9.14.020: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
   LINGER: Remaining in a median island longer than two (2) traffic signal
cycles, except in an emergency.
   LOITERING: Standing or lingering in a median island for any purpose other
than to safely and lawfully cross the street, except in an emergency.
   MEDIAN ISLAND: A paved or planted area separating a street, or highway, into
two (2) or more lanes or directions of travel.
   SOLICIT: Any request made in person seeking an immediate request for or
donation of money, food, cigarettes or any other items of value, or for the
purchase of an item for an amount far exceeding its value, under circumstances
where a reasonable person would understand that the purchase is in substance a
donation. "Solicit" also means any verbal request, or any nonverbal request
made with a sign, by a person seeking an immediate donation of money, food,
cigarettes, or any other items of value or the request that items be purchased
for any goods, wares, or merchandise or any article to be delivered in the
future, or for services to be performed in the future, or for making,
manufacturing, or repairing any article whatsoever for future delivery, or for
subscriptions to periodicals or tickets of admission to entertainments or
memberships in any clubs. (Ord. 2807, 2014)
9.14.030: PROHIBITION OF LINGERING, SOLICITING, OR LOITERING ON MEDIAN ISLAND:
It shall be unlawful for any person to linger, solicit, or loiter on a median
island within the city. (Ord. 2807, 2014)
9.14.040: SIGNS OR OTHER OBJECTS PROHIBITED:
No person shall bring any sign, material, or other object on the median island
that will obstruct any traffic signal light or extend into a traffic lane or
obscure any traffic sign on a median island. No person, sign, material, or
other object on the median island shall obstruct any traffic signal light or
extend into a traffic lane or obstruct a traffic sign on such a median island.
(Ord. 2807, 2014)
9.14.050: DISTRIBUTION OR EXCHANGE OF OBJECTS PROHIBITED:
No person, while standing on a median island or by stepping off a median
island, shall exchange any object with an occupant of a motor vehicle. (Ord.
2807, 2014)
9.14.060: EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   This chapter shall not apply to freeway oriented solicitation
prohibited by California Vehicle Code section 22520.5.
   B.   This chapter shall not apply to those persons occupying a median while
conducting activities related to maintenance, surveying, construction,
landscape maintenance, landscape improvements, law enforcement, responding to
an emergency, or as otherwise permitted by law. (Ord. 2807, 2014)
9.14.070: VIOLATION:
A violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor, punishable in accordance with
title 1, chapter 1.20 of this code. In addition, the city attorney shall also
have the power to seek injunctive relief for any violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 2807, 2014)
CHAPTER 9.16
OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC DECENCY
SECTION:
9.16.010: Intoxicating Liquor Defined
9.16.020: Drinking On Public Street
9.16.030: Visiting Place Of Prostitution
9.16.040: Urinating And Defecating In Public Prohibited
9.16.010: INTOXICATING LIQUOR DEFINED:
As used in this chapter, "intoxicating liquor" includes all spirituous,
fermented, vinous and malt liquors and any other liquor or mixture of liquor
which contains more than three and two-tenths percent (3.2%) of alcohol by
weight and which is not so mixed with other drugs as to prevent its use as a
beverage. (Prior code § 50003)
9.16.020: DRINKING ON PUBLIC STREET:
It is unlawful for any person within the city to drink or consume any
intoxicating liquor upon any public street, highway, road, alley or lane,
whether public or private within the city. (Ord. 2193 § 3, 1992: prior code §§
50000, 50002)
9.16.030: VISITING PLACE OF PROSTITUTION:
It is unlawful for any person within the city to be present at or visit any
house of ill fame or any place used or occupied for purposes of prostitution,
or where prostitution is permitted, or to live in or maintain an illicit
relation with any person, or to be present at or visit any house or place for
the purpose of having illicit relations with any person. (Prior code § 51000)
9.16.040: URINATING AND DEFECATING IN PUBLIC PROHIBITED:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate in public, other
than when using a toilet, urinal or commode located in a restroom, bathroom or
other structure enclosed from public view.
   B.   Proof of a verified medical condition that causes an individual to lack
control of the bodily functions that control urination or defecation is a
defense to a violation of this section. (Ord. 2683 § 1, 2007)
CHAPTER 9.18
BLINDER RACKS
SECTION:
9.18.010: Definitions
9.18.020: Requirement Of Blinder Racks
9.18.030: Violation; Penalty
9.18.010: DEFINITIONS:
Unless otherwise stated, words and terms are defined as follows:
   BLINDER RACK: An opaque device, which serves to completely obscure harmful
matter, placed in such fashion so that the lower two-thirds (2/3) of the
harmful matter is not exposed to view.
   EXHIBIT: To show or display.
   HARMFUL MATTER: Matter, taken as a whole, the predominant appeal of which to
the average person, applying contemporary statewide standards, is to prurient
interest, meaning a shameful or morbid interest in nudity, sex, or excretion,
and is patently offensive to the prevailing standards in the adult community as
a whole with respect to what is suitable material for minors, and lacks
significant literary, artistic, political, educational, or scientific value for
minors.
   MATTER: Any book, magazine, newspaper, video recording, or other printed or
written material or any picture, drawing, photograph, motion picture, or other
pictorial representation or any statue or other figure, or any recording,
transcription, or mechanical, chemical, or electrical reproduction or any other
articles, equipment, machines, or materials.
   MINOR: Any natural person under eighteen (18) years of age.
   PERSON: Any individual, partnership, firm, association, corporation, or
other legal entity. (Ord. 2139 § 1, 1990)
9.18.020: REQUIREMENT OF BLINDER RACKS:
No person shall exhibit matter which is harmful to minors in any public place,
other than a public place from which minors are excluded, unless "blinder
racks" are placed in front of the matter. (Ord. 2139 § 1, 1990)
9.18.030: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a
fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment for
not more than six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 2139
§ 1, 1990)
CHAPTER 9.20
WEAPONS
SECTION:
9.20.010: Gun Defined
9.20.020: Shooting Prohibited
9.20.030: Children With Guns Declared A Nuisance; Exception
9.20.040: Exemptions
9.20.050: Violation; Penalty
9.20.010: GUN DEFINED:
The term "gun", within the meaning of this chapter, means and includes air
guns, air rifles, pistols, revolvers and guns of any character fired by
explosives. (Prior code § 40801)
9.20.020: SHOOTING PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to fire any gun within the corporate limits of
the city. (Prior code § 40802)
9.20.030: CHILDREN WITH GUNS DECLARED A NUISANCE; EXCEPTION:
Any gun in the possession of a minor under the age of sixteen (16) years, in
any place within the corporate limits of the city, except within the home of
any such minor, or except when such minor is in the direct charge and under the
supervision of the parent or guardian of any such minor, is declared to be a
nuisance and to be subject to immediate seizure and confiscation when found in
the possession of any minor under the age of sixteen (16) years who is not so
in charge and under the supervision of any such parent or guardian. (Prior code
§ 40803)
9.20.040: EXEMPTIONS:
This chapter shall not apply to any regularly established gun or rifle club or
shooting gallery, the location of which has been previously approved in writing
by the chief of police, nor to any person specially licensed by the council to
destroy pests nor to officers in the discharge of their official duties. (Prior
code § 40804)
9.20.050: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor, and in addition to any other punishment herein
prescribed, shall be liable to fine and imprisonment. (Prior code § 40805)
CHAPTER 9.21
LASER DEVICES
SECTION:
9.21.010: Laser Devices Defined
9.21.020: Prohibited Uses
9.21.030: Exceptions
9.21.040: Violation; Penalty
9.21.010: LASER DEVICES DEFINED:
As used in this chapter, the term "laser device" means any of several devices
that convert incident electromagnetic radiation of mixed frequencies to one or
more discrete frequencies of highly amplified and coherent visible radiation;
as well as any other such devices operating on the principle of light
amplification by stimulated emission of radiation. (Ord. 2416 § 1, 1999)
9.21.020: PROHIBITED USES:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to point or otherwise direct the beam
from a laser device into the eye(s) or onto the body of another person.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person to point or otherwise direct the beam
from a laser device into the eye(s) or onto the body of any animal.
   C.   It is unlawful for any person to point or otherwise direct the beam
from a laser device toward any occupied vehicle.
   D.   It is unlawful for any person to point or otherwise direct the beam
from a laser device toward any stage, podium, bandstand or other area where a
live performance is taking place, or at any movie screen where a film or video
is being shown. (Ord. 2416 § 1, 1999)
9.21.030: EXCEPTIONS:
Nothing herein shall prohibit the use of a laser device:
   A.   By any licensed and qualified physician, veterinarian, medical
technician or other class of licensed therapist for diagnostic or treatment
purposes.
   B.   By any person for scientific, commercial or industrial purposes;
provided the laser device is not directed into the eye(s) or onto the body of
another person or animal or toward any occupied vehicle.
   C.   By any student, regularly enrolled in any educational institution;
provided such use is in a controlled laboratory or classroom setting, with the
permission and under the direct supervision of a licensed teacher or
instructor.
   D.   By any person possessing a valid California hunting license; provided
that the laser device is used as an aiming device, properly mounted and affixed
to a firearm and not directed in the eye(s) or onto the body of another person,
toward any occupied vehicle or toward any animal that is not being hunted.
   E.   By any person at a licensed shooting range; provided the laser device
is used as an aiming device, properly mounted and affixed to a firearm and not
directed into the eye(s) or onto the body of another person, animal or toward
any occupied vehicle.
   F.   By any peace officer in the ordinary course of his or her duties as an
aiming device, properly mounted and affixed to a firearm. (Ord. 2416 § 1, 1999)
9.21.040: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor, and in addition to any other punishment herein
prescribed, shall be liable to fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 2416 § 1, 1999)
CHAPTER 9.24
JUVENILE CURFEW
SECTION:
9.24.010: Definitions
9.24.020: Curfew Restrictions
9.24.030: Curfew; Penalty
9.24.040: Daylight Loitering; Restrictions
9.24.050: Police Service Fee
9.24.060: Daylight Loitering; Penalty
9.24.010: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings
ascribed to them:
   CURFEW HOURS: A. The period from ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. any evening of the
week, until six o'clock (6:00) A.M. the following day, except as provided in
subsection B of this definition.
      B.   The period from eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. on the evening of the
city's sponsored Market Night, until six o'clock (6:00) A.M. the following day,
within the Market Night outdoor area and all public property located within
twenty feet (20') of the Market Night outdoor area. For purposes of this
chapter, the "Market Night outdoor area" is defined as the geographical area
bounded by Citrus Avenue on the south, Eureka Street on the west, the
Interstate 10 Freeway on the north, and Sixth Street, between the Interstate 10
Freeway and Redlands Boulevard on the east, and then from Redlands Boulevard to
Citrus Avenue on the east.
   EMERGENCY: An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state
that calls for immediate action. The term incudes, but is not limited to, a
fire, natural disaster, an automobile accident or any situation requiring
immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.
   GUARDIAN: A. A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person
of a minor; or
      B.   A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by the
court.
   MINOR: Any person under eighteen (18) years of age.
   PARENT: A person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent or stepparent of
another person.
   PUBLIC PLACE: Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the
public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways and
the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings,
transport facilities and shops.
   RESPONSIBLE ADULT: A person at least eighteen (18) years of age, authorized
by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a minor.
   SERIOUS BODILY INJURY: Bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of
death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement or protracted loss
or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ. (Ord. 2708 § 1,
2008: Ord. 2575 § 1, 2004: Ord. 2367 § 1, 1997)
9.24.020: CURFEW RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   It is unlawful for any minor to be present in any public place or on
the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours.
   B.   It is unlawful for any parent or guardian of a minor knowingly to
permit, or by insufficient control to allow, the minor to be present in any
public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during
curfew hours.
   C.   It is a defense to prosecution under subsection A or B of this section
that the minor was:
      1.   Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian, or by a responsible
adult;
      2.   On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian, or
the responsible adult, without any detour or stop;
      3.   In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
      4.   Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home
from an employment activity, without any detour or stop;
      5.   Involved in an emergency;
      6.   On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence;
      7.   Attending an official school, religious or other recreational
activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization
or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to
or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school,
religious or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by
the city, a civic organization or another similar entity that takes
responsibility for the minor;
      8.   Exercising first amendment rights protected by the United States
constitution; or
      9.   Emancipated pursuant to law.
   D.   Before taking any enforcement action under this chapter, a police
officer shall ask the apparent offender's age and reason for being in the
public place or on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours. The
officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this section unless
the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based on
any responses and other circumstances, no defense under this section is present
or applicable.
   E.   Each violation of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a
separate offense. (Ord. 2367 § 1, 1997)
9.24.030: CURFEW; PENALTY:
Any person violating the provisions of section
9.24.020 of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction; provided, however,
that multiple violations of this chapter may be prosecuted as a misdemeanor
upon the exercise of prosecutorial discretion by the city attorney. To the
extent required by law, violations of this chapter shall be processed in
accordance with juvenile court law and procedure. (Ord. 2367 § 1, 1997)
9.24.040: DAYLIGHT LOITERING; RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   It is unlawful for any minor under the age of eighteen (18) years, who
is subject to compulsory education or to compulsory continuation education,
alone or in concert with others, to loiter, idle, wander, stroll or play in or
upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds, parking
areas, or other public grounds, public places or amusement and eating places,
vacant lots or other unsupervised places or any place open to the public
between the hours of eight thirty o'clock (8:30) A.M. and two thirty o'clock
(2:30) P.M. of the same day on days when said minor's school is in session.
   B.   It is unlawful for any parent or guardian to permit, or by insufficient
control to allow, a minor under the age of eighteen (18) years, who is subject
to compulsory education or to compulsory continuation education, alone or in
concert with others, to loiter, idle, wander, stroll or play in or upon the
public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds, parking areas, or
other public grounds, public places or amusement and eating places, vacant lots
or other unsupervised places or any place open to the public between the hours
of eight thirty o'clock (8:30) A.M. and two thirty o'clock (2:30) P.M. of the
same day on days when said minor's school is in session.
   C.   It is a defense to any prosecution under subsection A or B of this
section that the minor was:
      1.   Accompanied by his/her parent, guardian or other adult person having
the care and custody of the minor;
      2.   On an errand directed by his/her parent, guardian or other adult
person having the care and custody of the minor, without any detour or stop;
      3.   Going or coming directly from or to the minor's place of gainful
employment;
      4.   Going to or from a medical appointment;
      5.   Off campus for lunch and has in his/her possession a valid, school
issued, off campus permit;
      6.   Directly going to or from a school sponsored event or activity such
as a sporting event, field trip, or other such school activity;
      7.   Directly going to or from an event or activity that is directly
related to any medical condition of a parent, guardian or other adult person
having the care and custody of the minor;
      8.   In said place or places in connection with or required with respect
to a business, trade, profession or occupation in which the minor is lawfully
engaged;
      9.   Emancipated pursuant to law;
      10.   Exercising first amendment rights protected by the United States
constitution;
      11.   Involved in an emergency. For purposes of this subsection,
"emergency" means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting
state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited
to, a fire, natural disaster, an automobile accident or any situation requiring
immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life. "Serious
bodily injury" means bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or
that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement or protracted loss or
impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ;
      12.   On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence;
      13.   When the minor is authorized to be absent from his or her school
pursuant to the provisions of California Education Code section 48205, or any
other applicable state or federal law.
   D.   Before taking any enforcement action under this section a police
officer shall ask the minor's age and reason for being in the public place or
other location covered under this section during the hours of eight thirty
o'clock (8:30) A.M. and two thirty o'clock (2:30) P.M. of the same day on days
when said minor's school is in session. The officer shall not issue a citation
or make an arrest under this section unless the officer reasonably believes
that an offense has occurred and that, based on any responses and other
circumstances, no defense under this section is applicable. (Ord. 2396 § 1,
1999)
9.24.050: POLICE SERVICE FEE:
   A.   Purpose: The city finds and determines that minors who are repeatedly
detained and supervised by police personnel for violating curfew and daytime
loitering laws impose an extraordinary burden on the manpower and resources of
the police department because juveniles taken into custody by police personnel
must be supervised in an unsecured area of the police department until they are
released to a parent or guardian. police officers who supervise minors who have
been detained are then unavailable to carry out police duties in the field and
this decreases the level of police protection, thereby decreasing public safety
in the community. The purpose of this section is to defray the reasonable costs
that the city incurs to provide extraordinary police services to respond to,
detain, and supervise repeat curfew and daytime loitering violators.
As used in this section, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
   REPEAT CURFEW OR DAYTIME LOITERING VIOLATOR: Any minor: 1) who has been
detained and taken into custody by city police personnel on more than one
occasion in a twelve (12) month period for violating section
9.24.020 or
9.24.040 of this chapter and 2) who has been reprimanded by the San Bernardino
juvenile court because said court finds it to be true that the minor violated
section
9.24.020 or
9.24.040 of this chapter on more than one occasion in a twelve (12) month
period.
   RESPONSIBLE PARTY: Any parent, legal guardian, or other person in charge or
control of a repeat curfew violator.
   B.   Police Services Fee Established; Debt To City: A responsible party
shall be liable for a police services fee whenever the city's police personnel
respond to, detain, and supervise a repeat curfew or daytime loitering
violator. The city council shall establish the amount of the police services
fee by resolution. The police services fee charged to a responsible party shall
be a debt to the city by the responsible party. Any responsible party owing
money to the city pursuant to this section shall be liable in an action brought
by the city to recover such amount, including reasonable attorney fees.
   C.   Billing: The chief of police, or his or her designee, shall notify the
finance department in writing of: 1) the name and address of the responsible
party, 2) the date and time of the initial violation and of the repeat
violation of section
9.24.020 or
9.24.040 of this chapter, 3) the names of the police personnel who responded
to, detained and supervised the repeat curfew or daytime loitering violator,
and 4) the date that the repeat curfew or daytime loitering violator was
reprimanded by the San Bernardino juvenile court for the repeat violation. The
finance department may adopt administrative procedures for the purposes of
implementing the provisions of this section.
   D.   Appeal: Any responsible party who receives a bill from the finance
department pursuant to this section may, within fifteen (15) days after
receiving such bill, file a written request with the city clerk appealing the
bill. The written appeal shall state the grounds for such appeal and the
specific factual basis for the appeal. The responsible party is deemed to have
received a bill on the third day following the date that the finance department
caused the bill to be placed in the United States mail. The chief of police, or
his or her designee, shall review any written appeal filed with the city clerk
pursuant to this section and shall prepare a written decision on the appeal
within thirty (30) days from the date that the written appeal is received by
the city clerk. Appeals shall be heard by the city council. (Ord. 2396 § 2,
1999)
9.24.060: DAYLIGHT LOITERING; PENALTY:
Any person violating the provisions of section
9.24.040 of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction; provided, however,
that multiple violations of this chapter, in accordance with law, may be
prosecuted as a misdemeanor upon the exercise of prosecutorial discretion by
the city attorney. To the extent required by law, violations of this chapter
shall be prosecuted in accordance with juvenile court law and procedure. (Ord.
2396 § 3, 1999)
CHAPTER 9.28
MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES
SECTION:
9.28.010: Opening Hydrants
9.28.020: Peddling Prohibited Near Schools
9.28.010: OPENING HYDRANTS:
It is unlawful for any person within the city to open, or attempt to open, any
fire hydrant in the city without first obtaining a permit so to do from the
chief of the fire department. (Prior code §§ 50000, 50005)
9.28.020: PEDDLING PROHIBITED NEAR SCHOOLS:
No person shall sell, offer for sale, give away, solicit the sale of, or expose
for sale, any goods, wares or merchandise including, but not limited to, toys,
fruits, vegetables, peanuts, popcorn, candy, ice cream or other food items upon
any public street, sidewalk, or parkway within one thousand feet (1,000') of
the property line of any public or private primary or secondary school during
the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and five o'clock (5:00) P.M., on any day
when school is in session. This section does not prohibit the delivery of goods
or merchandise to school personnel, businesses or occupants of dwelling units.
(Ord. 2648 § 1, 2006)
CHAPTER 9.30
SOCIAL HOST LIABILITY
SECTION:
9.30.010: Purposes
9.30.020: Definitions
9.30.030: Consumption Of Alcoholic Beverages And Other Controlled Substances
Prohibited
9.30.040: Hosting, Permitting, Allowing A Gathering Prohibited
9.30.050: Responsibility For Property Management
9.30.060: Penalties For Violation Of Chapter
9.30.070: Recovery Of Response Costs
9.30.080: Billing And Collections
9.30.090: Reservation Of Legal Options
9.30.100: Appeals
9.30.010: PURPOSES:
The purposes of this chapter are to protect public health, safety and general
welfare; to enforce laws prohibiting the service to and consumption of
alcoholic beverages by underage persons; and to reduce the costs of providing
police, fire and other emergency response services to loud or unruly gatherings
by imposing a civil fee against social hosts and landowners (including
landlords) for the recovery of costs associated with providing law enforcement,
fire and other emergency response services to loud or unruly gatherings,
including those where alcoholic beverages are served to or consumed by underage
persons. (Ord. 2780, 2013)
9.30.020: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
   ALCOHOL: Ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from
whatever source or by whatever process produced.
   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE: Includes alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and every
liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine, or beer, and which contains
one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for
beverage purposes whether alone or when diluted, mixed, or combined with other
substances.
   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE: A drug or substance whose possession and use are
regulated under the controlled substances act. Such term does not include any
drug or substance for which the individual found to have consumed such
substance has a valid prescription issued by a licensed medical practitioner
authorized to issue such a prescription.
   GATHERING: A party, gathering, or event where a group of two (2) or more
persons have assembled or are assembling for a special occasion or social
activity.
   JUVENILE: Any person under eighteen (18) years of age.
   LOUD OR UNRULY GATHERING: A party or gathering of two (2) or more persons at
or on a residence or other private property upon which loud or unruly conduct
occurs. Such loud or unruly conduct includes, but is not limited to:
   A.   Excessive noise;
   B.   Excessive traffic;
   C.   Obstruction of public streets or crowds that have spilled into public
streets;
   D.   Public drunkenness or unlawful public consumption of alcohol, alcoholic
beverages, or marijuana or other controlled substance;
   E.   Service to, or consumption of alcohol or alcoholic beverages by, any
underage person, except as permitted by state law;
   F.   Assaults, batteries, fights, domestic violence or other disturbances of
the peace;
   G.   Vandalism;
   H.   Litter; and
   I.   Any other conduct which constitutes a threat to public health, safety,
quiet enjoyment of residential property or general welfare.
   PUBLIC PLACE: Any place in which the public or a substantial group of the
public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, and
the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings,
transport facilities and shops, other than the campus of a public or private
college or university, if such college or university: a) maintains a public
safety department adequately staffed to provide security and police services at
all times with respect to the campus, meaning twenty four (24) hours per day
and seven (7) days per week, and b) has in place a written protocol with the
Redlands police department with respect to coordination and cooperation
regarding provision of security and police services on the campus.
   RESIDENCE OR OTHER PRIVATE PROPERTY: A home, yard, apartment, condominium,
hotel or motel room, or other dwelling unit, or a hall or meeting room, whether
occupied on a temporary or permanent basis, whether occupied as a dwelling,
party or other social function, and whether owned, leased, rented, or used with
or without compensation, other than the campus of a public or private college
or university, if such college or university: a) maintains a public safety
department adequately staffed to provide security and police services at all
times with respect to the campus, meaning twenty four (24) hours per day and
seven (7) days per week, and b) has in place a written protocol with the
Redlands police department with respect to coordination and cooperation
regarding provision of security and police services on the campus.
   RESPONSE COSTS: The costs associated with responses by law enforcement, fire
and other emergency response providers to loud or unruly gatherings, including,
but not limited to:
   A.   Salaries and benefits of law enforcement, fire or other emergency
response personnel for the amount of time spent responding to, remaining at, or
otherwise dealing with loud or unruly gatherings, and the administrative costs
attributable to such responses; and
   B.   Except when the responsible person against whom the city might seek
cost recovery is a public or private college or university that satisfies the
requirements of "public place" as defined herein, the cost of any medical
treatment to or for any law enforcement, fire or other emergency response
personnel injured responding to, remaining at or leaving the scene of a loud or
unruly gathering; and
   C.   Except when the responsible person against whom the city might seek
cost recovery is a public or private college or university that satisfies the
requirements of "public place" as defined herein, the cost of repairing any
city equipment or property damaged, and the cost of the use of any such
equipment, in responding to, remaining at or leaving the scene of a loud or
unruly gathering.
   RESPONSIBLE PERSON: A person or persons with a right of possession in the
residence or other private property on which a loud or unruly gathering is
conducted, including, but not limited to:
   A.   An owner of the residence or other private property;
   B.   A tenant or lessee of the residence or other private property;
   C.   The landlord of another person responsible for the gathering;
   D.   The persons in charge of the residence or other private property; and/
or
   E.   Any persons who host, organize, supervise, permit, officiate, conduct
or control the gathering or any other persons accepting responsibility for such
a gathering. If the responsible person for the gathering is a juvenile, then
the parents or guardians of that juvenile and the juvenile will be jointly and
severally liable for the response costs incurred pursuant to this chapter. To
incur liability for response costs imposed by this chapter, the responsible
person for the loud or unruly gathering need not be present at such gathering
resulting in the response giving rise to the imposition of response costs. This
chapter therefore imposes vicarious as well as direct liability upon a
responsible person. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the term "responsible
person" shall not mean or be interpreted to mean a public or private college or
university, if such college or university: 1) maintains a public safety
department adequately staffed to provide security and police services at all
times with respect to the campus, meaning twenty four (24) hours per day and
seven (7) days per week, and 2) has in place a written protocol with the
Redlands police department with respect to coordination and cooperation
regarding provision of security and police services on the campus.
   UNDERAGE PERSON: Any person under twenty one (21) years of age. (Ord. 2780,
2013)
9.30.030: CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES AND OTHER CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES
PROHIBITED:
Except as permitted by state law, it is unlawful for any minor to:
   A.   Consume at any public place or any places open to the public any
alcoholic beverage, marijuana, or other controlled substance; or
   B.   Consume at any place not open to the public any alcoholic beverage,
unless in connection with the consumption of an alcoholic beverage that minor
is being supervised by his or her parent or legal guardian. (Ord. 2780, 2013)
9.30.040: HOSTING, PERMITTING, ALLOWING A GATHERING PROHIBITED:
   A.   Except as permitted by state law, it is unlawful for any person having
control of any premises who knows or should reasonably know that he or she has
hosted, permitted, or allowed a gathering to take place at said premises, where
at least one minor consumes an alcoholic beverage, marijuana or other
controlled substance whenever the person having control of the premises either
knows a minor has consumed an alcoholic beverage, marijuana or other controlled
substance or reasonably should have known that a minor consumed an alcoholic
beverage, marijuana or other controlled substance.
   B.   It is the duty of any person having control of any premises, who knows
or should know that he or she has hosted, permitted, or allowed a gathering at
said premises to take all reasonable steps to prevent the consumption of
alcoholic beverages, marijuana or other controlled substances by any minor at
the gathering. Reasonable steps are controlling access to alcoholic beverages,
marijuana or other controlled substances at the gathering; controlling the
quantity of alcoholic beverages, marijuana or other controlled substances
present at the gathering; verifying the age of the persons attending the
gathering by inspecting driver's licenses or other government issued
identification cards to ensure that minors do not consume alcoholic beverages,
marijuana or other controlled substances while at the gathering; and
supervising the activities of minors at the gathering.
   C.   Whenever a person having control of a premises is present at the
premises at the time that a minor possesses or consumes any alcoholic beverage,
marijuana or controlled substance thereon, it shall be prima facie evidence
that such person had the knowledge or should have had the knowledge specified
in this section.
   D.   Except as permitted by state law, it is unlawful for any person to
host, permit, conduct, organize or allow a gathering in, upon or at any public
place where at least one minor consumes alcoholic beverages, marijuana or
controlled substances.
   E.   A person who hosts, permits, or allows a gathering shall be deemed to
have actual or constructive knowledge that a minor has consumed or possessed
alcoholic beverages, marijuana or controlled substances if the person has not
taken all reasonable steps to prevent the consumption or possession of
alcoholic beverages, marijuana or controlled substances, as set forth in
subsection B of this section.
   F.   A person who hosts, permits, or allows a gathering shall be deemed to
have actual or constructive knowledge that a minor has consumed or possessed
alcoholic beverages, marijuana or controlled substances if the person has not
taken all responsible steps to prevent the consumption or possession of
alcoholic beverages, marijuana or controlled substances by minors.
   G.   A person who hosts, permits or allows a gathering shall not be in
violation of this section if he or she seeks immediate assistance from the
Redlands police department or other law enforcement agency to remove any person
who refuses to abide by the host's performance of the duties imposed by this
section, or terminate the gathering because the host has been unable to prevent
minors from consuming or possessing alcoholic beverages, marijuana or
controlled substances despite having taken all reasonable steps to do so, as
long as such request is made before any other person makes a complaint about
the gathering.
   H.   This section shall not apply to any location or place regulated by the
California department of alcohol and beverage control.
   I.   This section shall not apply to conduct involving the use of alcoholic
beverages that occurs exclusively between a minor and his or her parent or
guardian, as permitted by article I, section 4 of the California constitution.
(Ord. 2780, 2013)
9.30.050: RESPONSIBILITY FOR PROPERTY MANAGEMENT:
Every owner, occupant, lessee or holder of any possessory interest of a
residence or other private property within the city is required to maintain,
manage and supervise the property and all persons thereon in a manner so as not
to violate the provisions of this chapter. The owner of the property remains
liable for such violations regardless of any contract or agreement with any
third party regarding the property. (Ord. 2780, 2013)
9.30.060: PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION OF CHAPTER:
   A.   It shall be an infraction for any responsible person to conduct, aid,
allow, permit or condone a loud or unruly gathering at a residence or other
private property, or in, at or upon any public place.
   B.   The civil fines shall be no less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for
the first violation, two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the second violation,
and five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each subsequent violation, occurring
within one year of the first violation.
   C.   The fines prescribed in this section are in addition to any response
costs that may be assessed pursuant to this chapter.
   D.   The second, third or subsequent violation fines prescribed at
subsection B of this section are payable whether or not the responsible person
for such loud or unruly gathering is different from the responsible person for
any prior loud or unruly gathering at the residence or other private property.
   E.   The fine schedule prescribed in this section is a "rolling schedule",
meaning that in calculating the fine payable the city shall count backward
starting from the date of the most recent loud or unruly gathering to determine
how many prior loud or unruly gatherings have taken place at the residence or
other private property in question during the statutory twelve (12) month
period. A warning given pursuant to this chapter shall remain in effect for the
residence or other private property at a given address until a full twelve (12)
month period has elapsed during which there has been no response to a loud or
unruly gathering at the residence or other private property. (Ord. 2780, 2013)
9.30.070: RECOVERY OF RESPONSE COSTS:
   A.   When law enforcement, fire or other emergency response provider
responds to a loud or unruly gathering at a residence or other private place,
or in, at or upon any public place within the city within a twelve (12) month
period of a warning given to a responsible person for a loud or unruly
gathering, all responsible persons shall be jointly and severally liable for
the city's costs of providing response, costs for that response and all
subsequent responses during the warning period.
   B.   When a law enforcement, fire or other emergency response provider
official makes an initial response to a loud or unruly gathering at a residence
or other private property, or in, at or upon any public place within the city,
the official shall inform any responsible persons for the gathering at the
scene that:
      1.   The official has determined that a loud or unruly gathering exists;
and
      2.   Responsible persons will be charged for any response costs required
for subsequent responses to the scene for a loud or unruly gathering within a
twelve (12) month period.
   C.   Only one warning will be given to a responsible person pursuant to this
section before the city assesses response services costs pursuant to section
 9.30.060 of this chapter. If a responsible person cannot be identified at the
scene, the official may issue a warning to one or more persons identified in
the definition of "responsible person" of section
9.30.020 of this chapter and/or subsequently return to the residence or other
private property and issue the warning to a then present responsible person.
Warnings given to responsible persons who do not reside at the residence or
other private property in question shall be delivered by first class and/or
certified mail. (Ord. 2780, 2013)
9.30.080: BILLING AND COLLECTIONS:
The amount of response costs shall be deemed a debt owed to the city by the
responsible person held liable for the loud or unruly gathering and, if a
juvenile, by the juvenile's parents or guardians. Any person owing such costs
shall be liable in a civil action brought in the name of the city for recovery
for such fees, including reasonable attorney fees.
   A.   Notice of the costs for which the responsible person is liable shall be
mailed via first class and certified mail within fourteen (14) days of the
response giving rise to such costs. The notice shall contain the following
information:
      1.   The name of the persons being held liable for the payment of such
costs;
      2.   The address of the residence or other private property where the
loud or unruly gathering occurred;
      3.   The date and time of the response;
      4.   The law enforcement, fire and emergency service provider who
responded;
      5.   The date and time of any previous warning given and/or previous
responses to loud or unruly gatherings at the residence or other private
property in question within the previous twelve (12) months; and
      6.   An itemized list of the response costs for which the persons are
being held liable.
   B.   The responsible person must remit payment of the noticed response costs
to the finance department of the city within thirty (30) days of the date of
the notice. The payment of any such costs shall be stayed upon a timely appeal
made pursuant to this chapter.
   C.   The amount of a civil fine and/or responsive costs shall be deemed a
debt owed to the city by the persons found in violation of section
9.30.040 of this chapter and therefore liable for a fine under section
9.30.060 of this chapter and fees under section
9.30.070 of this chapter, and, if that person is a juvenile, then also his/her
parents or guardians. Any person owing such fine and/or fees shall be liable in
an action brought in the name of the city for recovery of such fines and/or
fees. These recovery costs may include reasonable attorney fees incurred in the
action if the city prevails, as the city reserves the right to seek to recover
reasonable attorney fees, on a case by case basis. (Ord. 2780, 2013)
9.30.090: RESERVATION OF LEGAL OPTIONS:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as a waiver by the city of any right
to seek reimbursement for actual costs of response services through other legal
remedies or procedures. The procedure provided for in this chapter is in
addition to any other statute, ordinance or law, civil or criminal. This
chapter in no way limits the authority of peace officers or private citizens to
make arrests for any criminal offense arising out of conduct regulated by this
chapter. (Ord. 2780, 2013)
9.30.100: APPEALS:
Any person upon whom is imposed a fine/penalty and/or response costs recovery
fees shall have the right to appeal the imposition of such fine/penalty or fees
to the city pursuant to the procedures established by the city for appealing
the abatement of public nuisances. (Ord. 2780, 2013)
CHAPTER 9.32
LIABILITY FOR EXTRAORDINARY LAW ENFORCEMENT SERVICES
SECTION:
9.32.010: Purpose
9.32.020: Definitions
9.32.030: Emergency Responses
9.32.040: Payment Of City's Costs And Penalties
9.32.050: Appeal
9.32.060: Additional Remedies
9.32.010: PURPOSE:
   A.   This chapter is adopted pursuant to California Constitution article II,
section 7, which authorizes the City of Redlands to make and enforce within its
City limits all local, police, sanitary, and other ordinances and regulations
not in conflict with general laws, and California Government Code section
53158. It is the intent of the City Council, by the adoption of this chapter,
to impose on and collect from the persons in charge of, or responsible for, an
event that generates extraordinary cost to the City over and above the cost of
providing normal law enforcement services and police protection Citywide. The
events for which charges are imposed are those voluntarily undertaken by the
person responsible for the services, or his or her parent, guardian or the
person having custody of a minor. The purpose of this chapter is to recover the
actual cost to the City incurred by providing these law enforcement services.
The City Council believes it is necessary that persons who voluntarily, through
their affirmative actions or omissions, incur special and extraordinary law
enforcement services pay to the City the reasonable cost of providing such
services.
   B.   This chapter is not intended to apply, and shall not apply, to events
of a political or religious nature, or any event involving speech protected by
the First Amendment of the Constitution of the United States or by the
Constitution of the State of California.
   C.   This chapter shall not apply to any person in charge of premises who is
a victim of a crime that directly causes the need for special or extraordinary
law enforcement services, and which crime results from the intentional wrongful
acts or omissions of, or the failure to otherwise comply with law by, such
person.
   D.   Any violation of this chapter is civil and not criminal. Any remedy
under this chapter is in addition to any other remedy provided by law,
including administrative citations and penalties. (Ord. 2868, 2018)
9.32.020: DEFINITIONS:
   CHIEF: The Chief of Police of the City or his or her designee.
   CITY: The City of Redlands.
   EMERGENCY: Any condition that results in, or is likely to result in, a law
enforcement response in an authorized City emergency vehicle or aircraft.
   EMERGENCY RESPONSE: The dispatch of one or more law enforcement officers to
a business or property for a disturbance or nuisance at the property requiring
extraordinary law enforcement services over and above those normally provided
for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare and which has
occurred without advance notice to the City. Emergency responses include, but
are not limited to, loud and boisterous conduct, noises and activities,
disturbing the peace, a congregation of two (2) or more persons in intoxicated
conditions or under the influence of drugs or alcohol, fighting, use of obscene
or inflammatory language, loud music constituting a nuisance or disturbing the
peace, activities causing excessive pedestrian or vehicular traffic and parking
problems and congestion, vehicular racing and cruising, events occurring after
eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. to six o'clock (6:00) A.M. of the following day,
use and display of narcotics, illegal drugs and controlled substances and
paraphernalia for its use, the congregation of two (2) or more persons using
illegal drugs, narcotics or controlled substances, or congregating in a noisy
or rowdy crowd, indecent exposure and lewd conduct, but does not include
domestic violence disturbances or false claims.
   EVENT: A gathering of two (2) or more persons on premises within the City at
the invitation, request or consent of the person in charge or control of the
premises, or any disturbance or nuisance at the premises causing an emergency
response of law enforcement officers as these terms are defined in this
section.
   EXTRAORDINARY LAW ENFORCEMENT SERVICES: Those necessarily and reasonably
incurred by the City in the protection of the public's health, safety and
welfare and in the protection of property which said services are in addition
to law enforcement services the City would normally provide without a special
charge and which have arisen because of activities or events undertaken by, the
actions or omissions of, or the failure to comply with law by, a person in
charge of the premises, as defined in this section.
   NUISANCE: Includes both public and private nuisances as defined in the
California Civil Code.
   PERSON IN CHARGE: The owner, manager, or occupant in charge of or in control
of the premises at which an event is occurring. If the person in charge is a
minor, his or her parents or legal guardian is presumed to be the person in
charge.
   PREMISES: A property, building and surroundings, or any open area, within
the City. (Ord. 2868, 2018)
9.32.030: EMERGENCY RESPONSES:
   A.   Except as provided herein below, if an event occurs and a law
enforcement officer investigating the matter determines that the same is a
threat to the public peace, health, safety or general welfare, or constitutes a
nuisance, said officer may, in addition to any other duty or responsibility
imposed upon him by law, give written warning notice to the person in charge of
the premises that if a second response is necessary because of a continuation
of any objectionable activity that the person in charge will be held liable to
the City for the cost of all subsequent law enforcement services necessary to
abate the disturbance or other activity giving rise to law enforcement services
over and above the normal services expended in connection with the first call.
   B.   The personnel and equipment of the law enforcement agency utilized
after the first warning to control or abate the nuisance or to protect the
public peace, health, safety or general welfare shall be deemed to be
extraordinary law enforcement services over and above the normal services
provided Citywide and the cost of said extraordinary law enforcement services,
including, but not limited to, the salaries of the law enforcement personnel,
the actual cost of any medical treatment to injured officers, the cost of
repairing any damage to City or law enforcement property, and overhead and
administrative costs related to all of the foregoing shall be billed to and is
the legal responsibility of the person in charge. (Ord. 2868, 2018)
9.32.040: PAYMENT OF CITY'S COSTS AND PENALTIES:
   A.   All costs levied by the Chief under this chapter are due and payable
within thirty (30) days following the date of the City's billing statement. A
penalty equaling ten percent (10%) of the levied amount will be assessed on the
day following the due date to defray the City's costs of collection for
delinquent payments.
   B.   The Chief shall notify the Finance Department in writing of the name
and address of the person responsible for the costs of the extraordinary police
services, the date and time such services were provided, the services performed
and the extraordinary police services required, and such other information as
may be required. The Finance Department shall thereafter cause appropriate
billings to be made.
   C.   Costs under this section constitute a debt to the City jointly and
severally owed by the person or persons in charge of the premises liable for
extraordinary law enforcement services. The parent or parents of a minor child
who violates this chapter shall be responsible for costs incurred by the child.
   D.   Any person owing money to the City pursuant to this chapter shall be
liable in an action brought by the City in its own name to recover such amount,
including reasonable attorney fees. (Ord. 2868, 2018)
9.32.050: APPEAL:
Any individual aggrieved by the written decision of the Chief may, within
fifteen (15) City business days of the date of the Finance Department's mailing
of the bill, appeal that decision in writing to the City Council by written
notice filed with the City Clerk. After a request for an appeal has been filed,
the City shall withhold collection of the bill until conclusion of the appeal.
The City Council may, in its discretion, determine that the cost for the
extraordinary services, in all fairness and the administration of justice,
should be affirmed, reduced or waived based upon reasonable evidence warranting
the same. If the costs for the extraordinary services are affirmed or reduced,
all amounts due to the City shall be paid within fifteen (15) days of such
decision. Unless appealed, the decision of the Chief is final. In the event of
nonpayment, the City Attorney is authorized and directed to bring all necessary
legal actions to collect the costs of said services. (Ord. 2868, 2018)
9.32.060: ADDITIONAL REMEDIES:
The provisions of this chapter are in addition to the authority of the police
to regulate events, gatherings, emergencies and nuisances and shall supplement
and not supplant the exercise of any other available law including, but not
limited to, arrest or citation pursuant to the California Penal Code or local
law. (Ord. 2868, 2018)
CHAPTER 9.34
REGULATION OF EPHEDRINE PURCHASES
SECTION:
9.34.010: Legislative Purpose
9.34.020: Definitions
9.34.030: Limitation On Sales
9.34.040: Penalties
9.34.010: LEGISLATIVE PURPOSE:
   A.   The city council of the city of Redlands finds that there is a current
and immediate threat to the public health, safety and welfare in that the
manufacture, processing, transportation, possession and sale of illicit
narcotics and drugs are inherently dangerous and that chemicals, compounds,
substances, byproducts and wastes which are associated with the manufacture of
illicit narcotics and drugs are both dangerous and injurious to the health,
welfare and safety of the citizens of Redlands.
   B.   The city council of the city of Redlands finds that there has been a
dramatic increase of sales, reports of sales, thefts and possession of over the
counter drugs which contain substances known as ephedrine, pseudoephedrine and
pseudoephedrine hydrochloride along with other substances and products
associated with the manufacture of methamphetamine and that retailers are
regularly victimized by those persons who steal these substances, drugs and
products on a regular basis.
   C.   The city council of the city of Redlands finds that the general public
does not normally purchase the described products in multiple quantities and it
is not the city council's intent to restrain legitimate business or customers
from selling or purchasing the described products.
   D.   No provision of this chapter shall hinder or supersede any other
applicable state or federal statute. (Ord. 2362 § 1, 1997)
9.34.020: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions apply to this chapter:
   COUNT: The number of pills, tablets, capsules or individual units of
substances contained within an individual package, box or container.
   CUSTOMER: Any person who purchases or acquires the products described in
this chapter, or persons who are present for the purchase or acquisition of the
products described in this chapter.
   EPHEDRINE: Any drug, substance or compound, whether legal or illegal that
contains pseudoephedrine hydrochloride, pseudoephedrine or ephedrine. These are
commonly known as, but not limited to, decongestants, nasal decongestants,
antihistamines and pep pills.
   RETAILER: Any retail business, company, corporation, person, employee,
associate, or wholesaler who furnishes, distributes, sells or gives away
products as described in this chapter.
   SELL: To furnish, give away, exchange, transfer, deliver, surrender or
supply, whether for monetary gain or not. (Ord. 2362 § 1, 1997)
9.34.030: LIMITATION ON SALES:
No retailer shall knowingly sell and no customer shall acquire more than four
(4) packages, per day, of a product containing ephedrine. No retailer shall
knowingly sell and no customer shall acquire, per day, products containing
ephedrine where the total count exceeds one hundred (100), or such other lesser
count as may be established by state or federal law. (Ord. 2362 § 1, 1997)
9.34.040: PENALTIES:
Any person, customer or retailer violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished
by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment for a
term not exceeding six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord.
2362 § 1, 1997)
CHAPTER 9.36
PSYCHOACTIVE BATH SALTS, PSYCHOACTIVE HERBAL INCENSE, AND OTHER SYNTHETIC DRUGS
SECTION:
9.36.010: Purpose And Intent
9.36.020: Definitions
9.36.030: Possession, Storage, Provision, Sale, And Distribution Of Synthetic
Drugs Prohibited
9.36.040: Public Nuisance
9.36.050: Confiscation Of Synthetic Drugs
9.36.060: Suspension Or Revocation Of Business License
9.36.070: Penalties
9.36.080: Seizure Of Evidence
9.36.090: Exclusions
9.36.010: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
   A.   Recreational use of psychoactive bath salts, psychoactive herbal
incense, and similar products commonly known as "synthetic drugs" has been
documented to cause hallucinations, agitation, psychosis, aggression, suicidal
and homicidal ideations, cannibalism, and death. While state and federal laws
and regulations prohibit some synthetic drugs, the makers of these drugs
continually alter the composition of the compounds in their products so as to
escape the scope of those laws and regulations. The purpose and intent of this
chapter is to provide the city with measures to address the dangers to the
community posed by synthetic drugs that are not regulated by state or federal
law.
   B.   Synthetic drugs are extremely dangerous and are gaining popularity at
an alarming rate among high school and college aged individuals, as well as
among parolees and probationers. These drugs are widely available in stores
throughout the city, despite the state of California's attempt to ban such
drugs under Health And Safety Code sections 11375.5 (banning synthetic
stimulant compounds and derivatives) and 11401 (banning "analogs" of controlled
substances) (collectively "state synthetic drug laws"), and the federal
government's attempt to ban such drugs under the controlled substances act (the
"CSA") (21 USC § 81 et seq.). The city council further finds that the dangers
of synthetic drugs, which have been documented to cause hallucinations,
agitations, psychosis, aggression, suicidal and homicidal ideations,
cannibalism, and death, require regulation.
   C.   While the state synthetic drug laws and the CSA prohibit certain
compounds that are used to create synthetic drugs, they are not comprehensive
enough to eliminate the distribution and sale of all synthetic drugs in the
city. Specifically, the city council finds that the makers of synthetic drugs
continually alter the composition of the compounds in their products so as to
not come under the prohibition of the state synthetic drug laws, the CSA, and
other law and regulations that attempt to prohibit the sale of synthetic drugs.
In fact, products which plainly are being marketed for use as synthetic drugs
are now being packaged with advertisements stating that the product does not
contain compounds specifically banned by the state synthetic drug laws. Thus
the city council finds that in order to implement an effective measure
prohibiting the distribution and sale of synthetic drugs, it is necessary to
look at all factors related to the sales and marketing of synthetic drugs.
These factors will help city officials determine whether a product that does
not come under the purview of state synthetic drug laws or the CSA is
nevertheless a synthetic drug because it is intended for recreational drug use.
   D.   While the question of whether a given product is being distributed or
sold for use as a recreational drug must be determined on a case by case basis,
the city council finds that the following evidentiary factors are helpful in
determining whether a given product is in fact a synthetic drug:
      1.   Marketing: Synthetic drugs are rarely, if ever, suitable for their
marketed uses. For example, a synthetic drug in the form of a powder might be
marketed as a "glass cleaner", even though the powder cannot reasonably be used
to clean glass.
      2.   Sales Location: Synthetic drugs are typically sold in liquor stores,
smoke shops and gas stations, yet synthetic drugs are marketed as products that
are not typically sold by these businesses. For example, synthetic drugs are
often marketed as bath salts, spice, incense, potpourri, skin treatments,
cleaning products and plant food; however, these types of products are
typically not sold in liquor stores, smoke shops or gas stations.
      3.   Warning Labels: Synthetic drugs often use warning labels such as:
"not for human consumption" and "not for purchase by minors". Bona fide bath
salts, incense, cleaning products and the like do not typically bear such
labels. Of particular relevance are labels that indicate a given product does
not contain chemical compounds banned by state synthetic drug laws, which bona
fide bath salts, incense, cleaning products and the like would not have any
reason to advertise.
      4.   Price: Synthetic drugs are typically more expensive than products
that are used for the synthetic drug's marketed use. For example, a synthetic
drug marketed as "glass cleaner" might be priced at fifty dollars ($50.00) for
an eighth (1/8) of an ounce, while bona fide glass cleaner is priced at
approximately five dollars ($5.00) for twenty six (26) ounces.
      5.   Similarity To Illicit Street Drugs: Synthetic drugs often resemble
illicit street drugs and/or use brand names and packaging that are designed to
make the product appear similar to illicit drugs. For example, many synthetic
drugs are sold as white powders packaged in vials (resembling cocaine) or dyed
green to appear similar to marijuana. Additionally, brand names are often
similar to street slang for illicit drugs and have no relation to the products
that are purportedly being sold. These brand names are always changing, but
include "Eight Ballz", "Spice", "Black Mamba", "K-2", "Puff", "Sugar Sticks",
"Green Buddha", "Diable Botanical Incense", "Scooby Snax Potpourri", "Grape Ape
Herbal Incense", "Three Monkey Incense", "Mr. And Mrs. Marley", "Cloud 9
Incense", and a group of synthetic drugs marketed as from "The Spice Guy".
   E.   An effective way to prevent and abate the health, safety and welfare
concerns that exist as a result of the marketing, distribution, and sale of
synthetic drugs in manners that brazenly seek to circumvent state and federal
law is through the administrative, civil and criminal enforcement procedures
set forth in title 1,
 chapter 1.22 and title 8,
chapter 8.04 of this code. This chapter shall not apply to any activity already
regulated by the state synthetic drug laws, the CSA, or any other applicable
state or federal law or regulation. (Ord. 2795, 2013)
9.36.020: DEFINITIONS:
   BUSINESS: Shall have the same meaning as the term is defined in section
5.04.020 of this code.
   CONSUME, CONSUMING, AND CONSUMPTION: To ingest, inhale, inject, smoke or
snort (insufflate).
   DISTRIBUTE, DISTRIBUTING, AND DISTRIBUTION: To furnish, give away, exchange,
transfer, deliver or supply, whether for monetary gain or not.
   PERSON: Shall include any natural person, business, firm, company,
corporation, public corporation, club, trust, partnership, association and/or
similar organization.
   POSSESS, POSSESSING, AND POSSESSION: To have for consumption, distribution,
or sale in one's actual or constructive custody or control, or under one's
authority or power, whether such custody, control, authority and/or power be
exercised solely or jointly with others.
   PROVIDE, PROVIDING, AND PROVISION: Offering to distribute or sell a product
or substance to any person.
   PSYCHOACTIVE BATH SALTS: Any crystalline or powder product that contains a
synthetic chemical compound that, when consumed, elicits psychoactive or
psychotropic stimulant effects. The term "psychoactive bath salts" includes,
without limitation:
   A.   Products that elicit psychoactive or psychotropic stimulant effects and
contain any of the following substances:
      1.   Salvia divinorum or Salvinorum A; all parts of the plant presently
classified botanically as Salvia divinorum, whether growing or not, the seeds
thereof, any extract from any part of such plant, and every compound,
manufacture, salts derivative, mixture or preparation of such plant, its seeds
or extracts;
      2.   Cathinone (2-amino-1-phenyl-1-propane), 4- methylmethcathinone (2-
methylamino-1-(4- methylphenyl)propan-1-one), 4-methoxymethcathinone (1-(4-
methoxyphenyl)-2-(methylamine)propan-1-one), MDPV (methylenedioxypyrovalerone),
methylene (3,4- methylenedioxy-N-methylcathinone), methcathinone (2-
(methylamino)-1-phenyl-propan-1-one), flephedrone (4-fluoromethcathinone), 3-
FMC (3- fluoromethcathinone), ethcathinone (2-ethylamino-1 -phenyl-propan-1 -
one), butylone ß-keto-N- methylbenzodioxolylbutamine), a-PPP (a-
pyrrolidinopropiophenone), MPPP (4-methyl-a- pyrrolidinopropiophenone), MDPPP
(3',4'- methylenedioxy-a-pyrrolidinopropiophenone), -PVP (1-phenyl-2-(1-
pyrrolidinyl)-1-pentanone) or naphyrone (1-naphthalen-2-yl-2-pyrrolidin-1-
ylpentan-1-one);
      3.   Any derivative of the above listed compounds;
      4.   Any synthetic substance and its isomers with a chemical structure
similar to the above listed compounds;
      5.   Any chemical alteration of the above listed compounds; or
      6.   Any other substantially similar chemical structure or compound; and
   B.   Products that elicit psychoactive or psychotropic stimulant effects and
are marketed under any of the following trade names: Bliss, Blizzard, Blue
Silk, Bonzai Grow, Charge Plus, Charlie, Cloud Nine, Euphoria, Hurricane, Ivory
Snow, Ivory Wave, Lunar Wave, Ocean, Ocean Burst, Pixie Dust, Posh, Pure Ivory,
Purple Wave, Red Dove, Scarface, Snow Leopard, Stardust, Vanilla Sky, White
Dove, White Night, and White Lightning.
   PSYCHOACTIVE HERBAL INCENSE: Any organic product consisting of plant
material that contains a synthetic stimulant compound that, when consumed,
elicits psychoactive or psychotropic euphoric effects. The term "psychoactive
herbal incense" includes, without limitation:
   A.   Products that elicit psychoactive or psychotropic euphoric effects and
contain any of the following substances:
      1.   Cannabicyclohexanol (2-[(1R,3S)-3- hydroxycyclohexyl]-5-(2-
methylnonan-2-yl)phenol), JWH-018 (naphthalen-1-yl-(1-pentylindol-3-yl)
methanone), JWH-073 (naphthalen-l-yl-(1- butylindol-3-yl)methanone), JWH-200
(1-(2- morpholin-4-ylethyl)indol-3-yl)-naphthalen-1- ylmethanone, HU-210 or
1.1-dimethylheptyl-11- hydroxy-delta8-tetrahydrocannabinol) (6aR,10aR)-9-
(hydroxymethyl)-6,6-dimethyl-3-(2-methyloctan-2- yl)-6a,7,10,10a-
tetrahydrobenzo[c] chromen-1-ol), CP 47, 497 (2-[(1R,3S)-3-hydroxycyclohexyl]-
5-(2- methyloctan-2-yl)phenol) and the dimethylhexyl, dimethyloctyl and
dimethylnonyl homologues of CP- 47, 497, AM-2201 (`1-[(5-fluoropentyl)-1H-
indol-3- yl]-(naphthalen-1-yl)methanone), 1-Pentyl-3-(2-
methoxyphenylacetyl)indole (also known as JWH- 250), 1-Hexyl-3-(1-
naphthoyl)indole (also known as JWH-019), 1-Pentyl-3-(4-chloro-1-
naphthoyl)indole (also known as JWH-398), N-benzylpiperazine (also known as
BZP), 1-(3- trifluoromethylphenyl)piperazine (also known as TFMPP);
      2.   Any derivative of the above listed compounds;
      3.   Any synthetic substance and its isomers with a chemical structure
similar to the above listed compounds;
      4.   Any chemical alteration of the above listed compounds;
      5.   Any other substantially similar chemical structure or compound; or
      6.   Any other synthetic cannabinoid; and
   B.   Products that elicit psychoactive or psychotropic euphoric effects and
are marketed under any of the following trade names: K2, K3, Spice, Genie,
Smoke, Potpourri, Buzz, Spice 99, Voodoo, Pulse, Hush, Mystery, Earthquake,
Stinger, Ocean Blue, Serenity, Fake Weed, and Black Mamba.
   PSYCHOACTIVE OR PSYCHOTROPIC EUPHORIC EFFECTS: Affecting the central nervous
system or brain function to change perception, mood, consciousness, cognition,
and/or behavior in ways that are similar to the effects of cannabis.
   PSYCHOACTIVE OR PSYCHOTROPIC STIMULANT EFFECTS: Affecting the central
nervous system or brain function to change perception, mood, consciousness,
cognition, and/or behavior in ways that are similar to the effects of cocaine,
methylphenidate or amphetamines.
   SELL, SELLING, AND SALE: To furnish, exchange, transfer, deliver, or supply
for monetary gain.
   SYNTHETIC DRUG: Shall include "psychoactive bath salts" and "psychoactive
herbal incense", as those terms are defined hereinabove. (Ord. 2795, 2013)
9.36.030: POSSESSION, STORAGE, PROVISION, SALE, AND DISTRIBUTION OF SYNTHETIC
DRUGS PROHIBITED:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to possess, store, provide, distribute,
or sell any synthetic drug within the city.
   B.   Merely disclaiming a synthetic drug as "not safe for human consumption"
will not avoid the application of this section.
   C.   It is unlawful for any person to store, provide, sell, or distribute or
to permit the storage, provision, sale or distribution of synthetic drugs from
any real property owned, possessed, managed, or controlled by that person in
the city.
   D.   The enforcing officer may consider any of the following evidentiary
factors to determine if the product is a synthetic drug:
      1.   The product is not suitable for its marketed use (such as
crystalline or powder being marketed as "glass cleaner");
      2.   The business providing, distributing or selling the product does not
typically provide, distribute or sell products that are used for that product's
marketed use (such as a liquor store selling "plant food");
      3.   The product contains a warning label that is not typically present
on products that are used for that product's marketed use (such as "not for
human consumption", "not for purchase by minors", or "does not contain
chemicals banned by Health And Safety Code section 11375.5");
      4.   The product is significantly more expensive than products that are
used for that product's marketed use (such as a half of a gram of a substance
marketed as "glass cleaner" costing $50.00);
      5.   The product resembles an illicit street drug (such as cocaine,
methamphetamine or marijuana); or
      6.   The product's name or packaging uses images or slang referencing an
illicit drug (such as "Eight Ballz" or "Green Buddha"). (Ord. 2795, 2013)
9.36.040: PUBLIC NUISANCE:
   A.   Declared A Public Nuisance: The storage, provision, sale, or
distribution of any synthetic drug from any property, structure, or building in
the city is declared to be a public nuisance.
   B.   Civil Remedies Available; Remedies Cumulative: In addition to the
penalties provided in section
9.36.070 of this chapter, any property used in violation of any provision of
this chapter shall constitute a public nuisance and may be abated by the city
by civil process by means of a restraining order, a preliminary or permanent
injunction, or in any manner provided by law for the abatement of such
nuisance. All remedies herein are cumulative and nonexclusive.
   C.   Attorney Fees: Any person, including the city, who prevails in any
action or proceeding for the abatement of a public nuisance as provided herein
shall be entitled to recover attorney fees incurred in any such action or
proceeding. (Ord. 2795, 2013)
9.36.050: CONFISCATION OF SYNTHETIC DRUGS:
Because the use of synthetic drugs has been documented to cause hallucinations,
agitation, psychosis, aggression, suicidal and homicidal ideations,
cannibalism, and death, any violation of this chapter presents a grave and
imminent danger not only to the person consuming the synthetic drug, but also
to the public at large. Any police officer who issues a criminal citation under
this chapter shall confiscate any synthetic drugs and store them, pending the
conclusion of the criminal case. (Ord. 2795, 2013)
9.36.060: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF BUSINESS LICENSE:
No person holding a validly issued city business license and owning or
operating a business in the city may use that business to provide, distribute,
or sell any synthetic drug or any substance claimed or represented to be a
synthetic drug. A violation of this chapter by the holder of a validly issued
city business license shall constitute grounds for suspension or revocation of
a business license in accordance with the procedures set forth in title 5,
chapter 5.04 of this code. (Ord. 2795, 2013)
9.36.070: PENALTIES:
   A.   Failure to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter is a
misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment in the city or county jail for a period
not exceeding six (6) months or by fine not exceeding one thousand dollars
($1,000.00), or by both, provided that where the city attorney determines that
such action would be in the interest of justice, he/she may specify in the
accusatory pleading that the offense shall be an infraction.
   B.   Each person committing, causing, or maintaining a violation of this
chapter or failing to comply with the requirements set forth herein shall be
deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion
of which any violation of any provision of this chapter is committed,
continued, maintained, or permitted by such person and shall be punishable
accordingly. (Ord. 2795, 2013)
9.36.080: SEIZURE OF EVIDENCE:
Any products or substances possessed, provided, distributed, or sold in
violation of any provision of this chapter shall be seized and stored in
accordance with law. (Ord. 2795, 2013)
9.36.090: EXCLUSIONS:
   A.   This chapter shall not apply to drugs or substances lawfully prescribed
or to intoxicating chemical compounds that have been approved by the federal
food and drug administration or are specifically permitted by California law.
   B.   This chapter shall not apply to drugs or substances that are prohibited
by state or federal law, including, without limitation, the state synthetic
drug laws, and the federal controlled substances act.
   C.   This chapter shall not be deemed to prohibit any act that is permitted,
prohibited, or preempted by any state or federal law or regulation. (Ord. 2795,
2013)
CHAPTER 9.38
PERMIT REQUIRED FOR NO-FAULT JUST CAUSE DEMOLITION AND/OR SUBSTANTIAL
REMODELING EVICTIONS
SECTION:
9.38.010: Purpose
9.38.020: Definitions
9.38.030: Notice Of Eviction Based On Intent To Demolish Or Substantially
Remodel Residential Real Property
9.38.040: Relocation Payments
9.38.050: Exclusions
9.38.060: Application
9.38.070: Enforcement And Penalties
9.38.010: PURPOSE:
This chapter protects tenants from pretextual evictions in which property
owners invoke substantial renovation or demolition of a unit as "just cause"
under Civil Code §§ 1946.2, 1947.12, and 1947.13 as adopted by Assembly Bill
1482 (the Tenant Protection Act of 2019, the "Act"), and as may be subsequently
amended, by requiring evicting property owners show a government-approved
demolition and/or remodeling permit to the tenant prior to initiating an
eviction for demolition or substantial remodel of residential real property.
(Ord. 2942 § 2, 2022)
9.38.020: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this chapter, shall be
construed as defined in this section:
 
JUST CAUSE:   Shall have the same meaning as in Civil Code § 1946.2, as may be
              amended.
OWNER:        Shall have the same meaning as in Civil Code § 1946.2, as may be
              amended.
RESIDENTIAL   Shall have the same meaning as in Civil Code § 1946.2, as may be
REAL          amended.
PROPERTY:
              The replacement or substantial modification of any structural,
              electrical, plumbing, or mechanical system that requires a permit
              from a government agency, or the abatement of hazardous
              materials, including lead-based paint, mold, or asbestos, in
              accordance with applicable federal, state, and local laws, that
SUBSTANTIALLY cannot be reasonably accomplished in a safe manner with the
REMODEL:      tenant in place and that requires the tenant to vacate the
              residential real property for at least 30 days. Cosmetic
              improvements alone, including painting, decorating, and minor
              repairs, or other work that can be performed safely without
              having the residential real property vacated, do not qualify as
              substantial rehabilitation.
TENANCY:      Shall have the same meaning as in Civil Code § 1946.2, as may be
              amended. (Ord. 2942 § 2, 2022)
 
9.38.030: NOTICE OF EVICTION BASED ON INTENT TO DEMOLISH OR SUBSTANTIALLY
REMODEL RESIDENTIAL REAL PROPERTY:
Before an owner of residential real property issues a notice to terminate a
tenancy for a no- fault just cause eviction based on demolition or a
substantial remodel of residential real property, the owner shall have obtained
all necessary permits for the substantial remodel and/or demolition from all
applicable government agencies. All termination notices for no-fault just cause
eviction described in this chapter shall include a copy of all issued permits,
which permits must then be in effect, and not be expired or revoked. The owner
shall include reasonably detailed information in the termination notice
regarding each of (i) the scope of the work, (ii) why the work cannot be
reasonably accomplished in a safe manner with the tenant in place, and (iii)
why the work requires the tenant to vacate for at least thirty (30) days. These
requirements are in addition to and do not supersede any other obligation the
owner may have under applicable local, state, and federal law. No other legal
remedies available to owners are affected by this chapter. (Ord. 2942 § 2,
2022)
9.38.040: RELOCATION PAYMENTS:
To the extent applicable for a no-fault just cause eviction for intent to
demolish or substantially remodel residential real property under California
Civil Code § 1946.2(b)(2)(D), the owner must provide relocation assistance in
the form of: (i) a rent waiver equal to two months of the tenant's rent that
was in effect when the owner issued the notice to terminate the tenancy; or
(ii) a payment of four thousand five hundred dollars ($4,500), whichever is
greater. The direct payment of four thousand five hundred dollars ($4,500)
shall be paid to the tenant in two payments. The first payment shall be two-
thirds (2/3) of the rental assistance to be paid within fifteen (15) calendar
days after the notice of termination is served on the tenant and the second
payment shall be one-third (1/3) of the rental assistance to be paid when the
tenant vacates the residential real property. The notice of termination shall
state the terms of the applicable rental assistance. (Ord. 2942 § 2, 2022)
9.38.050: EXCLUSIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the types of residential real
properties or residential circumstances described in California Civil Code §
1946.2(e). (Ord. 2942 § 2, 2022)
9.38.060: APPLICATION:
This chapter shall apply to notices of terminations issued on or after the
effective date of this chapter and to tenancies: (1) where the tenant remains
in possession; and (2) the period of notice required for notices of termination
under California Civil Code §§ 1946.1 and 1946.2 have not expired as of the
effective date of this chapter. (Ord. 2942 § 2, 2022)
9.38.070: ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES:
An owner's failure to comply with this chapter shall render any notice of
termination of tenancy issued void. The requirements of this chapter may be
asserted by the tenant as an affirmative defense in an unlawful detainer
proceeding. In addition to any other remedies available in law and equity, any
owner of residential real property who intentionally violates this chapter when
issuing an invalid termination notice pursuant to this chapter shall be liable
in a civil action to the tenant for a civil penalty in an amount of up to
fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000) and/or reasonable attorney's fees and costs,
each as determined by the court. (Ord. 2942 § 2, 2022)
TITLE 10
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
CHAPTER 10.04
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
10.04.010: Generally
10.04.020: Incorporation Of State Vehicle Code Definitions
10.04.030: Alley
10.04.040: Article
10.04.050: Authorized Emergency Vehicles
10.04.060: Bus Loading Zone
10.04.070: City Council
10.04.080: Controlled Access Highway
10.04.090: Freight Loading Zone
10.04.100: Holidays
10.04.110: Laned Roadway
10.04.120: Loading Zones
10.04.130: Motor Vehicles
10.04.140: Muffler
10.04.150: Official Traffic Control Devices
10.04.160: Official Traffic Control Signals
10.04.170: Park
10.04.180: Parkway
10.04.190: Passenger Loading Zone
10.04.200: Pedestrian
10.04.202: Parking Control Officer
10.04.210: Police Officer
10.04.220: Section
10.04.230: State Department Of Public Works
10.04.240: Stop Or Stand
10.04.250: Through Highway
10.04.260: Time
10.04.270: Traffic Division
10.04.280: Traffic Engineer
10.04.290: Vehicle Code
10.04.010: GENERALLY:
Whenever in this title the following terms are used, they shall have the
meaning respectively ascribed to them in this chapter. (Prior code § 67000)
10.04.020: INCORPORATION OF STATE VEHICLE CODE DEFINITIONS:
Whenever any words or phrases used in this chapter are not defined herein, but
are now defined in the Vehicle Code of the state of California, such
definitions as now existing are incorporated herein and shall be deemed to
apply to such words and phrases as used in this title as though set forth
herein in full. (Prior code § 67001)
10.04.030: ALLEY:
"Alley" means a public thoroughfare, not exceeding thirty feet (30') in width
for the use of pedestrians and/or vehicles, which affords only a secondary
means of access to the abutting property. (Prior code § 67002)
10.04.040: ARTICLE:
"Article" means an article of this title, unless the article of some other
title or law is indicated. (Prior code § 67004)
10.04.050: AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES:
An "authorized emergency vehicle" is:
   A.   Any publicly owned and operated ambulance, lifeguard or lifesaving
equipment or any privately owned or operated ambulance used to respond to
emergency calls and operated under license issued by the commissioner of the
California highway patrol.
   B.   Any publicly owned vehicle operated by the following persons, agencies,
or organizations:
      1.   Any forestry or fire department of any public agency or fire
department organized as provided in the Health and Safety Code;
      2.   Any federal, state, or local agency, or department, or district
employing peace officers as that term is defined in chapter 4.5 (commencing
with section 830) of part 2 of title 3 of the Penal Code, for use by those
officers in the performance of their duties;
      3.   Any vehicle owned by the state or any bridge and highway district,
and equipped and used either for fighting fires, or towing or servicing other
vehicles, caring for injured persons, or repairing damaged lighting or
electrical equipment;
      4.   Any state owned vehicle used in responding to emergency fire, rescue
or communication calls and operated either by the office of emergency services
or by any public agency or industrial fire department to which the office of
emergency services has assigned the vehicle;
      5.   Any vehicle owned or operated by any department or agency of the
United States government when such vehicle is used in responding to emergency
fire, ambulance or lifesaving calls, or is actively engaged in law enforcement
work;
      6.   Any vehicle for which an authorized emergency vehicle permit has
been issued by the commissioner of the California highway patrol. (Ord. 1917 §
4, 1986: prior code § 68600.3)
10.04.060: BUS LOADING ZONE:
"Bus loading zone" means that space adjacent to a curb or edge of a roadway
reserved for the exclusive use of buses during the loading or unloading of
passengers. (Prior code § 67008)
10.04.070: CITY COUNCIL:
"City council" means the city council of the city of Redlands. (Prior code §
67005)
10.04.080: CONTROLLED ACCESS HIGHWAY:
"Controlled access highway" means every highway, street or roadway in respect
to which owners or occupants of abutting property or lands and other persons
have no legal right of access to or from the same, except at such points only
and in such manner as may be determined by the public authority having
jurisdiction over such highway, street, or roadway. (Prior code § 67022(c))
10.04.090: FREIGHT LOADING ZONE:
"Freight loading zone" means the space adjacent to a curb for the exclusive use
of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers. (Prior code § 67010)
10.04.100: HOLIDAYS:
Within the meaning of this title, "holidays" are every Sunday, January 1,
February 12, February 22, May 30, July 4, the first Monday in September,
September 9, October 12, November 11, December 25, Thanksgiving Day, state and
city election days, and all holidays as designated in California Government
Code and any day proclaimed a holiday by the president of the United States or
the governor of California. (Prior code § 67006)
10.04.110: LANED ROADWAY:
"Laned roadway" means a roadway which is divided into two (2) or more clearly
marked lanes for vehicular traffic. (Prior code § 67022(a))
10.04.120: LOADING ZONES:
"Loading zones" means the space adjacent to a curb or edge of a roadway
reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of
passengers or materials. (Prior code § 67007)
10.04.130: MOTOR VEHICLES:
A "motor vehicle" is any vehicle which is self-propelled. (Prior code §
68600.1)
10.04.140: MUFFLER:
A "muffler" is a device consisting of a series of chambers or baffle plates or
other mechanical design for the purpose of receiving exhaust gas from an
internal combustion engine, and effective in reducing noise. (Prior code §
68600.2)
10.04.150: OFFICIAL TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES:
"Official traffic control devices" means all signs, signals, markings and
devices not inconsistent with this title, placed or erected by authority of a
public body or official having jurisdiction for the purpose of regulating,
warning or guiding traffic, but shall not include islands, curbs, traffic
barriers, or other roadway design features. (Prior code § 67012)
10.04.160: OFFICIAL TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNALS:
"Official traffic control signals" means any device, whether manually,
electrically, or mechanically operated by which traffic is alternately directed
to stop and proceed, and which may be equipped with a flashing feature which
when operated discontinues normal signal operation and causes the flashing of
any predetermined combination of signal lights, and which is erected by
authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction. (Ord. 1917 § 1,
1986: prior code § 67011)
10.04.170: PARK:
"Park" means to leave standing any vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise
than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or
unloading of passengers or materials. (Prior code § 67013)
10.04.180: PARKWAY:
"Parkway" means that portion of a street other than a roadway or a sidewalk.
(Prior code § 67003)
10.04.190: PASSENGER LOADING ZONE:
"Passenger loading zone" means the space adjacent to a curb or edge of a
roadway reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or
unloading of passengers. (Prior code § 67009)
10.04.200: PEDESTRIAN:
"Pedestrian" means any person who is afoot or who is using a means of
conveyance propelled by human power other than a bicycle. (Ord. 1917 § 3, 1986:
prior code § 67014)
10.04.202: PARKING CONTROL OFFICER:
"Parking control officer" means any officer or employee of the city's police
department, or any civilian volunteer, authorized by the chief of police to
enforce the provisions of this title relating to the parking of vehicles on
public and private property. (Ord. 2210 § 1, 1992)
10.04.210: POLICE OFFICER:
"Police officer" means every officer of the municipal police department, and
other law enforcement agencies of the state of California and United States.
(Prior code § 67021(a))
10.04.220: SECTION:
"Section" means a section of this title, unless the section of some other title
or law is specified. (Prior code § 67016)
10.04.230: STATE DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS:
"State department of public works" means the department of public works of the
state of California. (Prior code § 67017)
10.04.240: STOP OR STAND:
   A.   The word "stop" means the complete cessation of movement.
   B.   The words "stop or stand" means any stopping or standing of a vehicle,
whether occupied or not, except where necessary to avoid conflict with other
traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official
traffic control device. (Prior code § 67018)
10.04.250: THROUGH HIGHWAY:
"Through highway" means every street or highway or portion thereof at the
entrances to which vehicular traffic from intersecting streets or highways is
required by law to stop before entering or crossing the same and when stop
signs are erected as provided in this act. (Prior code § 67022(b))
10.04.260: TIME:
Whenever certain hours are named herein they shall mean standard time or
daylight saving time as may be in current use in the incorporated city. (Prior
code § 67019)
10.04.270: TRAFFIC DIVISION:
"Traffic division" means the traffic division of the police department of the
city, or in the event a traffic division is not established, then said term
whenever used herein shall be deemed to refer to the police department of the
city. (Prior code § 67021(b))
10.04.280: TRAFFIC ENGINEER:
"Traffic engineer" means the traffic engineer of the city. (Prior code § 67015)
10.04.290: VEHICLE CODE:
"Vehicle Code" means the Vehicle Code of the state of California. (Prior code §
67020)
CHAPTER 10.08
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS
SECTION:
10.08.010: Traffic Division; Establishment
10.08.020: Traffic Division; Duties
10.08.030: Traffic Engineer; Office Established
10.08.040: Emergency And Experimental Regulations
10.08.050: Authority Of Police And Fire Department Officials
10.08.010: TRAFFIC DIVISION; ESTABLISHMENT:
There is established in the police department of this city a traffic division
to be under control of an officer of police appointed by and directly
responsible to the chief of police. (Prior code § 67101)
10.08.020: TRAFFIC DIVISION; DUTIES:
It shall be the duty of the traffic division with such aid as may be rendered
by other members of the police department to enforce the street traffic
regulations of the city and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street
traffic in this city, to make arrests for traffic violations, to investigate
accidents and to cooperate with the city traffic engineer and other officers of
the city in administration of the traffic laws and in developing ways and means
to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out those duties specially imposed
upon said division by this title and the traffic titles of the city. (Prior
code § 67102)
10.08.030: TRAFFIC ENGINEER; OFFICE ESTABLISHED:
The office of city traffic engineer is established. The city engineer shall
serve as city traffic engineer in addition to his other functions, and shall
exercise the powers and duties with respect to traffic as provided in this
title. (Prior code § 67103)
10.08.040: EMERGENCY AND EXPERIMENTAL REGULATIONS:
   A.   The chief of police is empowered to make regulations necessary to make
effective the provisions of the traffic titles of this city and to make and
enforce temporary or experimental regulations to cover emergencies or special
conditions. No such temporary or experimental regulation shall remain in effect
for more than ninety (90) days.
   B.   The chief of police may test traffic control devices under actual
conditions of traffic. (Prior code § 67104)
10.08.050: AUTHORITY OF POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENT OFFICIALS:
   A.   It shall be the duty of the officers on the police department or such
officers as are assigned by the chief of police to enforce all street traffic
laws of this city and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street
traffic in this city.
   B.   Officers of the police department or such officers as are assigned by
the chief of police are authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand, or
signal in conformance with traffic laws, provided that, in the event of a fire
or other emergency, or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians,
officers of the police department may direct traffic as conditions may require
notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws.
   C.   Officers of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire, may
direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate
vicinity. (Prior code § 67202)
CHAPTER 10.12
ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
10.12.010: Payment Of Violation; Time And Amount
10.12.020: Violation; Penalty
10.12.010: PAYMENT OF VIOLATION; TIME AND AMOUNT:
The following penalties are hereby established for the listed violations:
   A.   If paid within twenty one (21) days:
Violation Fine
Violation                                                 Fine
Handicapped zone                                          $395.00
CVC § 22507.8
Blocking handicapped parking                              395.00
CVC § 22507.8
Parking on crosshatched area in handicapped zone          395.00
CVC § 22507.8
Sidewalk access ramp                                      295.00
RMC § 10.40.160
Parking a vehicle prohibited                              55.00
RMC § 10.40.120
Working on vehicle                                        55.00
RMC § 10.40.120
Fire lane                                                 100.00
CVC § 22500.1
15 feet of hydrant                                        100.00
RMC § 10.40.160
Commercial vehicle over 5 tons                            280.00
RMC § 10.40.150
Overtime parking                                          55.00
RMC § 10.40.310
Unregistered vehicle1                                     155.00
CVC § 40001(b)(1)
Missing license plate/registration tabs1                  100.00
CVC §§ 5200(a), 5204(a)
Parking on sidewalk                                       55.00
RMC § 10.40.160
Blocking driveway                                         55.00
RMC § 10.40.160
Blocking crosswalk                                        55.00
RMC § 10.40.160
Red zone                                                  55.00
RMC § 10.40.240
Passenger/freight loading zone                            55.00
RMC § 10.40.240
Not within 18 inches of curb                              55.00
RMC § 10.40.160
Double parking                                            55.00
RMC § 10.40.160
Posted no parking                                         55.00
RMC § 10.40.240
Parking in alley/blocking alley                           55.00
RMC § 10.40.260
Permit parking only                                       55.00
RMC § 10.40.160
Unlawful street storage                                   90.00
RMC § 10.40.110
Vehicle unattended while running                          90.00
RMC § 10.40.080
Market Night parking                                      55.00
RMC § 10.40.100
Temporary no parking                                      55.00
RMC § 10.40.100
Obstructing traffic sign                                  55.00
RMC § 10.40.140
Leaving wrecked vehicle upon highway                      120.00
RMC § 10.40.170
Failure to park in marked stall (street)                  55.00
RMC § 10.40.280
Handicapped placard cancellation administrative fee       25.00
Correctable "fix it" ticket penalty                       10.00
Misrepresent exemption or privilege                       55.00
RMC § 10.40.320
Misuse of placard/permit                                  55.00
RMC § 10.40.320
All Redlands municipal code parking violations not listed 55.00
All California Vehicle Code parking violations not listed 55.00
 
   Note:
      1.   Reduced to $25.00 penalty upon proof of correction within 21 days.
   B.   If not paid within twenty one (21) days: The penalty listed in
subsection A of this section, plus thirty five dollars ($35.00) and the fee
established from time to time by resolution of the city council to pay the
reasonable costs incurred by the city for processing and collecting delinquent
citations through the state's franchise tax board interagency offset service.
(Ord. 2793, 2013)
10.12.020: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this title or disobeying any
signs or markings installed pursuant thereto shall be guilty of an infraction
and punishable in accordance with section 42001 of the Vehicle Code, and as
that section may be amended. (Ord. 2685 § 1, 2007: prior code § 67107)
CHAPTER 10.16
DUTIES TO OBEY
SECTION:
10.16.010: Obedience Required
10.16.020: Persons Other Than Officials Not To Direct Traffic
10.16.030: Public Employees To Obey Regulations
10.16.040: Exemptions For Certain Vehicles
10.16.010: OBEDIENCE REQUIRED:
It is a misdemeanor for any person to do any act forbidden, or fail to perform
any act required, by this title. (Prior code § 67201)
10.16.020: PERSONS OTHER THAN OFFICIALS NOT TO DIRECT TRAFFIC:
No person other than an officer of the police department or a person deputized
by the chief of police or person authorized by law shall direct or attempt to
direct traffic by voice, hand, or other signal. (Prior code § 67204)
10.16.030: PUBLIC EMPLOYEES TO OBEY REGULATIONS:
The provisions of this title shall apply to the driver of any vehicle owned by
or used in the service of the United States government, the state, or any
county or city. It is unlawful for any said driver to violate any of the
provisions of this title except as otherwise permitted in this title or by
state statute. (Prior code § 67205)
10.16.040: EXEMPTIONS FOR CERTAIN VEHICLES:
   A.   The provisions of this title regulating the operation, parking and
standing of vehicles shall not apply to any vehicle that has qualified under
the Vehicle Code as an authorized emergency vehicle, when any such vehicle is
operated in the manner specified in the Vehicle Code in response to an
emergency call.
   B.   The foregoing exemption shall not, however, protect the driver of any
such vehicle from the consequences of his wilful disregard of the safety of
others.
   C.   The provisions of this title regulating parking or standing of vehicles
shall not apply to any vehicle of the Redlands police department, Redlands city
vehicles, county road department vehicles, state department of public works
vehicles while necessarily in use for construction, repair work, survey work,
traffic engineering investigations or for performance of other necessary
duties, or any vehicle owned by the United States while in use for the
collection, transportation or delivery of the United States mail. (Prior code §
67206)
CHAPTER 10.20
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
SECTION:
10.20.010: Signs; Authorization
10.20.020: Signs; Posting Required For Enforcement
10.20.030: Signals; Authorization
10.20.040: Signals; Placement
10.20.050: Hours Of Operation
10.20.060: Installation
10.20.070: Traffic Markings
10.20.080: Temporary Removal; Suspension Of Regulations
10.20.010: SIGNS; AUTHORIZATION:
The city council shall by resolution determine and designate the size, shape
and direction signs, other than signs the size, shape, and character of which
have been established by the state department of public works pursuant to the
Vehicle Code. (Prior code § 67301)
10.20.020: SIGNS; POSTING REQUIRED FOR ENFORCEMENT:
No provision of this title for which signs are required shall be enforced
against an alleged violator thereof unless appropriate signs are in place and
sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person, giving
notice of such provision. (Prior code § 67302)
10.20.030: SIGNALS; AUTHORIZATION:
   A.   The city council shall by resolution designate upon the basis of a
traffic engineering investigation what intersections shall be controlled by
official traffic control signals.
   B.   Whenever the city council finds upon the basis of a traffic engineering
investigation that the conditions, because of which traffic control signals
have been placed at an intersection pursuant to subsection A of this section no
longer exist, the city council shall by resolution direct that such traffic
control signals be removed. (Prior code § 67303)
10.20.040: SIGNALS; PLACEMENT:
The traffic engineer is authorized to place, maintain, operate or remove, or
cause to be placed, maintained, operated or removed, all official traffic
control signals authorized by the city council as herein provided. Such
official traffic signals shall conform to the provisions of sections 21450
through 21456 of the Vehicle Code. (Prior code § 67304)
10.20.050: HOURS OF OPERATION:
The traffic engineer is authorized to determine upon the basis of a traffic
engineering investigation, the hours and days during which any traffic control
device shall be in operation or be in effect, except in those cases where such
hours or days are specified in this title or established by resolution of the
city council. (Prior code § 67305)
10.20.060: INSTALLATION:
   A.   The traffic engineer may place and maintain such traffic control
devices in addition to those authorized by other provisions of this title as
may be necessary to regulate, guide or warn traffic, but the traffic engineer
shall make such determination upon the basis of traffic engineering principles
and traffic investigations and in accordance with such standards, limitations
and rules as may be established by title or resolution of the city council.
   B.   Whenever the traffic engineer finds upon the basis of a traffic
investigation that the conditions, because of which such traffic control
devices have been installed as provided in subsection A of this section no
longer exist, the traffic engineer shall remove such traffic control devices.
(Prior code § 67306)
10.20.070: TRAFFIC MARKINGS:
   A.   The traffic engineer is authorized to place, upon the basis of a
traffic engineering investigation, traffic guide lines dividing highways into
the number of traffic lanes that are proper and necessary, and may place such
other pavement markings as are necessary to direct vehicular movements in
accordance with requirements of this title and the Vehicle Code.
   B.   Whenever the traffic engineer finds upon the basis of a traffic
engineering investigation that the conditions, because of which traffic guide
lines or other markings were placed as provided in subsection A of this section
no longer exist, the traffic engineer shall remove such traffic guide lines or
such markings. (Prior code § 67307)
10.20.080: TEMPORARY REMOVAL; SUSPENSION OF REGULATIONS:
Whenever, because of the construction, alteration, repair or improvement of any
highway, or because of other emergency, compliance with any prohibition of this
title, including a prohibition pursuant to any action of the city council taken
in accordance with this title, will create a traffic hazard and the traffic
engineer so finds, he is hereby authorized to either remove or cover up any
traffic control device which informs persons of such prohibition. While such
traffic control device is removed or covered the effect of such prohibition is
suspended. At the end of such emergency, unless otherwise determined by the
city council, the traffic engineer shall replace or uncover such traffic
control device. (Prior code § 67308)
CHAPTER 10.24
SPEED LIMITS
SECTION:
10.24.010: Twenty Five Miles Per Hour; Authority To Increase Limit
10.24.020: Sixty Five Miles Per Hour; Authority To Decrease
10.24.030: Prima Facie Speed Limits
10.24.040: Boundary Streets
10.24.010: TWENTY FIVE MILES PER HOUR; AUTHORITY TO INCREASE LIMIT:
   A.   Pursuant to section 22357(a) of the California Vehicle Code, whenever
the City Council determines upon the basis of a traffic engineering
investigation that a greater speed would facilitate the orderly movement of
vehicular traffic and would be safe upon any street otherwise subject to a
prima facie limit of twenty five (25) miles per hour under the Vehicle Code,
the City Council shall determine and declare, by ordinance, a higher prima
facie speed limit and direct the City Engineer to erect and maintain signs upon
such street as provided in the California Vehicle Code, indicating the
appropriate prima facie limit. Such signs may be supplemented by appropriate
pavement markings.
   B.   Whenever the City Council upon the basis of a traffic engineering
investigation finds that the conditions, because of which a speed limit has
been determined as provided in subsection A of this section, no longer exist,
the City Council shall by ordinance direct the City Engineer to remove such
signs and markings from such street and appropriately reevaluate the speed
limit. (Ord. 2867, 2018)
10.24.020: SIXTY FIVE MILES PER HOUR; AUTHORITY TO DECREASE:
   A.   Pursuant to section 22358 of the Vehicle Code, whenever the City
Council determines upon the basis of a traffic engineering investigation that
the prima facie limit of sixty five (65) miles per hour is more than is
reasonable or safe upon any street or highway where such prima facie limit of
sixty five (65) miles per hour is applicable under the Vehicle Code the City
Council shall determine and declare, by ordinance, a lower prima facie limit
which is appropriate to facilitate the orderly movement of traffic and is
reasonable and safe and direct the City Engineer to erect and maintain signs
upon such street or highway as provided in the Vehicle Code indicating the
appropriate speed limit. Such signs may be supplemented by appropriate pavement
markings.
   B.   Whenever the City Council, upon the basis of a traffic engineering
investigation, finds that the conditions, because of which a speed limit has
been determined as provided in subsection A of this section no longer exist,
the City Council shall, by ordinance, direct the City Engineer to remove such
signs and markings from such street and appropriately reevaluate the speed
limit. (Ord. 2867, 2018)
10.24.030: PRIMA FACIE SPEED LIMITS:
It is determined upon the basis of an engineering and traffic survey that the
orderly movement of vehicular traffic would be facilitated in a reasonable and
safe manner by establishing enforceable speed limits under the conditions found
to exist upon the following streets. It is declared that the prima facie speed
limits shall be as herein set forth on these streets or parts of streets herein
designated when signs are erected giving notice thereof. This section does not
apply to any twenty-five (25) mile per hour prima facie limit which is
applicable when passing a school building or the grounds thereof or when
passing a senior center or other facility primarily used by senior citizens.
Street Segment Speed Limit (mph)
Street                         Segment                        Speed Limit (mph)
Alabama Street                 Barton Road to Park Avenue     40
Alabama Street                 Park Avenue to Lugonia Avenue  35
                               City limit south of Santa Ana
Alabama Street                 River to City limit north of   55
                               Santa Ana River
Alessandro Road                Crescent Avenue to Sunset      40
                               Drive
Alessandro Road                Sunset Drive to Creekside      40
                               Drive
Alessandro Road                Creekside Drive to San Timoteo 35
                               Canyon Road
Alta Vista Drive               Florida Street to Sunset Drive 35
Barton Road                    West City Limit to Terracina   40
                               Boulevard
Barton Road                    Terracina Boulevard to Alabama 40
                               Street
Barton Road                    Alabama Street to Lakeside     40
                               Avenue
Brockton Avenue                New York Street to Texas       30
                               Street
Brockton Avenue                Texas Street to Church Street  30
Brockton Avenue                Church Street to Judson Street 30
Brockton Avenue                Judson Street to Wabash Avenue 30
Brookside Avenue               Lakeside Avenue to Center      35
                               Street
Brookside Avenue               Center Street to Eureka Street 35
Cajon Street                   Vine Street to Fern Avenue     30
Cajon Street                   Fern Avenue to Garden Street   30
California Street              Palmetto Avenue to Almond      40
                               Avenue (southbound)
California Street              Almond Avenue to Redlands      40
                               Boulevard
Center Street                  State Street to Brookside      35
                               Avenue
Center Street                  Brookside Avenue to Cypress    35
                               Avenue
Center Street                  Cypress Avenue to Crescent     35
                               Avenue
Center Street                  Crescent Avenue to Ridge       35
                               Street
Central Avenue                 University Street to Judson    30
                               Street
Church Street                  Pioneer Avenue to Redlands     30
                               Boulevard
Citrus Avenue                  Eureka Street to Orange Street 30
Citrus Avenue                  Redlands Boulevard to          30
                               University Street
Citrus Avenue                  University Street to Wabash    35
                               Avenue
Colton Avenue                  Redlands Boulevard to Church   30
                               Street
Colton Avenue                  Church Street to Grove Street  30
Colton Avenue                  Grove Street to Dearborn       35
                               Street
Colton Avenue                  Dearborn Street to Wabash      40
                               Avenue
Crescent Avenue                Ramona Drive to Serpentine     30
                               Drive
Crestview Road                 Ford Street to Buckingham      25
                               Drive
Cypress Avenue                 Terracina Boulevard to Center  35
                               Street
Cypress Avenue                 Center Street to Redlands      35
                               Boulevard
Cypress Avenue                 Redlands Boulevard to Citrus   35
                               Avenue
Dearborn Street                5th Avenue to Colton Avenue    35
Dearborn Street                Colton Avenue to Lugonia       35
                               Avenue
Dearborn Street                Lugonia Avenue to San          40
                               Bernardino Avenue
Dearborn Street                San Bernardino Avenue to       35
                               Sessums Drive
Elizabeth Street               Garden Street to Crescent      35
                               Avenue
Fern Avenue                    Redlands Boulevard to Cajon    35
                               Street
Fern Avenue                    Cajon Street to Center Street  35
Fern Avenue                    Center Street to San Mateo     35
                               Street
Fern Avenue                    San Mateo Street to Terracina  35
                               Boulevard
Fifth Avenue                   Ford Street to Dearborn Street 40
Fifth Avenue                   Dearborn Street to Wabash      40
                               Avenue
Ford Street                    Citrus Avenue to Fifth Avenue  40
Ford Street                    Fifth Avenue to Reservoir Road 40
Ford Street                    Reservoir Road to Sunset Drive 40
Ford Street                    Sunset Drive to Garden Hill    40
                               Drive
Franklin Avenue                Eucalyptus Drive to Oak Street 25
Franklin Avenue                Oak Street to Garden Street    25
Garden Street                  Mariposa Drive to Cajon Street 35
Grove Street                   Highland Avenue to Citrus      30
                               Avenue
Grove Street                   Citrus Avenue to Brockton      35
                               Avenue
Highland Avenue                Ford Street to Cajon Street    40
Highland Avenue                Cajon Street to San Mateo      35
                               Street
Highland Avenue                San Mateo Street to Serpentine 30
                               Drive
Judson Street                  Citrus Avenue to Colton Avenue 35
Judson Street                  Colton Avenue to Lugonia       35
                               Avenue
Judson Street                  Lugonia Avenue to Pioneer      35
                               Avenue
Live Oak Canyon Road           San Timoteo Canyon Road to     40
                               Easterly City Boundary
Lugonia Avenue                 1,500 feet w/o Research Avenue 45
                               to California Street
Lugonia Avenue                 California Street to Alabama   40
                               Street (eastbound)
Lugonia Avenue                 Alabama Street to Tennessee    40
                               Street (eastbound)
Lugonia Avenue                 Tennessee Street to Texas      40
                               Street
Lugonia Avenue                 Texas Street to Orange Street  40
Mariposa Drive                 Wabash Avenue to Country Club  30
                               Drive
Mariposa Drive                 Country Club Drive to Garden   30
                               Street
Mariposa Drive                 Halsey Street to Dwight Street 25
Mountain View Avenue           I-10 Freeway to Central Avenue 45
                               (northbound)
New York Street                Colton Avenue to Lugonia       40
                               Avenue
Olive Avenue                   Citrus Avenue to San Mateo     35
                               Street
Olive Avenue                   San Mateo Street to Terracina  35
                               Boulevard
Orange Street                  Lugonia Avenue to Pioneer      40
                               Avenue
Orange Street                  Pioneer Avenue to Hubbard      45
                               Court
Orange Street                  Hubbard Court to City limits   50
Orange Tree Lane               California Street to Nevada    35
                               Street
Orange Tree Lane               Nevada Street to Alabama       35
                               Street
Pacific Street                 Crescent Avenue to Carob       25
                               Street
Pacific Street                 Carob Street to Ridge Street   25
Palm Avenue                    Serpentine Drive to San Mateo  30
                               Street
Palm Avenue                    San Mateo Street to Ford       35
                               Street
Palmetto Avenue                Nevada Street to California    40
                               Street (westbound)
Palmetto Avenue                California Street to Marigold  40
                               Avenue
Palo Alto Drive                Country Club Drive to Mirasol  35
                               Drive
Palo Alto Drive                Mirasol Drive to Sunset Drive  30
Pennsylvania Avenue            Texas Street to Orange Street  35
Pennsylvania Avenue            Orange Street to Church Street 35
Pennsylvania Avenue            Church Street to University    35
                               Avenue
Pennsylvania Avenue            University Avenue to Judson    35
                               Street
Pioneer Avenue                 Texas Street to Orange Street  35
Pioneer Avenue                 Orange Street to Occidental    35
                               Drive
Pioneer Avenue                 Occidental Drive to Dearborn   40
                               Street
Pioneer Avenue                 Texas Street to I-210 Freeway  40
Redlands Boulevard             California Street to Texas     40
                               Street
Redlands Boulevard             Texas Street to Eureka Street  35
Redlands Boulevard             Eureka Street to Citrus Avenue 30
Redlands Boulevard             Citrus Avenue to Highland      30
                               Avenue
Redlands Boulevard             Highland Avenue to Ford Street 50
Reservoir Road                 Ford Street to Wabash Avenue   45
Rossmont Drive                 Garden Street to Sunset Drive  25
San Bernardino Avenue          Tennessee Street to Orange     40
                               Street
San Bernardino Avenue          Orange Street to University    40
                               Street
San Bernardino Avenue          University Street to Wabash    40
                               Avenue
San Bernardino Avenue          Mountain View Avenue to        50
                               California Street
San Mateo Street               Brookside Avenue to Fern       35
                               Avenue
San Mateo Street               Fern Avenue to Highland Avenue 35
San Timoteo Canyon Road        Fern Avenue to Barton Road     40
Sunset Drive                   Alta Vista Drive to Panorama   25
                               Point
Sunset Drive                   Panorama Point to Wabash       25
                               Avenue
Sunset Drive                   Wabash Avenue to Ford Street   25
Sunset Drive                   Ford Street to Franklin Avenue 25
Sunset Drive                   Serpentine Road to Alessandro  25
                               Drive
Sunset Drive                   Alessandro Drive to Ridge      25
                               Street
Sunset Drive                   Ridge Street to Helen Drive    25
Sunset Drive                   Helen Drive to Alta Vista      25
                               Drive
Sunnyside Avenue               Fern Avenue to Cypress Avenue  25
Sunnyside Avenue               Cypress Avenue to Smiley       25
                               Heights Drive
Tennessee Street and San Mateo Colton Avenue to Brookside     40
Street                         Avenue
Terracina Boulevard            Barton Road to Olive Avenue    40
Terracina Boulevard            Olive Avenue to Cypress Avenue 35
Texas Street                   Redlands Boulevard to Lugonia  35
                               Avenue
Texas Street                   Lugonia Avenue to San          35
                               Bernardino Avenue
Texas Street                   San Bernardino Avenue to       35
                               Domestic Avenue
University Street              Cypress Avenue to Colton       35
                               Avenue
University Street              Colton Avenue to Lugonia       35
                               Avenue
University Street              Lugonia Avenue to San          25
                               Bernardino Avenue
Via Vista Drive                Country Club Drive to Helena   25
                               Lane
Wabash Avenue                  Fifth Avenue to Citrus Avenue  40
Wabash Avenue                  Citrus Avenue to Colton Avenue 35
Wabash Avenue                  Colton Avenue to Sessums Drive 35
Wabash Avenue                  Fifth Avenue to Panorama Drive 35
Wabash Avenue                  Reservoir Road to Palo Alto    25
 
(Ord. 2982, 2025: Ord. 2946, 2022: Ord. 2885, 2019)
10.24.040: BOUNDARY STREETS:
In accordance with California Vehicle Code section 22359, no ordinance
increasing or decreasing speed limits shall be effective with respect to
boundary line streets and highways where portions thereof are within different
jurisdictions, until all authorities having jurisdiction of the portions of the
street concerned have approved the same. (Ord. 2867, 2018)
CHAPTER 10.28
TURNING MOVEMENTS
SECTION:
10.28.010: Restricted Turn Signs
10.28.020: Turning Markers And Multiple Lanes
10.28.010: RESTRICTED TURN SIGNS:
   A.   Pursuant to sections 21961 and 2213 of the Vehicle Code, whenever the
city council determines upon the basis of a traffic engineering investigation
that the prohibition of the making of any turning movement by a vehicle at any
intersection or between any designated intersections is necessary, the city
council shall by resolution direct the traffic engineer to erect an appropriate
sign or signs stating the prohibition of such turning movement at such
intersection or between such intersections. The sign or signs may be
supplemented by appropriate pavement markings.
   B.   Whenever the city council finds upon the basis of a traffic engineering
investigation that the conditions, because of which such turning movement at
such intersection or between such intersections has been prohibited as provided
in subsection A of this section, no longer exist, the city council shall direct
the traffic engineer to remove such sign or signs and pavement markings. (Prior
code § 67401)
10.28.020: TURNING MARKERS AND MULTIPLE LANES:
   A.   Pursuant to section 22101 of the Vehicle Code the city council hereby
authorizes the traffic engineer upon the basis of a traffic engineering
investigation to place markers, buttons or signs within or adjacent to
intersections and thereby require and direct that a different course from that
specified in section 22100 of the Vehicle Code be traveled by vehicles turning
at an intersection or may allocate and indicate more than one lane of traffic
from which drivers of vehicles may make right or left hand turns.
   B.   Whenever the traffic engineer finds upon the basis of a traffic
engineering investigation that any turning movement within or adjacent to any
intersection which has been required by the placing of markers, buttons or
signs as provided in subsection A of this section, is no longer necessary, the
traffic engineer shall remove such markers, buttons, or signs. (Ord. 1918 § 1,
1986: prior code § 67402)
CHAPTER 10.32
ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS
SECTION:
10.32.010: Erection And Removal Of Signs
10.32.010: ERECTION AND REMOVAL OF SIGNS:
   A.   Pursuant to section 21100 of the Vehicle Code, whenever the city
council determines upon the basis of a traffic engineering investigation that
it is necessary to designate particular highways or alleys or portions thereof
as one-way highways or alleys and require that all vehicles thereon move in one
specified direction, the city council shall by resolution direct the traffic
engineer to erect appropriate signs indicating the direction of travel at each
highway or alley intersecting such one-way highway or alley upon such
particular highway or alley or portion thereof.
   B.   Whenever the city council finds upon the basis of a traffic engineering
investigation that the conditions, because of which such highway or alley or
portions thereof has been designated as a one-way highway or alley as provided
in subsection A of this section, no longer exist, the city council shall by
resolution direct the traffic engineer to remove such signs from such one- way
highway or alley. (Ord. 1918 § 2, 1986: prior code § 67501)
CHAPTER 10.34
FOOD VEHICLE VENDING
SECTION:
10.34.010: Definitions
10.34.020: Business License Required
10.34.030: Compliance With County Health Regulations
10.34.040: Lighting/Signage
10.34.050: Prohibited Distance Of Activities
10.34.060: Stationary Vending And Operational Limits
10.34.070: Exemptions
10.34.080: Prohibited Vending Areas
10.34.090: Enforcement And Penalty
10.34.010: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings
ascribed to them.
CROSSWALK: As defined by the vehicle code, as that term may be amended from
time to time.
DIRECTOR: The facilities and community services department, and the director's
designee.
FOOD VENDING VEHICLE OR VENDING VEHICLE: Any vehicle or trailer, as those terms
are defined in the vehicle code, which is equipped or used for retail sales of
produce and/or prepared, prepackaged, or unprepared, unpackaged food or
foodstuff of any kind, on any public street, alley, or highway, or private
street or alley, within the city. The inventory of these vehicles is not
necessarily limited to edible items and may include non-food sundries.
OPERATOR: Any entity and all persons that own, control, manage, and/or leases a
food vending vehicle; and/or contracts with any person to drive, operate,
prepare food in, and/or vend from, a food vending vehicle; and/or drive,
operate, vend and/or prepare food in or from a food vending vehicle.
PERSON: One or more persons, groups, businesses, business trusts, companies,
corporations, joint ventures, joint stock companies, partnerships, entities,
associations, clubs, or organizations composed of two (2) or more individuals
(or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer, or employee of any of them),
whether engaged in business, nonprofit, or any other activity.
RESTOCKING: The transfer of food, goods or merchandise to a food vending
vehicle from any other person or vehicle and includes, but is not limited to,
loading and delivery of food, goods and merchandise.
SCHOOL: Any institution of learning for minors, whether public or private,
offering instruction in those courses of study required by the education code
and maintained pursuant to standards set by the state board of education. This
definition includes a nursery school, kindergarten, elementary school, middle
or junior high school, senior high school, or any special institution of
education, but it does not include either a vocational institution or a
professional institution of higher education, including a community or junior
college, college, or university.
STREET: Shall be defined by the vehicle code, as that term may be amended from
time to time.
VEND OR VENDING: To sell, offer for sale, display for sale, or solicit offers
to purchase food, food products, beverages, goods, or merchandise on a public
or private street, alley, highway or public place within the city and includes
the movement or standing of a food vending vehicle for the purpose of searching
for, obtaining or soliciting retail sales of produce, prepared food,
prepackaged food or non-food sundries. (Ord. 2910, 7-21-2020)
10.34.020: BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED:
   A.   No person, either for themselves or for any other person, shall conduct
or engage in food vehicle vending within the city without first obtaining a
city business license pursuant to this section.
   B.   Each operator shall possess and at all times display in conspicuous
view upon each such vehicle a city business license.
   C.   Every food vending vehicle shall have the name, address, and telephone
number of the holder of the business license permanently affixed on both the
left and right sides of the vehicle. Such information shall be in letters and
numerals not less than four (4) inches in height and shall be in contrast to
the color of the background upon which the letters are placed. (Ord. 2910, 7-
21-2020)
10.34.030: COMPLIANCE WITH COUNTY HEALTH REGULATIONS:
Each operator vending any produce or other food items shall comply with all San
Bernardino County environmental health services department requirements for
mobile food facilities, as well as all required food handling permits. Each
operator shall possess and at all times display such permits in conspicuous
view upon each vending vehicle. (Ord. 2910, 7-21-2020)
10.34.040: LIGHTING/SIGNAGE:
No additional lighting, other than that required by the vehicle code, may be
installed or operated on a food vending vehicle. Any signage or display for a
food vending vehicle must comply with the generally applicable sign regulations
contained in
chapter 15.36 of this code. (Ord. 2910, 7-21-2020)
10.34.050: PROHIBITED DISTANCE OF ACTIVITIES:
   A.   No operator of a food vending vehicle shall operate any sound
amplification systems or other sound making devices or music systems to
advertise, draw attention to, or announce the presence of any such vehicle
while such vehicle is moving, stopped, standing, or parked upon any public or
private street.
   B.   No owner or operator of a vending vehicle shall permit vending within
two hundred fifty (250) feet from a school, park, community center, public
playground facility, or certified farmer's market.
   C.   No owner or operator shall permit the vending vehicle to vend within
fifty (50) feet of a marked or unmarked crosswalk in an intersection.
   D.   No food vending vehicle shall be parked, stopped, or left standing in
any manner which blocks or impedes vehicular access to any driveway or
restricts the free movement of other vehicles upon any public or private
street.
   E.   No food vending vehicle shall be parked, stopped, or left standing in
any manner which blocks or impedes vehicular access to any driveway or
restricts the free movement of other vehicles upon any public or private
street. Vending shall only be permitted where the food vending vehicle has been
brought to a complete stop and parked adjacent to the curb in a lawful manner.
   F.   Vending from a food vending vehicle while the vehicle is parked,
stopped, or standing on any public or private street, alley, or highway is
permitted only when that part of the food vending vehicle open to prospective
customers is on the side of the vehicle immediately next to the right side of
the public or private street, alley, or highway. Under no circumstances may
vending occur from the left side of a food vending vehicle. Notwithstanding the
above provisions, no person shall vend to any customer whose location creates a
traffic hazard.
   G.   All food vending vehicles shall maintain and make refuse containers
available large enough to contain all trash and refuse generated by the
operation of such vehicle. The operator of the food vending vehicle shall pick
up all trash and refuse generated by the operator's vending, during the time
the vehicle is stopped, that is within not less than a fifty (50) foot radius
of the vehicle, before such vehicle is moved. Restocking of a food vending
vehicle shall only occur where the vehicle is lawfully parked, and such
restocking does not restrict vehicle or pedestrian traffic or otherwise create
a traffic hazard. (Ord. 2910, 7-21-2020)
10.34.060: STATIONARY VENDING AND OPERATIONAL LIMITS:
   A.   No food vending vehicle shall attach to, or receive, any electrical
power or other utilities from any public or private property while the vehicle
is located on any private or public street or alley, without a permit issued by
the city.
   B.   A food vending vehicle doing business at one location for more than one
(1) hour must operate within two hundred (200) feet of an approved restroom,
the distance being measured from the food vending vehicle to the entrance of
the structure in which the restroom facilities are located.
   C.   Approved restroom must have warm water of a temperature at least one
hundred degrees Fahrenheit (100°F), soap, hand dryer and single-use paper
towels.
   D.   Vending is prohibited from a food vending vehicle that is parked,
stopped, or standing on any public street, alley, or highway where the posted
speed limit on the public street, alley, or highway is thirty-five (35) miles
per hour or greater.
   E.   No owner or operator of a vending vehicle shall permit objects,
including but not limited to tables, chairs, or other furniture, trash
receptacles, generators or equipment, to be placed into that portion of the
street, alley or highway which is open to vehicular traffic, nor shall any
object, including but not limited to tables, chairs, other furniture, trash
receptacles, generators or equipment, be placed within or upon the parkway or
sidewalk.
   F.   In conformance with the California retail food code, and County of San
Bernardino environmental health services department, food vending vehicles
shall be stored at or within an approved commissary in order to have protection
from unsanitary conditions. Food vending vehicles shall not be stored overnight
outside of an approved commissary. (Ord. 2910, 7-21-2020)
10.34.070: EXEMPTIONS:
This chapter shall not apply to any city-sponsored event where the operator of
the food vending vehicle is operating pursuant to a valid contract with, or
other written approval by, the city manager or his or her designee. (Ord. 2910,
7-21-2020)
10.34.080: PROHIBITED VENDING AREAS:
   A.   Notwithstanding any ordinance to the contrary, it is unlawful for any
person to operate a food vending vehicle on the following designated public
streets and sidewalks within the City of Redlands.
      1.   East State Street, from the west side of Orange Street to Redlands
Boulevard.
      2.   East Citrus Avenue, from Eureka Street to the east side of 9th
Street.
      3.   Redlands Boulevard, from Texas Street to East Citrus Avenue.
      4.   West State Street, from North Center Street to the east side of
North Eureka Street.
      5.   Oriental Avenue, from Texas Street to the east side of Orange
Street.
      6.   West Stuart Avenue, from Texas Street to the east side of Orange
Street.
      7.   Eureka Street, from West Citrus Avenue to West Pearl Avenue.
      8.   Cajon Street, from East Olive Avenue to West Pearl Avenue.
      9.   3rd Street, from West Redlands Boulevard to Oriental Avenue.
      10.   6th Street from East Olive Avenue to West Pearl Avenue.
      11.   East Olive Avenue, from Cajon Street to East Citrus Avenue.
      12.   East Vine Street, from Cajon Street to 6th Street.
      13.   North 5th Street, from East Citrus Avenue to East Redlands
Boulevard.
      14.   7th Street, from East Citrus Avenue to East Redlands Boulevard.
      15.   8th Street, from East Citrus Avenue to East Redlands Boulevard.
      16.   9th Street, from East Citrus Avenue to East Redlands Boulevard.
   B.   Notwithstanding any ordinance to the contrary, it is unlawful for any
person to operate a food vending vehicle within any area of the city with a
single-family residential zoning designation or any variation thereof. (Ord.
2910, 7-21-2020)
10.34.090: ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTY:
Unless a different penalty is prescribed for violation of a specific provision
of this code, every act prohibited or declared unlawful, and every failure to
perform an act made mandatory by this code, is punishable as a misdemeanor.
Every person who causes, aids, abets or conceals a violation of this code is
guilty of violating this code. Each person, firm or corporation shall be deemed
guilty of a separate offense for each day or portion thereof during which any
violation of any provision of this code is committed, continued or permitted by
such person, firm or corporation and shall be punishable therefor as provided
in this chapter. The remedies provided by this chapter are cumulative and in
addition to any other remedies available at law or in equity. All violations of
this chapter, at the discretion of the city, shall be punishable misdemeanors.
(Ord. 2910, 7-21-2020)
CHAPTER 10.36
THROUGH HIGHWAYS AND SPECIAL STOPS AND YIELDS
SECTION:
10.36.010: Establishment
10.36.020: Stop Signs At Railroad Grade Crossings
10.36.030: Stop Signs; Placement
10.36.040: Stop Signs; Removal
10.36.050: Emergency Stop Signs
10.36.060: Stop Signs; Emergency Removal
10.36.070: Stop Signs; Obedience Required
10.36.080: Yield Right Of Way Signs At Intersections
10.36.090: Emergence From Alley, Driveway Or Building
10.36.100: Stop When Traffic Obstructed
10.36.010: ESTABLISHMENT:
Pursuant to sections 21101, 21352, 21354 and 21355 of the Vehicle Code, the
city council may determine upon the basis of a traffic engineering
investigation by resolution that it is necessary to designate any highway as a
through highway and to require that all vehicles stop before entering or
crossing the same or to designate any intersection as a stop intersection and
to require all vehicles to stop at one or more entrances to such intersection
when signs are erected as provided in the Vehicle Code. (Ord. 1918 § 3, 1986:
prior code § 67601)
10.36.020: STOP SIGNS AT RAILROAD GRADE CROSSINGS:
Pursuant to section 21110 of the Vehicle Code, the city council may determine
upon the basis of a traffic engineering investigation, by resolution that all
vehicles shall stop before entering or crossing the tracks at any highway
railroad grade crossing when signs are in place giving notice thereof, but no
such title shall be effective unless approved by an order of the public
utilities commission of the state. (Prior code § 67602)
10.36.030: STOP SIGNS; PLACEMENT:
When the city council has adopted resolutions pursuant to sections
10.36.010 and
10.36.020 of this chapter, the traffic engineer shall erect a stop sign on each
and every street intersecting such through street or portion thereof so
designated and at those entrances of other intersections where a stop is
required and at any railroad grade crossing so designated. Every such sign
shall conform with and shall be placed as provided in sections 21352, 21354 and
21355 of the Vehicle Code. Such signs may be supplemented by appropriate
pavement markings. (Prior code § 67603)
10.36.040: STOP SIGNS; REMOVAL:
Whenever the city council finds, upon the basis of a traffic engineering
investigation, that the conditions, because of which such highways have been
designated as through highways or such intersection or such highway railroad
grade crossing has been designated at which vehicles are required to stop
before entering the tracks, as provided in sections
10.36.010 and
10.36.020 of this chapter, no longer exist, the city council shall by
resolution direct the traffic engineer to remove such signs and pavement
markings from such intersections or railroad grade crossings. (Prior code §
67604)
10.36.050: EMERGENCY STOP SIGNS:
The traffic engineer is authorized when any emergency condition as indicated by
a traffic engineering investigation exists at any highway intersection or
intersections, to place and maintain stop signs as provided in section
10.36.030 of this chapter for the duration of such emergency condition. Such
stop signs shall be removed when such emergency condition ceases to exist
unless otherwise determined by the city council. (Prior code § 67605)
10.36.060: STOP SIGNS; EMERGENCY REMOVAL:
The traffic engineer is authorized, when because of temporary detours or other
emergency it would be impractical and a hazard to require vehicles to stop at
an intersection where stop signs have been erected pursuant to this title, to
either remove such signs or so cover them that no portion of the word "stop"
remains visible. At the termination of such emergency the traffic engineer
shall restore such signs or uncover such signs unless otherwise determined by
the city council. (Prior code § 67606)
10.36.070: STOP SIGNS; OBEDIENCE REQUIRED:
Where stop signs have been erected pursuant to this title, any vehicle
approaching such sign shall stop in accordance with the provisions of section
22450 of the Vehicle Code except that no stop is required where:
   A.   An officer is on duty and directs traffic to proceed;
   B.   A traffic signal is in operation and indicates that traffic may
proceed;
   C.   A stop sign has been removed or covered pursuant to section
10.36.060 of this chapter. (Prior code § 67607)
10.36.080: YIELD RIGHT OF WAY SIGNS AT INTERSECTIONS:
   A.   Pursuant to section 21356 of the Vehicle Code, whenever the city
council determines upon the basis of a traffic engineering investigation that
it is necessary to required vehicles entering an intersection at one or more of
its approaches to slow and yield the right of way as provided in section 21803
of the Vehicle Code, the city council shall by resolution direct the traffic
engineer to erect and maintain "yield right-of-way" signs on such approaches.
   B.   Whenever the city council determines upon the basis of a traffic
engineering investigation that signs were erected as provided in subsection A
of this section, no longer exist, the city council shall by resolution direct
the traffic engineer to remove such signs. (Ord. 1918 § 4, 1986: prior code §
67608)
10.36.090: EMERGENCE FROM ALLEY, DRIVEWAY OR BUILDING:
The driver of a vehicle within a business or residence district emerging from
an alley, driveway, or building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to
driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk area extending across any
alleyway, yielding the right of way to any pedestrian as may be necessary to
avoid collision, and upon entering the roadway shall yield right of way to all
vehicles approaching on such roadway. (Prior code § 67609)
10.36.100: STOP WHEN TRAFFIC OBSTRUCTED:
No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is
sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to
accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of
other vehicles or pedestrians notwithstanding any traffic control signal
indication to proceed. (Prior code § 67610)
CHAPTER 10.40
STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
SECTION:
10.40.010: Applicability
10.40.020: Standing Prohibited Between Roadways
10.40.030: Parking To Be Parallel With Curb
10.40.040: Parking Prohibited On Narrow Streets
10.40.050: Permit Required For Loading Or Unloading At Angle To Curb
10.40.060: Parking Adjacent To Schools
10.40.070: Stopping Or Standing Prohibited In Specified Places
10.40.080: Unattended Motor Vehicle
10.40.090: Parking Restriction Or Prohibition; Determination
10.40.100: Temporary No Parking
10.40.110: Use Of Streets For Storage Of Vehicles Prohibited
10.40.120: Parking For Certain Purposes Prohibited
10.40.130: Parking All Night Prohibited (Rep. by Ord. 2897, 2019)
10.40.140: Obstruction Of Official Traffic Signs Or Devices Prohibited
10.40.150: Parking Of Commercial Vehicles In Residential District Prohibited
10.40.160: Stopping, Standing, Parking Prohibited In Specific Places
10.40.170: Wrecked Or Disabled Vehicles
10.40.180: Physically Handicapped On Street Parking
10.40.190: Physically Handicapped Off Street Parking
10.40.200: Loading Or Unloading; Determination Of Zones
10.40.210: Loading Zones; Indication
10.40.220: Passenger Loading Zones; Indication
10.40.230: Bus Loading Zones; Restricted Use
10.40.240: Curb Markings Designate No Stopping And Parking
10.40.250: Effect Of Permission To Load Or Unload
10.40.260: Standing In Alley
10.40.270: Bus Loading Zone Adjacent To Schools
10.40.280: Angle Parking
10.40.290: Parallel Parking Lines
10.40.300: Parallel Parking; Right Of Way
10.40.310: Parking Restricted; Commercial And Other Districts
10.40.320: Unlawful To Misrepresent Exemption Or Privilege
10.40.010: APPLICABILITY:
   A.   The provisions of this title prohibiting the stopping, standing or
parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times herein
specified, except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with
other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or
official traffic control device.
   B.   The provisions of this title imposing a time limit on standing or
parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other more
restrictive provisions of the Vehicle Code or an ordinance of this city
prohibiting or limiting the standing or parking of vehicles in specified places
or at specified times.
   C.   It shall be the duty of the parking control officers to assist the
traffic division in enforcing all regulations of this city regarding stopping,
standing, and parking and to cooperate with the city traffic engineer and other
officers of the city in administering the parking laws and to carry out those
duties specially imposed upon said officers by this title. (Prior code § 67701)
10.40.020: STANDING PROHIBITED BETWEEN ROADWAYS:
No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle within any median strip between
roadways or within any traffic island or other area designated to separate or
guide the movement of traffic. (Prior code § 67702)
10.40.030: PARKING TO BE PARALLEL WITH CURB:
   A.   Subject to other and more restrictive limitations, a vehicle may be
stopped or parked within eighteen inches (18") of the left hand curb facing in
the direction of traffic movement upon any one-way street, unless signs or curb
markings as described in section
10.40.240 of this chapter are in place prohibiting such stopping or standing.
   B.   In the event a highway includes two (2) or more separate roadways and
traffic is restricted to one direction upon any such roadway, no person shall
stand or park a vehicle upon or adjacent to the left hand side of such one-way
roadway unless signs are in place permitting such standing or parking.
   C.   Whenever the city council determines upon the basis of a traffic
engineering investigation that standing or parking of vehicles shall be
prohibited upon the left hand side of any one- way street or when standing or
parking may be permitted upon or adjacent to the left hand side of any one-way
roadway of a highway having two (2) or more separate roadways, the city council
shall, by resolution, direct the traffic engineer to place signs, pavement
markings or curb markings as described in section
10.40.240 of this chapter on such street or highway giving notice thereof.
   D.   Whenever the city council upon the basis of a traffic engineering
investigation finds that the conditions because of which parking was either
prohibited or permitted as provided in subsection C of this section no longer
exist, it shall, by resolution, direct the traffic engineer to remove such
signs, pavement markings, and curb markings from such portion of street or
highway.
   E.   Subject to other and more restrictive limitations, a vehicle may be
stopped or parked within eighteen inches (18") of the right hand curb, except
that motorcycles shall be parked with at least one wheel touching the right
hand curb. Where no curb or barriers bound any roadway, right hand parallel
parking is required unless otherwise indicated. (Prior code § 67703)
10.40.040: PARKING PROHIBITED ON NARROW STREETS:
   A.   The traffic engineer is authorized upon the basis of a traffic
engineering investigation to place signs or curb markings as described in
section
10.40.240 of this chapter, indicating no parking upon any highway when the
width of the roadway and shoulders of such highway does not exceed twenty feet
(20') or upon one side of a highway when the width of the roadway and shoulders
of such highway does not exceed thirty feet (30').
   B.   Whenever the traffic engineer finds that due to widening, the
conditions as set forth in subsection A of this section no longer exist, he
shall remove such signs and curb markings from such portion of such highway.
(Prior code § 67704)
10.40.050: PERMIT REQUIRED FOR LOADING OR UNLOADING AT ANGLE TO CURB:
The traffic engineer is authorized to issue special permits to allow the
backing of a vehicle to the curb for the purpose of loading or unloading
merchandise or materials subject to the terms and conditions of such permit.
Such permits may be issued either to the owner or lessee of real property or to
the owner of the vehicle and shall grant to such person the privilege as
therein stated and authorized herein, and it shall be unlawful for any
permittee or other person to violate any of the special terms or conditions of
any such permit. (Prior code § 67705)
10.40.060: PARKING ADJACENT TO SCHOOLS:
   A.   The traffic engineer is authorized upon the basis of a traffic
engineering investigation to place signs or curb markings described in section
10.40.240 of this chapter indicating no parking upon either side of any street
adjacent to any school property when such parking would interfere with traffic
or create a hazardous situation.
   B.   Whenever the traffic engineer upon the basis of a traffic engineering
investigation finds that the conditions because of which parking was prohibited
as provided in subsection A of this section, he shall remove such signs and
curb markings. (Prior code § 67706)
10.40.070: STOPPING OR STANDING PROHIBITED IN SPECIFIED PLACES:
   A.   The traffic engineer is authorized to prohibit stopping, standing, or
parking and to place signs or curb markings described in section
10.40.240 of this chapter at any of the following places when such prohibition
as indicated by a traffic engineering investigation will alleviate dangerous,
hazardous traffic conditions, facilitate the full use of the roadway or serve
the convenience of the public:
      1.   At any place within one hundred feet (100') of the intersection of
two (2) or more highways;
      2.   At any place within twenty five feet (25') of a railroad grade
crossing;
      3.   Adjacent to either side of a crosswalk or driveway entrance for a
distance not to exceed twenty feet (20') from either side of such crosswalk or
driveway;
      4.   Adjacent to any fire hydrant when it has been determined that
stopping, standing, or parking of any vehicle, whether attended or unattended,
would present some special hazard or would prevent ready access to the fire
hydrant;
      5.   At any place in connection with a street or highway vehicular
parking layout or plan;
   B.   Whenever the traffic engineer upon the basis of a traffic engineering
investigation finds that the conditions because of which stopping, standing or
parking was prohibited as authorized in subsection A of this section no longer
exists, he shall remove such signs and such curb markings from such portion of
such street or highway. (Prior code § 67707)
10.40.080: UNATTENDED MOTOR VEHICLE:
No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit it to stand
unattended without first stopping the engine, locking the ignition, removing
the key, and effectively setting the brake thereon, and when standing upon any
grade, turning the front wheels to the curb or side of the highway. (Prior code
§ 67708)
10.40.090: PARKING RESTRICTION OR PROHIBITION; DETERMINATION:
   A.   Whenever the city council determines upon the basis of a traffic
engineering investigation that it is necessary to prohibit stopping, standing
or parking of vehicles on certain highways or portions thereof or on any
municipal parking lot at all or certain hours of the day in order to facilitate
the movement of traffic or to eliminate hazardous conditions, the city council
shall by resolution direct the traffic engineer to place appropriate signs or
curb markings as designated in section
10.40.240 of this chapter on such highways or portions thereof or on such
municipal parking lot.
   B.   Whenever the city council upon the basis of a traffic engineering
investigation finds that the conditions because of which it was necessary to
prohibit the stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles at all or certain hours
of the day as provided in subsection A of this section no longer exist, the
city council shall, by resolution, direct the traffic engineer to remove such
signs and curb markings from such highways or portions thereof.
   C.   Whenever the city council determines upon the basis of protecting
public health, safety and welfare that it is necessary to prohibit or restrict
the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles, including, but not limited to,
commercial and recreational vehicles that are six feet or more in height
(including any load thereon) (an "Oversized Commercial or Recreational
Vehicle"), on certain streets or highways, or portions thereof, during all or
certain hours of the day the city council may by resolution direct the City
engineer to place appropriate signs or curb markings as designated in section
10.40.240 of this chapter on such streets or highways or portions thereof.
      (1)   For purposes of this subsection, a "commercial vehicle" is a motor
vehicle of a type required to be registered under the California Vehicle Code
used or maintained for the transportation of persons for hire, compensation, or
profit or designed, used, or maintained primarily for the transportation of
property.
      (2)   For purposes of this subsection, a "recreational vehicle" is a
motorhome, travel trailer, truck camper, or camp trailer; with or without
motive power; designed for human habitation or other occupancy.
   D.   The City Council may, in accordance with the authority provided by
Vehicle Code section 22507 and 22507.5, implement the provisions of this
chapter by resolution. Any violation of the provisions of a resolution of this
chapter shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 2897 §1, 2019: Prior
code §67709)
10.40.100: TEMPORARY NO PARKING:
Whenever the traffic engineer determines that traffic congestion or traffic
hazard of any emergency nature is likely to result from the operation,
stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles during the holding of public or
private assemblages, gatherings, or functions, or during the construction,
alteration, repair, or improvement of any highway, or for any other reason, he
may place or cause to be placed, temporary signs prohibiting the operation,
stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles during the existence of such
emergency. (Prior code § 67710)
10.40.110: USE OF STREETS FOR STORAGE OF VEHICLES PROHIBITED:
   A.   No person who owns or has possession, custody, or control of any
vehicle shall park such vehicle upon any street or alley for more than a
consecutive period of seventy two (72) hours.
   B.   In the event a vehicle is parked or left standing upon a street in
excess of a consecutive period of seventy two (72) hours, the police chief or
any member of the police department or any member of the highway patrol may
remove such vehicle from the street in the manner and subject to the
requirements of the Vehicle Code. (Prior code § 67711)
10.40.120: PARKING FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES PROHIBITED:
No person shall park a vehicle upon any street, road or highway to wash, grease
or repair such vehicle, except for repairs necessitated by an emergency. No
person shall sleep in a parked vehicle on any street, road or highway. (Ord.
2718 § 31, 2009)
10.40.130: PARKING ALL NIGHT PROHIBITED: (Rep. by Ord. 2897, 2019)
10.40.140: OBSTRUCTION OF OFFICIAL TRAFFIC SIGNS OR DEVICES PROHIBITED:
   A.   It is unlawful for the driver, owner, or operator of any vehicle to
park or leave standing any vehicle that blocks or obstructs any official
traffic sign or device.
   B.   Any such vehicle must be moved immediately to alleviate the traffic
hazard. Said vehicle can be stored under authority of the California Vehicle
Code, section 22651b. (Prior code § 67714)
10.40.150: PARKING OF COMMERCIAL VEHICLES IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT PROHIBITED:
   A.   No person shall park or stand any commercial vehicle, truck tractor,
semitrailer or trailer having a manufacturer's gross vehicle weight rating of
ten thousand (10,000) pounds or more, on any street, alley or parkway in any
residential district of the city.
   B.   No person shall stop, stand or park any commercial vehicle, track
tractor, semitrailer or trailer having a maximum gross weight exceeding ten
thousand (10,000) pounds for a continuous period of time in excess of two (2)
hours in any nonresidential district of the city. Each consecutive two (2) hour
period shall be considered a separate violation for the purpose of this
subsection.
   C.   The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
      1.   Any vehicle making pick ups or deliveries of goods, wares or
merchandise from or to any building or structure located on the restricted
streets and highways, or for the purpose of delivering materials to be used in
the actual and bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling or construction of any
building or structure upon the restricted streets or highways for which a
building permit has previously been obtained;
      2.   Any vehicle parked in connection with and in the aid of the
performance of a service to or on a property in the block in which said vehicle
is parked;
      3.   Any passenger bus under the jurisdiction of the public utilities
commission;
      4.   Any vehicle owned by a public utility or licensed contractor if
necessary for use in connection with the installation or repair of any public
utility;
      5.   Any vehicle owned by the city, county, state or licensed contractor
engaged in the installation, maintenance or repair of any public property,
utility or highway;
      6.   Any authorized emergency vehicle as defined by the California
Vehicle Code.
   D.   For the purpose of this section, the term "residential district" shall
mean any single-family or multiple-family zoning districts in the city.
   E.   Any commercial vehicle, truck tractor, semitrailer or trailer having a
maximum gross weight exceeding ten thousand (10,000) pounds left parked or
standing on any street, alley or parkway in excess of twenty four (24) hours
may be towed away pursuant to California Vehicle Code section 22651(n).
   F.   Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section shall be
guilty of an infraction.
   G.   With the exception of alleys, this section shall not apply to any
street in a nonresidential district until signs or markings giving adequate
notice of the provisions of this section have been placed. (Ord. 2359 §§ 1, 2,
1997)
10.40.160: STOPPING, STANDING, PARKING PROHIBITED IN SPECIFIC PLACES:
It is prohibited for any person to stop, leave standing, or park any vehicle:
   A.   On a sidewalk. "Sidewalk" as defined by California Vehicle Code section
555.
   B.   On a crosswalk. "Crosswalk" as defined by California Vehicle Code
section 275.
   C.   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped, parked or standing at the
curb or edge of a roadway.
   D.   Within three feet (3') of any sidewalk access ramp.
   E.   Within fifteen feet (15') of any fire hydrant if the vehicle is not
occupied by a person sixteen (16) years or older, capable of moving the vehicle
if necessary.
   F.   Within any city parking facility that requires a permit or pass when
the vehicle does not display the required permit or pass.
   G.   1. Upon a roadway, when the right hand wheels of such vehicle are not
parallel with and within eighteen inches (18") of the right hand curb or
roadway edge, except that motorcycles shall be parked with at least one wheel
or fender touching the right hand curb.
      2.   This shall not be construed to prohibit angled parking when such
angled parking spaces are provided.
   H.   In front of any public or private drive. A violation of this section
shall be an infraction. (Prior code § 67717)
10.40.170: WRECKED OR DISABLED VEHICLES:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person, auto dismantler, or vehicle repair
facility to park or leave standing, any wrecked or disabled vehicle upon any
highway within the city for a period greater than thirty (30) minutes.
   B.   This section shall not prohibit a person from parking or leaving
standing a vehicle for the purpose of making emergency repairs.
   C.   A violation of this section shall be an infraction. (Prior code §
67718)
10.40.180: PHYSICALLY HANDICAPPED ON STREET PARKING:
   A.   Blue curbs shall be indicated by blue paint on the curb or edge of the
paved portion of the street. In addition, a sign may be posted as provided by
the California Vehicle Code, section 22511.7. The sign shall be posted
immediately adjacent to and visible from each stall or space; the sign
consisting of a profile view of a wheelchair with occupant in white on blue
background. That person using blue curb parking spaces shall comply with the
following:
      1.   No person shall park or stand any vehicle in a disabled person's
parking zone (blue curb) unless said vehicle bears a special license plate or
displays a special placard issued under the provisions of section 9105 or
section 22511.5 of the California Vehicle Code.
      2.   Blue curb parking spaces shall be operative twenty four (24) hours a
day, Sundays and holidays included.
      3.   Parking zones for the physically handicapped are subject to any
temporary parking prohibitions established by the city.
   B.   The city council shall designate blue curb parking spaces for the
purpose of providing on street parking for exclusive use by physically
handicapped persons. (Prior code § 67719)
10.40.190: PHYSICALLY HANDICAPPED OFF STREET PARKING:
   A.   The city council shall designate parking stalls/spaces in periodically
owned, leased, or controlled off street parking facilities for exclusive use by
physically handicapped persons.
   B.   Any person in lawful possession of an off street parking facility may
designate stalls/spaces for the exclusive use by physically handicapped
persons.
   C.   Persons using blue curb parking spaces on public owned or private
property shall comply with this title as stated below:
      1.   As authorized by California Vehicle Code section 22511.8, any person
in lawful possession of an off street parking facility may designate stalls/
spaces in said facility for the exclusive use of vehicles which display a
distinguishing license plate or a placard issued pursuant to section 22511.5 or
to disabled veterans as specified in section 9105 of the California Vehicle
Code.
      2.   The owner or person in lawful possession of an off street parking
facility, after notifying the Redlands police department, may cause the removal
to the nearest public garage, of any vehicle occupying a blue curb space and
not displaying one of the distinguishing placards or license plates specified
in section 22511.8 of the California Vehicle Code.
      3.   Parking stalls/spaces shall be marked as specified in section
10.40.180 of this chapter. In addition, at all entrances to the parking
facility, a sign shall be posted which is clearly visible. The sign shall have
a blue background with a profile view of a wheelchair and occupant in white.
The sign shall state: "Restricted parking in marked spaces. Unauthorized
vehicles not displaying distinguishing placards or license plates issued for
physically handicapped persons shall be towed away at owner's expense. Towed
vehicles may be reclaimed by telephoning the police department". (Prior code §
67720)
10.40.200: LOADING OR UNLOADING; DETERMINATION OF ZONES:
   A.   Whenever the city council determines upon the basis of traffic
engineering investigation that loading zones, passenger loading zones, or bus
loading zones are necessary on any highway or portion thereof, the city council
shall by resolution direct the traffic engineer to place signs or curb markings
as provided in section
10.40.240 of this chapter on such highway or portion thereof.
   B.   Whenever the city council upon the basis of a traffic engineering
investigation finds that the conditions because of which loading zones were
established along such highway or portion thereof as provided in subsection A
of this section no longer exist, the city council shall by resolution direct
the traffic engineer to remove such signs or such curb markings designating
such zones. (Prior code § 67801)
10.40.210: LOADING ZONES; INDICATION:
Loading zones shall be indicated by appropriate signs indicating such zone or
by a yellow line stenciled with black letters "Loading Only" upon the top or
side of all curbs within such zones. (Prior code § 67802)
10.40.220: PASSENGER LOADING ZONES; INDICATION:
Passenger loading zones shall be indicated by appropriate signs or by a white
line stenciled with black letters "Passenger Loading Only" upon the top or side
of all curbs within such zones. Bus loading zones shall be indicated by
appropriate signs or by a red line stenciled with white letters "No Standing"
together with the words "Bus Zone" on the top or side of all curbs within such
zones. (Prior code § 67803)
10.40.230: BUS LOADING ZONES; RESTRICTED USE:
No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle except a bus in a bus loading
zone. (Prior code § 67804)
10.40.240: CURB MARKINGS DESIGNATE NO STOPPING AND PARKING:
   A.   The traffic engineer is authorized, subject to the provisions and
limitations of this title, to place, and when required herein shall place the
following curb markings to indicate parking or standing regulations, and said
curb markings shall have the meaning herein set forth.
      1.   Red shall mean no stopping, standing or parking at any time except
as permitted by the Vehicle Code and except that a bus may stop in a red zone
marked or signed as a bus zone.
      2.   Yellow shall mean no stopping, standing or parking at any time
between seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M. of any day except
Sundays and holidays for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of
passengers or materials, provided that the loading or unloading of passengers
shall not consume more than three (3) minutes nor the loading or unloading of
materials more than twenty (20) minutes.
      3.   White shall mean no stopping, standing or parking for any purpose
other than loading or unloading of passengers which shall not exceed three (3)
minutes and such restrictions shall apply between seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and
six o'clock (6:00) P.M. of any days except Sundays and holidays and except as
follows:
         a.   When such zone is in front of a hotel the restrictions shall
apply at all times.
         b.   When such zone is in front of a theater the restrictions shall
apply at all times except when such theater is closed.
      4.   Green shall mean no standing or parking for longer than such time as
shall be indicated by sign or lettering on the curb at any time between such
hours as shall be indicated by signs or curb markings.
   B.   When there are no curbs, the traffic engineer shall indicate the
parking or standing regulations by installing in lieu of curb markings
appropriate signs giving notice of such regulations. (Prior code § 67805)
10.40.250: EFFECT OF PERMISSION TO LOAD OR UNLOAD:
   A.   Permission herein granted to stop or stand a vehicle for purposes of
loading or unloading materials shall apply only to commercial vehicles and
shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor, and in no event for more
than twenty (20) minutes.
   B.   The loading or unloading of materials shall apply only to commercial
deliveries, the delivery or pick up of express and parcel post packages and
United States mail.
   C.   Permission herein granted to stop or park for purposes of loading or
unloading passengers shall include the loading or unloading of personal baggage
but shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor and in no event for
more than three (3) minutes.
   D.   Within the total time limits above specified, the provisions of this
section shall be enforced so as to accommodate necessary and reasonable loading
or unloading but without permitting abuse of the privileges hereby granted.
(Prior code § 67806)
10.40.260: STANDING IN ALLEY:
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose other than the
loading or unloading of passengers or materials in any alley:
   A.   When loading or unloading passengers the time shall not exceed three
(3) minutes;
   B.   When loading or unloading materials the time shall not exceed twenty
(20) minutes. (Prior code § 67807)
10.40.270: BUS LOADING ZONE ADJACENT TO SCHOOLS:
   A.   The traffic engineer is authorized upon the basis of a traffic
engineering investigation to place signs or curb markings described in section
10.40.240 of this chapter indicating "Bus Loading Zone" upon either side of any
street adjacent to any school property when such loading zone would facilitate
the orderly movement of traffic.
   B.   Whenever the traffic engineer, upon the basis of a traffic engineering
investigation, finds that the conditions because of which a bus loading zone
was established as provided in subsection A of this section no longer exist, he
shall remove such signs and curb markings. (Prior code § 67808)
10.40.280: ANGLE PARKING:
   A.   Whenever the city council determines upon the basis of a traffic
engineering investigation that the width of a highway or portion thereof and
traffic conditions are such that the parking of vehicles at an angle to the
curb or edge of the highway will not be unduly hazardous to the flow of traffic
and that there is need for additional parking space which angle parking will
provide, the city council shall by resolution direct the traffic engineer to,
and the traffic engineer shall indicate at what angle traffic conditions make
it desirable that vehicles should be parked by placing parallel white lines
upon the surface of such highway or portion thereof. On such portions of such
highways a person shall not stop, stand or park any vehicle except between, at
the angle indicated by, and parallel to both adjacent white lines, with the
nearest wheel not more than one foot (1') from the curb or bumper which may be
placed in lieu of curbs or the edge of the highway. The traffic engineer may
prohibit stopping, standing, or parking in connection with any angle parking
layout or plan as provided in subsection
10.40.070A5 of this chapter.
   B.   Whenever the city council upon the basis of a traffic engineering
investigation finds that the conditions, because of which angle parking has
been permitted upon a highway or portion thereof as provided in subsection A of
this section, no longer exist, the city council shall by resolution direct the
traffic engineer to obliterate such angle parking lines and other markings from
such highways or portions thereof. Thereafter on such portion of the highway no
person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, other than according to section
22502(a) of the Vehicle Code or as provided in this title. (Prior code § 67901)
10.40.290: PARALLEL PARKING LINES:
   A.   Whenever parallel parking is required on a highway or portion thereof
as provided in section 22502(a) of the Vehicle Code, the city council
authorizes the traffic engineer to place white lines consistent with the
provisions of section 22502(a) of the Vehicle Code parallel to and/or at right
angle to the curb or edge of the highway when a traffic engineering
investigation indicates that such white lines would facilitate the parking of
vehicles or alleviate a hazardous condition. When such white lines have been
placed no person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle outside of the
rectangular space indicated, by such lines and the curb or the edge of the
highway. The traffic engineer may prohibit stopping, standing or parking in
connection with any parallel parking plan or layout as provided in subsection
10.40.070A5 of this chapter.
   B.   Whenever the traffic engineer upon the basis of a traffic engineering
investigation finds that the conditions, because of which parallel white lines
were placed as provided in subsection A of this section, no longer exist, the
traffic engineer shall obliterate such white lines from such highway or portion
thereof. (Prior code § 67902)
10.40.300: PARALLEL PARKING; RIGHT OF WAY:
   A.   Definition: For the purpose of this section, a "limited parallel
parking space" means the area open for lawful parking alongside of, and
adjacent to, a curb or edge of a highway, which area is not sufficient length
to permit two (2) or more vehicles to park therein at the same time.
   B.   Right Of Way: Any person seeking to park his vehicle in a limited
parallel parking space, whose vehicle arrives at said parking space prior to
any other vehicle, and who proceeds beyond said space with his entire vehicle a
distance not to exceed ten feet (10') for the purpose of backing his vehicle
therein, shall have the right of way over any person driving or attempting to
drive any other vehicle directly into such limited parallel parking space and
the driver of such other vehicle shall yield the right of way to the driver who
first arrived at said limited parallel parking space. (Prior code § 67903)
10.40.310: PARKING RESTRICTED; COMMERCIAL AND OTHER DISTRICTS:
   A.   Whenever, by resolution of the city council, any parking time limit is
imposed on designated streets, it shall be the duty of the city engineer to
place appropriate signs or markings giving notice thereof, and no such
regulations shall be effective unless the signs or markings are installed and
in place at the time of any alleged offense.
   B.   When signs are erected or markings are placed giving notice thereof, no
person shall park a vehicle for longer than the specific time on any one day,
whether the place of parking is the same or changed, and the time of parking is
continuous or interrupted upon any street in any district or area within the
city. (Ord. 2478 § 1, 2001)
10.40.320: UNLAWFUL TO MISREPRESENT EXEMPTION OR PRIVILEGE:
   A.   Whenever, by ordinance or resolution of the city or under the
provisions of the California Vehicle Code, any requirement or prohibition is
imposed, or any exemption is granted or any special regulation is provided
regarding vehicles displaying a specified decal, sign, or license plate, it is
unlawful for any person to wilfully attempt to violate the provisions of this
chapter, by any wilful act, subterfuge, or misrepresentation, such as, but not
limited to: alteration or eradication of markings which aid in the performance
of the enforcement duty of parking control officers as imposed by this chapter,
or display of a special decal, sign, or license plate, to gain from an
exemption or special regulation provided, when such decal, sign, or license
plate was not issued to the vehicle displaying same. (Prior code § 67905)
CHAPTER 10.42
PREFERENTIAL PARKING ZONES
SECTION:
10.42.010: Purpose
10.42.020: Petition Forms
10.42.030: Establishment Of A Preferential Parking Zone
10.42.040: Termination Of A Preferential Parking Zone
10.42.050: Permit Issuance
10.42.060: Permit Fee
10.42.070: Permit Display
10.42.080: Permit Revocation
10.42.090: Notice Of Preferential Parking Zones
10.42.100: Enforcement Hours
10.42.110: Parking Privileges Of Permit Holders
10.42.120: Designation Of Zones
10.42.130: Exemptions
10.42.140: Violations
10.42.010: PURPOSE:
This chapter shall be known as, and may be cited as, the "Preferential Parking
Code." This chapter is enacted pursuant to authority granted by Sections 22507
and 22507.5 of the California Vehicle Code. Preferential parking zones are
necessary to alleviate serious problems in certain residential areas of the
City due, in part, to the parking of motor vehicles on streets by nonresidents
of the immediate area for extended periods of time and the nonuse of available
public transit alternatives to automobile travel by nonresidents which has
resulted in neighborhood decline in affected areas because of traffic
congestion, noise, air pollution, traffic hazards, and inability of residents
to park their vehicles reasonably close to their residences. (Ord. 2897 § 3,
2019)
10.42.020: PETITION FORMS:
The Municipal Utilities and Engineering Department shall provide petition forms
for preferential parking zones upon the written request of any five (5)
residents of a proposed zone, one (1) of whom shall be designated in the
request as the official representative of the zone advocates. (Ord. 2897 § 3,
2019)
10.42.030: ESTABLISHMENT OF A PREFERENTIAL PARKING ZONE:
   A.   Proceedings for establishment of a preferential parking zone may be
initiated by petition containing the signatures of at least sixty (60) percent
of the residents of all units of occupancy fronting curbs proposed to be
included in the zone. The petition shall include a description of the proposed
zone boundaries, the proposed restriction, and the days and hours the
restriction is proposed to be effective. The petition shall state that all
signatories desire to have preferential parking restrictions imposed and that
all signatories are willing to pay associated administrative costs necessary to
establish such zone. Each signatory shall affix his or her signature, printed
name, and address to the petition which petition shall be circulated by the
zone advocates. Not more than sixty (60) days after the petition form is
provided by the MUED Department pursuant to section
10.42.020 of this Code, the signed and completed petition shall be submitted to
the Traffic and Parking Commission.
   B.   The Traffic and Parking Commission shall set a place and time for a
public discussion on the proposed zone. The MUED Director shall mail notice of
the hearing at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing to all property owners,
residents, and other occupants within the proposed zone and within three
hundred (300) feet of the boundaries of the proposed zone.
   C.   Following public discussion, the Traffic and Parking Commission shall
make a recommendation to the City Council regarding whether the preferential
parking zone should be established. Following receipt of the recommendation of
the Traffic and Parking Commission, the City Council shall, by resolution,
determine whether the preferential parking zone shall be established. Said
determination shall be based upon factors which may include but are not limited
to, the following:
      (1)   High Demand: More than seventy-five (75) percent of the on-street
spaces are occupied during the days and hours proposed for parking restriction;
and
      (2)   Self Contained Area: The zone, alone or in combination with other
existing or potential preferential parking zones, constitutes a self-contained
area of parking demand and supply. For purposes of this section, "self-
contained area" shall mean an area of sufficient size to allow for resident
parking, using boundaries such as major streets, nonresidential land uses,
transition to higher or lower density residential areas, water bodies and other
natural features; and using surveys of existing conditions to determine the
extent of the area impacted by nonresident parking.
   D.   Each preferential parking zone shall be identified by a letter or
combination of letters which shall be the official designation of the zone.
(Ord. 2897 § 3, 2019)
10.42.040: TERMINATION OF A PREFERENTIAL PARKING ZONE:
The City Council may terminate a preferential parking zone upon receipt of a
petition calling for termination which has been received and transmitted by the
City Clerk, and which contains the signatures and corresponding printed name
and address representing a majority (fifty percent (50%) plus one (1)) of the
dwelling units in the zone. The City Council may also terminate a preferential
parking zone, without submission of a petition requesting termination, by
resolution setting forth the reasons for such termination which reasons may
include, but are not limited to, changes in circumstances which led to the
original establishment of the zone. (Ord. 2897 § 3, 2019)
10.42.050: PERMIT ISSUANCE:
   A.   Parking permits for preferential parking zones shall be issued by the
Department of Finance. No more than one (1) permit shall be issued for each
vehicle for which application is made. Each permit issued shall show by code,
color or both, the particular preferential parking zone for which it has been
issued and resident permits shall include the license plate number of the motor
vehicle for which it was issued.
   B.   Preferential parking permits for residents shall be issued only upon
application of a legal resident of the established zone who is the registered
owner or has exclusive use and control of the vehicle for which application is
made. Proof of residency and ownership or exclusive use and control shall be
demonstrated as determined by the Finance Director.
   C.   The number of preferential parking permits, if any, that may be issued
pursuant to this chapter shall be determined and calculated as follows:
   (1)   Residents: No more than three (3) permits for residents shall be
issued to any one (1) residence. Permits issued to residents shall remain valid
while the applicant continues to reside at the address set forth on the
application and remains the owner of the vehicle for which the permit is
issued.
   (2)   Visitors: Not more than two (2) visitor preferential parking permits
shall be issued to any one (1) residence for the use of visitors to the home of
the applicant. Visitor permits shall remain valid while the applicant continues
to reside at the address set forth on the application. (Ord. 2897 § 3, 2019)
10.42.060: PERMIT FEE:
Applications for issuance of initial permits or transfer permits when the
holder of a permit in one zone moves to another zone and desires a permit for
the new zone, or a replacement permit in the case of a lost or mutilated
permit, shall be filed with the Department of Finance and shall be accompanied
by the fee established by resolution of the City Council. Fees may be prorated
for periods of less than one (1) year except that no refund shall be issued for
cancellation of a permit unless the zone is terminated by City Council action.
The Finance Director shall not issue a replacement permit unless the Finance
Director has received satisfactory evidence that the permit being replaced has
been lost or mutilated. (Ord. 2897 § 3, 2019)
10.42.070: PERMIT DISPLAY:
Preferential parking permits for residents shall be prominently displayed and
firmly attached to the left side of the rear bumper of the vehicle for which
the permit was issued. Permits for visitors shall be prominently displayed
either on the left side of the rear window of the vehicle or hanging from the
interior rear view mirror. (Ord. 2897 § 3, 2019)
10.42.080: PERMIT REVOCATION:
   A.   The Finance Director is authorized to revoke the preferential parking
permit of any person found to be in violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter and, upon written notification, that person must surrender the permit
to the Finance Director or prove its destruction or disfigurement to the
Finance Director's satisfaction.
   B.   Any person whose preferential parking permit has been revoked shall not
be issued a new permit for one (1) calendar year following revocation and must
submit a new application and pay the fee required for a new permit. (Ord. 2897
§ 3, 2019)
10.42.090: NOTICE OF PREFERENTIAL PARKING ZONES:
The Facilities and Community Services Director shall place and maintain, or
cause to be placed and maintained, on each street or portion of street
designated to be within a preferential parking zone, appropriate signs giving
notice that vehicles must display preferential parking permits and any
applicable time limits for parking of vehicles without permits. (Ord. 2897 § 3,
2019)
10.42.100: ENFORCEMENT HOURS:
Preferential parking in the zones established by the City Council shall be in
effect on those days and during those hours as shall be determined by the City
Council when the zone is established. (Ord. 2897 § 3, 2019)
10.42.110: PARKING PRIVILEGES OF PERMIT HOLDERS:
Any vehicle properly displaying a valid preferential parking permit issued for
that vehicle may be parked on any street or portion of street within the zone
for which the permit was issued without being limited by the time restrictions
imposed pursuant to this chapter. Permit holders shall be subject to parking
restrictions imposed pursuant to any other chapter of this Code or other state
law provisions. Preferential parking permits shall not guarantee or reserve to
the holder any specific on-street parking space. (Ord. 2897 § 3, 2019)
10.42.120: DESIGNATION OF ZONES:
The streets and/or portions of streets established as preferential parking
zones for the purposes of this chapter shall be designated by resolution of the
City Council. (Ord. 2897 § 3, 2019)
10.42.130: EXEMPTIONS:
The following vehicles are exempt from the parking restrictions imposed
pursuant to this chapter:
   A.   Vehicles in use for the construction or repair of any utility;
   B.   Vehicles engaged in official government business;
   C.   Vehicles from which persons or goods are being loaded or unloaded;
   D.   Vehicles engaged in construction, repairs, or similar services on
property within the preferential parking zone; or
   E.   Emergency vehicles. (Ord. 2897 § 3, 2019)
10.42.140: VIOLATIONS:
   A.   No vehicle shall be parked or stopped adjacent to any curb in a
preferential parking zone in violation of any posted restrictions during the
time preferential parking is in effect, unless such vehicle shall have the
permit prominently displayed in accordance with section
10.42.070 of this Code.
   B.   No person shall falsely represent that he or she is eligible for
preferential parking permit(s) or furnish false information in an application
for a permit.
   C.   No person shall park or leave standing in a preferential parking zone,
any vehicle which displays a preferential parking permit issued for a different
vehicle.
   D.   No person shall park or leave standing in a preferential parking zone
any vehicle which displays a facsimile or counterfeit preferential parking
permit.
   E.   No person whose preferential parking permit has been revoked shall
refuse or fail to surrender the permit when requested to do so in writing by
the Director of Finance.
   F.   No resident or visitor preferential parking permit issued pursuant to
this chapter shall thereafter be assigned, transferred, sold or used for any
consideration, monetary or otherwise. (Ord. 2897 § 3, 2019)
CHAPTER 10.44
MUNICIPAL PARKING FACILITIES
SECTION:
10.44.010: Municipal Parking Facility Defined
10.44.020: Parking In Designated Spaces Required
10.44.030: Compliance With Specified Traffic Direction Required
10.44.040: Traffic Speed
10.44.050: Applicability Of Regulations
10.44.060: Bicycles, Skateboards, Etc.
10.44.070: Posting Of Regulations
10.44.080: Enforcement Duty
10.44.090: Enforcement Personnel Authorization
10.44.100: Written Citation
10.44.110: Manner Of Payment
10.44.120: Nonpayment An Infraction
10.44.010: MUNICIPAL PARKING FACILITY DEFINED:
A "municipal parking facility" is a parking lot, parcel of land, facility,
garage, or structure owned, leased, or operated by the city, or in which the
city has a possessory right of interest and which is used as a municipal or
public parking facility and for the off street parking of vehicles. (Prior code
§ 62000)
10.44.020: PARKING IN DESIGNATED SPACES REQUIRED:
In any municipal parking facility, no person shall park or leave standing any
vehicle, whether attended or unattended, in any driveway, aisle, walk, or area
other than entirely within a designated parking space or in any location or
position across any line or marking designating a parking space. (Prior code §
62100)
10.44.030: COMPLIANCE WITH SPECIFIED TRAFFIC DIRECTION REQUIRED:
In any municipal parking facility, no person shall drive a vehicle upon any
driveway, aisle, walk, or area in a direction contrary to the direction of
travel indicated by arrows or markings painted or placed thereon. (Prior code §
62101)
10.44.040: TRAFFIC SPEED:
In any municipal parking facility, no person shall drive a vehicle at a speed
greater than ten (10) miles per hour or at a speed greater than is reasonable
and prudent, having due regard for the weather, visibility, the traffic, the
surface and width of the driveway or aisle, and in no event at a speed which
endangers the safety of persons or property. (Prior code § 62102)
10.44.050: APPLICABILITY OF REGULATIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall not relieve any person from the duty to
observe other more restrictive provisions of the Vehicle Code or local title or
of any special condition or regulation of the city. (Prior code § 62103)
10.44.060: BICYCLES, SKATEBOARDS, ETC.:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to ride upon any bicycle, roller skate or
skates, skateboard, or other similar contrivance in any municipal parking
facility, except authorized law enforcement personnel of the city's bicycle
mounted enforcement team.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person to ride upon any bicycle, roller skate or
skates, skateboard, or other contrivance upon any sidewalk within any business
district within the city of Redlands, except for authorized law enforcement
personnel of the city. Business district means any business district as defined
by section 235 of the California Vehicle Code. (Ord. 2718 § 32, 2009: Ord. 2206
§ 1, 1992: prior code § 62104)
10.44.070: POSTING OF REGULATIONS:
Whenever, by this title or any other resolution of this city, any parking time
limit is imposed or public parking is prohibited on any municipal parking
facility, it shall be the duty of the city traffic engineer to place, or cause
to be placed appropriate signs or marking giving notice thereof, and no such
regulations shall be effective unless the signs or markings are installed and
in place at the time of any alleged offense. (Prior code § 62105)
10.44.080: ENFORCEMENT DUTY:
It shall be the duty of the chief of police to enforce the provisions of this
chapter. The chief of police shall effect enforcement through the use of
parking control officers. (Ord. 2210 § 2, 1992: prior code § 62200)
10.44.090: ENFORCEMENT PERSONNEL AUTHORIZATION:
Parking control officers and all city police officers are authorized to give
the notice required by sections 41102 and 41103(1) of the Vehicle Code of the
state of California of violation of any provision of the Vehicle Code governing
the standing or parking of a vehicle, or any provision of any title enacted by
the city governing the standing or parking of a vehicle or relating to
municipal parking lots or structures. (Prior code § 62201)
10.44.100: WRITTEN CITATION:
The parking control officer or police officer shall issue and attach in writing
a citation for illegal parking, in the same form and subject to the same
procedure provided for by the titles of this city and the laws of the state
applicable to traffic regulations within the city. (Prior code § 62202)
10.44.110: MANNER OF PAYMENT:
Payment may be made in person to the office of the city's finance director,
city hall, Redlands, or by mailing said penalty to the office of the city's
finance director. (Ord. 2718 § 33, 2009)
10.44.120: NONPAYMENT AN INFRACTION:
The failure of such owner or operator to pay said penalty within thirty (30)
days shall subject such owner or operator to the infraction penalty provided
for the violations of the provisions of this code. (Prior code § 62205)
CHAPTER 10.48
CROSSWALKS
SECTION:
10.48.010: Between Intersections; Establishment
10.48.020: At Intersections; Establishment
10.48.030: Pedestrian Use Required; Where
10.48.040: Pedestrian To Cross At Right Angles
10.48.010: BETWEEN INTERSECTIONS; ESTABLISHMENT:
   A.   Pursuant to section 21106 of the Vehicle Code, whenever the city
council determines upon the basis of a traffic engineering investigation that a
crosswalk between intersections would facilitate the orderly movement of
pedestrian and vehicular traffic, the city council shall, by resolution, direct
the traffic engineer to provide and maintain painted markings or other
appropriately devised symbols or warning signs at all crosswalks which have
been designated as such.
   B.   Whenever the city council finds upon the basis of a traffic engineering
study that the conditions because of which a crosswalk has been provided and
maintained as provided in subsection A of this section no longer exist, shall
by resolution direct the traffic engineer to remove such markings, symbols or
signs from such crosswalk. (Prior code § 68101)
10.48.020: AT INTERSECTIONS; ESTABLISHMENT:
   A.   The city council authorizes the traffic engineer to provide and
maintain painted crosswalk markings or other appropriately devised symbols or
warning signs at any intersection whenever a traffic engineering investigation
indicates that such markings, symbols, or signs would facilitate the orderly
movement of pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
   B.   Whenever the traffic engineer upon the basis of a traffic engineering
investigation finds that the conditions because of which painted crosswalk
markings or other appropriately devised symbols or warning signs at any
intersection have been provided and maintained as provided in subsection A of
this section no longer exist, the traffic engineer shall remove such markings,
symbols, or signs at such crosswalk. (Prior code § 68102)
10.48.030: PEDESTRIAN USE REQUIRED; WHERE:
No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than by a crosswalk in the central
traffic district or in any business district. (Prior code § 68103)
10.48.040: PEDESTRIAN TO CROSS AT RIGHT ANGLES:
No pedestrian shall cross a roadway at any place other than by a route right
angles to the curb or by the shortest route to the opposite curb in a marked
crosswalk. (Prior code § 68104)
CHAPTER 10.52
WEIGHT LIMITATIONS
SECTION:
10.52.010: Unimproved Highways
10.52.020: Temporary Limits On Improved Highways
10.52.030: Closing Highways To Commercial Vehicles
10.52.040: Bridges
10.52.010: UNIMPROVED HIGHWAYS:
   A.   Whenever the city council determines upon the basis of an engineering
investigation that a highway is unimproved as the word unimproved is used in
sections 35706 through 35709 of the Vehicle Code and that the nature of the
pavement or surface is such that it will be damaged if vehicles of over a
certain gross weight are permitted to operate thereon, the city council shall,
by resolution, direct the traffic engineer to erect signs specifying the
maximum gross weight limits which shall be permitted to operate on such
highway.
   B.   The traffic engineer shall erect and maintain signs upon all unimproved
highways upon which a weight limit is imposed at the entrances thereto from all
improved highways, from all highways upon which no weight limit has been
imposed, and from all highways upon which a greater weight limit has been
imposed.
   C.   Whenever such weight limit signs have been placed as provided in this
section, it shall be a misdemeanor for any person to drive or operate a vehicle
upon such unimproved highway when the maximum gross weight limit stated by such
signs is exceeded, except that any commercial vehicle shall not be prohibited
from using any city highway by direct route to or from a state highway for the
purpose of delivering or loading for transportation goods, wares, or
merchandise, as provided in section 35714(c) of the Vehicle Code.
   D.   Whenever the city council finds that because of repaving or repair of
an unimproved highway that a weight limit is no longer necessary upon such
highway, the city council shall by resolution direct the traffic engineer to
remove the weight limit signs from such highway or entrances thereto. (Ord.
1918 § 7, 1986: prior code § 68201)
10.52.020: TEMPORARY LIMITS ON IMPROVED HIGHWAYS:
   A.   Whenever the city council upon the basis of an engineering
investigation determines that an improved highway as defined in sections 35706
through 35709 of the Vehicle Code, will be destroyed by reason of deterioration
of vehicle of over a certain gross weight is permitted to operate thereon, the
city council shall by resolution direct the traffic engineer to erect temporary
signs, as provided in subsection
10.52.010B of this chapter for unimproved highways, specifying the maximum
gross weight limits upon such highway. No such reduced weight limits shall
extend for a period of more than ninety (90) days unless actual repair of such
highway is begun within such time and thereafter continuously carried on to
completion.
   B.   Whenever such temporary weight limit signs have been placed as provided
in this section, it shall be a misdemeanor for any person to drive or operate a
vehicle upon such improved highway when the maximum gross weight of such
vehicle plus the weight of the load thereon exceeds the weight limit stated by
such signs except that any commercial vehicle shall not be prohibited from
using any city highway by direct route to or from a state highway for the
purpose of delivering or loading for transportation of goods, wares, or
merchandise as provided in section 35714(c) of the Vehicle Code. (Ord. 1918 §
8, 1986: prior code § 68202)
10.52.030: CLOSING HIGHWAYS TO COMMERCIAL VEHICLES:
   A.   Pursuant to sections 35712 through 35714 of the Vehicle Code whenever
the city council determines upon the basis of a traffic engineering
investigation that it is necessary to prohibit the use of any street, road, or
highway in residential subdivision area to commercial vehicles exceeding a
gross weight of one thousand four hundred (1,400) pounds, the city council
shall by resolution direct the traffic engineer to erect and maintain signs
indicating such prohibition.
   B.   Whenever the city council determines upon the basis of a traffic
investigation that the conditions because of which a load limit was established
as provided in subsection A of this section no longer exist, the city council
shall by resolution direct the traffic engineer to remove such weight
restriction signs. (Prior code § 68203)
10.52.040: BRIDGES:
Whenever the city council determines upon the basis of an engineering
investigation that the structure of a bridge on a highway is such that it is
unsafe for vehicles over a certain weight to use such bridge, the city council
shall by resolution direct the traffic engineer to place signs at both
entrances to such bridge specifying the maximum gross weight limits of any
vehicle or combination of vehicles which shall be permitted to cross such
bridge. (Prior code § 68301)
CHAPTER 10.54
TRUCK ROUTES
SECTION:
10.54.010: Establishment
10.54.020: Use Of Truck Routes
10.54.030: Exemptions
10.54.040: Deliveries To Construction Sites
10.54.050: Review Of Proposed Route
10.54.010: ESTABLISHMENT:
Whenever the city council, by resolution, designates and describes any street,
or a portion thereof, as a street the use of which is permitted by any vehicle
exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of five (5) tons, the city engineer is
authorized to designate such streets by appropriate signs as truck routes for
the movement of vehicles exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of five (5)
tons. (Ord. 2097 § 1, 1989)
10.54.020: USE OF TRUCK ROUTES:
Whenever truck routes are established and designated by appropriate signs, the
operator of any vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of five (5) tons
shall drive on such routes and none other; provided, however, the provisions of
this chapter shall not prohibit the operator of any vehicle exceeding a maximum
gross weight of five (5) tons from having ingress and egress by direct route to
and from restricted streets when necessary for the purpose of making pickups or
deliveries of goods, wares and merchandise from or to any building or structure
located on such restricted streets or for the purpose of delivering materials
to be used in the actual or bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling or
construction of any building or structure upon such restricted streets for
which work a building permit has previously been obtained, subject to the
restrictions of section
10.54.040 of this chapter. (Ord. 2097 § 1, 1989)
10.54.030: EXEMPTIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following vehicles:
   A.   Passenger buses under the jurisdiction of the public utilities
commission of the state;
   B.   Vehicles owned by a public utility while necessarily in use in the
construction, installation or repair of any public utility; and
   C.   Any vehicle defined in the Vehicle Code as a house car or a vehicle
used for recreational purposes only. (Ord. 2097 § 1, 1989)
10.54.040: DELIVERIES TO CONSTRUCTION SITES:
The route to be used by vehicles exceeding a gross weight of five (5) tons,
which are delivering materials and equipment to a construction site not on a
truck route, shall be subject to the review and approval of the city engineer.
(Ord. 2097 § 1, 1989)
10.54.050: REVIEW OF PROPOSED ROUTE:
   A.   At the time of application for a building, grading, off site
improvement, street cut, sewer or water permit, the applicant shall submit to
the city engineer a proposed route to be used by vehicles traveling to and from
the construction site. The city engineer shall review and approve the route or
provide an alternate route to be used by the applicant.
   B.   If the proposed route submitted by the applicant is not approved by the
city engineer, the city engineer shall make known to the applicant, if
requested, the reasons upon which his disapproval was based. A diagram of the
approved route, signed by the city engineer, shall be given to the applicant
and shall be retained by the applicant at the project site during the course of
construction. (Ord. 2097 § 1, 1989)
CHAPTER 10.56
BICYCLES
SECTION:
10.56.010: License Required
10.56.020: License; Issuance
10.56.030: License; Condition Of Bicycle
10.56.040: License; Effect
10.56.050: License Plate And Registration
10.56.060: License; Bicycle Attachment
10.56.070: License Plate Removal
10.56.080: License; Recordation
10.56.090: License; Notification Of Bicycle Destruction
10.56.100: Fees; Initial Purchase And Renewal
10.56.110: Fees; Penalty For Late Renewal
10.56.120: Fees; Payment
10.56.130: Fees; Transfer
10.56.140: Dealer; Secondhand Dealer Purchase Report
10.56.150: Dealer; Report Of Sale
10.56.160: Registration Transfer; Report
10.56.170: Registration Transfer; Application
10.56.180: Impoundment
10.56.190: Citation; Issuance
10.56.010: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to operate or use a bicycle, as defined in
section 21200 of the Vehicle Code without having attached thereto a California
bicycle license, upon any of the streets, alleys or public highways of this
city. (Prior code § 63100)
10.56.020: LICENSE; ISSUANCE:
The police department of the city is authorized and directed to obtain original
bicycle license plates and renewal license plates from the California
department of motor vehicles and issue same at the police department. (Prior
code § 63101)
10.56.030: LICENSE; CONDITION OF BICYCLE:
The bicycle shall be equipped and maintained as provided for in section 21201
of the Vehicle Code at all times when operated in the city, and before a
license can be issued. (Prior code § 63102)
10.56.040: LICENSE; EFFECT:
Licenses, when issued, shall entitle the licensee to operate such bicycle, for
which said license has been issued, upon all the streets, alleys and public
highways, exclusive of the sidewalks thereof, in the city. (Prior code § 63103)
10.56.050: LICENSE PLATE AND REGISTRATION:
The city shall provide, for a fee, a California bicycle license and maintain
registration records as provided in division 16.7 of the California Vehicle
Code. (Prior code § 63104)
10.56.060: LICENSE; BICYCLE ATTACHMENT:
The plate shall be attached to the frame of the bicycle below the seat on the
seat post portion of the frame. (Prior code § 63105)
10.56.070: LICENSE PLATE REMOVAL:
The plate shall not be removed. (Prior code § 63106)
10.56.080: LICENSE; RECORDATION:
The police department shall maintain registration records. (Prior code § 63107)
10.56.090: LICENSE; NOTIFICATION OF BICYCLE DESTRUCTION:
It shall be the duty of every license holder to notify to police department
within ten (10) days of the destruction of the bicycle. The registration card
shall be returned to the police department at that time. (Prior code § 63108)
10.56.100: FEES; INITIAL PURCHASE AND RENEWAL:
The initial license fee and the renewal fee to be paid for each bicycle shall
be one dollar fifty cents ($1.50). A bicycle purchased after license deadline
may be licensed for fifty cents ($0.50) for each year remaining in the three
(3) year period or portion of the remaining year, upon proof of sale. (Prior
code § 63200)
10.56.110: FEES; PENALTY FOR LATE RENEWAL:
A penalty of one dollar ($1.00) shall be added upon any application for annual
renewal of registration made on or after February 1 of the registration renewal
year, except as provided in section
10.56.100 of this chapter. (Prior code § 63201)
10.56.120: FEES; PAYMENT:
All licenses shall be payable in advance to the chief of police or his
representative, who is designated as the license collector for all fees due
under this chapter. (Prior code § 63202)
10.56.130: FEES; TRANSFER:
Pursuant to sections
10.56.160 and
10.56.170 of this chapter, a bicycle license may be transferred when the
ownership of said bicycle is transferred and a fee of fifty cents ($0.50) shall
be paid for the registration of such transfer. (Prior code § 63203)
10.56.140: DEALER; SECONDHAND DEALER PURCHASE REPORT:
All persons engaged in the business of buying secondhand bicycles are required
to make a weekly report to the police department, giving the name and address
of the person from whom each bicycle is purchased, the description of each
bicycle purchased, the frame number thereof, and the number of any license
found thereon, if any. (Prior code § 63300)
10.56.150: DEALER; REPORT OF SALE:
All persons engaged in the business of selling new or secondhand bicycles are
required to make a weekly report to the police department, giving a list of all
sales made by such dealers, which list shall include the name and address of
each person to whom sold, the kind of bicycle sold, together with a description
and frame number thereof, and the number of the license attached thereto, if
any. (Prior code § 63301)
10.56.160: REGISTRATION TRANSFER; REPORT:
It is the duty of every person who sells or transfers ownership of any bicycle,
to report such sale or transfer by returning to the police department the
registration card issued to such person as licensee thereof, together with the
name and address of the person to whom said bicycle was sold or transferred;
and such report shall be made within ten (10) days of the date of said sale or
transfer. (Prior code § 63400)
10.56.170: REGISTRATION TRANSFER; APPLICATION:
It shall be the duty of the purchaser or transferee of such bicycle to apply
for a transfer of registration thereof within ten (10) days of the date of such
transfer of registration. (Prior code § 63401)
10.56.180: IMPOUNDMENT:
In addition to the penalty hereinabove set forth, the police department, or any
of the members thereof, may impound any bicycle operated in violation of any of
the provisions of this chapter, and retain possession of same until the license
provided for herein is obtained by the owner of such bicycle. (Prior code §
63500)
10.56.190: CITATION; ISSUANCE:
The police department may issue a traffic citation to any person who operates a
bicycle in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or the California
Vehicle Code. (Prior code § 63501)
CHAPTER 10.58
OFF ROAD USE OF MOTOR VEHICLES UPON UNIMPROVED CITY PROPERTY
SECTION:
10.58.010: Scope
10.58.020: Definitions
10.58.030: Prohibited Operations
10.58.040: Permits
10.58.050: Operation By Permit
10.58.060: Appeal
10.58.070: Violations
10.58.080: Exemption
10.58.010: SCOPE:
This chapter is designed to regulate the operation of motorized vehicles by all
persons, whether they possess a valid California motor vehicle operator's
license or not, upon all unimproved city property, except highways, in the
city. (Ord. 2818, 2015)
10.58.020: DEFINITIONS:
Unless it is apparent from the context that another meaning is intended, the
following words and phrases when used herein shall have the meaning ascribed to
them by this section:
   CITY MANAGER: The city manager of the city or the city manager's authorized
designee.
   HIGHWAY: A way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained and open to
the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. "Highway" includes
streets, roads and alleys.
   MOTOR DRIVEN CYCLE: Any motor vehicle as defined by section 405 of the
California Vehicle Code.
   MOTOR VEHICLE: Any vehicle as defined by section 415 of the California
Vehicle Code.
   MOTORCYCLE: Any motor vehicle as defined by section 400 of the California
Vehicle Code.
   MOTORIZED BICYCLE: Any motor vehicle as defined by section 406 of the
California Vehicle Code.
   MOTORIZED SCOOTER: Any motor vehicle as defined by section 407.5 of the
California Vehicle Code.
   UNIMPROVED PUBLIC PROPERTY: Any parcel of land owned by the city which
either contains no structures or which is not surfaced with cement, concrete,
asphaltic concrete, or other similar material, or which does not have a hard
surface made up of a mixture of rock, sand or gravel bound together with a
chemical or mineral substance other than natural soil. (Ord. 2818, 2015)
10.58.030: PROHIBITED OPERATIONS:
   A.   No person shall drive a motor vehicle on any unimproved public property
without having in his or her immediate possession and, upon request of a peace
officer, displaying written permission from the city manager to be on such
property; however, this subsection shall not apply to a person having lawful
business with the city relating to the property or to any person possessing the
legal right to conduct business on such property.
   B.   No person shall park a motor vehicle on any unimproved public property
without displaying in such a manner as to be seen through the front windshield
by any person outside of such vehicle, written permission from the city manager
to be on such property; however, this subsection shall not apply to a person
having lawful business with the city relating to the property or to any person
possessing the legal right to conduct business on such property.
   C.   No person shall operate any privately owned motorcycle, motorized
bicycle, motor driven cycle, motor scooter, or motorized tricycle or
quadricycle upon any unimproved public property, except highways within the
city, and except as set forth in section
10.58.040 of this chapter. This subsection shall not apply to a person having
lawful business with the city relating to the property or to any person
possessing the legal right to conduct business on such property. This shall not
be construed to prohibit the operation of a motorcycle or motor driven cycle
having a valid California vehicle registration by any person possessing a valid
California operator's license upon the public highways in the city. (Ord. 2818,
2015)
10.58.040: PERMITS:
Any person desiring to operate a motorcycle, motorized bicycle, motor driven
cycle, motor scooter, or motorized tricycle or quadricycle on unimproved public
property may do so upon first obtaining a permit from the city manager. Permits
shall be issued upon determination of the city manager that the proposed
operation of any such vehicle will not create any undue fire hazard or
constitute a nuisance. (Ord. 2818, 2015)
10.58.050: OPERATION BY PERMIT:
The operation of any motorcycle, motorized bicycle, motor driven cycle, motor
scooter, or motorized tricycle or quadricycle on unimproved public property by
authority of a permit issued in accordance with the provisions of section
10.58.040 of this chapter shall be limited to the hours commencing one-half (1/
2) hour after sunrise and ending one-half (1/2) hour before sunset. Each permit
so issued shall specify the area or areas of permitted operation. The permit
shall be displayed on the vehicle at all times and shall be presented to any
peace officer on request. The permit is not, and shall so state on its face, an
expression by the city that such proposed operation can be done with safety to
the operator of the vehicle. (Ord. 2818, 2015)
10.58.060: APPEAL:
Any person whose application for a permit under section
10.58.040 of this chapter is denied may appeal such decision to the city
council by filing a written notice of appeal within ten (10) days after
notification by the city manager that said permit has been denied. The city
council shall thereupon conduct a hearing on said appeal within thirty (30)
days from the date of filing said notice of appeal with the city clerk. The
decision of the city council shall be final and conclusive upon all persons
concerned. (Ord. 2818, 2015)
10.58.070: VIOLATIONS:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor. Each person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each
and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of
this chapter is committed or continued by such person. (Ord. 2818, 2015)
10.58.080: EXEMPTION:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply upon any public highway, street,
road or alley within the city. (Ord. 2818, 2015)
CHAPTER 10.60
MISCELLANEOUS TRAFFIC PROVISIONS
SECTION:
10.60.010: Passengers On Motorcycles And Bicycles
10.60.020: Driving Through Funeral Processions
10.60.030: New Pavement
10.60.040: Restricted Access
10.60.050: Tampering With Traffic Survey Devices Unlawful
10.60.060: Parking Near Scene Of Fire, Accident Or Disaster
10.60.070: Authority To Remove Signs Obstructing View
10.60.080: Permissive Vehicle Operation
10.60.090: Operation In Excess Of Designated Noise Level
10.60.100: Spark Arrester And Muffler Required
10.60.110: Exempted Vehicles
10.60.010: PASSENGERS ON MOTORCYCLES AND BICYCLES:
No person shall ride upon a highway on either a motorcycle or bicycle on a
portion of said vehicle which is not specifically designed for the carrying of
passengers nor shall any person operating a motorcycle or bicycle upon a
highway permit another to do so. (Prior code § 68901)
10.60.020: DRIVING THROUGH FUNERAL PROCESSIONS:
No driver of a vehicle shall drive between vehicles comprising a funeral
procession while they are in motion and when the vehicles in such procession
are conspicuously so designated. (Prior code § 68403)
10.60.030: NEW PAVEMENT:
No person shall ride or drive any animal or any vehicle over or across any
newly made pavement or freshly painted marking on any street when a barrier or
sign is in place warning persons not to drive over or across such pavement or
marking, or sign stating that the street or any portion thereof is closed.
(Prior code § 68404)
10.60.040: RESTRICTED ACCESS:
No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any limited access roadway except
at such entrances and exits as are established by public authority. (Prior code
§ 68405)
10.60.050: TAMPERING WITH TRAFFIC SURVEY DEVICES UNLAWFUL:
It is unlawful for any person to move, molest, tamper with or damage any survey
device used for the purpose of making traffic investigations located on any
city highway. (Prior code § 68406)
10.60.060: PARKING NEAR SCENE OF FIRE, ACCIDENT OR DISASTER:
No person shall stop, stand, or park any vehicle on either side of the highway
within one thousand feet (1,000') of any fire, accident, or disaster, except
persons whose presence is required by investigating officers, public employees
and/or public utilities employees on official business or whose duties require
their presence. (Prior code § 68407)
10.60.070: AUTHORITY TO REMOVE SIGNS OBSTRUCTING VIEW:
The traffic engineer is authorized to remove any sign which constitutes an
obstruction to the vision and view of traffic by a driver of a motor vehicle at
the entrance to any intersection. (Prior code § 68408)
10.60.080: PERMISSIVE VEHICLE OPERATION:
No person shall operate any vehicle or cause or permit any vehicle operated or
controlled by him to park or stand on any lands or premises within the city
without having written permission from the owner of such lands or his agent, or
the person in lawful possession thereof; provided, however, that this section
shall not be applicable to persons having visible or lawful business with said
owner, agent or person in lawful possession. Upon request of a peace officer,
any such written permission shall be displayed to the peace officer. (Ord. 2138
§ 1, 1990: prior code § 68700)
10.60.090: OPERATION IN EXCESS OF DESIGNATED NOISE LEVEL:
No person shall operate on lands or premises in the city any motor vehicle
which makes sounds and noise in excess of the noise level provided in section
23130 of the Vehicle Code of the state. (Prior code § 68800)
10.60.100: SPARK ARRESTER AND MUFFLER REQUIRED:
Any motor vehicle operated on property within the city of Redlands shall be
equipped with a spark arrester and muffler as defined in section 27150 of the
Vehicle Code of the state of California. No person shall operate a motor
vehicle unless it is so equipped with a spark arrester and muffler. (Prior code
§ 68801)
10.60.110: EXEMPTED VEHICLES:
The provisions of sections
 10.60.090 and
10.60.100 of this chapter shall not apply to the following vehicles:
   A.   Authorized emergency vehicles;
   B.   Vehicles operated upon parking lots or structures open to the public or
private parking lots or structures and operated solely for ingress to and
egress from such parking area and parking;
   C.   Vehicles operated upon property primarily used for motor vehicles
retail or wholesale sales, service or repair, manufacture, or distribution, but
operated in a manner not to be offensive and which shall not disturb the peace
and quiet of the general neighborhood;
   D.   Vehicles generally used exclusively for commercial, industrial, or
office purposes in a manner that shall not be offensive and shall not disturb
the peace and quiet of the neighborhood;
   E.   Vehicles operated upon private roadways or easements necessary for
ingress to or egress from property used for those purposes designated in
subsections B, C, and D of this section, and for no other purpose;
   F.   Vehicles operated upon public streets and highways;
   G.   Vehicles operated on property actually used for residential purposes,
where such motorcycles or motor driven cycles are on said property with the
express or implied invitation of the owner or occupant and when such use is
solely for ingress to and egress from said residential property. (Prior code §
68900)
CHAPTER 10.70
DESIGNATED ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING PARKING SPOTS
SECTION:
10.70.010: Designated Electric Vehicle Charging Parking Spots
10.70.010: DESIGNATED ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING PARKING SPOTS:
   A.   A local authority, by ordinance or resolution, and a person in lawful
possession of an off-street parking facility may designate stalls or spaces in
an off-street parking facility owned or operated by that local authority or
person for the exclusive purpose of charging and parking a vehicle that is
connected for electric charging purposes.
   B.   A local authority, by ordinance or resolution, may designate stalls or
spaces on a public street within its jurisdiction for the exclusive purpose of
charging and parking a vehicle that is connected for electric charging
purposes.
   C.   The owner or person in lawful possession of a privately owned or
operated off-street parking facility, after notifying the police or sheriff's
department, may cause the removal of a vehicle from a stall or space designated
in the facility to the nearest public garage if the vehicle is not connected
for electric charging purposes.
   D.   The local authority owning or operating an off-street parking facility,
after notifying the police or sheriff's department, may cause the removal of a
vehicle from a stall or space designated if the vehicle is not connected for
electric charging purposes.
   E.   The local authority, after notifying the police or sheriff's
department, may cause the removal of a vehicle from a stall or space designated
to the four tow companies listed under the police department's tow contract if
the vehicle is not connected for electric charging purposes.
   F.   The posting required for an off-street parking facility owned or
operated either privately or by a local authority shall consist of a sign not
less than 17 by 22 inches in size with lettering not less than one inch in
height that clearly and conspicuously states the following:
   "Unauthorized vehicles not connected for electric charging purposes will be
towed away at owner's expense. Towed vehicles may be reclaimed at or by
telephoning:
      Address:    1270 W. Park Avenue, Redlands Ca., 92373
      Telephone:    (909) 798-7681
   The sign shall be posted in either of the following locations:
      1.   Immediately adjacent to, and visible from, the stall or space.
      2.   In a conspicuous place at each entrance to the off-street parking
facility.
   The posting required for stalls or spaces on a public street designated
shall follow the California Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
   G.   If the parking facility is privately owned and public parking is
prohibited by the posting of a sign meeting the requirements, the requirements
may be met by the posting of a sign immediately adjacent to, and visible from,
each stall or space indicating that a vehicle not meeting the requirements will
be removed at the owner's expense and containing the telephone number of the
local traffic law enforcement agency.
   H.   This section does not interfere with existing law governing the ability
of local authorities to adopt ordinances related to parking programs within
their jurisdiction, such as programs that provide free parking in metered areas
or municipal garages for electric vehicles. (Ord. 2956, 2023)
TITLE 11
RESERVED
TITLE 12
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES
DIVISION I. STREETS
CHAPTER 12.04
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
12.04.010: Short Title
12.04.020: Construction
12.04.030: Exceptions
12.04.040: Definitions Generally
12.04.050: Barrier Or Obstruction
12.04.060: Obstruction; Exceptions
12.04.070: City Equipment
12.04.080: City Ownership
12.04.090: Engineer
12.04.100: Excavation
12.04.110: Facility Or Equipment
12.04.120: Incidental Expenses
12.04.130: Owner
12.04.140: Person
12.04.150: Sidewalk
12.04.160: Street
12.04.170: Street Betterment
12.04.180: Street Improvement
12.04.190: Temporary Driveway
12.04.200: Travel
12.04.210: Vehicle
12.04.220: Work
12.04.010: SHORT TITLE:
This division is known as the STREET SAFETY ORDINANCE. (Prior code § 74100)
12.04.020: CONSTRUCTION:
It is the intention of the council in adopting the ordinance codified in this
division to require all departments of the city using or occupying the streets
of the city, to comply with the provisions hereof except that such departments
shall not pay the engineer any deposit before securing permit and such
department shall not pay any permit fee or any general or special deposits as
herein provided. (Prior code § 74101)
12.04.030: EXCEPTIONS:
The provisions of this division shall not apply to any work done or to be done,
in, upon, along, across, under or over any street pursuant to any street
improvement law or street safety law of the state, law of the United States, or
ordinance of this city, providing for the improvement thereof or pursuant to
any contract in which the city is a party and which has been authorized by the
city council; provided that the provisions of sections 12.20.360 through
12.20.550 of this division shall apply to all such work unless the provisions
of the specifications therefor are contrary to said sections 12.20.360 through
12.20.550 of this division. (Prior code § 74102)
12.04.040: DEFINITIONS GENERALLY:
Whenever in this division the words or phrases hereinafter in this chapter
defined are used, they shall have the respective meanings assigned to them in
this chapter (unless in the given instance the context wherein they are used
shall clearly import a different meaning). (Prior code § 74000)
12.04.050: BARRIER OR OBSTRUCTION:
"Barrier" or "obstruction" means any object, material, instrumentality or
impediment in, upon, along, across, under or over a street needed or useful for
a limited period of time in performing or doing work in, upon, along, across,
under or over or in or upon property in close proximity thereto whether the
same obstructs travel or not. (Prior code § 74001)
12.04.060: OBSTRUCTION; EXCEPTIONS:
A barricade, torch, or light when placed upon, along or across a street by any
person placing personal property lawfully in, upon, along, under or over such
street to protect the public, such property or any work done in connection
therewith, or by any officer or employee of this city in the course of his
employment, shall not be considered an obstruction within the meaning of the
foregoing definition. (Prior code § 74002)
12.04.070: CITY EQUIPMENT:
"City equipment" means any equipment owned by, rented, operated or controlled
by the city. (Prior code § 74003)
12.04.080: CITY OWNERSHIP:
When the city is the owner within the foregoing definition, the word "owner"
includes the department or departments of the city having control or
supervision over such property. (Prior code § 74009)
12.04.090: ENGINEER:
"Engineer" means the city engineer and superintendent of streets of the city.
(Prior code § 74004)
12.04.100: EXCAVATION:
"Excavation" means any opening in the surface of any street made in any manner
whatsoever, except an opening into a structure located beneath the surface of
the street, the top of which is flush with the adjoining surface of the street
and so constructed as to permit frequent openings without injury or damage to
the surface of the street. (Prior code § 74005)
12.04.110: FACILITY OR EQUIPMENT:
"Facility" or "equipment" means pipe, pipeline, tube, main service, trap, vent,
vault, manhole, gauge, regulator, valve, conduit, wire, tower, pole, pole line,
crossarm or bracket, anchor, cable, junction box, transformer, or any other
material, structure or object of any kind or nature not particularly mentioned
herein which is or may be lawfully constructed, left, placed or maintained in,
upon, along, across, under or over any portion of any street. (Prior code §
74006)
12.04.120: INCIDENTAL EXPENSES:
"Incidental expenses" means all expenses incidental to work authorized by any
permit issued hereunder or incidental to inspection, supervision, or completion
thereof, including a reasonable charge for overhead. (Prior code § 74007)
12.04.130: OWNER:
"Owner" means the person in which the division to any given piece of property
is vested, or any person owning or having any interest in such property. (Prior
code § 74008)
12.04.140: PERSON:
"Person" means any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, association,
organization, business trust, and every department of the city and every
officer or employee of any of them while working in the course of his
employment. (Prior code § 74010)
12.04.150: SIDEWALK:
"Sidewalk" is that portion of a highway, other than the roadway, set apart for
pedestrian travel, and includes a park or parking strip maintained in the area
between the property line, and the street line and also includes curbing,
bulkheads, retaining walls or other works for the protection of any sidewalk or
of any such park or parking strip. (Prior code § 74018)
12.04.160: STREET:
"Street" means public street, lane, alley, court, easement, right of way or
other public place in the city, as they now exist or may hereafter be
established, or any portion thereof, including all or part of any highway,
right of way or easement, whether or not such entire area as used for highway
purposes, excepting any easement or right of way vested in the city for a
specified single utility purpose only. (Prior code § 74011)
12.04.170: STREET BETTERMENT:
"Street betterment" means any of the following (when any work in connection
therewith is done or performed by or at the instance and request of the owner
of the real property abutting the street where such work is to be done or
performed): grading, paving of the street, gutter, sidewalk, crosswalk, step,
seat, curb, fountain, driveway, tunnel, subway, viaduct, bridge, sewer,
instrumentality of sanitation, together with the necessary outlet, or drain,
channel for drainage purposes with necessary outlet, pole, post, wire, pipe,
conduit, lamp, ornamental light, standards, and any suitable or necessary
appliance for the lighting of any street, hydrant and appliance for fire
protection, wall, retaining wall, embankment or any appliance, attachment, or
appurtenance in connection with any structure or object mentioned in this
definition, or any similar structure or object which will improve the whole or
any portion of any street. (Prior code § 74012)
12.04.180: STREET IMPROVEMENT:
"Street improvement" means any improvement or portion thereof, which the city
is authorized by law to make in, upon, along, across, under or over any street,
and any instrumentality used or useful in connection with the use thereof for
travel or in connection with the construction, erection, maintenance, or repair
thereof, including a torch, red light, lantern, or barrier. (Prior code §
74013)
12.04.190: TEMPORARY DRIVEWAY:
"Temporary driveway" means the equipment required by this division at the
location upon any street designated in any permit issued hereunder authorizing
a vehicle to be driven or operated over any sidewalk or curb at a point other
than where a driveway has been constructed or maintained. (Prior code § 74014)
12.04.200: TRAVEL:
"Travel" means vehicular, equestrian or pedestrian travel. (Prior code § 74015)
12.04.210: VEHICLE:
"Vehicle" means a device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may
be propelled, moved or drawn on the highway or street weighing in excess of one
hundred (100) pounds. (Prior code § 74016)
12.04.220: WORK:
"Work" means any or all of the acts mentioned in subsections
12.16.010B through E, inclusive, of this division. (Prior code § 74017)
CHAPTER 12.08
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
12.08.010: Authority; Delegation
12.08.020: Report Of Defects In Improvements
12.08.030: Report Of Park Damage
12.08.040: Report Of Unsafe Street
12.08.050: Report Of Restoration
12.08.060: Continuing Violation
12.08.070: Unreasonable Interference With Travel; Prosecution Of Work
12.08.010: AUTHORITY; DELEGATION:
Unless especially otherwise provided, deputies or assistants may perform the
duties and have the authority of specified officers. (Prior code § 74200)
12.08.020: REPORT OF DEFECTS IN IMPROVEMENTS:
It is the duty of the officers and employees of the city to report or cause to
be reported to the engineer any defect or defects actually known to such
officers or employees in any improvement made in the streets. (Prior code §
74201)
12.08.030: REPORT OF PARK DAMAGE:
It is the duty of the officers and employees of the park department to report
to the engineer any damage to any grass, plant or tree in any parking in any
street of the city known to have been caused (or where reasonable grounds exist
for believing that the same was caused) as the result of work done by any
person holding a permit from the engineer pursuant to the provisions of this
division. (Prior code § 74202)
12.08.040: REPORT OF UNSAFE STREET:
The city street superintendent shall report immediately to the city fire chief
and police chief any streets, that he has knowledge of by reason of permits
issued or otherwise, that are blocked, obstructed or made unsafe for travel.
(Prior code § 74203)
12.08.050: REPORT OF RESTORATION:
The city street superintendent shall report to said officers when he has
inspected said streets and finds them again open or safe for travel. (Prior
code § 74204)
12.08.060: CONTINUING VIOLATION:
Each person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for every calendar day
during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this division is
committed, continued, or permitted by such person. (Prior code § 74205)
12.08.070: UNREASONABLE INTERFERENCE WITH TRAVEL; PROSECUTION OF WORK:
When the doing or performing of any of the things mentioned in sections
12.16.010 through
12.16.340 of this division, in any of the streets of this city shall
unreasonably interfere with travel thereon and the engineer so finds, he shall
notify the permittee to that effect, and thereafter such work shall be
prosecuted diligently for a total period of not less than fifteen (15) hours
each calendar day from twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight to twelve o'clock (12:
00) midnight, except holidays and Sunday. (Prior code § 74206)
CHAPTER 12.12
STREET AND SIDEWALK USE
SECTION:
12.12.010: Excessive Noise Unlawful
12.12.020: Oil On Streets Unlawful
12.12.030: Fire Extinguishers Required For Vehicles Carrying Explosive Or
Flammable Materials
12.12.040: Obstruction Without Permit Unlawful
12.12.050: Obstruction; Exception For Merchandise On Sidewalk And Trains
12.12.060: Emergency Vehicle Right Of Way
12.12.070: Merchandise On Sidewalk; Unlawful When
12.12.080: Obstruction Of Ditches And Gutters
12.12.090: Awnings; Height
12.12.100: Awnings; Building Code Compliance Required
12.12.110: Trees Not To Obstruct
12.12.120: Maintenance Responsibility Of Adjoining Landowner
12.12.130: Barbed Wire Fences
12.12.140: Control Of Irrigation And Storm Water
12.12.150: Temporary Street Closings
12.12.010: EXCESSIVE NOISE UNLAWFUL:
It is unlawful to make or cause to be made any unusual and excessively loud
noise upon any street within the city limits of this city, except in connection
with a lawfully conducted parade, or as otherwise permitted by law or by order
of the chief of police. This section shall not apply to law enforcement
personnel during the course of their official duties or to the operator of any
emergency vehicles. (Ord. 1931 § 11, 1986: prior code § 75000)
12.12.020: OIL ON STREETS UNLAWFUL:
It is unlawful to place, cause or permit to be placed or discharged, any oil,
petroleum, naphtha, liquid asphaltum, gasoline, kerosene, or any kindred
substance, or water mixed with any such substance into any sewer, public or
otherwise, or in or upon any street or sidewalk in this city, or upon any
private property so that the same will or may run into or upon any such street
or sidewalk; or to drive or permit or allow to be driven, run, or propelled any
vehicle or machine carrying, in bulk or otherwise, any such substance, upon the
streets of the city, unless the same shall be contained within such vehicle in
such a manner that said substances cannot be spilled, dropped, leak or drip
from said container, or from drip pans attached to said vehicle or container.
(Prior code § 75001)
12.12.030: FIRE EXTINGUISHERS REQUIRED FOR VEHICLES CARRYING EXPLOSIVE OR
FLAMMABLE MATERIALS:
All vehicles traversing city streets carrying more than the normal amount of
vehicular fuel for the normal operation of such vehicle and all commercial
vehicles carrying explosives, explosive liquids or gases shall, at all times,
carry fire extinguishers appropriate to the material carried, as approved by
the fire chief or state fire marshal. (Prior code § 75002)
12.12.040: OBSTRUCTION WITHOUT PERMIT UNLAWFUL:
It is unlawful to obstruct the free passage or use of any portion of any
roadway, street or sidewalk, without first obtaining a permit to do so from the
street superintendent. In determining whether to issue such a permit, the
street superintendent shall be guided by the following considerations:
   A.   The conditions of vehicle and pedestrian traffic in the affected area;
   B.   The effect upon stores, offices and other places of business in the
area;
   C.   The effect upon residences, hospitals, churches, schools, and other
educational institutions in the area;
   D.   The importance of or need for the obstructing activity; and
   E.   The general requirements of the public health, safety and welfare.
(Ord. 1931 § 12, 1986: prior code § 75003)
12.12.050: OBSTRUCTION; EXCEPTION FOR MERCHANDISE ON SIDEWALK AND TRAINS:
Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to prevent the obstruction of one-half
(1/2) of the width of any sidewalk, not exceeding two (2) hours in any one day
for the receipt of or delivery of merchandise, nor to prevent any railroad
engine or train cars from stopping or remaining upon any street for a period
not exceeding three (3) consecutive minutes. (Prior code § 75004)
12.12.060: EMERGENCY VEHICLE RIGHT OF WAY:
Any emergency vehicle shall have right of free passage, unobstructed right of
way, at any time upon sounding of siren or warning device, red light flashed
toward the operator of said obstructing vehicle, or by any means utilized to
signify that an emergency does exist. (Prior code § 75005)
12.12.070: MERCHANDISE ON SIDEWALK; UNLAWFUL WHEN:
It is unlawful to block or obstruct or make unsafe for travel on the sidewalk
or streets of the city with merchandise for sale, storage, display or
advertisement, or refuse and debris, or containers therefor, or to install or
retain any appurtenances to buildings extending over public property unless
specifically permitted herein. (Prior code § 75006)
12.12.080: OBSTRUCTION OF DITCHES AND GUTTERS:
It is unlawful to construct or maintain any dam or obstruction in or across any
public wastewater or storm water ditch, channel or gutter in this city, or to
construct or maintain over or across any such ditch, channel or gutter, any
bridge, crossing or covering without permission being first obtained from the
city manager. Such permission shall not unreasonably be withheld, and shall be
granted only upon such conditions as are necessary to protect the public
health, safety and general welfare. (Ord. 1931 § 14, 1986: prior code § 75010)
12.12.090: AWNINGS; HEIGHT:
It is unlawful to erect or maintain over any sidewalk any awning, any part of
which is less than seven feet (7') above the sidewalk. (Prior code § 75011)
12.12.100: AWNINGS; BUILDING CODE COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
Awnings will be constructed in accordance with the provisions of the uniform
building code, adopted by the city. (Prior code § 75012)
12.12.110: TREES NOT TO OBSTRUCT:
It is unlawful to permit the branches or foliage of any tree, plant, hedge or
bush growing on private property to obstruct the free passage of vehicles in
the roadway of any street or of pedestrians upon the sidewalk portion thereof,
or to hang over such portion of sidewalk within seven feet (7') of the surface
thereof. (Prior code § 75013)
12.12.120: MAINTENANCE RESPONSIBILITY OF ADJOINING LANDOWNER:
It is the duty of the owner of real property abutting a portion of a street
improved by a street betterment (whether said street betterment was
constructed, erected or made at the instance or request of such owner or any
predecessor in interest of such owner, or not) to maintain said street
betterment on such portion of such street abutting such owner's real property
in such condition that the same shall not endanger persons or property, and to
maintain the same in a condition which will not interfere with the public
convenience or safety in the use of such street betterment, save and except as
to those conditions created or maintained in, upon, along, across, under or
over said street by any person other than the owner under and by virtue of any
permit issued hereunder or any right to them granted by law or by the
legislative body of the city, and such persons shall be under a like duty in
relation thereto. (Prior code § 75014)
12.12.130: BARBED WIRE FENCES:
It is unlawful to construct or maintain any barbed wire fence or thorn bearing
hedge along the line of any street in the city. (Prior code § 75016)
12.12.140: CONTROL OF IRRIGATION AND STORM WATER:
It is unlawful to allow or permit any irrigation water (except from lawns),
storm water drained from buildings or water drained from swimming pools to run
upon or over the surface of any sidewalk in this city or upon or into the
roadway of any street therein, except in the gutters thereof or properly
controlled channels that may be approved at the discretion of the city manager.
(Prior code § 75017)
12.12.150: TEMPORARY STREET CLOSINGS:
The chief of police or the city engineer may temporarily close any portion of
any street for celebrations, parades, local special events, and other purposes
when, in the opinion of the police chief or the city engineer, such a street
closing is necessary for the safety and protection of persons who are to use
that portion of the street during the temporary closing. (Ord. 2118 § 1, 1990)
CHAPTER 12.16
STREET REPAIR AND CONSTRUCTION PERMITS
SECTION:
12.16.010: Required; When
12.16.020: Emergency Work Excepted
12.16.030: City Departments Exempt
12.16.040: Application; Form
12.16.045: Action On Applications For Permits To Excavate
12.16.050: Filing Of Drawings, Profiles, Specifications
12.16.060: Exceptions For Filing Of Drawing Or Plat
12.16.070: Additional Maps And Drawings
12.16.080: Tunneling; Backfill Specifications
12.16.090: Conformance To Plans And Specifications Required
12.16.100: Permit Demonstrates Lawful Right To Use Of Street
12.16.110: Application; Changes By Engineer
12.16.120: Conditions Of Issuance; Grounds For Denial
12.16.130: Denial For Finding Of Public Detriment
12.16.140: Permit Not To Grant Franchise, Right Or Privilege
12.16.150: Compliance With Ordinances Not Excused
12.16.160: Permit Subject To City And Public Rights
12.16.170: House Connection Permit; Expiration
12.16.180: Sewer Connection Excavation; Time For Filling
12.16.190: Failure To Finish Work; Completion By Engineer
12.16.200: Failure To Restore Damage
12.16.210: Work Delay; Permit Cancellation
12.16.220: Revocation; Authority
12.16.230: City Prerogative Where Work Conflicts
12.16.240: Revocation For Breach Of Condition
12.16.250: Liability For Damage
12.16.260: Permit Fee Required
12.16.270: Inspection Fee Required
12.16.280: Minimum Fee
12.16.290: Deposit Required
12.16.300: Effect Of Special Assessment
12.16.310: Penalty For Work Before Securing Permit
12.16.320: City Liability For Engineer's Expense
12.16.330: Billing Of Departments
12.16.340: Accounting
12.16.350: General Deposit; Maintenance
12.16.360: General Deposit; Amount
12.16.370: Bond In Lieu Of Deposit
12.16.380: Bond; Approval
12.16.390: Bond; Amount
12.16.400: Bond; Renewal And Maintenance
12.16.410: Insufficient Bond; Engineer Action
12.16.420: Refund Of Unnecessary Permit Fee Or Special Deposit
12.16.430: Permit Fee Forfeiture For Failure To Work
12.16.440: Refund Of General Deposit
12.16.450: Exoneration Of Bond
12.16.460: Form Of Exoneration
12.16.470: Indemnification Of City
12.16.480: Permittee Right To Defend City
12.16.490: Notice Of Damage
12.16.500: Notice; Computation Of Time
12.16.510: Notice; Failure Not To Affect Permittee Liability
12.16.010: REQUIRED; WHEN:
No person shall do or perform, or cause the doing or performing of any, or any
number of, or all of the following, until and unless he has filed with the
engineer a written application, and secured from the engineer a permit
therefor, and until and unless he shall have complied with all of the
conditions and regulations of this division applicable thereto, except as
hereinafter provided in sections
12.16.020 through
12.16.340 of this chapter:
   A.   Excavating In Street: Make any excavation, tunnel or bore in or under
the surface of any street;
   B.   Facilities, Equipment: Construct, erect, place, or repair any facility
or equipment in, upon, along, across, under or over any street, or remove any
facility or attached equipment from any street;
   C.   Street Betterments: Repair, construct, reconstruct, erect or make any
street betterment in, upon, along, across, under or over any street or remove
any street betterment from any street, when such work is done or performed by
or at the instance and request of the owner of the real property abutting said
street where such street betterment is to be repaired, constructed,
reconstructed, erected or made, or removed;
   D.   Street Improvements: Destroy or remove any street improvement in, upon,
along, across, under or over any street;
   E.   Street Obstruction: Construct, leave, place or maintain any obstruction
in, upon, along, across or over any street;
   F.   Driving Over Sidewalk: Drive or operate a vehicle over any curb or
sidewalk located upon any street at a point other than where a driveway has
been constructed or otherwise improved. (Prior code §§ 76000–76007)
12.16.020: EMERGENCY WORK EXCEPTED:
Section
12.16.010 of this chapter shall not apply in case of emergency when it is
necessary for the preservation of life or property to do work immediately in,
upon, along, across, under or over any street in the city, provided that the
person doing such work shall file a statement of the necessity therefor, a
drawing or plat as required by section
12.16.050 of this chapter and make a deposit as required by sections
12.16.010 through
12.16.340 of this chapter with the engineer within eight (8) hours after
beginning said work, or within four (4) hours after the office of the engineer
is first open subsequent to beginning said work. (Prior code § 76008)
12.16.030: CITY DEPARTMENTS EXEMPT:
A department of the city shall not be required to make application for or
secure a permit from the engineer to construct, erect, place, or repair a pole,
pole line, tower, crossarm or bracket, transformer, conduit junction box, wire,
meter, meter box, valve, valve box, in, upon, along, across, under or over a
street of the city or remove the same from a street of the city when such work
does not interfere with, disturb, destroy or remove any street improvement.
(Prior code § 76009)
12.16.040: APPLICATION; FORM:
Applications shall be submitted in format and manner specified by the director
and shall contain the following information:
   A.   The name, address and telephone number of the applicant. Where the
applicant is not the owner of the facility or facilities to be installed or
maintained, the application shall include the name, address and telephone
number of the owner, and the applicant must demonstrate in a form and manner
specified by the department that the applicant is authorized to act on behalf
of the owner. Also included shall be the name of the contractor, his license
number and type, the underground service alert identification number and the
Cal OSHA number if applicable;
   B.   A plan, diagram or map, approved by the director, showing the proposed
location and dimensions of the excavation and the facilities to be installed,
maintained or repaired in connection with the excavation, and such other
details as the department may require;
   C.   The proposed starting day of repair, construction or excavation;
   D.   The proposed duration of the repair, construction or excavation, which
shall include the duration of the restoration of the public right of way
physically disturbed by the repair, construction or excavation;
   E.   Possession of a current business tax certificate issued by the city of
Redlands;
   F.   Evidence that the appropriate warranty and fees have been submitted as
required by section
12.20.110 of this division;
   G.   Evidence of insurance for the applicant and owner as specified by the
department;
   H.   Any other information that may reasonably be required by the
department. (Ord. 2397 § 1, 1999: prior code § 76010)
12.16.045: ACTION ON APPLICATIONS FOR PERMITS TO EXCAVATE:
   A.   After receipt of an application for a permit to repair, construct or
excavate, the department shall determine whether the application is complete.
If the application is deemed to be incomplete, the department shall advise the
applicant of the reasons for rejecting the application as incomplete.
   B.   If the application is deemed to be complete, the department, in its
discretion, shall deny, approve or conditionally approve the application. In
order to preserve and maintain the public health, safety, welfare and
convenience, the department may condition a permit with specified requirements
including, but not limited to, those that limit or modify the facilities to be
installed or maintained, the location of the facilities to be installed or
maintained, and the time, place and manner of excavation.
   C.   If the application is denied, the department shall advise the applicant
in writing of the basis for the denial.
   D.   If the application is approved or conditionally approved, the
department shall issue a permit to the applicant. (Ord. 2397 § 2, 1999)
12.16.050: FILING OF DRAWINGS, PROFILES, SPECIFICATIONS:
If an applicant applies for a permit to do any work mentioned in subsection
12.16.010A, B, or C of this chapter, at the time of filing such application,
the applicant also shall file with the engineer a drawing or plat showing the
proposed location, size and depth of an excavation, tunnel or bore to be made,
the proposed location and elevation above or below the established grade of the
centerline of the street, and if below the street, the proposed elevation below
the actual surface of the roadway, the character of the street improvement or
street betterment, facility or equipment or work to be done as the case may be.
(Prior code § 76011)
12.16.060: EXCEPTIONS FOR FILING OF DRAWING OR PLAT:
The filing of such drawing or plat shall not be required when an application is
filed requesting a permit to excavate in a street for the purpose of making a
service connection when extending a lateral to a property line from a main duct
line, or for the location of trouble in conduit or pipes, or making repairs
thereto, or for any minor work of repair, reconstruction or excavation when the
description of the work to be done in the application gives all the data
required by section
12.16.050 of this chapter to be shown on a drawing or plat. (Prior code §
76012)
12.16.070: ADDITIONAL MAPS AND DRAWINGS:
Additional maps or drawings will be submitted and approved as in section
12.16.050 of this chapter. (Prior code § 76013)
12.16.080: TUNNELING; BACKFILL SPECIFICATIONS:
At the time any person applies for a permit for making a tunnel or bore in any
street, he shall submit to the engineer for approval, specifications setting
forth the method proposed to be used in backfilling said tunnel or bore. (Prior
code § 76014)
12.16.090: CONFORMANCE TO PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS REQUIRED:
Any work done pursuant to subsection
12.16.010A, B, or C of this chapter shall be done and performed in accordance
with the drawings, plans, profiles or specifications designated in the permit
issued therefor. (Prior code § 76015)
12.16.100: PERMIT DEMONSTRATES LAWFUL RIGHT TO USE OF STREET:
The applicant of any permit authorized to be issued pursuant to the provisions
of this division shall show to the satisfaction of the engineer a lawful right
to use and occupy the streets of the city for the purpose and at the location
mentioned in the application. (Prior code § 76016)
12.16.110: APPLICATION; CHANGES BY ENGINEER:
The engineer may make such changes in said application as to the location, size
and depth of any excavation, tunnel or bore as he may deem necessary for the
protection of the streets wherein such excavation, tunnel or bore is to be
made, or as in his judgment are necessary for the proposed purposes thereof,
and may make such changes as to location, size or character of an obstruction,
street betterment or temporary driveway constructed, erected, made, left,
placed or maintained, in, upon, along or across, under or over any streets as
in his judgment are necessary to comply with good engineering and workmanship,
to prevent undue interference with travel upon the streets, or danger to the
safety of persons using the same, and may make such changes as to location, or
elevation above or below the surface of the street of any facility or equipment
to be constructed, erected or placed as in his judgment are necessary to
prevent undue interference with travel on the streets or danger to the safety
of persons using the same. (Prior code § 76017)
12.16.120: CONDITIONS OF ISSUANCE; GROUNDS FOR DENIAL:
If the proposed location of any street betterment, or facility or equipment to
be constructed, reconstructed, erected, installed, maintained, operated or
repaired, in, upon, along, across, under or over any street or removed from any
street, and if the proposed location of any obstruction or temporary driveway
to be constructed, left, placed or maintained in, upon, along, across or over
any street by the applicant does not interfere:
   A.   Interference With Travel: Unreasonably with the use of the street for
the purpose of travel;
   B.   Interference With City Plans: With any proposed or contemplated use of
the street by the city or any of its departments, either above or below the
surface of the street, for which plans have been prepared, or for which plans
are in the course of preparation, which said plans have been authorized by the
city manager or the legislative body of the city;
   C.   Interference With Personal Property: With personal property lawfully
in, upon, along, across, under or over streets, and otherwise complies with the
applicable provisions of this division, or any other ordinance of the city
germane thereto, in force and effect at the time such application is made; the
engineer shall approve such application and issue a permit or permits therefor.
(Prior code § 76018)
12.16.130: DENIAL FOR FINDING OF PUBLIC DETRIMENT:
However, the engineer shall not issue any permit when the proposed manner of
doing the work would be detrimental to the public welfare. (Prior code § 76019)
12.16.140: PERMIT NOT TO GRANT FRANCHISE, RIGHT OR PRIVILEGE:
Nothing in this division contained (and no fact, circumstance or inference
arising therefrom) shall be deemed or considered to grant any franchise, right
or privilege in, over or under any street of the city. (Prior code § 76020)
12.16.150: COMPLIANCE WITH ORDINANCES NOT EXCUSED:
Nothing in this division contained shall be construed or taken to exempt, or as
a contract right exempting a permittee from complying with any ordinance now in
force, or which may hereafter be adopted. (Prior code § 76021)
12.16.160: PERMIT SUBJECT TO CITY AND PUBLIC RIGHTS:
Every permit for work in, upon, along, across, under or over a street shall be
granted subject to the right of the city, or any other person entitled thereto,
to use that part of such street for any purpose for which said street may
lawfully be used. (Prior code § 76022)
12.16.170: HOUSE CONNECTION PERMIT; EXPIRATION:
Every permit for making a house connection to a sewer or for making repairs to
the same, shall terminate within fifteen (15) days after the date of issuance.
(Prior code § 76023)
12.16.180: SEWER CONNECTION EXCAVATION; TIME FOR FILLING:
Any excavation made for the purpose of making a house connection to a sewer
shall be refilled in the manner required by this division within three (3) days
after the date of commencing such work, and within one day after final
inspection of the pipe, if any, by the engineer; and nothing in this division
contained shall be construed to allow a longer period of time therefor. (Prior
code § 76024)
12.16.190: FAILURE TO FINISH WORK; COMPLETION BY ENGINEER:
If any person shall fail, refuse or neglect to complete the making of any house
connection to a sewer, or to refill any excavation therefor within the time
required by this chapter, the engineer shall complete the refilling of such
excavation in the manner required by this division; and the engineer shall
charge and retain the cost of such refilling from the deposit made at the time
of securing the permit therefor. (Prior code § 76025)
12.16.200: FAILURE TO RESTORE DAMAGE:
   A.   Failure to promptly repair streets or rights of way which have been
excavated for purposes related to building construction or damaged by
construction related equipment or processes shall cause the director of
building and safety, after notification by the city engineer, to withhold
further building inspections and it shall be unlawful for the construction work
to continue beyond the point where the next inspection is required by section
304 of the current edition of the uniform building code. The required building
inspections can be resumed at such time as the city engineer notifies the
director of building and safety that the repairs to the street have commenced
or resumed. Failure to diligently then pursue the repair work to its acceptance
by the city engineer (cessation of work for 2 days or more) shall cause the
director of building and safety to withhold further building inspections until
the repair work has been completed and accepted by the city engineer.
   B.   Seven (7) calendar days prior to notifying the director of building and
safety to withhold further inspections, the city engineer shall give written
notice to the building permit holder of record, delivered either in person or
by registered or certified mail, advising the permit holder of record that
further building inspections by the department of building and safety will be
withheld on his project if the repair of streets or rights of way (which have
been excavated for the purpose of building construction or damaged by
construction related equipment) is not commenced within seven (7) calendar days
after the date on the notice.
   C.   After notification by the city engineer to the permit holder of record
that further building inspections will be withheld, and the street work is then
commenced and the building inspections are then performed as required, but the
work is then not pursued diligently (cessation of work for 2 or more days), the
city engineer need not give the permit holder of record further notification
that further building inspection by the department of building and safety will
be withheld from his project until street repairs are completed as approved by
the city engineer.
   D.   The time limitations specified by this section are subject to
extensions upon written request and evidenced that the work could not proceed
because of inclement weather.
   E.   In addition, any performance or completion bond or bonds posted for the
completion of the street improvements do not affect the provisions of this
section. (Prior code § 76025.1)
12.16.210: WORK DELAY; PERMIT CANCELLATION:
If the work provided for in any permit is not completed within the time
prescribed herein, such permit shall be canceled and the city shall retain the
permit fee therefor. (Prior code § 76026)
12.16.220: REVOCATION; AUTHORITY:
Any permit issued under the provisions of this division may be revoked by the
engineer on approval of the city manager. (Prior code § 76027)
12.16.230: CITY PREROGATIVE WHERE WORK CONFLICTS:
At any time it may become necessary for the city to construct any sewer, water
main, pipeline or conduit, or other public work of any kind along, in, or
through the excavation constructed or maintained under authority of such
permit; and the city shall have the right to use any portion of any such sewer,
water main, pipeline, conduit or other public work or improvement. (Prior code
§ 76028)
12.16.240: REVOCATION FOR BREACH OF CONDITION:
If the permittee shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any of the
conditions of the permit issued to him, or with any of the terms or conditions
of any ordinance now in force or hereafter adopted by the city in the exercise
of its police power during the term hereof; and if such failure, neglect or
refusal shall continue for more than three (3) days after demand by the
engineer for compliance therewith, then, and in that event, the engineer, in
addition to all rights and remedies allowed by law to the city, thereupon may
revoke said permit. (Prior code § 76029)
12.16.250: LIABILITY FOR DAMAGE:
In the event that it becomes necessary for the engineer, with the approval of
the city manager, to revoke a permit in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter, the city, its officers and employees, shall not be held liable for any
damage that may accrue therefrom; and the permittee, by the acceptance of said
permit, expressly releases the city, its officers and employees as in this
section provided. (Prior code § 76030)
12.16.260: PERMIT FEE REQUIRED:
Before the engineer shall issue any permit to any person other than any
department of the city, he shall collect from the applicant a permit fee per
job as established by the city council in a resolution. (Prior code § 76031)
12.16.270: INSPECTION FEE REQUIRED:
Before the engineer shall issue any permit to any person other than any
department of the city, he shall collect from the applicant therefor inspection
fees according to a resolution by the city council. (Prior code § 76036)
12.16.280: MINIMUM FEE:
In any one job or project of construction involving one or more types of
improvements, the minimum fee, including both the permit and the inspection
fee, shall be as established by the city council in a resolution. (Prior code §
76037)
12.16.290: DEPOSIT REQUIRED:
Before the engineer shall issue any permit to any person other than any
department of the city, he shall collect from the applicant therefor a deposit,
in an amount estimated by the engineer to be equal to the cost and expense of:
   A.   Backfilling any excavation, tunnel, or bore;
   B.   Restoring street surface, excavated or otherwise damaged, to the
standard specified by the engineer;
   C.   Removing any temporary driveway or other obstruction resulting from
work done under the permit;
   D.   Repairing or replacing any street improvement damaged as a result of
the work. (Prior code § 76038)
12.16.300: EFFECT OF SPECIAL ASSESSMENT:
No charge shall be made for any property which has been specially assessed to
pay the costs and expenses of the construction of such improvement. (Prior code
§ 76039)
12.16.310: PENALTY FOR WORK BEFORE SECURING PERMIT:
In the event a person does or performs or causes the doing or performing of any
of the acts mentioned in sections
 12.16.010 through
12.16.340 of this chapter, without securing a permit therefor (except in case
of emergency as herein provided) the amount of the fee herein provided for such
work shall be increased an additional fee as established by the city council in
a resolution, and the payment of such additional amount of fee shall not excuse
or in any way interfere with the enforcement of any of the provisions hereof.
(Prior code § 76040)
12.16.320: CITY LIABILITY FOR ENGINEER'S EXPENSE:
When the engineer issues a permit to any department of the city, said
department shall be liable for and shall pay the engineer his expenses in
connection with any work he may do as the result of the issuance of said
permit, in the same amount as any person is required to pay pursuant to the
provisions hereof, except that each department shall not be required to pay any
permit fee, or make a special or general deposit. (Prior code § 76041)
12.16.330: BILLING OF DEPARTMENTS:
Monthly, the city manager shall send a bill to any or all of the departments of
the city securing permits from the engineer pursuant to the provisions herein
during the preceding calendar month for all work done, materials furnished,
reasonable rental value of equipment used, and incidental expenses of the city
in connection with said permits. (Prior code § 76042)
12.16.340: ACCOUNTING:
After such bill has been approved, audited and allowed, the general fund of the
city shall be credited with the amount thereof. (Prior code § 76043)
12.16.350: GENERAL DEPOSIT; MAINTENANCE:
Any person intending to do any work in, on, over or under any street, may make
and maintain with the engineer a general deposit which shall be used for the
same purpose or purposes as the charges required in sections
12.16.010 through
12.16.340 of this chapter. (Prior code § 76100)
12.16.360: GENERAL DEPOSIT; AMOUNT:
A general deposit may be made as established by the city council in a
resolution. (Prior code § 76101)
12.16.370: BOND IN LIEU OF DEPOSIT:
In lieu of making said general deposit, such person may file with the engineer
a bond payable to the city of Redlands, executed by such person and by a surety
company, conditioned that if such person fails to pay the bill for the
reasonable cost and expense of the work done and performed by the engineer
pursuant to the provisions of this division, then the surety will pay the same
to the amount of such bond. (Prior code § 76105)
12.16.380: BOND; APPROVAL:
Such bond and the surety thereon must receive the approval of the city manager
or city attorney of the city before the same shall be accepted by the engineer.
(Prior code § 76106)
12.16.390: BOND; AMOUNT:
The amount of said bond shall be determined on the basis used for determining
the amount of a general deposit. (Prior code § 76107)
12.16.400: BOND; RENEWAL AND MAINTENANCE:
Immediately upon the reduction of the obligation of such surety by payments
made thereon, such bond shall be renewed and at all times maintained in the
full amount herein required. (Prior code § 76108)
12.16.410: INSUFFICIENT BOND; ENGINEER ACTION:
In the event that the estimated amount of any charges, special or general
deposit shall prove to be insufficient, the engineer must cause the work done
pursuant to the provisions of said permit to be stopped until such additional
sum is deposited as will equal the estimated cost and expense. (Prior code §
76109)
12.16.420: REFUND OF UNNECESSARY PERMIT FEE OR SPECIAL DEPOSIT:
Where any permit fee or special deposit has been paid more than once, or
illegally, erroneously or wrongfully paid or collected, ninety percent (90%) of
such permit fee and one hundred percent (100%) of such special deposit may be
refunded by the city where a claim therefor, made on a form furnished by the
city accountant, duly verified by the person paying such fee or special
deposit, his attorney, duly authorized agent or guardian, or his executor or
administrator, shall have been filed with the city accountant within thirty
(30) days after the expiration of said permit, setting forth the name and
address of the claimant, the amount and date of the payment sought to be
refunded, and the reason or ground upon which the claim for refund is based,
and said claim has been approved by the engineer. (Prior code § 76200)
12.16.430: PERMIT FEE FORFEITURE FOR FAILURE TO WORK:
Where any permit fee or special deposit has been paid and no work has been done
under the permit issued therefor, no refund shall be made of such permit fee;
but one hundred percent (100%) of such special deposit may be refunded by the
city in the manner set forth in section
12.16.420 of this chapter. (Prior code § 76201)
12.16.440: REFUND OF GENERAL DEPOSIT:
A general deposit, or the balance of a general deposit, may be refunded to the
person making such deposit, his attorney, duly authorized agent or guardian, or
his executor or administrator, at any time after fifteen (15) days after all
sums due and owing the city have been paid or deducted from said general
deposit, and after all permits issued to the person making such deposit have
expired, and all work authorized by any permit issued to said person has been
completed and accepted by the engineer, when a claim therefor, duly verified by
the person making such general deposit, his attorney, city authorized agent or
guardian, his executor or administrator shall have been filed with the city,
setting forth the name and address of the claimant, the amount and date of the
payment of said general deposit, and when said claim has been approved by the
engineer. (Prior code § 76202)
12.16.450: EXONERATION OF BOND:
The surety on a bond filed in lieu of a general deposit may be released from
liability thereon at any time after fifteen (15) days after all sums due and
owing the city have been paid, and after all permits issued to the person
filing such bond have expired, and all work authorized by any permit issued to
said person has been completed and accepted by the engineer, when an
application for release from such liability, duly verified by the principal and
the surety, shall have been filed with the engineer setting forth the name and
address of the surety, and the date, number, and amount of said bond. (Prior
code § 76203)
12.16.460: FORM OF EXONERATION:
The release of the surety from liability shall be effected by an order signed
by the engineer and approved by the city attorney and the city manager, which
order shall be filed by the engineer with the bond thereby released. (Prior
code § 76204)
12.16.470: INDEMNIFICATION OF CITY:
The permittee of any permit issued hereunder shall indemnify, save and hold
harmless, against and from all damages, judgments, decrees, costs and
expenditures which the city, or such officer or employee, may suffer, or which
may be recovered from, or obtainable against the city, or growing out of or
resulting from the exercising by the permittee of any or all of the rights or
privileges authorized by said permit, or by reason of any act or acts of the
permittee or its servants or agents, in exercising such authorization. (Prior
code § 76300)
12.16.480: PERMITTEE RIGHT TO DEFEND CITY:
Such permittee shall have the right, at its option, to defend any suit that may
be instituted against the city, or any officer or employee thereof, by reason
of or growing out of or resulting from the exercise by the grantee of any or
all of the rights or privileges authorized by said permit, or by reason of any
act or acts of the permittee, or its servants or agents, in exercising said
authorization. (Prior code § 76301)
12.16.490: NOTICE OF DAMAGE:
In the event the city, or any officer or employee thereof, suffers any damage,
or any person makes claims against the city, or any officer or employee
thereof, by reason of or growing out of or resulting from the exercise by the
permittee of any or all of the rights or privileges authorized by said permit,
or by reason of any act or acts of the permittee, or its servants or agents in
exercising said authorization, the city, or such officers or employees thereof,
must give written notice thereof to the permittee as soon as practicable, but
not less than five (5) days thereafter. (Prior code § 76302)
12.16.500: NOTICE; COMPUTATION OF TIME:
In estimating the five (5) days mentioned in section
12.16.490 of this chapter, the first day shall be excluded and the last day
included. (Prior code § 76303)
12.16.510: NOTICE; FAILURE NOT TO AFFECT PERMITTEE LIABILITY:
Failure to give such notice shall not affect the liability of the permittee
under section
12.16.470 of this chapter. (Prior code § 76304)
CHAPTER 12.20
STREET CONSTRUCTION AND CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS
SECTION:
12.20.010: Definitions
12.20.020: Conformance With Plans And City Specifications
12.20.030: Moratorium Areas; No Permit Shall Be Issued
12.20.040: Permit To Be Kept At Work Site
12.20.050: Duration And Validity
12.20.060: Director; Supervision And Inspection
12.20.070: Director; Notice Of Commencement Of Work
12.20.080: Director; Authority To Permit Continuance
12.20.090: Liability And Indemnification
12.20.100: Workmanship And Performance Warranty Fee
12.20.110: Additional Fees For Excavation
12.20.120: Underground Service Alert
12.20.130: Barricades And Warning Signs Required
12.20.140: Limits Upon Excavation In The Public Right Of Way
12.20.150: Stop Work Order, Permit Modification And Permit Revocation
12.20.160: Restoration Of The Public Right Of Way
12.20.170: Repair By The Department
12.20.180: Emergency Repair By The Department
12.20.010: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever the following terms are used in this chapter, they shall have the
meanings established by this section:
   APPLICANT: Any owner or duly authorized agent of such owner, who has
submitted an application for a permit to excavate.
   CITY: The city of Redlands.
   DEPARTMENT: The municipal utilities and engineering department.
   DEPOSIT: Any bond, cash deposit, or other security provided by the
applicant.
   DIRECTOR: The director of the municipal utilities and engineering department
or his/her designee, including the construction inspector.
   EXCAVATION: Any opening in the surface or subsurface of the public right of
way.
   FACILITY OR FACILITIES: Any and all cables, cabinets, ducts, conduits,
converters, equipment, drains, handholds, manholes, pipes, pipelines, splice
boxes, surface location markers, tunnels, utilities, vaults, and other
appurtenances or tangible things owned, leased, operated, or licensed by an
owner or person, that are located or are proposed to be located in the public
right of way.
   OWNER: Any person, including any agency, department, or subdivision of the
city, who owns any facility or facilities that are or are proposed to be
installed or maintained in the public right of way.
   PERMIT OR PERMIT TO EXCAVATE: A permit to perform an excavation as it has
been approved or may be amended or renewed by the department.
   PERMITTEE: The applicant to whom a permit to excavate has been granted by
the department in accordance with this chapter.
   PERSON: Any natural person, corporation, partnership, or any governmental
agency, including agency, department, or subdivision of the city, the state of
California, or United States Of America.
   PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY: The area across, along, beneath, in, on, over, under,
upon and within the dedicated public alleys, boulevards, courts, lanes, places,
roads, sidewalks, streets, and ways within the city, as they now exist or
hereafter will exist and which are or will be under the permitting jurisdiction
of the department.
   PUBLIC UTILITY FRANCHISE: Granted by the city of Redlands or the state of
California is a contract granting special privileges to use the public right of
way. It is not intended that this chapter impose additional rules or
regulations which are inconsistent with the rights or obligations under the
franchise or confer authority to the city that conflicts with the state's
Public Utilities Code or the jurisdiction of the California public utilities
commission.
   UTILITY: Any franchise owner whose facility or facilities in the public
right of way are used to provide gas, electricity, steam, water, sewer service,
telecommunications, video, or other services to customers regardless of whether
such owner is deemed a public utility by the California public utilities
commission. (Ord. 2782, 2012)
12.20.020: CONFORMANCE WITH PLANS AND CITY SPECIFICATIONS:
Any permittee, before commencing any work in the streets or public rights of
way of the city pursuant to any permit issued in accordance with the provisions
of this title shall obtain a copy of, and comply with at all times while
performing such work, the city's general permit conditions and trench
specifications as adopted by resolution of the city council. Further, if
required by said permit, shall secure the plans approved by the director
showing the lines and grades for performing said work, and shall conform to the
same. (Ord. 2782, 2012)
12.20.030: MORATORIUM AREAS; NO PERMIT SHALL BE ISSUED:
Permission to excavate in newly renovated streets will not be granted for five
(5) years after completion of street renovation as determined by the city.
Utilities shall determine alternate methods of making necessary repairs to
avoid excavating in newly constructed, paved or renovated streets. Exceptions
to the above as mutually agreed upon by the utilities and the director are as
follows:
   A.   An emergency which endangers life or property;
   B.   Interruption of essential utility service;
   C.   Work that is mandated by city, state or federal legislation;
   D.   Service for buildings where no other reasonable means of providing
service exists;
   E.   Other situations deemed by the city council to be in the best interest
of the general public.
All permits which are issued under subsections A through E of this section
shall be in accordance with the standards, details and specifications
established by and on file in the office of the director. (Ord. 2782, 2012)
12.20.040: PERMIT TO BE KEPT AT WORK SITE:
The permittee shall keep the permit at the site of the work at all times while
any work is in progress, by retaining the same on his person or delivering it
to the project superintendent or person in charge of the actual doing or
performing of the work authorized by said permit. (Ord. 2397 § 3, 1999)
12.20.050: DURATION AND VALIDITY:
   A.   Permits shall be void if construction has not begun within thirty (30)
days of the start date specified in the permit or if excavation, including
restoration, has not been completed within the specified duration; provided,
however, that the director, in his or her discretion, may issue one 30-day
extension to the start date and extensions as may be deemed appropriate to the
duration of excavation upon written request from the permittee.
   B.   After any work in connection with any excavation, obstruction, facility
or equipment, or street betterment is commenced, by the holder of any permit as
herein provided, the work of accomplishing the purpose thereof shall be
diligently carried on and completed by him in a manner that shall not obstruct
the street or any travel thereon more than is absolutely necessary. (Ord. 2397
§ 3, 1999)
12.20.060: DIRECTOR; SUPERVISION AND INSPECTION:
All work done in the streets shall be done under the direction and to the
reasonable satisfaction of the director or his/her designee. From time to time,
or at such time as the director deems necessary, as the work progresses, all
work done or performed pursuant to any permit issued by the director shall be
inspected. (Ord. 2397 § 3, 1999)
12.20.070: DIRECTOR; NOTICE OF COMMENCEMENT OF WORK:
Any permittee of any permit issued hereunder (excepting any department of the
city) shall notify the public works department twenty four (24) hours in
advance of starting or commencing any work to be done or performed thereunder,
and before refilling any excavation, tunnel or bore, in order that the director
may procure and assign an inspector to inspect the same. (Ord. 2397 § 3, 1999)
12.20.080: DIRECTOR; AUTHORITY TO PERMIT CONTINUANCE:
No work shall be done, or any excavation, tunnel or bore refilled until such
notice shall be given and authority is given therefor by the director. (Ord.
2397 § 3, 1999)
12.20.090: LIABILITY AND INDEMNIFICATION:
   A.   Liability Upon Permittee: Each owner and permittee is wholly
responsible for the quality of the work performed in the public right of way
and both the owner and permittee are jointly and severally liable for all
consequences of any condition of such work and any facilities installed in the
public right of way. Neither the issuance of any permit, inspection, repair,
nor suggestion, approval, or acquiescence of any person affiliated by the city
shall excuse any owner and/or permittee from such responsibility or liability.
   B.   Indemnification, Defense And Hold Harmless: Each owner and permittee
shall indemnify, defend and hold harmless the city of Redlands and its
officers, agents and employees, as well as their associated and affiliated
companies and their respective officers, agents and employees from any and all
suits, actions, losses, claims and liabilities of every kind, nature and
description, including, but not limited to, attorney fees and any injury or
death to any person(s) or damage to any property(ies) arising out of or in
connection with the work performed by it or on its behalf under a permit to
excavate. Upon the request of the city, the owner and/or permittee, at no cost
or expense to the city, shall defend any suit, action or legal proceeding
asserting a claim for losses or liabilities, to the extent that any such suit,
action or legal proceeding claims a loss covered by the terms of this
indemnification agreement. (Ord. 2397 § 3, 1999)
12.20.100: WORKMANSHIP AND PERFORMANCE WARRANTY FEE:
   A.   For all work requiring a permit by the terms of this chapter, the
person making application for permit shall provide, prior to the issuance of
said permit, security as required by the director which shall include, at a
minimum, a warranty bond. The warranty shall run ten (10) years from the
completion and final acceptance of the construction and/or repair work by the
director. The release of said security shall be governed by the California
Civil Code. Utility excavators shall post the security required by the director
or in conformance with a franchise agreement between the city and the utility.
   B.   All permits issued under the requirements of this chapter will include
the payment of a nonrefundable workmanship and performance warranty fee to the
city. This workmanship and performance warranty fee shall be imposed as
follows:
      1.   Where the workmanship and performance of the permittee is limited to
the statutory one year period; cuts are allowed by payment of a workmanship and
performance warranty fee as established by resolution.
      2.   Where the permittee commits to a ten (10) year workmanship and
performance warranty agreement with the city; cuts are allowed by payment of a
limited workmanship and performance warranty fee as established by resolution.
      3.   Utilities that are a part of the city of Redlands and utilities
operating under a franchise granted by the city that clearly indicates an
explicit obligation to repair (warranty) any restoration defects are exempt
from payment of the workmanship and performance warranty fee. Utilities
operating under a franchise that does not have explicit obligation to warranty
and repair may enter into an agreement with the city that provides a warranty
and security satisfactory to the city and thereby, during the term of the
agreement, be exempt from payment of the warranty fee. The agreement must
comply with the warranty and security requirements of this chapter.
      4.   Where permission to excavate in newly renovated streets has been
granted, excepting therefrom those items provided in section
12.20.030 of this chapter, payment of the workmanship and performance warranty
fee shall be required under subsections B1 through B2 of this section
regardless of franchise status.
   C.   In all cases where cuts are allowed, the permittee is required to
restore the trench and street section to city standards and specifications. All
warranties shall include adequate security for the warranty period. All
pavement warranty fees received under the requirements of this section shall be
expended solely for the purpose of maintaining the workmanship and performance
of city streets. (Ord. 2397 § 3, 1999)
12.20.110: ADDITIONAL FEES FOR EXCAVATION:
In instances where administration of this chapter or inspection of an
excavation is or will be unusually costly to the department, the director may
require an applicant to pay an additional sum in excess of any amount charged
elsewhere in this chapter. The additional sum shall be sufficient to recover
actual costs incurred by the department and shall be charged on a time and
materials basis. Whenever additional fees are charged, the director shall
provide the applicant with an estimate of the additional fees. (Ord. 2397 § 3,
1999)
12.20.120: UNDERGROUND SERVICE ALERT:
Any person excavating in the public right of way shall comply with the
requirements of the underground service alert regarding notification of
excavation and marking of subsurface facilities. (Ord. 2397 § 3, 1999)
12.20.130: BARRICADES AND WARNING SIGNS REQUIRED:
Every person making an excavation in any street, or causing the same to be
made, or constructing, leaving, placing or maintaining an obstruction in any
street, or causing the same to be constructed, left, placed or maintained shall
place and maintain appropriate traffic control devices, including, but not
limited to, barricades, cones, delineators and construction zone signs in
accordance with the state of California "Manual Of Traffic Controls For
Construction And Maintenance Work Zones". Such traffic control shall be in
place prior to the commencement of work and shall be maintained in good
condition until all work is completed and the streets are clear of any and all
obstructions. (Ord. 2397 § 3, 1999)
12.20.140: LIMITS UPON EXCAVATION IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY:
   A.   Scope: It is unlawful for any permittee to make, to cause, or permit to
be made, any excavation in the public right of way outside the boundaries,
times and description set forth in the permit.
   B.   Rock Wheel: Use of a rock wheel to excavate in the public right of way
is unlawful without the prior written approval of the director.
   C.   Trenchless Technology: Use of trenchless technology in the public right
of way is unlawful without the prior written approval of the director.
   D.   Lane Closures In Excess Of Six Hundred Feet Prohibited: No lane
closures in excess of six hundred feet (600') will be allowed, except in cases
of an emergency or by consent of the director.
   E.   Cross Street Access: A minimum of one lane of travel in each direction
shall be maintained on all arterial streets crossing the excavation. One lane
of travel may be allowed for local and minor streets, provided appropriate
flagging procedures are used. Closing cross streets to traffic is unlawful
without the prior written approval of the director.
   F.   Local Access To Businesses And Residents: Access to local businesses
must be maintained at all times. Access to local residences may be restricted
upon approval of the director. Residents must be provided a minimum of forty
eight (48) hours' notice by the permittee that access will be restricted. Such
restriction shall only be allowed on weekdays between the hours of nine o'clock
(9:00) A.M. and four o'clock (4:00) P.M. (Ord. 2397 § 3, 1999)
12.20.150: STOP WORK ORDER, PERMIT MODIFICATION AND PERMIT REVOCATION:
When the director has determined a person has violated this chapter, any
condition of the permit, that an excavation poses a hazardous situation or
constitutes a public nuisance, public emergency, or other threat to the public
health, safety or welfare, or when the director determines there is a paramount
public purpose, the director is authorized to issue a stop work order, to
impose new conditions upon a permit, or to suspend or revoke a permit by
notifying the permittee of such action in writing. (Ord. 2397 § 3, 1999)
12.20.160: RESTORATION OF THE PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY:
   A.   Like New Restoration: In any case in which the street, sidewalk or
other public right of way is or is caused to be excavated, the owner and
permittee shall restore or cause to be restored such excavation to like new
condition in the manner prescribed by the standard plans and specifications,
the design manual, orders, regulations and rules of the city of Redlands. As a
minimum, trench restoration shall include resurfacing to a constant width equal
to the widest part of the trench excavation.
   B.   Modification To Requirements: Upon written request from the permittee,
the director, in his or her discretion, may approve in writing modifications to
the requirements of this chapter.
   C.   Incomplete Work And Completion By The Department: In any case where an
excavation is not completed or restored in the time and manner specified in the
permit, this chapter, the standard plans and specifications, the design manual,
or the orders, regulations and rules of the department, the director shall
order the owner or permittee to complete the work as directed within twenty
four (24) hours. If the owner or permittee should fail, neglect or refuse to
comply with the order, the director may complete or cause to be completed such
work in such manner as the director deems expedient and appropriate. The owner
or permittee shall compensate the department for any costs associated with the
administration, construction, consultants, equipment, inspection,
notifications, remediation, repair, restoration, or any other actual costs
incurred by the department or other departments or agencies of the city made
necessary by said work. (Ord. 2397 § 3, 1999)
12.20.170: REPAIR BY THE DEPARTMENT:
   A.   In the event any person(s) fails, neglects, or refuses to repair or
restore any condition pursuant to the director's notice as set forth in this
chapter, the director shall repair or restore, or cause to be repaired or
restored, such condition in such a manner as the director deems expedient and
appropriate. The person(s) identified by the director as the responsible party
shall compensate the department or any costs associated with the
administration, construction, consultants, equipment, inspection, notification,
remediation, repair, restoration, or any other actual costs incurred by the
department or other departments or agencies of the city made necessary by
reason of the repair or restoration undertaken by the department.
   B.   Repair or restoration by the department in accordance with this chapter
shall not relieve the person(s) from any and all liability at the site of the
repair or restoration, including, but not limited to, future failures. (Ord.
2397 § 3, 1999)
12.20.180: EMERGENCY REPAIR BY THE DEPARTMENT:
   A.   If, in the judgment of the director, the site of an excavation is
considered hazardous, constitutes a public nuisance, public emergency, or other
imminent threat to the public health, safety and welfare that requires
immediate action, the director shall order the condition remedied by written,
oral, telephonic or facsimile communication to the owner, applicant or any
agent thereof and shall designate the owner or applicant as the responsible
party.
   B.   If the responsible party is inaccessible or fails, neglects or refuses
to take immediate action to remedy the condition as specified in said
communication, the director shall remedy the condition or cause the condition
to be remedied in such a manner as the director deems expedient and
appropriate. The person(s) identified by the director as the responsible party
shall compensate the department for any reasonable costs associated with the
administration, construction, consultants, equipment, inspection, notification,
remediation, repair, restoration, or any other actual costs incurred by the
department or other departments or agencies of the city made necessary by
reason of the emergency remediation undertaken by the department. (Ord. 2397 §
3, 1999)
CHAPTER 12.22
DEDICATION AND IMPROVEMENTS FOR NONSUBDIVISION DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS
SECTION:
12.22.010: Findings, Purpose And Intent
12.22.020: Definitions
12.22.030: Dedications Required
12.22.040: Public Improvements Required
12.22.050: Public Utility Relocations
12.22.055: Undergrounding Of Utilities
12.22.060: Construction Of Public Improvements
12.22.070: Deferral Of Improvement Requirements
12.22.080: Conditions Of Deferral
12.22.090: Waiver Or Modification Of Requirements
12.22.100: Criteria For Determining Whether A Street Or Street Segment Has Been
Improved To The Maximum Feasible And Desirable State
12.22.110: Duty To Deny Final Building Permit Approval
12.22.010: FINDINGS, PURPOSE AND INTENT:
   A.   The Redlands city council has found and determined that:
      1.   There is a lack of adequate curbs, gutters, water and wastewater
facilities, storm drains, streetlights, sidewalks, streets, trails and other
rights of way in various areas of the city, which is prejudicial and dangerous
to the public health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the city;
      2.   The lack of improved sidewalks in the city in many instances forces
pedestrians, including schoolchildren, to walk in the streets and to be subject
to the hazards of vehicular traffic;
      3.   The lack of improved sidewalks during rainy weather has caused
unhealthy conditions resulting from pedestrians walking through mud and water
along streets or dirt shoulders;
      4.   Streets and highways of inadequate width and design hinder vehicular
movements and may constitute a hazard to the safety and health of users;
      5.   The lack of curbs, storm drains, water and wastewater facilities and
other street improvements results in poor drainage and a collection of filth
and waste;
      6.   The lack of improved streets impedes the operation of firetrucks,
police cars and other emergency vehicles as well as the operation of street
sweepers and refuse collection vehicles; and
      7.   The lack of adequate recreational trails and pathways causes
pedestrians, bicyclists and equestrians to use other unsafe or inappropriately
designed rights of way which may constitute a hazard to the safety and health
of such users.
   B.   It is the purpose of the city in adopting the provisions of this
chapter to:
      1.   Impose reasonable requirements of dedication and improvements upon
persons engaged in the development, construction, reconstruction or remodeling
of buildings which tend to result in increased demands upon the existing public
rights of way, streets, highways and utility facilities in the city, thereby
increasing the danger to the public health, safety and welfare;
      2.   Extend the basic requirements of the state subdivision map act by
establishing standards and requirements for dedication and improvements in
connection with the development of land in which no subdivision is involved;
      3.   Alleviate the undesirable situation found to exist in subsection A
of this section by spreading the cost of public improvements upon abutting
property in an equitable manner, and by causing the installation of those
improvements required by the city to serve property about to be developed at
the time of its development.
   C.   The city intends to require, in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter, the dedication of portions of the public rights of way, including
streets, highways, alleys, trails, pathways, streetlights, water, wastewater
and storm drain facilities, and the construction of improvements contiguous to
the property from the property line to the centerline of the public rights of
way as necessitated by the nature and type of building or structure being
constructed and the use to which the property is being put.
   D.   The provisions of this chapter are intended to be additional to any
other requirement of law pertaining to the provision of public facilities and
improvements, and nothing in this chapter shall be construed to excuse
compliance with any other requirement for the provision of public facilities or
improvements. (Ord. 2578 § 1, 2004)
12.22.020: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
   ALLEY: A public or private way permanently reserved as a secondary means of
access to abutting property.
   BUILDING: Includes any building, structure or dwelling for which a building
permit is required to be issued by the city.
   DIRECTOR: The city's municipal utilities and engineering director or the
director's authorized designee.
   IMPROVEMENTS: Means and includes sidewalks, gutters, pavement, driveways,
curbs, streets, alleys, trails, storm drain facilities, water systems, sanitary
sewer systems, street lighting, fire protection installation and pavement
transitions.
   PERSON: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind. The term "person" also includes any owner, lessee or
agent constructing or arranging for the construction, modification or
alteration of a building or dwelling. (Ord. 2578 § 1, 2004; amd. Ord. 2907, 5-
5-2020)
12.22.030: DEDICATIONS REQUIRED:
   A.   Any person who constructs, or causes to be constructed, any building in
the city shall, upon the determination of the director, provide by means of an
irrevocable offer of dedication or other appropriate conveyance as approved by
the city attorney the rights of way necessary for the construction of any
street, highway, alley, trail or pathway described or identified in the city's
general plan, any applicable specific plans or as otherwise required by the
director in accord with an established city street system, plan or standard.
Rights of way shall also be provided for any improvements to existing
facilities, including rights of way for storm drains, water, wastewater or
other required public facilities. All rights of way shall be accompanied by a
title examination and be free of all liens and encumbrances.
   B.   The dedications required by subsection A of this section shall, upon
the determination of the director, also apply to any person who alters,
enlarges, expands or causes to be altered, enlarged or expanded any building in
the city.
   C.   The dedications required by this chapter shall be made prior to, and as
a condition of, issuance of the building permit for the subject property.
   D.   Prior to the issuance of the building permit for the subject property,
there shall be paid to the public works department a fee in an amount
established by city council resolution for processing the irrevocable offer of
dedication. (Ord. 2578 § 1, 2004; amd. Ord. 2907, 5-5-2020)
12.22.040: PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED:
   A.   Any person who constructs, or causes to be constructed, any building in
the city shall construct all improvements required by the city’s general plan
and any applicable specific plans, or as otherwise required by the director in
accordance with an established city street system, plan or standard, upon the
property and along all street frontages adjoining the property upon which such
building is constructed, unless adequate improvements already exist. In each
instance, the director shall determine whether or not the necessary
improvements exist and are in accordance with the general plan and such
specific plans. Each building permit application shall be so endorsed at the
time it is issued.
   B.   The improvements required by subsection A of this section shall, in the
determination of the director, also apply to any person who alters, enlarges or
expands, or causes to be altered, enlarged or expanded, any building in the
city, if such work exceeds seven hundred fifty (750) square feet. (Ord. 2578 §
1, 2004; amd. Ord. 2907, 5-5-2020)
12.22.050: PUBLIC UTILITY RELOCATIONS:
In the event the director determines that the contemplated construction of
improvements, as required by this chapter in individual cases, will necessitate
the relocation or alteration of public utility facilities, including, but not
limited to, gas, electricity, telephone, cable television, water and wastewater
the director may require the person requesting the building permit to produce
satisfactory evidence that such person has made arrangements with such public
utility company for the relocation or modification of such public utility
facilities. (Ord. 2578 § 1, 2004)
12.22.055: UNDERGROUNDING OF UTILITIES:
In the event the director determines that the contemplated construction of
improvements, as required by this chapter in individual cases, will necessitate
the relocation or alteration of public utility facilities, including, but not
limited to, gas, electricity, telephone, cable television, water and wastewater
the director may require the person requesting the building permit to produce
satisfactory evidence that such person has made arrangements with such public
utility company for the relocation or modification of such public utility
facilities. (Ord. 2578 § 1, 2004)
12.22.060: CONSTRUCTION OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS:
If the director determines that public improvements are required, these public
improvements shall be designed to city standards and their construction
guaranteed by an improvement agreement secured by a bond or cash deposit, prior
to issuance of a building permit for the subject property. If the building
permit is not exercised, the improvement obligation shall terminate and the
security shall be returned. (Ord. 2578 § 1, 2004)
12.22.070: DEFERRAL OF IMPROVEMENT REQUIREMENTS:
Upon written application, the director, by written order, may recommend to the
city council the deferral of any of the improvements required by this chapter
if the director finds that the public health, safety and welfare of the
inhabitants of the city will not be endangered by the deferment of the
construction of the improvements, and that any one of the following exists:
   A.   There is a lack of adequate data in regard to the grades, plans or
surveys which complicates the construction of the improvements and indicates
they should be deferred to a later time;
   B.   The construction of the improvements is included in an approved or
pending assessment district or otherwise guaranteed as provided by city
ordinance;
   C.   Construction of the improvements would be incompatible with the present
state of the neighborhood's development, or be impractical or premature because
of the condition of the surrounding property; or
   D.   Construction of the improvements would create a hazardous or defective
condition. (Ord. 2578 § 1, 2004)
12.22.080: CONDITIONS OF DEFERRAL:
Any deferral of improvements pursuant to this chapter shall be conditioned on
the filing with the director of a future improvement secured by one of the
following at the sole discretion of the public works director:
   A.   A bond or bonds by one or more duly authorized corporate sureties in a
form approved by the city attorney;
   B.   A deposit, either with the city or with a responsible escrow agent or
trust company selected by the city, of cash or negotiable instruments of the
kind approved for securing deposits of public money;
   C.   An irrevocable letter of credit from one or more responsible financial
institutions regulated by the federal or state government, pledging that the
funds are guaranteed for payment on demand by the city, in a form approved by
the city attorney and from a financial institution approved by the city
manager. (Ord. 2578 § 1, 2004)
12.22.090: WAIVER OR MODIFICATION OF REQUIREMENTS:
Upon written application made before issuance of the building permit,
accompanied by a fee in an amount established by city council resolution, the
city council may, after a public hearing noticed in the same manner as is
required for public hearings on application for variances from the requirements
of zoning, waive or modify any of the requirements of this chapter if, based
upon substantial evidence, the city council finds that the conditions of
subsections A and B of this section, or of subsection C of this section, are
met as follows:
   A.   The street fronting on the subject property has already been improved
to the maximum feasible and desirable state, recognizing there are some such
streets which may have less than standard improvements when necessary to
preserve the character of the neighborhood, and to avoid unreasonable
interference with existing conditions such as mature trees, walls, yards and
open space; and
   B.   The granting of the waiver or modification will not perpetuate a
hazardous or defective condition, be otherwise detrimental to the health,
safety or welfare of the residents of the city, or relieve a property owner of
the obligations or requirements that have been imposed on other property or
property owners on the same street; or
   C.   The requirement:
      1.   Is for a purpose not reasonably related to the use of the property,
or
      2.   Deprives the property of privileges enjoyed by other property in the
vicinity and under identified zoning classification, or
      3.   Imposes requirements that are not roughly proportional to
requirements that have been imposed or could be imposed upon other property in
the vicinity through land use regulation or any special assessment proceeding,
or
      4.   Imposes a requirement that is not roughly proportional to the
benefit to the property or to the burden resulting from use of the property.
(Ord. 2578 § 1, 2004)
12.22.100: CRITERIA FOR DETERMINING WHETHER A STREET OR STREET SEGMENT HAS BEEN
IMPROVED TO THE MAXIMUM FEASIBLE AND DESIRABLE STATE:
   A.   When considering an application for waiver or modification of
requirements under this chapter the city council may determine that a street or
street segment has been improved to the maximum feasible and desirable state,
despite the lack of curbs, gutters, sidewalks, width as specified in the
general plan, or other features if the following criteria are met:
      1.   The street is designated as a local street by the general plan;
      2.   A petition requesting maintenance of the street or street segment
without full improvements and consenting to the waiver or modification of the
requirements for full improvements executed by the owners, as shown on the
latest assessment roll, of not less than seventy five percent (75%) of the
parcels having frontage on, or taking access from, the street or street segment
to which the request applies has been submitted to the director;
      3.   The traffic and parking commission has considered the petition and
has determined that installation of curbs, gutters or sidewalks is not
necessary to implement the "safe routes to schools" program.
   B.   The minimum street segment for which a petition may be submitted is the
length between two (2) cross streets, or between a cross street and a cul-de-
sac or other terminus. (Ord. 2578 § 1, 2004)
12.22.110: DUTY TO DENY FINAL BUILDING PERMIT APPROVAL:
The city's building official shall deny final approval and acceptance of a
building permit, and shall refuse to allow final public utility connections and
occupancy in any building, structure or dwelling, unless the director
determines that all required dedications have been made and that all necessary
improvements exist, are constructed, or unless the director, pursuant to this
chapter, has determined to defer the installation of such improvements, and the
required future improvement agreement and a lien agreement have been received
and recorded, or unless the requirements of this chapter have been modified or
waived pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 2578 § 1, 2004)
CHAPTER 12.28
STRUCTURES ABOVE OR BELOW STREETS
SECTION:
12.28.010: Notice Of Abandonment Of Facility
12.28.020: Removal Of Facility And Equipment
12.28.030: Commencement Of Work; Assessment Of Costs
12.28.040: Change Of Location Or Equipment
12.28.050: Rights Reserved To City As To Improvements
12.28.060: Removal Of Facility Or Equipment Conflicting With Improvements
12.28.070: Time Extension
12.28.080: Failure To Comply; Work Done By City
12.28.090: Billing
12.28.100: Determination Of Cost
12.28.110: Collection
12.28.010: NOTICE OF ABANDONMENT OF FACILITY:
Upon abandonment of any facility or equipment located above or below the
surface of the street, the owner thereof shall notify the engineer in writing
of such abandonment within not less than twenty (20) days thereafter. (Prior
code § 77200)
12.28.020: REMOVAL OF FACILITY AND EQUIPMENT:
If, in the opinion of the engineer, said facility or equipment so abandoned
should be removed the owner shall commence the removal of the same at the
owner's own cost and expense within twenty (20) days after receipt of notice to
that effect from the engineer. (Prior code § 77201)
12.28.030: COMMENCEMENT OF WORK; ASSESSMENT OF COSTS:
If, in the opinion of the engineer, any work should be done in the streets for
the purpose of ensuring the restoration of improved surface of said street to a
useful, safe, durable or good condition as the result of such abandonment, the
city shall commence such work after twenty (20) days' written notice to the
owner to that effect from the engineer; and when the work is completed the city
shall send a bill to the owner for the total cost and expense thereof, which
shall be collected in any manner authorized by law. (Prior code § 77202)
12.28.040: CHANGE OF LOCATION OR EQUIPMENT:
In the event that (during the period of time any facility or equipment is
located in, upon, along, across, under or over any street) the city shall
change the grade, width or location of any street, or improve any street in any
manner, including laying of any sewer, storm drain, conduit, water or other
pipe, or construct any pedestrian tunnel or other improvement, and, in the
opinion of the engineer such work shall render necessary any change in the
position or location of any facility or equipment in the street including the
support thereof while such work is being done or performed, or the
disconnecting or reconnecting thereof, the owner shall begin the work of doing
any and all things to effect such change in position or location in conformity
with such written instructions at his own cost and expense, within twenty (20)
days after written notice from the engineer and request to do so. (Prior code §
772023)
12.28.050: RIGHTS RESERVED TO CITY AS TO IMPROVEMENTS:
The city reserves the right for itself to lay, construct, erect, install, use,
operate or maintain any type or description of improvements, below surface or
above surface, in, upon, along, across, under or over the streets of the city.
(Prior code § 77204)
12.28.060: REMOVAL OF FACILITY OR EQUIPMENT CONFLICTING WITH IMPROVEMENTS:
If the necessary location for such improvements conflicts with any facilities
or equipment laid, constructed, erected, used, installed, operated or
maintained or not, the owner, at his own cost and expense, within twenty (20)
days after written notice from the city manager and request to do so, shall
begin the work of changing the location of all facilities or equipment so
conflicting with such improvements to a location in, upon, across, under or
over the street, to be approved by the engineer. (Prior code § 77205)
12.28.070: TIME EXTENSION:
The city engineer may grant in writing an extension of the time specified in
this chapter for the commencement of work if in his opinion such extension of
time is necessary. (Prior code § 77206)
12.28.080: FAILURE TO COMPLY; WORK DONE BY CITY:
In the event any permittee, or owner of any facility or equipment shall fail to
commence work in compliance with the written instructions of the engineer or
city manager, provided for in this division, within twenty (20) days after
service of the same upon the permittee or owner or his local agent or manager
or within a shorter time where the same is specifically provided for in this
division (unless unable to comply with such instructions by reason of strikes,
riots, act of God or acts of public enemies) the engineer shall cause the work
required in said notice to be done and performed. (Prior code § 77207)
12.28.090: BILLING:
When the work is completed the city accountant shall send a bill for the cost
and expense thereof to the permittee, owner or his local agent or manager.
(Prior code § 77208)
12.28.100: DETERMINATION OF COST:
The cost of doing the work shall be considered the actual cost plus a
reasonable charge for overhead. (Prior code § 77209)
12.28.110: COLLECTION:
The bill shall be collected in any manner authorized by law. (Prior code §
77210)
DIVISION II. HOUSE NUMBERING
CHAPTER 12.32
NUMBERING OF DWELLINGS
SECTION:
12.32.010: New Dwelling Defined
12.32.020: Purpose
12.32.030: Posting Of Address Required
12.32.040: Design Standards
12.32.050: Dwellings Occupied Prior To Curb Construction
12.32.010: NEW DWELLING DEFINED:
For the purpose of this chapter, "a new dwelling" is a dwelling structure
housing one or more dwelling units identified by one street address which was
authorized by a building permit dated after the effective date of the ordinance
codified in this chapter. (Prior code § 46000)
12.32.020: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the safety and welfare of the
community by providing a standardized location for the addresses of new
dwellings which will facilitate the rapid identification of a property by
emergency vehicles in emergency situations. Such standardized locations also
minimizes traffic hazards and offers convenience for those motorists who are
seeking an address from a moving vehicle in traffic. (Prior code § 46001)
12.32.030: POSTING OF ADDRESS REQUIRED:
Prior to the approval of the final inspection of a new dwelling, the address
number, as determined by the city, shall be placed on the premises of the
dwelling in a location which is readily visible from the street. In addition,
the dwelling address number shall also be placed on the face of the property,
provided that said curb is at least six inches (6") in height. If a driveway
exists in front of said property, the number shall be located on the curb
commencing within six inches (6") of the driveway approach. (Prior code §
46002)
12.32.040: DESIGN STANDARDS:
The numbers shall be painted on the curb as specified by the standards titled
"Standard Design For House Numbers On Curbs"; copies of which are on file in
the offices of Redlands city clerk, the Redlands department of public works,
and Redlands department of building and safety. Such numbers shall be painted
with a white background which extends one-half inch (1/2") above and below the
numbers and two inches (2") on each side of the numbers. The numbers shall be
of black paint and each number shall be uniformly four inches (4") in height.
All paint shall be of the type as specified by its manufacturer for exterior
use on concrete surfaces. All painting operations shall be done neatly with the
use of stencils and the paint shall be applied to a thickness consistent with
uniformity and durability. (Prior code § 46003)
12.32.050: DWELLINGS OCCUPIED PRIOR TO CURB CONSTRUCTION:
If a dwelling has been completed and ready for occupancy prior to the
construction or completion of the curb in front of the dwelling, said curb will
not be deemed complete or acceptable to the city until the dwelling address
numbers have been placed on the curb as defined by this chapter. (Prior code §
46004)
DIVISION III. UNDERGROUNDING
CHAPTER 12.36
UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICTS
SECTION:
12.36.010: Definitions Generally
12.36.020: Commission Defined
12.36.030: Person Defined
12.36.040: Poles, Overhead Wires And Associated Overhead Structures Defined
12.36.050: Underground Utility District Or District Defined
12.36.060: Utility Defined
12.36.070: Public Hearing
12.36.080: Initiation Of Proceedings By Petition
12.36.090: Report By Director Of Public Works
12.36.100: Designation
12.36.110: Unlawful Acts
12.36.120: Emergency Or Unusual Circumstances
12.36.130: Exceptions
12.36.140: Notice To Property Owners And Utility Companies
12.36.150: Utility Company Responsibility
12.36.160: Property Owner Responsibility
12.36.170: Responsibility Of City
12.36.180: Time Extension
12.36.190: Violation; Penalty
12.36.010: DEFINITIONS GENERALLY:
Whenever in this chapter the words or phrases defined in sections
12.36.020 through
12.36.060 of this chapter are used, they shall have the respective meanings
assigned to them in the definitions set out in those sections. (Prior code §
93000)
12.36.020: COMMISSION DEFINED:
"Commission" means the public utilities commission of the state of California.
(Prior code § 93001)
12.36.030: PERSON DEFINED:
"Person" means and includes individuals, firms, corporations, partnerships, and
their agents and employees. (Prior code § 93003)
12.36.040: POLES, OVERHEAD WIRES AND ASSOCIATED OVERHEAD STRUCTURES DEFINED:
"Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures" means poles, towers,
supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms, crossarms, braces,
transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches, communication circuits,
appliances, attachments, and appurtenances located aboveground within a
district and used or useful in supplying electric, communication or similar or
associated service. (Prior code § 93004)
12.36.050: UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICT OR DISTRICT DEFINED:
"Underground utility district" or "district" means that area in the city within
which poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures are prohibited
as such area is described in a resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of
section
12.36.100 of this chapter. (Prior code § 93002)
12.36.060: UTILITY DEFINED:
"Utility" includes all persons or entities supplying electric, communication or
similar or associated service by means of electrical materials or devices.
(Prior code § 93005)
12.36.070: PUBLIC HEARING:
The council may from time to time call public hearings to ascertain whether the
public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires the removal of poles,
overhead wires and associated overhead structures within designated areas of
the city and the underground installation of wires and facilities for supplying
electric, communication, or similar or associated service. The council shall
call such hearings only upon making a determination that the city or a public
utility has voluntarily agreed to pay over fifty percent (50%) of all costs of
conversion, excluding costs of users' connections to underground electric or
communication facilities, or upon receiving a petition which satisfies the
requirements of section
12.36.080 of this chapter. The city clerk shall notify all affected property
owners, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, and all utilities
concerned by mail of the time and place of such hearings at least fifteen (15)
days prior to the date thereof. Each such hearing shall be open to the public
and may be continued from time to time. At each such hearing, all persons
interested shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The decision of the
council shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 1931 § 15, 1986: prior code §
93100)
12.36.080: INITIATION OF PROCEEDINGS BY PETITION:
   A.   Proceedings for a conversion may be initiated by petition. The petition
shall:
      1.   Describe the proposed assessment district, as provided in section
5181 of the California Streets and Highways Code;
      2.   Generally describe the proposed conversion; and
      3.   Request that proceedings for such conversion be taken.
   B.   The petition shall be signed by not less than five (5) owners of
assessable land in the proposed assessment district, as shown by the last
equalized assessment roll used by the city, owning lands constituting more than
one-half (1/2) of the area of all assessable lands within the proposed
assessment district. The petition shall be filed with the city clerk, who shall
thereupon check or cause said petition to be checked. If the petition is signed
by the requisite number of qualified signers, the clerk shall execute a
certificate of sufficiency and present said petition and certificate to the
city council. (Ord. 1931 § 16, 1986: prior code § 93100A)
12.36.090: REPORT BY DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS:
Prior to holding such hearing, the director of public works shall consult with
all affected utilities and shall prepare a report for submission at such
hearing containing, among other information, the extent of such utilities'
participation and estimates of the total costs to the city and affected
property owners. The report shall also contain an estimate of the time required
to complete underground installation and removal of overhead facilities. (Prior
code § 93101)
12.36.100: DESIGNATION:
If, after holding a public hearing, the council finds that the public
necessity, health, safety or welfare requires the removal and underground
installation within a designated area, the council shall, by resolution,
declare such designated area an underground utility district and order removal
of overhead facilities and underground installation. The resolution shall
include a description of the area comprising said district and shall fix the
time within which such removal and underground installation shall be
accomplished and within which affected property owners must be ready to receive
underground service. A reasonable time shall be allowed for the removal and
underground installation, having due regard for the availability of labor,
materials and equipment necessary for removal and installation of such
underground facilities as may be occasioned thereby. (Prior code § 93102)
12.36.110: UNLAWFUL ACTS:
Whenever the council creates an underground utility district and orders the
removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures therein as
provided in section
12.36.160 of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person or utility to
erect, construct, place, keep, maintain, continue, employ or operate poles,
overhead wires and associated overhead structures in the district after the
date when such overhead facilities are required to be removed by such
resolution, except as said overhead facilities may be required to furnish
service to an owner or occupant of property prior to the performance by owner
or occupant of the underground work necessary for such owner or occupant to
continue to receive utility service as provided in section
12.36.160 of this chapter, and for such reasonable time required to remove said
facilities after said work has been performed, and except as otherwise provided
in this chapter. (Prior code § 93200)
12.36.120: EMERGENCY OR UNUSUAL CIRCUMSTANCES:
Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, overhead facilities may be
installed and maintained for a period, not to exceed thirty (30) days, without
authority of the director of public works in order to provide emergency
service. The director of public works may grant special permission, on such
terms as he may deem appropriate, in cases of unusual circumstances, without
discrimination as to any person or utility, to erect, construct, install,
maintain, use or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead
structures. (Prior code § 93201)
12.36.130: EXCEPTIONS:
In any resolution adopted pursuant to section
12.36.100 of this chapter, the city may authorize any or all of the following
exceptions:
   A.   Any municipal facilities or equipment installed under the supervision
and to the satisfaction of the city engineer;
   B.   Poles, or electroliers used exclusively for street lighting;
   C.   Overhead wires (exclusive of supporting structures) crossing any
portion of a district within which overhead wires have been prohibited, or
connecting to buildings on the perimeter of a district, when such wires
originate in an area from which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead
structures are not prohibited;
   D.   Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used for the
transmission of electric energy at nominal voltages in excess of thirty four
thousand five hundred (34,500) volts;
   E.   Overhead wires attached to the exterior surface of a building by means
of a bracket or other fixture and extending from one location on the building
to another location on the same building or to an adjacent building without
crossing any public street;
   F.   Antennas, associated equipment and supporting structures, used by a
utility for furnishing communication services;
   G.   Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as surface
mounted transformers, pedestal mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and
concealed ducts;
   H.   Temporary poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used
or to be used in conjunction with construction projects. (Prior code § 93202)
12.36.140: NOTICE TO PROPERTY OWNERS AND UTILITY COMPANIES:
   A.   Within ten (10) days after the effective date of a resolution adopted
pursuant to section
12.36.100 of this chapter, the city clerk shall notify all affected utilities
and all persons owning real property within district created by such resolution
of the adoption thereof. The city clerk shall further notify such affected
property owners of the necessity that, if they or any person occupying such
property desire to continue to receive electric, communication, or similar or
associated service, they or such occupant shall provide all necessary facility
changes on their premises so as to receive such service from the lines of the
supplying utility or utilities at a new location subject to the applicable
rules, regulations, and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file
with the commission.
   B.   Notification by the city clerk shall be made by mailing a copy of the
resolution adopted pursuant to section
12.36.100 of this chapter, together with a copy of the ordinance codified in
this chapter, to affected property owners as such are shown on the last
equalized assessment roll and to the affected utilities. (Prior code § 93203)
12.36.150: UTILITY COMPANY RESPONSIBILITY:
If underground construction is necessary to provide utility service within a
district created by any resolution adopted pursuant to section
12.36.100 of this chapter, the supplying utility shall furnish that portion of
the conduits, conductors and associated equipment required to be furnished by
it under its applicable rules, regulations and tariffs on file with the
commission. (Prior code § 93204)
12.36.160: PROPERTY OWNER RESPONSIBILITY:
   A.   Every person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting a
building or structure within a district shall construct and provide that
portion of the underground service connection on his property between the
facilities referred to in section
12.36.150 of this chapter and the termination facility on or within said
building or structure being served. If the above is not accomplished by any
person within the time provided for in the resolution enacted pursuant to
section
12.36.100 of this chapter, the director of public works shall give notice in
writing to the person in possession of such premises, and a notice in writing
to the owner thereof as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, to provide
the required underground facilities within ten (10) days after receipt of such
notice.
   B.   The notice to provide required underground facilities may be given
either by personal service or by mail. In case of service by mail on either of
such persons, the notice must be deposited in the United States mail in a
sealed envelope with postage prepaid, addressed to the person in possession of
such premises at such premises, and the notice must be addressed to the owner
thereof as such owner's name appears, and must be addressed to such owner's
last known address as the same appears on the last equalized assessment roll,
and when no address appears, to general delivery, city of Redlands. If notice
is given by mail, such notice shall be deemed to have been received by the
person to whom it has been sent within forty eight (48) hours after the mailing
thereof. If notice is given by mail to either the owner or occupant of such
premises, the director of public works shall, within forty eight (48) hours
after the mailing thereof, cause a copy thereof, printed on a card not less
than eight inches by ten inches (8" x 10") in size, to be posted in a
conspicuous place on the premises.
   C.   The notice given by the director of public works to provide the
required underground facilities shall particularly specify what work is
required to be done, and shall state that if said work is not completed within
thirty (30) days after receipt of such notice the director of public works will
provide such required underground facilities, in which case the cost and
expense thereof will be assessed against the property benefited and become a
lien upon such property.
   D.   If upon the expiration of the thirty (30) day period, the required
underground facilities have not been provided, the director of public works
shall forthwith proceed to do the work; provided, however, if such premises are
unoccupied and no electric or communications services are being furnished
thereto, the director of public works shall in lieu of providing the required
underground facilities, have the authority to order the disconnection and
removal of any and all overhead service wires and associated facilities
supplying utility service to said property. Upon completion of the work by the
director of public works, he shall file a written report with the city council
setting forth the fact that the required underground facilities have been
provided and the cost thereof, together with a legal description of the
property against which such cost is to be assessed. The council shall thereupon
fix a time and place for hearing protests against the assessment of the cost of
such work upon such premises, which said time shall not be less than ten (10)
days thereafter.
   E.   The director of public works shall forthwith, upon the time for hearing
such protests having been fixed, give a notice in writing to the person in
possession of such premises, and a notice in writing thereof to the owner
thereof, in the manner hereinabove provided for the giving of the notice to
provide the required underground facilities, of the time and place that the
council will pass upon such report and will hear protests against such
assessment. Such notice shall also set forth the amount of the proposed
assessment.
   F.   Upon the date and hour set for the hearing of protests the council
shall hear and consider the report and all protests, if there be any, and then
proceed to affirm, modify or reject the assessment.
   G.   If any assessment is not paid within fifteen (15) days after its
confirmation by the council, the amount of the assessment shall become a lien
upon the property against which the assessment is made by the director of
public works and the director of public works is directed to turn over to the
assessor and tax collector a notice of lien on each of said properties on which
the assessment has not been paid, and said assessor and tax collector shall add
the amount of said assessment to the next regular bill for taxes levied against
the premises upon which said assessment was not paid. The assessment shall be
due and payable at the same time as said property taxes are due and payable,
and if not paid when due and payable shall bear interest at the rate of six
percent (6%) per annum. (Prior code § 93205)
12.36.170: RESPONSIBILITY OF CITY:
The city shall remove at its own expense all city owned equipment from all
poles required to be removed hereunder in ample time to enable the owner or
user of such poles to remove the same within the time specified in the
resolution enacted pursuant to section
12.36.100 of this chapter. (Prior code § 93206)
12.36.180: TIME EXTENSION:
In the event that any act required by this chapter or by a resolution adopted
pursuant to section
12.36.100 of this chapter cannot be performed within the time provided on
account of shortage of materials, war, restraint by public authorities,
strikes, labor disturbances, civil disobedience, or any other circumstances
beyond the control of the actor, then the time within which such act will be
accomplished shall be extended for a period equivalent to the time of such
limitation. (Prior code § 93207)
12.36.190: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision or to fail to comply
with any of the requirements of this chapter. Any person violating any
provision of this chapter or failing to comply with any of its requirements
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be
punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by
imprisonment not exceeding six (6) months, or by both such fine and
imprisonment. Each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for
each day during any portion of which any violation of any of the provisions of
this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person, and shall be
punishable therefor as provided for in this chapter. (Prior code § 93208)
DIVISION IV. PUBLIC PLACES
CHAPTER 12.40
PARADES AND PUBLIC ASSEMBLIES
SECTION:
12.40.010: Purpose
12.40.020: Definitions
12.40.030: Administration By Chief
12.40.040: Appeal From Decision Of Chief To City Council
12.40.050: Permit Requirements
12.40.060: Application For Permit; Procedure And Time Requirements
12.40.070: Application For Permit; Form And Content
12.40.080: Application For Permit; Application Fee
12.40.090: Action On Permit Application; Approval And Issuance Of Permit
12.40.100: Action On Permit Application; Permit Conditioning Or Denial Of
Permit
12.40.110: Permit Conditions; Animals
12.40.120: Duty To Care For Animals
12.40.130: General Permit Conditions; Indemnification Agreement
12.40.140: General Permit Conditions; Liability Insurance
12.40.150: General Permit Conditions; Traffic Control Fee
12.40.160: Special Permit Conditions
12.40.170: Special Permit; Subsequent Conditions
12.40.180: Revocation Of Permit
12.40.190: Emergency Suspension Of Authorized Event
12.40.200: Cordoning Off The Route Or Site Of An Event
12.40.210: Notice To Adjoining Property Owners
12.40.220: Public Conduct During An Authorized Event
12.40.230: Judicial Review; Denial Or Revocation Of Permit
12.40.240: Violations
12.40.010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate parades and public assemblies
occurring on a city street, parking facility, sidewalk or other public right of
way and which obstruct or otherwise interfere with the normal flow of vehicular
or pedestrian traffic or which do not comply with applicable traffic laws.
(Ord. 2617 § 1, 2005)
12.40.020: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall govern the construction of the words and
phrases used in this chapter:
   AGGRIEVED PERSON: Any person who is adversely affected by a determination
made by a city officer or employee pursuant to the provisions of this chapter
in a manner significantly greater than the public generally, including, but not
limited to, any applicant for a permit required by this chapter who is
adversely affected by the action of the chief on such permit.
   CHIEF: The chief of police or his/her designee.
   CITY MANAGER: The city manager or his/her designee.
   EVENT: Any parade or public assembly.
   FREE SPEECH RIGHTS: Expressive activity protected by the first amendment of
the United States constitution or article 1, section 2 of the California
constitution, provided that such activity is the principal purpose of the
event.
   PARADE: Any organized march or organized procession of animals, vehicles or
persons (other than public employees acting within the course and scope of
their employment) on a city street, parking facility, sidewalk or other public
right of way, other than a group of people participating in a public assembly.
   PUBLIC ASSEMBLY: Any group of people participating in an organized activity
(other than public employees acting within the course and scope of their
employment) on a city street, parking facility, sidewalk or other public right
of way, other than a group of people participating in a parade. (Ord. 2617 § 1,
2005)
12.40.030: ADMINISTRATION BY CHIEF:
The chief shall have primary responsibility for the administration of this
chapter, subject to the overall direction of the city manager. In carrying out
such responsibilities, the duties of the chief shall include, but not be
limited to, acting on all applications for a permit required by this chapter.
In addition, the chief shall be authorized to revoke a permit issued pursuant
to this chapter in the manner provided for herein. (Ord. 2617 § 1, 2005)
12.40.040: APPEAL FROM DECISION OF CHIEF TO CITY COUNCIL:
   A.   Right Of Appeal: Any person aggrieved by a decision of the chief may
appeal such decision to the city council, except as provided in subsection B of
this section.
   B.   Exception: Because time is of the essence, there shall be no appeal to
the city council from the decision of the chief where the exercise of free
speech rights is involved. Rather, the aggrieved person may appeal to the city
manager in an attempt to resolve the situation pursuant to subsection
12.40.060B3 of this chapter. (Ord. 2617 § 1, 2005)
12.40.050: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct, sponsor or knowingly
participate in any parade or public assembly on any city street, sidewalk,
parking facility or other public right of way which obstructs or interferes
with the normal flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic or which does not
comply with applicable traffic laws unless and until a permit for such event
has been approved and issued in the manner provided by this chapter. A permit
is not deemed issued until the chief has received the applicant's written
acceptance pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 2617 § 1, 2005)
12.40.060: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT; PROCEDURE AND TIME REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Event:
      1.   Except as provided in subsection B of this section, completed
applications for a permit authorizing an event:
         a.   Shall be filed in the office of the chief at least:
            (1)   Forty five (45) days prior to the date of such event, in
order to ensure adequate time for an appeal to the city council from a
determination by the chief to deny the application or approve the application
subject to conditions; or
            (2)   Twenty five (25) days, but less than forty five (45) days,
prior to the date of such event in which case the opportunity to appeal to the
city council is deemed waived.
         b.   Shall be denied, approved or approved subject to conditions by
the chief within ten (10) days after receipt of the application. After the
decision, the chief shall immediately attempt to notify the applicant orally
and shall immediately notify the applicant, the city manager and the city
attorney in writing of the chief's decision. The writing may be by telegram,
facsimile or any written document sent by the chief. Both the oral and the
written notifications shall describe, with particularity, the facts and reasons
for any denial or approval subject to conditions.
      2.   Acceptance by the applicant of the approval, or approval subject to
conditions, shall be in writing and must be received by the chief within six
(6) days after written notice of the chief's decision was sent to the
applicant. The writing may be by telegram, facsimile or any written document
sent by the applicant. Failure to accept as set forth herein or failure to file
a timely appeal to the city council shall automatically be deemed a withdrawal
of the application. If the applicant files a valid written acceptance and
complies with the applicable conditions precedent, if any, the permit will
automatically issue upon receipt of the written acceptance by the chief. The
chief shall immediately notify the city manager and the city attorney that the
permit has been issued.
      3.   Appeals from the decision of the chief shall be made by filing a
notice of appeal with the city clerk not later than five (5) days following the
date the applicant has received written notice of the chief's decision;
provided that the city council may extend the time for filing such notice of
appeal for good cause shown. Such notice of appeal shall be in a form
prescribed by the chief, shall contain a statement of the reasons why the
person filing the appeal believes that the decision of the chief does not
comply with the provisions of this chapter, and shall set forth the relief
requested by such person from such decision. The appeal shall be heard and
decided, unless continued for good cause, by the city council at its first
regular or adjourned regular meeting on or after the day following the filing
of the notice of appeal, subject to the notice and other requirements of the
Ralph M. Brown act. Within three (3) days after the city council's decision the
city clerk shall notify the applicant in writing of the city council's
decision. The applicant shall have three (3) days after receipt of the notice
to file a written acceptance of the decision with the chief. A failure to
accept timely, if the appeal was upheld by the city council, shall
automatically be deemed a withdrawal of the application.
      4.   Because time is of the essence, there shall be no appeal to the city
council from the decision of the chief where the exercise of free speech rights
is involved. Rather, the aggrieved person may appeal to the city manager in an
attempt to resolve the situation pursuant to subsection B3 of this section.
   B.   Free Speech Event:
      1.   Completed applications for a permit authorizing an event which
involves an exercise of free speech rights:
         a.   Shall be filed in the office of the chief at least five (5) days
prior to the date of such event in order to ensure adequate time for a
determination by the chief to approve or deny the application or approve the
application subject to conditions; and at least seven (7) days prior to the
date of the event to allow adequate time for an appeal to the city manager, if
requested by the aggrieved person, pursuant to subsection B3 of this section;
and
         b.   Shall be denied, approved or approved subject to conditions by
the chief within forty eight (48) hours of receipt of the application. After a
decision, the chief shall immediately attempt to notify the applicant orally
and shall immediately notify the applicant, the city manager and the city
attorney, in writing, of the chief's decision. The writing may be by telegram,
facsimile or any written document sent by the chief. Both the oral and written
notifications shall describe, with particularity, the facts and reasons for any
denial or approval subject to conditions.
      2.   Acceptance by the applicant of the approval or approval subject to
conditions shall be in writing and must be received by the chief within twenty
four (24) hours after notification has been sent to the applicant. The writing
may be by telegram, facsimile or any written document sent by the applicant.
Failure to accept as set forth in this subsection or failure to timely file an
appeal as set forth in subsection B3 of this section shall automatically be
deemed a withdrawal of the application. If the applicant files a valid written
acceptance and complies with the applicable conditions precedent, if any, the
permit will automatically issue upon receipt of the written acceptance by the
chief. The chief shall immediately notify the city manager and the city
attorney that the permit has been issued.
      3.   If the applicant has filed a completed application at least seven
(7) days before the event and the permit is denied or conditioned in a manner
unacceptable to the applicant, the applicant, within forty eight (48) hours of
oral or written notification of the chief's decision, whichever occurs first,
may appeal in writing to the city manager, presenting facts and reasons why the
denial or conditions should be reversed or deleted, respectively, and the
application granted or granted as modified. The appeal hearing shall be at a
time and place mutually agreeable to the parties. If the parties cannot agree
on the time or place, the appeal hearing shall be the next day at four o'clock
(4:00) P.M. at the city manager's office. The city manager shall render a
decision within twenty four (24) hours of the appeal hearing and immediately
thereafter attempt to notify the applicant orally and shall immediately notify
the applicant, city attorney and the chief in writing of the city manager's
decision. The writing may be by telegram, facsimile or any written document
sent by the city manager. Both the oral and written notifications shall
describe, with particularity, the facts and reasons for the decision. If the
applicant does not file a completed application at least seven (7) days before
the event, does not appeal within forty eight (48) hours of notification, or
does not attend the appeal hearing either personally or through an authorized
representative, as required in this subsection B3 then the applicant waives the
right to appeal to the city manager. (Ord. 2617 § 1, 2005)
12.40.070: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT; FORM AND CONTENT:
Applications for a permit authorizing an event shall be filed by a natural
person, shall be in a form prescribed by the chief, and shall contain all of
the following information:
   A.   Information Required For All Events: Applications for all events shall
contain:
      1.   The name, mailing address and daytime and evening telephone numbers
of the person filing the application;
      2.   If the event is to be conducted by an organization, the name,
mailing address and daytime telephone number of the organization; the name,
mailing address and daytime telephone number of the president, leader or other
head of the organization; and written documentation of the authority under
which the applicant is applying for the permit on behalf of the organization;
      3.   The name, mailing address and daytime telephone number of the person
who will be present and in charge of the event on the day of the event;
      4.   The name, mailing address and daytime telephone number of any
monitors to be employed during the event;
      5.   The name, mailing address and daytime and evening telephone numbers
of an alternate person to contact if an emergency arises and the applicant is
unavailable;
      6.   The nature of the event;
      7.   The proposed date and estimated starting and ending time of the
event;
      8.   The proposed location of the event, including its boundaries;
      9.   The estimated number of participants in the event;
      10.   The type and estimated number of vehicles, animals and structures
that will be used in the event;
      11.   A description of any sound amplification equipment to be employed
at the event;
      12.   The number, size and material of construction of any signs or
banners to be used in the event;
      13.   The parking requirements for the event;
      14.   The location of any water, first aid and comfort stations to be
provided at the event; and
      15.   The type and number of any vendors who will sell food or beverages
at the event pursuant to a permit issued in the manner provided for by this
code.
   B.   Additional Information Required For Parades: In addition to the
information required by subsection A of this section, every application for a
parade shall include the following information:
      1.   The time when units of the parade will begin to assemble;
      2.   The proposed assembly point for the parade;
      3.   The proposed parade route;
      4.   The interval space to be maintained between units of the parade; and
      5.   The number, type and size of floats or other vehicles. (Ord. 2617 §
1, 2005)
12.40.080: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT; APPLICATION FEE:
Every application for a permit authorizing an event shall be accompanied by an
application fee in an amount established by resolution of the city council;
provided that, no fee shall be charged where the event involves an exercise of
free speech rights. (Ord. 2617 § 1, 2005)
12.40.090: ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATION; APPROVAL AND ISSUANCE OF PERMIT:
When the chief determines that a completed application has been filed for a
permit authorizing an event in a manner required by this chapter, and that
there are no grounds for denying such permit, the chief shall approve such
application subject to all the general conditions hereinafter required by this
chapter with any special conditions authorized by this chapter and determined
by the chief to be necessary in order to protect the safety of persons and
property and the control of pedestrian and vehicular traffic in and around the
site of the event. (Ord. 2617 § 1, 2005)
12.40.100: ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATION; PERMIT CONDITIONING OR DENIAL OF
PERMIT:
The following factors shall be considered by the chief in determining whether
the imposition of reasonable permit conditions pursuant to section
12.40.160 of this chapter will satisfy public health, safety or welfare
concerns and allow the event to proceed as modified. If not, the chief shall
deny the application for a permit.
   A.   The person applying for the permit has failed to provide supplemental
application information requested by the chief or has otherwise failed to
complete the application;
   B.   The information contained in the application, including supplemental
application information requested by the chief, is found to be false in any
material respect;
   C.   An application for another event to be held on the same date as that
requested by the applicant has been previously filed or approved, and such
other event is so close in time and location to the event proposed by the
applicant as to cause undue traffic congestion or to place the city in a
position of being unable to meet the needs for police services for both events;
   D.   The time, route or size of the event will substantially interrupt the
safe and orderly movement of traffic contiguous to the site or route of the
event or disrupt the use of a street at its peak traffic time;
   E.   The concentration of persons, animals or vehicles at the site of the
event or at the site of an assembly or disbanding area around the event will
prevent proper police, fire or ambulance services from reaching areas
contiguous to the event;
   F.   The size of the event will require the diversion of so many city police
officers to ensure that participants stay within the boundaries or route of the
event and to protect participants in the event, that police protection to the
rest of the city will be seriously jeopardized; provided, however, that nothing
herein authorizes the denial of a permit because of the need to protect
participants from the conduct of others if reasonable permit conditions can be
imposed;
   G.   Given the size and nature of the event, the reasonably available number
of city police officers and other personnel is not sufficient to ensure the
safety of participants or the attending public;
   H.   The event consists of a parade that will not move from its point of
origin to its point of termination in three (3) hours or less;
   I.   The location of the event will substantially interfere with
construction or maintenance work previously scheduled to take place on or along
the city street, parking facility, sidewalk or other public right of way to be
occupied by the event;
   J.   The event will occur at a time when a school is in session and along a
route or at a location adjacent to the school or a class thereof, and the noise
created by the activities of the event will substantially disrupt the
educational activity of such school or class;
   K.   The decorative material on parade floats is not noncombustible or flame
retardant or motorized parade floats and towing apparatus are not provided with
portable fire extinguishers readily accessible to the operator, as provided in
the uniform fire code;
   L.   The application is not timely submitted and there is insufficient time
to investigate and process the application pursuant to the time lines herein.
(Ord. 2617 § 1, 2005)
12.40.110: PERMIT CONDITIONS; ANIMALS:
No person shall cause, permit or allow any animal owned or possessed by him, or
any animal in his care, custody or control to be present at any parade or
public assembly except:
   A.   Equine or other animals which have been specially trained and are being
used to enhance security;
   B.   Dogs which have been specially trained and are being used by blind or
disabled persons to aid and guide them in their movements;
   C.   Caged animals which are kept at a place designated for such purpose;
   D.   In connection with activities authorized in the issuance of a permit
per sections
12.40.050 through
12.40.070 of this chapter. (Ord. 2617 § 1, 2005)
12.40.120: DUTY TO CARE FOR ANIMALS:
It is the mandatory duty of all persons owning, possessing, in control of, or
otherwise responsible for any animal at a parade or public assembly to promptly
collect, pick up and remove all fecal matter left behind by such animal in or
upon any public property, including, but not limited to, public streets,
highways, rights of way and parks of the city. (Ord. 2617 § 1, 2005)
12.40.130: GENERAL PERMIT CONDITIONS; INDEMNIFICATION AGREEMENT:
   A.   Indemnification Requirements: As a condition precedent to the issuance
of a permit authorizing an event, the permittee shall enter into an agreement
with the city in a form approved by the city attorney which shall set forth the
undertaking of the permittee to indemnify the city, hold the city harmless and
reimburse the city from and for any liability, damage or loss occurring during
the course of the event authorized by such permit where such liability, damage
or loss is proximately caused by the negligent or intentional, wrongful acts or
omissions of the permittee, any officer, employee or agent of the permittee or
any person who is under the permittee's legal control. In addition, such
agreement shall provide that in the event a claim is made against the city by
suit or otherwise, whether the same be groundless or not, arising out of such
negligent or intentional, wrongful acts or omissions, the permittee shall
defend the city and shall indemnify the city for any judgment rendered against
it or any sums paid out in settlement or otherwise. Such agreement shall be
filed with the chief prior to the issuance of the permit.
   B.   Waiver Of Indemnification Agreement: The indemnification agreement
required by this section shall be waived by the chief for any permit
authorizing an event involving an exercise of free speech rights. (Ord. 2617 §
1, 2005)
12.40.140: GENERAL PERMIT CONDITIONS; LIABILITY INSURANCE:
   A.   Insurance Requirements: As a condition precedent to the issuance of a
permit authorizing an event, the permittee shall obtain public liability
insurance from an insurance company licensed to do business in the state of
California. Such insurance shall provide "occurrence" coverage against
liabilities for death, personal injury or property damage arising out of or in
any way connected with such event. Such insurance shall be in the amount of at
least one million dollars ($1,000,000.00), combined single limit, and shall
name the city and the city's elected officials, employees and agents as
additional insureds under the coverage afforded. In addition, such insurance
shall be primary and noncontributing with respect to any other insurance
available to city. Proof of such insurance, in a form approved by the city's
risk manager, shall be filed with the chief prior to the issuance of the permit
and such insurance shall be maintained in full force and effect throughout the
course of the event authorized by such permit.
   B.   Waiver Of Insurance Requirements: The insurance required by this
section shall be waived by the chief for any permit authorizing an event
involving an exercise of free speech rights. (Ord. 2617 § 1, 2005)
12.40.150: GENERAL PERMIT CONDITIONS; TRAFFIC CONTROL FEE:
   A.   Fee Requirements: As a condition precedent to the issuance of a permit
authorizing an event, the permittee shall pay to the city a fee in an amount
equal to the city's total estimated costs for providing all of the personnel
and materials, including, but not limited to, police department personnel,
which are necessary in order to control and monitor pedestrian and vehicular
traffic in and around the site of such event. Such traffic control fee shall be
determined by the chief based upon a schedule of traffic control fees and rates
established by resolution of the city council; the estimate of chief as to the
type, number and hours of employment of police department personnel necessary
to control and monitor pedestrian and vehicular traffic in and around the site
of the event, all as set forth by the chief's report on the event; and on the
estimate of the chief as to the type, number and hours of employment of other
city personnel necessary to control or monitor the event. Such fee shall be
paid by the permittee prior to the issuance of the permit.
   B.   Waiver Of Traffic Control Fee: The traffic control fee required by this
section shall be waived by the chief for any permit authorizing an event
involving an exercise of free speech rights. (Ord. 2617 § 1, 2005)
12.40.160: SPECIAL PERMIT CONDITIONS:
When acting on a permit authorizing an event the chief, after reviewing the
facts, may condition such permit upon the permittee's compliance with
reasonable requirements concerning the time, place or manner of conducting such
event, as necessary to protect the safety of persons and property or to control
vehicular and pedestrian traffic in and around the site of the event, provided
that such requirements shall not be imposed in a manner that will unreasonably
restrict the exercise of free speech rights. Such conditions may include, but
shall not be limited to, requirements concerning the following:
   A.   The assembly or disbanding area for a parade occurring along a route;
   B.   The accommodation of pedestrian and vehicular traffic in and around the
site of an event, including restricting an event to a city sidewalk, or only a
portion of a city street, parking facility or other public right of way;
   C.   The number and type of vehicles, animals or structures to be displayed
or used in the event;
   D.   The inspection and approval by city personnel of stages, booths, floats
and other structures or vehicles to be used or operated in the event, in order
to ensure that such structures or vehicles have been safely constructed and can
be safely operated;
   E.   The deposit of a sum of money for cleanup if the event will include the
erection of structures, the display or use of horses or other large animals,
the operation of water aid stations or the sale of food or beverages pursuant
to a permit issued in a manner provided for by this code;
   F.   The provision and use of traffic cones and barricades;
   G.   The provision and operation of first aid stations or sanitary
facilities, including handicap accessible sanitary facilities;
   H.   The provision and use of garbage containers, and the cleanup and
restoration of the site of the event at the termination of the event;
   I.   The use of sound amplification equipment, and restrictions on the
amount of noise generated by motors and other equipment used in the course of
the event;
   J.   The provision of a notice of permit conditions to event participants;
and
   K.   Alternate sites, times, dates or modes of the exercise of free speech
rights. (Ord. 2617 § 1, 2005)
12.40.170: SPECIAL PERMIT; SUBSEQUENT CONDITIONS:
   A.   Grounds For Special Permit Subsequent Conditions: The chief may
condition a permit authorizing an event when the chief determines that there
are grounds for conditioning a previously issued permit in the manner provided
for in section
12.40.160 of this chapter, provided that such facts were first disclosed or
otherwise made known to the chief after issuance of the permit and further
provided that such facts were not discoverable by the exercise of due diligence
by the chief prior to the issuance of a permit.
   B.   Notice Of Special Permit Subsequent Conditions: When the chief decides
to condition a previously issued permit based upon subsequently discovered
facts, the chief shall immediately cause a written notice of such action to be
served on the permittee and shall provide copies of the notice to the city
manager, city attorney and all other city employees charged with carrying out
any responsibilities under this chapter. However, when the chief decides to
condition a previously issued permit on the day of the event and has learned of
such facts within twenty four (24) hours of the event, the chief shall announce
such action to the event participants, to those city officers and employees
engaged in monitoring or controlling traffic during the event, and to the
person in charge of the event, if such person can be located at the site of the
event. Thereafter, the chief shall cause a written notice of such action to be
delivered to the permittee and shall provide copies of the notice to the city
manager and city attorney.
   C.   Hearing On Special Permit Subsequent Conditions; Free Speech Events:
Except where the chief learns of the facts justifying conditioning a previously
issued permit within twenty four (24) hours of the event, the applicant shall
have a right to a hearing before the city manager within twenty four (24) hours
of the imposition of the new conditions; provided that the event is scheduled
at least forty eight (48) hours after the request for hearing is made and the
event involves the exercise of free speech rights. The hearing shall be at the
city manager's office at four o'clock (4:00) P.M. the day after the hearing is
requested, unless otherwise agreed upon. The city manager shall issue a
decision orally at the conclusion of the hearing and shall also notify the
applicant, the chief and the city attorney, in writing, of the city manager's
decision.
   D.   Content Of Notices Of Special Permit Subsequent Conditions: Any
notification of action by the chief or city manager taken pursuant to
subsection B or C of this section, whether oral or written, shall describe,
with particularity, the facts and the reasons for the decision. Any such
written notice may be by telegram, facsimile or any written document sent by
the chief or city manager, respectively. (Ord. 2617 § 1, 2005)
12.40.180: REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
   A.   Mandatory Revocation By Chief: The chief shall revoke a permit
authorizing an event if the chief determines that there were grounds for
denying the permit, as set out in section
 12.40.100 of this chapter, which were first disclosed or otherwise made known
to the chief after issuance of the permit and such facts were not discoverable
by the exercise of due diligence by the chief prior to the issuance of the
permit.
   B.   Discretionary Revocation By Chief: The chief may revoke a permit
authorizing an event if the chief determines that the event is being conducted
in violation of the terms and conditions of the permit or that event
participants have violated any applicable law or regulation; provided, however,
that this subsection shall not authorize the revocation of a permit because of
the need to protect participants from the conduct of others unless there are
insufficient resources available to provide necessary police protection; and
provided further that the chief shall not revoke a permit in the manner
provided by this subsection unless and until the chief advises the permittee or
responsible event participants of such violation and provides a reasonable
opportunity to correct such violation.
   C.   Notice Of Revocation: When the chief decides to revoke a permit prior
to the date of event, the chief shall immediately cause a written notice of
such action to be served on the permittee and shall provide copies of the
notice to the city manager, city attorney and all other city officers charged
with carrying out any responsibilities under this chapter. However, where the
chief decides to revoke a permit on the day of the event and has learned of the
facts justifying revocation within twenty four (24) hours of the event, the
chief shall announce such action to the event participants, to those city
officers and employees monitoring or controlling traffic during the event, and
to the person in charge of the event, if such person can be located at the site
of the event. Thereafter, the chief shall cause a written notice of such action
to be delivered to the permittee and shall provide copies of the notice to the
city manager and city attorney.
   D.   Hearing On Revocation: In all cases, except where the chief learns of
the facts justifying revocation of the permit within twenty four (24) hours of
the event, the applicant shall have a right to a hearing before the city
manager within twenty four (24) hours of the revocation; provided that the
event is scheduled at least forty eight (48) hours after the request for
hearing is made. The hearing shall be at the city manager's office at four
o'clock (4:00) P.M. the day after the hearing is requested, unless otherwise
agreed upon. The city manager shall issue a decision orally at the conclusion
of the hearing and shall also notify the applicant, the chief of police and the
city attorney, in writing, of the city manager's decision.
   E.   Content Of Notices Of Revocation: Any notification of action by the
chief of police or city manager taken pursuant to subsection C or D of this
section, whether oral or written, shall describe with particularity the facts
and the reasons for the decision. Any such written notice may be by telegram,
facsimile or any written document signed or sent by the chief of police or city
manager, respectively. (Ord. 2617 § 1, 2005)
12.40.190: EMERGENCY SUSPENSION OF AUTHORIZED EVENT:
The chief of police and any sworn peace officer employed by the city may
temporarily suspend an event authorized by a permit whenever there is a fire or
other emergency that requires the event to be temporarily suspended to protect
public safety. When an event is temporarily suspended for this reason, the
permittee and event participants shall immediately comply with the suspending
officer's instructions. The chief of police shall immediately attempt to notify
the applicant orally and shall notify the applicant, the city manager and the
city attorney, in writing, within twenty (20) hours after the suspension,
describing with particularity the facts and the reasons for the suspension. The
writing may be by telegram, facsimile or any written document sent or signed by
the chief. (Ord. 2617 § 1, 2005)
12.40.200: CORDONING OFF THE ROUTE OR SITE OF AN EVENT:
The chief is authorized and directed to place barricades on the city's streets,
parking facilities, sidewalks or other public rights of way, and to undertake
such other actions as may be necessary to cordon off the route or site of an
event authorized by a permit. In addition, the chief shall, when appropriate,
post the route or site of such event as a no parking zone for the duration of
the event and sufficiently in advance thereof as may be necessary to prevent
vehicles from parking along the route or at the site of the event. (Ord. 2617 §
1, 2005)
12.40.210: NOTICE TO ADJOINING PROPERTY OWNERS:
The chief shall endeavor to give notice of the nature, date and time of any
event authorized by a permit as soon as possible prior to the date of such
event to all owners of property adjoining the city street, sidewalk or other
public right of way where such event is to occur, either by delivering copies
of such notice to the property owners, by publishing such notice in a newspaper
of general circulation, or by posting such notice along the route or at the
site of the event. However, the provisions of this section shall be directory
only, and the failure of the chief to give such notice shall not invalidate a
permit. (Ord. 2617 § 1, 2005)
12.40.220: PUBLIC CONDUCT DURING AN AUTHORIZED EVENT:
   A.   Interference With Event: No person shall physically obstruct, impede,
hamper or otherwise interfere with any event authorized by a permit or with any
person, animal or vehicle participating or used in such event.
   B.   Driving Through Site Of Parade: No person shall drive a vehicle between
vehicles or persons traversing the route of a parade authorized by a permit
when such vehicles or persons are in motion.
   C.   Prohibited Parking: No person shall park along or within any portion of
the route or site of an event authorized by a permit, when the route or site
has been posted as a no parking zone by the chief in the manner authorized by
this chapter. (Ord. 2617 § 1, 2005)
12.40.230: JUDICIAL REVIEW; DENIAL OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
In the event of denial or revocation of a permit involving an exercise of free
speech rights, the city shall file an action in the superior court of the state
of California in San Bernardino County, challenging the validity of the denial
or revocation. The action shall be filed as soon as practicable, but no later
than two (2) court working days after such denial or revocation becomes final.
The city shall request, at the time of filing, that the matter be heard by the
court as soon as possible, but no later than two (2) court days after filing.
(Ord. 2617 § 1, 2005)
12.40.240: VIOLATIONS:
Any violation of the provisions of this chapter, including any violation of the
terms and conditions of a permit approved and issued in the manner provided by
this chapter, shall be unlawful and punishable as a misdemeanor. (Ord. 2617 §
1, 2005)
CHAPTER 12.42
PHOTOGRAPHY AND FILMING PERMITS
SECTION:
12.42.010: Purpose And Intent
12.42.020: Definitions
12.42.030: Permit Required
12.42.040: Exceptions
12.42.050: Application For Permit
12.42.060: Time For Filing Application
12.42.070: Application Fee
12.42.080: Reimbursement Of Costs To The City
12.42.090: Application Approval Conditions
12.42.100: Issuance Of Permit
12.42.110: Term Of Permit
12.42.120: Modification, Suspension And Revocation Of Permit
12.42.130: Authority To Establish Rules And Regulations
12.42.010: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
It is the purpose and intent of the city of Redlands to encourage the motion
picture, television and commercial still photography industries to utilize the
scenic beauty and variety of backdrops afforded in the city as locations for
filming, videotaping and/or photographing for commercial production. It is the
purpose and intent of this chapter to provide the means by which such
activities may be reasonably regulated to preserve the public health and safety
and provide for the protection of property, to not unduly restrict such
activities, and to maintain harmonious relations between the community and
those engaged in such activities. (Ord. 2293 § 1, 1995)
12.42.020: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter only, the following words and terms shall be
deemed to mean and be construed as follows:
   CHARITABLE FILMS: Commercials, motion pictures, television, videotapes or
still photography produced by a nonprofit organization, which qualifies under
section 501(c)(3) of the internal revenue code as a charitable organization. No
person, directly or indirectly, shall receive a profit from the marketing and
production of the film or from showing the films, tapes or photos.
   FILM PERMIT OFFICER (FPO): An employee designated by the city manager to
oversee the photography/filming permit process. The film permit officer shall
serve as the city's liaison to the California film commission, the San
Bernardino-Riverside County film commission, and other such organizations
associated with motion pictures, television and still photography. The film
permit officer shall also serve as liaison between the applicant and all city
departments involved in the filming activity.
   MOTION PICTURE, TELEVISION AND STILL PHOTOGRAPHY: Means and includes all
activity attendant to staging or shooting commercial motion pictures,
television shows or programs, and commercials.
   NEWS PURPOSES: The filming, videotaping, photographing or otherwise
preserving for newspapers or television news broadcasting by reporters,
photographers or cameramen in the employ of a newspaper, news service,
television station or similar entity, of news events concerning those persons,
scenes or occurrences which are in the news and are of general public interest.
   STUDENT FILMS: Commercials, motion pictures, television, videotapes or still
photography produced by an individual currently enrolled as a student at an
accredited college or university. The student shall not, directly or
indirectly, receive a profit from the production, showing and/or marketing of
the film.
   STUDIO: An established or fixed place of business where filming or
videotaping for motion picture, television or still photography production is
regularly conducted upon the premises. (Ord. 2293 § 1, 1995)
12.42.030: PERMIT REQUIRED:
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it is unlawful for any person to
engage in the business or activity of filming, videotaping or otherwise
producing motion pictures, television or still photography for commercial
purposes or public exhibition at any place within the city, other than at or in
an established motion picture, television or photography studio, unless such
person has first been issued a photography/filming permit by the film permit
officer. (Ord. 2293 § 1, 1995)
12.42.040: EXCEPTIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the filming, videotaping or
the photographing or otherwise preserving of motion pictures or still
photographs:
   A.   Solely for private or family use;
   B.   For use in a criminal investigation or civil proceeding;
   C.   For news purposes. (Ord. 2293 § 1, 1995)
12.42.050: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
   A.   An application for a film permit shall be submitted to the film permit
officer, on a form which the film permit officer shall furnish, wherein the
applicant shall state the following information:
      1.   The name of the owner, the address and telephone number of the place
at which the activity is to be conducted;
      2.   The specific location at such address or place;
      3.   The inclusive hours and dates such activity will transpire;
      4.   A general statement of the character or nature of the proposed
filming activity;
      5.   The name, address and telephone number of the person(s) in charge of
such filming activity;
      6.   The approximate number of personnel to be involved;
      7.   The approximate amount/type of vehicles/ equipment to be involved;
      8.   Use of any animals, planned stunts or pyrotechnics;
      9.   Services of city employees desired or required on location during
filming;
      10.   A detailed site plan and parking plan; and
      11.   Such other information as the film permit officer may deem
necessary.
   B.   The city manager shall determine the number of fire, police and other
city personnel necessary to ensure that the filming activity does not endanger
the health and safety of persons or property in the area of the filming
location, to minimize the disruption to businesses or residents in the area,
and to minimize traffic congestion.
   C.   Written permit applications may be filed in person, by mail or by
facsimile machine. Applications submitted on the state uniform permit
application and inland empire permit application shall be accepted. (Ord. 2293
§ 1, 1995)
12.42.060: TIME FOR FILING APPLICATION:
Applications shall be filed with the film permit officer a minimum of two (2)
business days prior to the proposed filming date. (Ord. 2293 § 1, 1995)
12.42.070: APPLICATION FEE:
The applicant shall pay a permit fee in the amount established by resolution of
the city council of the city of Redlands. The permit fee shall be paid to the
film permit officer when the application form is submitted for approval.
   A.   Charitable films and student films require a permit, but shall be
exempt from permit fees.
   B.   To ensure cleanup and restoration of the filming location on public
property, the applicant may be required to post a refundable deposit in an
amount not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) at the time the
application is submitted. Upon completion of filming and inspection of the site
by the film permit officer, all or a portion of the deposit may be returned.
(Ord. 2293 § 1, 1995)
12.42.080: REIMBURSEMENT OF COSTS TO THE CITY:
The applicant shall reimburse the city in an amount necessary to cover the
expenses incurred by the city to provide police, fire and other city personnel
and equipment which result from the issuance of the photography/filming permit
and the activities authorized therein. The city manager may require the
applicant to deposit the estimated cost of such personnel and equipment at the
time the permit application is submitted for approval. (Ord. 2293 § 1, 1995)
12.42.090: APPLICATION APPROVAL CONDITIONS:
Upon a determination by the city manager that the activities described in the
application form do not pose a threat to the public health and safety and
provide for the protection of property, the application may be approved. The
city manager may impose such conditions to approval as are necessary to make
such a determination. If such a determination cannot be made, the application
for the photography/filming permit shall be denied. (Ord. 2293 § 1, 1995)
12.42.100: ISSUANCE OF PERMIT:
   A.   The film permit officer may issue a photography/filming permit to
applicant, subject to the conditions of the approved application, after
applicant has:
      1.   Met all insurance requirements as stated on the photography/film
permit application, including the provision of a certificate of insurance with
a minimum one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) general liability limit naming
the city of Redlands as additional insured; and
      2.   Fully executing the photography/film permit application to
indemnify, defend and save the city harmless from any and all claims and
liability of any kind whatsoever resulting from or arising out of the issuance
of such permit; and
      3.   Prepaid permit fees and, if required by city manager, prepaid
estimated costs incurred by the city for the use of its personnel and
facilities, with overpayments to be reimbursed and underpayments billed for
payment to the applicant thirty (30) days after the final day of shooting.
   B.   Prior to issuance of the permit, the applicant may be required to
consult with neighboring business operators and/or residents and submit with
the application suitable evidence showing that such business operators or
residents do not object to the proposed filming activity. Where it is apparent
that the filming activity will be unduly disruptive to neighboring businesses
and/or residents, and that any number of business operators and/or residents
have not consented to the filming activity, the city manager may delay issuance
of the permit to determine the reasons, if any, for opposition to the proposed
filming activity. (Ord. 2293 § 1, 1995)
12.42.110: TERM OF PERMIT:
The term of the permit shall be for such period of time as is necessary to
complete the activities set forth in the application for the permit. (Ord. 2293
§ 1, 1995)
12.42.120: MODIFICATION, SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
   A.   If the activities described in the application form are not completed
when the permit expires, and upon good cause shown, the film permit officer may
extend the term of the permit for a period of time necessary to complete the
activities set forth in the application for the permit.
   B.   The city manager may temporarily suspend filming activity when police
and fire personnel assigned to the location are required to respond to an
emergency elsewhere in the city.
   C.   A permit may be revoked in the following circumstances:
      1.   Where there has been a material misrepresentation in the permit
application with respect to the nature of the filming activity, the number of
personnel or equipment, or other relevant matter;
      2.   If the permittee violates any of the conditions of approval,
performs those activities described in the application for photography/filming
permit in a manner that poses a threat to the public health and safety or the
preservation of property, or engages in activities outside the scope of the
activities described in the application.
   D.   No person shall conduct, or continue to conduct, filming activity after
suspension or revocation of a filming permit. (Ord. 2293 § 1, 1995)
12.42.130: AUTHORITY TO ESTABLISH RULES AND REGULATIONS:
   A.   The city manager is authorized to establish such rules and regulations
as are necessary to realize the purpose and intent of this chapter. Such rules
and regulations shall have as their objective the protection of the health and
safety of the persons affected by the filming activity and the avoidance of
undue disruptions of persons within the area of a filming location.
   B.   The city manager may delegate the responsibilities placed upon him by
this chapter to subordinate officers and employees. (Ord. 2293 § 1, 1995)
CHAPTER 12.44
PARKS
SECTION:
12.44.010: Definitions
12.44.020: Compliance Required
12.44.030: Applicability
12.44.040: Vehicle And Bicycle Operation
12.44.050: Solicitation Prohibited
12.44.060: Animals Prohibited; Exceptions
12.44.070: Duty To Care For Animals
12.44.080: Amplified Sound; Purpose Of Regulations
12.44.090: Amplified Sound; Permit Required
12.44.100: Amplified Sound; Grant Or Denial Of Permit
12.44.110: Amplified Sound; Appeal Of Permit Denial
12.44.120: Amplified Sound; Power Source Designated
12.44.130: Amplified Sound; Regulation Of Volume
12.44.135: Additional Alternate Power Sources; Approval, Inspection And Fees
12.44.140: Firearms, Fireworks And Toy Weapons Prohibited
12.44.150: Damaging Property Prohibited
12.44.160: Damaging Land Prohibited
12.44.170: Water
12.44.180: Fires And Camping (Rep. by Ord. 2825, 2015)
12.44.190: Picnicking
12.44.192: Tables And Picnic Benches; Conduct Prohibited
12.44.200: Disposal Of Waste Liquids And Refuse
12.44.210: Games
12.44.220: Advertising Matter
12.44.230: Permit Required To Sell Merchandise
12.44.240: Commercial Activity Prohibited
12.44.250: Park Hours
12.44.260: Meetings
12.44.270: Consumption Of Alcoholic Beverages
12.44.280: Reservation; Responsibility
12.44.282: Reservations; Sports Fields Fees
12.44.290: Reservation; Without Formal Permit
12.44.294: Redlands Community Center; Permit Fees
12.44.300: Reservation; Formal Permit; Generally
12.44.310: Reservation; Formal Permit; Application
12.44.320: Reservation; Formal Permit; Conditions
12.44.330: Reservation; Formal Permit; Additional Facilities
12.44.335: Reservation; Formal Permit; Time Limitations
12.44.340: Reservation; Formal Permit; Fees
12.44.350: Reservation; Formal Permit; Security
12.44.360: Reservation; Formal Permit; Reimbursement
12.44.370: Consent Required For Permit Or Reservation Transfer
12.44.380: Right Of Appeal
12.44.390: Insurance
12.44.400: Enforcement Responsibility (Rep. by Ord. 2823, 2015)
12.44.420: Drug Free Zones
12.44.430: Rules And Regulations Applicable To Redlands Skate Park At Sylvan
Park
12.44.010: DEFINITIONS:
The following words shall have the meaning indicated when used in this chapter:
   AMPLIFIED SOUND: Music, sound wave, vibration, or speech projected or
transmitted by electronic equipment, including amplifiers.
   DIRECTOR: The Director of the Facilities and Community Services Department,
or the Director’s authorized designee.
   PARK: Any park, playground, athletic facility, recreation area or center, or
any other area or structure maintained and operated by the City by itself or in
conjunction with any other governmental or private entity for recreational
purposes.
   PERMIT OR RESERVATION: Written authorization for exclusive use of parks or
buildings or portions thereof, as provided for and defined in this chapter.
   RISK MANAGER: The City's Risk Manager and his or her authorized designee.
   VEHICLE: Any device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved,
or drawn, excepting a device moved by human power. (Ord. 2919 § 1, 2021; Ord.
2823, 2015)
12.44.020: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
   A.   No person shall enter, be, or remain in any park unless he complies at
all times with all of the regulations set forth in this chapter applicable to
such park and with all other applicable laws, ordinances, rules and
regulations. The Director may establish such rules and regulations for use or
operation of City parks, in the interest of the public health, safety and
welfare which are not in direct conflict or less restrictive than the
provisions of this section, provided that signs describing such rules and
regulations, and the penalty for violation thereof, are placed and posted
adjacent to such park. Such rules and regulations shall be subject to the prior
approval of the City Manager.
   B.   Every person shall comply with all written rules and regulations
established and properly posted by the Director pursuant to this section; and
no person shall willfully disobey or comply with any lawful order or direction
of any City employee implementing, carrying out, or furthering the purpose of
any rule or regulation posted by the Director. The Director and the Director’s
designated employees shall have the authority to eject and expel from such park
any person who is in violation of this section, this chapter, or any rule or
regulation properly established by the Director. (Ord. 2919 § 2, 2021; Ord.
2081 § 1, 1989: prior code § 72101)
12.44.030: APPLICABILITY:
The rules and regulations set out in this chapter apply in all parks in the
city unless expressly stated otherwise elsewhere in this chapter. (Ord. 2081 §
1, 1989: prior code § 72200)
12.44.040: VEHICLE AND BICYCLE OPERATION:
   A.   Roads For Public Use: The provisions of the California Vehicle Code are
applicable in the city parks upon any way or place of whatever nature which is
publicly maintained and open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular
travel. All violations of said vehicle code shall be enforced and prosecuted in
accordance with the provisions thereof.
   B.   Surfaces Other Than Roads For Public Use: No person shall drive or
otherwise operate a vehicle in a city park, and no person shall ride a bicycle
(as defined in the California Vehicle Code) in a city park, upon surfaces other
than those maintained and open to the public for purposes of vehicular travel,
except upon temporary parking areas as may be designated from time to time by
the director, and further excepting vehicles in the service of the city.
   C.   Skateboard Use: No person shall ride or otherwise use a skateboard in a
city park upon surfaces other than those specifically designated, maintained
and posted as open to the public for such purpose, and each person engaging in
such skateboard activities does so at his own risk. (Ord. 2081 § 1, 1989: prior
code § 72201)
12.44.050: SOLICITATION PROHIBITED:
Except as provided in
Chapter 12.45 of this Code, no person shall practice, carry on, conduct or
solicit for any occupation, business, or profession in any city park or
building, or sell or offer for sale any merchandise, article, or anything
whatsoever, unless such person is acting pursuant to a contract with the city,
or pursuant to a permit granted by the director or approved by the city
council. (Ord. 2922, 2023: Ord. 2823, 2015)
12.44.060: ANIMALS PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS:
No person shall cause, permit, or allow any animal owned or possessed by him,
or any animal in his care, custody, or control to be present in a park except:
   A.   Equine animals being led or ridden under reasonable control upon any
bridle paths or trails provided for such purposes;
   B.   Equine or other animals which are hitched or fastened at a place
expressly designated for such purpose;
   C.   Dogs or cats when led by a cord or chain not more than six feet (6')
long, or when confined within the interior of a vehicle; provided, however,
dogs shall not be permitted within those portions of the city's sports park
managed by the American Youth Soccer Organization (AYSO) for the city during
the times AYSO is conducting or otherwise providing organized youth soccer
programs;
   D.   Dogs which have been specially trained and are being used by blind or
disabled persons to aid and guide them in their movements;
   E.   Small pets which are kept on the person of the possessor at all times;
   F.   In connection with activities authorized in writing by the director;
   G.   Fowl or animals turned loose at the direction of the director. (Ord.
2764, 2011)
12.44.070: DUTY TO CARE FOR ANIMALS:
   A.   It is the mandatory duty of all persons owning, possessing, in control
of, or otherwise responsible for a dog, a cat, or an equine animal in a city
park to promptly collect, pick up, and remove all fecal matter left behind by
said animal in or upon the park; but this section shall not apply to guide dogs
for blind or disabled persons.
   B.   Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor.
   C.   The director shall cause signs to be posted within all city parks
notifying persons owning or in control of animals of their obligation to comply
with the provisions of this section and section
12.44.060 of this chapter and the penalties for violation hereof. (Ord. 2764,
2011)
12.44.080: AMPLIFIED SOUND; PURPOSE OF REGULATIONS:
The city has enacted those sections of this chapter regulating amplified sound
for the sole purpose of securing and promoting the public health, comfort,
safety, and welfare of its citizenry. The use of electrical equipment of any
kind in a city park poses physical risks of harm for which the city may have
liability unless such use is reasonably regulated. Additionally, the right of
persons to speak is properly limited with regard to time, place and manner by
balancing the correlative constitutional rights of the citizens of this
community to privacy and freedom from the public nuisance of excessively loud
and unnecessary sound. (Ord. 2081 § 1, 1989: Ord. 1931 § 6, 1986: prior code §
72205(a))
12.44.090: AMPLIFIED SOUND; PERMIT REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to install, use, and operate within a park a
loudspeaker or any sound amplifying equipment for the purposes of giving
instructions, directions, talks, addresses, or lectures, or of transmitting
music to any persons or assemblages of persons in a park, or in the vicinity
thereof, except when installed, used, or operated in compliance with one of the
following provisions:
   A.   By authorized law enforcement or park and recreation personnel; or
   B.   Under a reservation or permit issued by the director, and when operated
in accordance with terms of that reservation or permit. (Ord. 2081 § 1, 1989:
Ord. 1931 § 6, 1986: prior code § 72205(b))
12.44.100: AMPLIFIED SOUND; GRANT OR DENIAL OF PERMIT:
   A.   In determining whether to grant or deny a permit, the director shall be
guided by the following considerations:
      1.   The extent to which sound may carry into private or residential
areas of the city.
      2.   Any actual conflict with other scheduled park uses or events.
      3.   The necessity for careful and safe provision of electricity and the
safety of individuals near such electrical sources.
   B.   The director shall not deny a permit on the basis of any dislike for or
disagreement with the content of any proposed talks, addresses, lectures, or
musical presentations. (Ord. 2823, 2015)
12.44.110: AMPLIFIED SOUND; APPEAL OF PERMIT DENIAL:
Upon denial by the director of an application made pursuant to this section,
the applicant may appeal to the city council within two (2) days thereafter by
filing an application and a copy of the notice of denial with the city clerk,
and requesting a hearing. The city clerk shall set the appeal for hearing by
the city council at its next regular meeting. Upon such appeal, the city
council may reverse, affirm or modify in any regard the determination of the
director. (Ord. 2823, 2015)
12.44.120: AMPLIFIED SOUND; POWER SOURCE DESIGNATED:
Amplifiers permitted in parks shall be operated only through a power source
provided by the parks division. (Ord. 2081 § 1, 1989: Ord. 1931 § 6, 1986:
prior code § 72205(e))
12.44.130: AMPLIFIED SOUND; REGULATION OF VOLUME:
If, at any time, the director determines that the sound produced by an
amplified sound system in a park is unreasonably interfering with other persons
using the park or with nearby residents in the comfortable and reasonable
enjoyment of their premises, the director shall request the person in charge of
the assembly, or any other person appearing to be involved in the production of
the sound, to immediately reduce the level thereof. If the sound is not reduced
within five (5) minutes to a reasonable level, the director may immediately
contact the parks division staff to curtail the power source. (Ord. 2823, 2015)
12.44.135: ADDITIONAL ALTERNATE POWER SOURCES; APPROVAL, INSPECTION AND FEES:
Any additional or alternate power source for lighting or other purposes which
may be required must be approved for such use by the city's building and safety
division and by the director, for safety, noise and appropriateness. The
building and safety division shall inspect all connections, wiring, and
components of sound, lighting and/or wiring systems prior to rehearsal and/or
performance, and may impose a fee for such inspections as established by
resolution of the city council. (Ord. 2823, 2015)
12.44.140: FIREARMS, FIREWORKS AND TOY WEAPONS PROHIBITED:
No person shall carry or discharge firearms, firecrackers, rockets, torpedoes,
or other types of explosives, or carry or discharge any air gun, or pistol, or
any slingshot or similar device, or any bows and arrows, or carry or use any
object calculated to make a noise sufficient to disturb the peace or quiet of
the park, or bring into any park any of the above objects or articles, and if
such objects or articles are brought into any public park, the person or
persons so bringing them in will be subject to having them taken away from his
person by the proper authorities. (Ord. 2081 § 1, 1989: prior code § 72206)
12.44.150: DAMAGING PROPERTY PROHIBITED:
No person shall cut, break, injure, deface, or disturb any tree, shrub, plant,
rock, building, cage, pen, monument, fence, bench, or other structure,
apparatus, or property, or pluck, pull up, cut, take, or remove any shrub,
bush, plant, or flower, or mark or write upon, paint, or deface in any manner
any building, monument, fence, bench, or other structure. (Ord. 2081 § 1, 1989:
prior code § 72207)
12.44.160: DAMAGING LAND PROHIBITED:
No person shall cut or remove any wood, turf, grass, soil, rock, sand, gravel,
or fertilizer. (Ord. 2081 § 1, 1989: prior code § 72208)
12.44.170: WATER:
No person shall swim, fish in, bathe, wade in, or pollute the water of any
fountain, pond, lake, stream, or reservoir except by permission of the
director. (Ord. 2081 § 1, 1989: prior code § 72209)
12.44.180: FIRES AND CAMPING:
(Rep. by Ord. 2825, 2015)
12.44.190: PICNICKING:
No person shall cook, prepare, serve, or eat any lunch, barbecue, or picnic
except at areas specifically designated for such purposes. (Ord. 2081 § 1,
1989: prior code § 72211)
12.44.192: TABLES AND PICNIC BENCHES; CONDUCT PROHIBITED:
No person shall sit upon or lie down on the top of any publicly owned table or
picnic bench except due to a medical emergency. (Ord. 2826, 2015)
12.44.200: DISPOSAL OF WASTE LIQUIDS AND REFUSE:
No person shall wash dishes, or empty salt water or other waste liquids, or
leave garbage, cans, bottles, papers, or other refuse elsewhere than in
designated trash or refuse receptacles. (Ord. 2081 § 1, 1989: prior code §
72212)
12.44.210: GAMES:
No person shall play or engage in any game, except in areas specifically
designated for such purposes. (Ord. 2081 § 1, 1989: prior code § 72213)
12.44.220: ADVERTISING MATTER:
No person shall distribute any handbills or circulars, or post, place, or erect
any bills, notice, paper, or advertising device or matter of any kind except
upon application to and as may be permitted by the director; provided, however,
in the director's discretion, the director may forward any such application to
the city council for consideration. (Ord. 2823, 2015)
12.44.230: PERMIT REQUIRED TO SELL MERCHANDISE:
No person shall sell or offer for sale any merchandise, article or thing,
except upon application to and as may be permitted by the director; provided,
however in the director's discretion, the director may forward any such
application to the city council for consideration. (Ord. 2823, 2015)
12.44.240: COMMERCIAL ACTIVITY PROHIBITED:
Except as provided in
Chapter 12.45 of this Code, no person shall practice, carry on, conduct, or
solicit for any trade, occupation, business or profession except upon
application to and as may be permitted by the director; provided, however, in
the director's discretion, the director may forward any such application to the
city council for consideration. In the event the director or city council
determines that commercial activity may be permitted, a concessionaire fee may
be imposed as a condition of the issuance of such permit. (Ord. 2922, 2023:
Ord. 2823, 2015)
12.44.250: PARK HOURS:
No person shall stay or remain in any public park between the hours of nine
o’clock (9:00) P.M. and six o’clock (6:00) A.M. of the following day without
permission of the Director. The provisions of sections
12.44.100 and
12.44.110 of this chapter shall govern the granting or denial of such
permission. The Director may establish seasonal, or other, hours of use and
operation for parks. Signs describing such hours of permissible use, and the
penalty for violation thereof, shall be placed and posted in accordance with
this Chapter. (Ord. 2919 § 3, 2021; Ord. 2823, 2015)
12.44.260: MEETINGS:
No person shall hold any meeting, service, concert, exercise, parade or
exhibition at which more than fifty (50) persons are expected to attend in any
public park without first obtaining a permit from the director. (Ord. 2081 § 1,
1989: Ord. 1931 § 10, 1986: prior code § 72220)
12.44.270: CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES:
No person shall drink or consume any alcoholic beverages or liquors in any open
area of any public park. A person may drink or consume alcoholic beverages or
liquors in public parks only in enclosed public areas as defined by resolution
of the city council pursuant to a written permit from the director. (Ord. 2193
§ 2, 1992: Ord. 2081 § 1, 1989: prior code § 72221)
12.44.280: RESERVATION; RESPONSIBILITY:
The director shall be responsible for scheduling and controlling the use of
parks, or portions thereof, for the maximum benefit and participation by
interested persons or groups, both public and private. All reservable areas in
Sylvan Park shall be subject to reservation according to the rules and
regulations of the parks division. Activities sponsored by the parks division
or recreation department shall be given preference in the use of city parks.
(Ord. 2081 § 1, 1989: prior code § 72300)
12.44.282: RESERVATIONS; SPORTS FIELDS FEES:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the City’s sports field
reservation process, and the application, field usage, and associated
facilities fees, shall be established by resolution of the City Council. Any
person, entity, or organization who violates any provision of any resolution
adopted pursuant to this section shall be deemed guilty of either a misdemeanor
or infraction, as set forth in
chapter 1.20 of this Code. (Ord. 2927 § 2, 2021)
12.44.290: RESERVATION; WITHOUT FORMAL PERMIT:
   A.   Groups of less than fifty (50) persons desiring the use of park areas
or structures may request the director to reserve designated park areas for
such use. All persons reserving picnic areas shall be subject to the fee
schedules applicable to these reserved areas.
   B.   If the director is satisfied from the information presented to him that
the desired area may be reserved for the intended use without unreasonably
interfering with the use of the park by other persons and without disturbing
the peace of the surrounding neighborhood, he may grant a reservation upon such
conditions as he deems necessary. The director will issue reservation forms as
necessary to verify the granting of such reservations.
   C.   If for any reason the director is not satisfied as to the
reasonableness of the proposed activity in relation to the use of the park by
other persons, or as to the effect of such use upon the peace of the
neighborhood, or if he finds that he is unable to agree with the person
requesting the reservation as to conditions to be imposed, he shall ask the
person to fill out a request for formal permit in accordance with the
procedures in sections
12.44.300 through
12.44.360 of this chapter. (Ord. 2193 § 4, 1992: Ord. 2081 § 1, 1989: prior
code § 72301)
12.44.294: REDLANDS COMMUNITY CENTER; PERMIT FEES:
Any person or group making application for use of the Redlands Community Center
shall pay the fees for such use as established by resolution of the city
council. (Ord. 2199 § 1, 1992)
12.44.300: RESERVATION; FORMAL PERMIT; GENERALLY:
The procedures set out in sections
12.44.310 through
12.44.360 of this chapter shall be followed by persons desiring to reserve park
areas for gatherings or assemblies of fifty (50) or more persons, and by
persons requested by the director to complete a request for formal permit under
the provisions as listed in section
12.44.290 of this chapter. (Ord. 2081 § 1, 1989: prior code § 72302)
12.44.310: RESERVATION; FORMAL PERMIT; APPLICATION:
Applications for formal permits must be submitted in writing upon forms
available at the quality of life department no less than two (2) weeks or more
than ninety (90) calendar days in advance of intended use. (Ord. 2823, 2015)
12.44.320: RESERVATION; FORMAL PERMIT; CONDITIONS:
The director may impose such reasonable conditions inconsistent with the
provisions of this chapter, upon the issuance of the formal permit as he deems
necessary for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare,
including, without limitation, conditions related to time, place, frequency,
duration, fees, consumption of alcoholic beverages, maximum attendance, parking
restrictions and placement of apparatus and equipment. Such conditions and fees
shall be set forth in writing and delivered to persons applying for
reservations at the time an application is requested. (Ord. 2199 § 2, 1992:
Ord. 2081 § 1, 1989: prior code § 72302(b))
12.44.330: RESERVATION; FORMAL PERMIT; ADDITIONAL FACILITIES:
The director may also require the applicant to provide additional water and
sanitary facilities and refuse receptacles as he reasonably believes to be
necessary for the protection of public health, safety, and welfare in
connection with the intended use. (Ord. 2081 § 1, 1989: prior code § 72302(c))
12.44.335: RESERVATION; FORMAL PERMIT; TIME LIMITATIONS:
Except as specifically authorized under special circumstances by the Director,
use of power tools in any park shall conclude no later than ten o'clock (10:00)
P.M. Rehearsals shall conclude no later than ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and
performances shall conclude no later than eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. (Ord.
2081 § 1, 1989)
12.44.340: RESERVATION; FORMAL PERMIT; FEES:
All fees in support of park areas and structures will be paid at least two (2)
weeks prior to the issuance of the formal permit unless special arrangements
for payment have been approved in advance by the Director. Park fees or
deposits may include, without limitation, such amounts as may be determined by
the Risk Manager to be reasonably necessary as security for repair of damage to
park property, for cost of cleanup, and for extra personnel to regulate conduct
and traffic. (Ord. 2081 § 1, 1989: Prior Code § 72302(d))
12.44.350: RESERVATION; FORMAL PERMIT; SECURITY:
The Director may require the applicant to provide a designated number of
approved security personnel as may be required by the Chief of Police. (Ord.
2081 § 1, 1989: Prior Code § 72302(e))
12.44.360: RESERVATION; FORMAL PERMIT; REIMBURSEMENT:
The applicant shall agree to reimburse the City for any unusual cleanup and
facility repair expenses and for services provided by the Parks Division or the
Police Department incurred as a result of the activity authorized by the
permit. (Ord. 2081 § 1, 1989: Prior Code § 72302(f))
12.44.370: CONSENT REQUIRED FOR PERMIT OR RESERVATION TRANSFER:
No permit or reservation for the use of a park, or any portion thereof, shall
be transferable without the written consent of the Director. (Ord. 2081 § 1,
1989: Prior Code § 72303)
12.44.380: RIGHT OF APPEAL:
Any person aggrieved by any act or determination of the Director or the Chief
of Police in the exercise of the authority herein granted shall have the right
to appeal to the City Council. The appeal shall be in writing, stating the
decision appealed from and the reasons for the appeal. That appeal shall be
filed with the City Clerk within five (5) working days after the occurrence of
the act or determination forming the basis for the appeal. The appeal shall be
heard by the Council at the first regular Council meeting occurring more than
five (5) days after the filing of the appeal. (Ord. 2081 § 1, 1989: Prior Code
§ 72400)
12.44.390: INSURANCE:
Persons or groups holding an event requiring a permit under this chapter within
any City park may be required to provide evidence of current insurance, with
the City being named as an additional insured insuring the City from any and
all liability for injury to persons or property resulting from the event. The
minimum amount of such insurance shall be determined by the Risk Manager in his
or her discretion. This section shall not apply to City sponsored activities.
(Ord. 2823, 2015)
12.44.400: ENFORCEMENT RESPONSIBILITY:
(Rep. by Ord. 2823, 2015)
12.44.420: DRUG FREE ZONES:
The following parks and adjacent parking lots and sidewalks are hereby
designated "drug free zones" pursuant to California Health and Safety Code
section 11380.5: Sylvan Park, Jennie Davis Park, Smiley Park, Prospect Park,
Community Park, Lugonia Park, Ford Park, Texonia Park, Caroline Park, Brookside
Park, Crafton Park, Ed Hales Park and Hillside Memorial Park. (Ord. 2273 § 1,
1995)
12.44.430: RULES AND REGULATIONS APPLICABLE TO REDLANDS SKATE PARK AT SYLVAN
PARK:
   A.   It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section for any person to
engage in, or for any adult responsible for the supervision of a minor child to
permit the minor child to engage in, any activity prohibited under this
section.
   B.   The Redlands skate park is an unsupervised facility. Riding or
otherwise using a skateboard or any other permitted wheeled recreational device
in the skate park, or entering into the skate park for the purpose of engaging
in such activity, without a helmet, elbow pads and knee pads is prohibited.
   C.   Other wheeled recreational devices permitted in the skate park are
limited to non-motorized bicycles, scooters, in-line skates, roller skates, or
wheelchairs.
   D.   Use of motorized vehicles within the skateboard park is prohibited.
   E.   Additional ramps, jumps, obstacles or any other equipment are
prohibited within the skate park, except as may be authorized in writing by the
Director.
   F.   The use of wheeled recreational devices, including skateboards and in-
line skates are considered hazardous recreational activities that create a
substantial risk of serious injury or death to participants, those assisting
participants, and spectators of such activities. All users of the skate park
voluntarily assume the risk of serious injury or death in the use of the skate
park.
   G.   The skate park shall be open for use during the hours that Sylvan Park
is open; provided, however, the Director may establish seasonal, or other,
hours of use and operation for the skate park. Signs describing such hours of
permissible use, and the penalty for violation thereof, shall be placed and
posted in accordance with this chapter.
   H.   The Director may establish such rules and regulations for use or
operation of the skate park, in the interest of the public health, safety and
welfare which are not in direct conflict or less restrictive than the
provisions of this section, provided that signs describing such rules and
regulations, and the penalty for violation thereof, are placed and posted
adjacent to the skate park. Such rules and regulations shall be subject to the
prior approval of the City Manager.
   I.   Every person shall comply with all written rules and regulations
established and properly posed by the Director pursuant to this section; and no
person shall willfully disobey or comply with any lawful order or direction of
any City employee implementing, carrying out, or furthering the purpose of any
rule or regulation posted by the Director. The Director and the Director’s
designated employees shall have the authority to eject and expel from the skate
park any person who is in violation of this section, this chapter, or any rule
or regulation properly established by the Director. (Ord. 2919 § 4, 2021; Ord.
2888, 2019)
CHAPTER 12.45
SIDEWALK VENDING
SECTION:
12.45.010: Purpose
12.45.020: Definitions
12.45.030: Stationary Sidewalk Vending Locations And Standards
12.45.040: Standards For Sidewalk Vending In Parks
12.45.050: Standards For Roaming Sidewalk Vending
12.45.060: Administrative Fines
12.45.010: PURPOSE:
The City finds that the vending of prepared or pre-packaged foods, goods, and/
or wares at semi-permanent locations on public sidewalks and rights-of-way may
pose unsafe conditions and special dangers to the public health, safety, and
welfare of residents and visitors and the local environment. The purpose of
this Chapter is to implement regulations on both roaming and stationary
sidewalk vending that protect the public health, safety, and welfare of the
community and the local environment while complying with the requirements of
general state law, as amended from time to time, to promote safe vending
practices, prevent safety, traffic, and health hazards, and preserve the public
peace, safety, and welfare of the community and the local environment. (Ord.
2922, 2023)
12.45.020: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this Chapter, the following words shall have the meanings
ascribed to them:
CERTIFIED  A location operated in accordance with Chapter 10.5 (commencing with Section
FARMERS'   47000) of Division 17 of the Food and Agricultural Code and any regulations
MARKET:    adopted pursuant to that chapter.
CITY:      The City of Redlands.
CITY EVENT A permit issued by the City for temporary uses (i.e. special event permits,
PERMIT:    temporary use permits, film permits, or park reservations).
           The calendar day of any concert, trade show, conference, sporting event, or any
EVENT DAY: other event potentially attracting large numbers of persons and vehicles to the
           venue.
PARK:      A public park owned by the City.
ROAMING
SIDEWALK   A sidewalk vendor who moves from place to place and stops only to complete a
VENDOR OR  transaction.
VENDING:
SIDEWALK   A person who sells, offers to sell, operates, engages in, or carries on a food or
VENDOR OR  merchandise vending business from a pushcart, stand, display, pedal-driven cart,
VENDING:   wagon, showcase, rack, or other non-motorized conveyance, or from one's person,
           upon a public sidewalk or other pedestrian path.
           Any individual, whether a resident of the City or not, using telephone service or
           other communication, or traveling by foot, wagon, automobile, motor truck, or any
           other type of conveyance from place to place, from house to house, or from street
           to street taking, or attempting to take, orders for the sale of goods, wares,
           merchandise, or personal property of any nature whatsoever for future delivery,
           or for services to be furnished or performed in the future, whether or not such
SOLICITOR  individual has, carries, or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such sale
or         or whether the individual is collecting advance payments on such sales or not.
CANVASSER: 1.   "Solicitor" or "canvasser" shall include any person who, for such person, or
           for another person, firm, or corporation, hires, leases, uses, or occupies any
           building, structure, tent, vehicle, hotel room, lodging house, apartment, shop,
           or any other place in the City for the sole purpose of exhibiting samples and
           taking orders for future delivery.
           2.   Such definition shall not include solicitors or canvassers taking orders or
           displaying merchandise exclusively from a public sidewalk or public pedestrian
           path in compliance with Chapter 5.60 of this Code.
STATIONARY
SIDEWALK   A sidewalk vendor who engages in sidewalk vending from a fixed location. (Ord.
VENDOR OR  2922, 2023)
VENDING:
 
12.45.030: STATIONARY SIDEWALK VENDING LOCATIONS AND STANDARDS:
   A.   Stationery sidewalk vendors are prohibited from operating in the City
unless they have obtained a valid business license. As part of the application
for a business license, the stationary sidewalk vendor shall submit proof of
general liability insurance naming the City of Redlands as an additional
insured in the amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) and, if the vendor
is preparing and/or selling food, a copy of a current San Bernardino County
Department of Environmental Health Services permit issued to the vendor. The
permits and proof of insurance shall be posted for public view during vending
activities.
   B.   Stationary sidewalk vendors are prohibited from operating or
establishing in any residential zone of the City.
   C.   Stationary sidewalk vendors may operate in non-residential zones of the
City, including mixed use zones, seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to two o'clock (2:
00) A.M. Monday through Sunday provided they meet the following:
      1.   The sidewalk vendor can set up vending operations while still
leaving a minimum of thirty-six inches (36") of accessible path of travel,
without obstruction, along the public sidewalk or public pathway; and
      2.   The sidewalk vendor maintains the vending area in a clean, orderly,
and sanitary condition; and
      3.   The sidewalk vendor does not block entrances to buildings,
driveways, parking spaces or building windows; and
      4.   No vending shall occur within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant,
fire escape, loading zone, handicapped parking space or access ramp, fire
station driveway, or police station driveway; and
      5.   In order to achieve the minimum accessible path of travel set forth
in subsection C1, only one (1) table, two (2) chairs and one (1) umbrella shall
be permitted in conjunction with the vendor's vending activities. No fences,
shade structures, other site furniture, or any freestanding signs are
permitted; and
      6.   The vendor shall not attach or use any water lines, electrical
lines, gas lines or power generators during vending operations; and
      7.   Exterior storage or display of refuse, equipment, materials, goods,
wares, or merchandise associated with the vendor is prohibited; and
      8.   No vending shall occur within two hundred feet (200') of any City-
sponsored or co-sponsored events, the Certified Farmers' Market, construction-
related street or lane closure, filming location, the Redlands Municipal
Airport, Event Day, or an event held pursuant to a City Event Permit; and
      9.   No vending shall occur within a corner cutoff area. A corner cutoff
area is that area at all intersecting and intercepting streets or highways. The
cutoff line shall be in a horizontal plane, making an angle of forty five
degrees (45°) with the side, front, or rear property line, as the case may be.
It shall pass through the points located on both sides and front or rear
property lines at a distance of thirty feet (30') from the intersection of such
lines at the corner of a street or highway; and
      10.   No vending shall occur within one hundred feet (100') of the
property line of any school; any postsecondary educational facility attended by
secondary pupils; or any private kindergarten, elementary, or secondary school
facility; and
      11.   No vending shall occur within three feet (3') of any street lights,
edges of tree wells, parking meters, or above-ground utility structures; and
      12.   No vending shall occur within three feet (3') of any existing
subsurface utility box, valve, or vault; and
      13.   No vending shall occur within thirty feet (30') of another vendor;
and
      14.   No vending shall occur within three feet (3') of bus stop
locations, red curbs, or at locations where there are existing above-ground
amenities such as newsstands or street furniture, including but not limited to
benches and bike racks; and
      15.   No vending shall occur within fifty feet (50') from the centerline
of a rail line.
      16.   No vending shall occur in public streets, roadways, medians,
pedestrian islands, parking lots, alleys, or bikeways; and
      17.   No vending shall occur within thirty feet (30') of the entrance way
to any building, store, theater, movie house, house of worship, or place of
public assembly; and
      18.   Open burning or open flame devices are not permitted to be
utilized. (Ord. 2922, 2023)
12.45.040: STANDARDS FOR SIDEWALK VENDING IN PARKS:
   A.   Sidewalk vending of food or merchandise by roaming or stationary
vendors shall be prohibited in any City Park with a concession stand operated
by a vendor under exclusive contract with the City selling similar food or
merchandise.
   B.   Sidewalk vendors may operate in Parks provided they meet the following:
      1.   For stationary sidewalk vending, the sidewalk vendor can set up
vending operations while still leaving a minimum of thirty-six inches (36") of
accessible path of travel, without obstruction, along the public sidewalk or
public pathway; and
      2.   The sidewalk vendor shall cease operations one (1) hour prior to the
close of the park; and
      3.   The sidewalk vendor maintains the vending area in a clean, orderly,
and sanitary condition; and
      4.   The sidewalk vendor location does not block entrances to buildings,
driveways, parking spaces, or building windows; and
      5.   No vending shall occur within five hundred feet (500') of an Event
Day or event held pursuant to a City Event Permit; and
      6.   No vending shall occur within a corner cutoff area. A corner cutoff
area is that area at all intersecting and intercepting streets or highways. The
cutoff line shall be in a horizontal plane, making an angle of forty five
degrees (45°) with the side, front, or rear property line, as the case may be.
It shall pass through the points located on both sides and front or rear
property lines at a distance of thirty feet (30') from the intersection of such
lines at the corner of a street or highway; and
      7.   The sidewalk vendor does not cause an undue concentration of
commercial activity that unreasonably interferes with the scenic and natural
character of the park or the public's use and enjoyment of natural resources,
including the accessibility of such natural resources by persons with
disabilities, and recreational opportunities or regulations directly related to
objective health, safety or wellness concerns; and
      8.   No vending shall occur in public streets, roadways, medians,
pedestrian islands, parking lots, alleys, or bikeways; and
      9.   Open burning or open flame devices are not permitted to be utilized.
(Ord. 2922, 2023)
12.45.050: STANDARDS FOR ROAMING SIDEWALK VENDING:
Roaming sidewalk vendors shall meet the following:
   A.   Roaming sidewalk vendors are prohibited from operating in the City
unless they have obtained a valid business license. As part of the application
for a business license, the roaming sidewalk vendor shall submit proof of
general liability insurance naming the City as an additional insured in the
amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) and, if the vendor is preparing
and/or selling food, a copy of a current San Bernardino County Department of
Environmental Health Services permit issued to the vendor. The permits and
proof of insurance shall be available for inspection during vending activities
upon request; and
   B.   Sidewalk vending hours for residential zones shall be conducted from
sunrise to sunset Sunday through Saturday; and
   C.   The sidewalk vendors shall maintain their temporary vending area in a
clean, orderly, and sanitary condition; and
   D.   The sidewalk vendor does not block entrances to buildings, driveways,
parking spaces, or building windows; and
   E.   The sidewalk vendor does not conduct sales from a public street; and
   F.   No vending shall occur within a corner cutoff area. A corner cutoff
area is that area at all intersecting and intercepting streets or highways. The
cutoff line shall be in a horizontal plane, making an angle of forty five
degrees (45°) with the side, front, or rear property line, as the case may be.
It shall pass through the points located on both sides and front or rear
property lines at a distance of thirty feet (30') from the intersection of such
lines at the corner of a street or highway; and
   G.   No vending shall occur within two hundred feet (200') of a city-
sponsored or co-sponsored event, the Certified Farmers' Market, construction-
related street or lane closure, filming location, the Redlands Municipal
Airport, an Event Day or an event held pursuant to a City Event Permit; and no
vending shall occur within one hundred feet (100') from the property line of
any school; any postsecondary educational facility attended by secondary
pupils; or any private kindergarten, elementary, or secondary school facility;
and
   H.   No vending shall occur within three feet (3') of any street lights,
edges of tree wells, parking meters, or above-ground utility structures; and
   I.   No vending shall occur within three feet (3') of any existing
subsurface utility box, valve, or vault; and
   J.   No vending shall occur within thirty feet (30') of another vendor; and
   K.   No vending shall occur within three feet (3') of bus stop locations,
red curbs, or at locations where there are existing above-ground amenities such
as newsstands or street furniture, including but not limited to benches and
bike racks; and
   L.   No vending shall occur within fifty feet (50') from the centerline of a
rail line; and
   M.   No vending shall occur in public streets, roadways, medians, pedestrian
islands, parking lots, alleys, or bikeways; and
   N.   No vending shall occur within thirty feet (30') of the entrance way to
any building, store, theater, movie house, house of worship, or place of public
assembly. (Ord. 2922, 2023)
12.45.060: ADMINISTRATIVE FINES:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision, or fail to
comply with any requirements, of this Chapter. A violation of this Chapter
shall by punished by:
      1.   A Notice of Violation shall be issued for a first violation.
      2.   An administrative fine not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00) for a
second violation within one (1) year of the first violation.
      3.   An administrative fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00)
for a third violation within one (1) year of the first violation.
      4.   An administrative fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00)
for each additional violation within one (1) year of the first violation.
   B.   Any violation of this Chapter shall not be punishable as an infraction
or misdemeanor, and any person alleged to have violated any provisions of this
Chapter shall not be subject to arrest except when otherwise permitted under
law.
   C.   When assessing an administrative fine pursuant to this Chapter, the
adjudicator shall take into consideration the person's ability to pay the fine.
The City shall provide the person with notice of his or her right to request an
ability-to-pay determination and shall make available instructions or other
materials for requesting an ability-to-pay determination. The person may
request an ability-to-pay determination at adjudication or while the judgment
remains unpaid, including when a case is delinquent or has been referred to a
comprehensive collection program.
      1.   If the person meets the criteria described in subdivision (a) or (b)
of Government Code section 68632, the City shall accept, in full satisfaction,
twenty percent (20%) of the administrative fine imposed pursuant to this
Chapter.
      2.   The City may allow the person to complete community service in lieu
of paying the total administrative fine, may waive the administrative fine, or
may offer an alternative disposition.
   D.   A sidewalk vendor that is preparing and/or selling food without a valid
San Bernardino County Department of Environmental Health Services permit may
have their food discarded when it is determined by the City's enforcement
officer that there is an immediate threat to the public health and safety.
   E.   Nothing contained herein shall be construed to impede the City's or the
County's ability to enforce San Bernardino County Health Department codes and
regulations. (Ord. 2922, 202
CHAPTER 12.46
UNLAWFUL CAMPING AND STORAGE OF PERSONAL PROPERTY IN PUBLIC PLACES
SECTION:
12.46.010: Declaration Of Purpose
12.46.020: Definitions
12.46.030: Prohibited Acts
12.46.040: Storage Of Personal Property In Public Places
12.46.050: Exceptions
12.46.060: Enforcement
12.46.010: DECLARATION OF PURPOSE:
   A.   The city council finds that this chapter is reasonably necessary to
preserve and protect the public peace, health, safety, and the general welfare
of the city, its residents, and businesses.
   B.   This chapter establishes reasonable regulations related to the usage of
space within the city and unlawful camping while preserving the rights of
individuals to use public property to exercise their first amendment and other
constitutional rights.
   C.   The purpose of this chapter is to maintain public streets and property,
and limited private property such as private streets and parking lots, in a
clean, safe and accessible condition for residents and the public at large; to
promote and protect human sanitation and health while preserving appropriate
recreational opportunities within the community; and to discourage or prevent
the secondary impacts of vagrancy such as crime, visual blight, poor
sanitation, disease, and promote desirable economic activity and economic
development while accommodating circumstances of necessity.
   D.   Nothing in this chapter is intended to prohibit or make unlawful,
activities of an owner of private property or other lawful user of private
property that are normally associated with and incidental to the lawful and
authorized use of private property for residential or other purposes; and
provided further, nothing is intended to prohibit or make unlawful, activities
of a property owner or other lawful user if such activities are expressly
authorized by other provisions of this code or other laws, ordinances and
regulations. (Ord. 2825, 2015)
12.46.020: DEFINITIONS:
   CAMP: To pitch, sleep in, cook in or occupy camp facilities or to use camp
paraphernalia for the purpose of temporary or permanent human habitation or
domicile. "Camp" shall not mean the use of any facilities or equipment which is
used solely in connection with a special event conducted in accordance with a
permit issued by the city under other provisions of this code.
   CAMP FACILITIES: Include, but are not limited to, tents, huts, or temporary
shelters.
   CAMP PARAPHERNALIA: Includes, but is not limited to, collapsible shelters,
cots, beds, sleeping bags, bed rolls, hammocks or barbecues, open fires,
portable stoves or other cooking equipment not provided or approved by the
city.
   PARKING LOT: A land area or facility for the temporary parking of motor
vehicles.
   PRIVATE PROPERTY ACCESSIBLE TO THE PUBLIC: Privately owned property in the
city, improved or unimproved, that lacks a physical barrier to entry,
including, but not limited to, any of the following: privately owned streets;
privately owned parking lots; and property that is unenclosed and undeveloped.
   PUBLIC PROPERTY: Any publicly owned property in the city, improved or
unimproved, including, but not limited to, any of the following: public
alleyways; public parking lots; public passageways; public streets; public
rights of way; publicly owned, maintained or operated parks; publicly owned,
maintained or operated landscaped areas or greenbelts; publicly owned,
maintained or operated open spaces, including, but not limited to, public
facilities or buildings of any kind; publicly owned, maintained or operated
golf courses and related facilities; public sidewalks, curbs and gutters;
public educational institutions; or other government owned, maintained or
operated properties located within the city.
   STORE: To put aside or accumulate for use when needed, to put for
safekeeping, or to place or leave in a location for an unreasonable amount of
time. (Ord. 2825, 2015)
12.46.030: PROHIBITED ACTS:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to camp or occupy camp facilities or use
camp paraphernalia in any of the following areas within the city, except as
otherwise provided herein or mandated by applicable law:
      1.   Any public property or public or private street or right of way,
including sidewalks, bus stops, and public landscaping;
      2.   Any public yard, building setback, vacant land, or open space, or
any other area open or accessible to the public, improved or unimproved;
      3.   Any public or private parking lot not fenced and open to the public;
      4.   In, on, under, or adjacent to any structure not intended for human
occupancy, whether with or without bedding or camp paraphernalia, including,
but not limited to, a tent, hammock or other similar protection or equipment;
and
      5.   Under, or adjacent to, a parked vehicle on any public property or
public or private parking lot.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person to make or kindle an open fire on public
or private property accessible to the public except in an appropriate
containment device provided or approved for that purpose by the city fire
marshal and city building official.
   C.   It is not intended by this section to prohibit temporary overnight
camping on private residential property by friends or family of the property
owner, so long as the owner consents. (Ord. 2825, 2015)
12.46.040: STORAGE OF PERSONAL PROPERTY IN PUBLIC PLACES:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to store personal property, including
camp facilities and camp paraphernalia, in the following areas, except as
otherwise designated by the city:
      1.   On any public property or public or private street or right of way
within the city;
      2.   On any public yard, building setback, vacant land, open space or any
other public area open or accessible to the public, improved or unimproved;
      3.   On any public or private parking lot;
   B.   All stored personal property may be impounded by the city provided:
      1.   Immediate removal of the personal property without notice as
required in subsection B2 of this section is necessary to protect public
health, safety, or welfare, including, but not limited to, when the location of
the personal property restricts for emergency response personnel or vehicles;
or
      2.   A written notice is served on the person storing the personal
property or is posted prominently and conspicuously on the stored personal
property. The written notice shall contain the following:
         a.   A description of the personal property to be removed (such
description may refer to an attached photograph).
         b.   The location of personal property.
         c.   The date and time the notice was posted.
         d.   The section of the Redlands municipal code that is being
violated.
         e.   A statement that the personal property will be impounded if not
removed within twenty four (24) hours.
         f.   The location where the removed property will be stored.
         g.   A statement that impounded property will be sold or otherwise
disposed of if not claimed within ninety (90) days after impoundment.
         h.   A statement that the property owner shall be responsible for all
costs of removal, storage and disposal.
      3.   Impounded personal property shall be moved to a place of storage,
and the owner shall be assessed moving, storage, and other related fees and
costs. Additionally, the owner of impounded personal property shall bear the
responsibility for the risk of any loss or damage to the impounded property.
Any impounded property of a perishable nature may be disposed of immediately in
any manner without notice after impoundment by the city.
      4.   At least thirty (30) days prior to disposal of impounded personal
property, the city shall serve notice in writing apprising the owner of the
personal property of the description and location of the impounded personal
property and the intent of the city to sell, donate, or otherwise dispose of
the impounded property. Service of written notice shall be by personal service
or by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of
the owner of the impounded property if the owner is known or can be determined.
Where the identity or the address of the owner is unknown or cannot be
determined through the exercise of reasonable diligence, the notice shall be
posted for three (3) consecutive days on the public property where the property
was stored or seized. If notice cannot be posted as provided heretofore, then
it shall be posted on the internet website of the city for three (3)
consecutive days.
      5.   The owner or any other person entitled to the impounded personal
property may repossess the property prior to its disposal upon submitting
satisfactory proof of ownership or entitlement and payment of all unpaid rent,
debts, and charges owing and all handling, storage, appraisal, advertising, and
other expenses incurred by the city in connection with the proposed disposal of
the impounded property.
      6.   All fees and unpaid rent, debts and charges owing and all expenses
of handling, storage, appraisal, advertising, and other sale expenses incurred
by the city shall be deducted from the proceeds of any sale of the impounded
property. Any amount remaining shall be held in trust for the owner of the
property for thirty (30) days after sale, after which time the proceeds shall
be paid into the general fund.
   C.   The city shall maintain a record of the date and method of disposal of
the impounded personal property, including the consideration received for the
property, if any, and the name and address of the person taking possession of
the property. Such record shall be kept as a public record for a period of not
less than one year from the date of disposal of the property.
   D.   The city and its officers, employees, and agents shall not be liable to
the owner of impounded personal property because of any disposal of the
property made pursuant to this chapter. The remedies available to the owner of
impounded property are limited to those provided in this chapter.
   E.   The provisions of this section shall not apply to any personal property
or money subject to confiscation pursuant to state or federal laws or to
personal property or money that constitutes evidence in an ongoing criminal
investigation and/or civil proceeding pursuant to state or federal law. (Ord.
2825, 2015)
12.46.050: EXCEPTIONS:
This chapter shall not apply to camping, occupying camp facilities or using
camp paraphernalia, or to any person storing personal property, including camp
paraphernalia within the city:
   A.   Where the area has been designated by the city for such purposes and
the activity has been permitted as a temporary use or special event pursuant to
the provisions of this code regulating temporary special events; or
   B.   Where a gathering, meeting or event is sponsored or conducted by the
city. (Ord. 2825, 2015)
12.46.060: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision or to fail to
comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. In addition to other
remedies provided by law, any person violating any provision of the chapter is
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
   B.   Each person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and
every day, or any portion thereof, during which any violation of or failure to
comply with any of the provisions of this chapter is committed, continued or
permitted by such person, and each instance shall be deemed a punishable
offense as provided in this chapter.
   C.   The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed as permitting
conduct not prescribed herein and shall not affect the enforceability of any
other applicable provisions of law.
   D.   Any citation issued for a violation of this chapter may be dismissed
upon review by the city manager or his or her designee if, in the interest of
justice, at the time of citation issuance, all homeless shelters serving
populations in the city were full to capacity, the person cited had no
reasonable or adequate alternative course of action, and the person cited did
not substantially contribute to the circumstances necessitating camping as his
or her only reasonable course of action. (Ord. 2825, 2015)
CHAPTER 12.47
SITTING OR LYING DOWN ON SIDEWALKS IN THE DOWNTOWN COMMERCIAL AREA
SECTION:
12.47.010: Definitions
12.47.020: Prohibition
12.47.030: Exceptions
12.47.040: Warning
12.47.050: Violation; Penalty
12.47.010: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings ascribed to them:
   COMMERCIAL AREA OF DOWNTOWN REDLANDS: That geographical area bounded by
Eureka Street on the west, Pearl Avenue on the north, Church Street on the
east, and Olive Avenue on the south. (Ord. 2826, 2015)
12.47.020: PROHIBITION:
No person shall sit or lie down upon the public sidewalk, or upon a blanket,
chair, stool, or any other object placed upon the public sidewalk, in the
commercial area of downtown Redlands during the hours from eight o'clock (8:00)
A.M. to two thirty o'clock (2:30) A.M. (Ord. 2826, 2015)
12.47.030: EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   The prohibition set forth in section
12.47.020 of this chapter shall not apply to:
      1.   Any person sitting or lying down on the sidewalk due to a medical
emergency;
      2.   Any person who, as the result of a disability, utilizes a wheelchair
or similar device to move about the public sidewalk;
      3.   Any child accompanied by an adult who is seated in and using a
stroller or similar device to move about the public sidewalk;
      4.   Any person sitting upon a chair, bench, or planter box wall which
has been designed to be sat upon, located on the public sidewalk and which is
placed there by a public agency;
      5.   Any person sitting or lying down upon a chair or bench located upon
the public sidewalk which was placed there by an abutting private property
owner or tenant pursuant to a sidewalk encroachment permit, or temporary street
closure permit;
      6.   Any person sitting or lying down while conducting, attending or
participating in any activity or event which is authorized by a lawfully issued
temporary street closure permit or other permit issued by the city which
permits use of the public sidewalk;
      7.   Any person sitting on a public sidewalk within a bus zone while
waiting for public or private transportation. (Ord. 2826, 2015)
12.47.040: WARNING:
No person shall be cited under this chapter unless the person engages in
conduct prohibited by this chapter after having been notified by a law
enforcement officer that he or she is in violation of the prohibition of this
chapter. (Ord. 2826, 2015)
12.47.050: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine not
exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment for not exceeding
six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 2826, 2015)
CHAPTER 12.48
REDLANDS BOWL
SECTION:
12.48.010: Reservation Of Seating Space
12.48.010: RESERVATION OF SEATING SPACE:
It is unlawful for any person or persons to reserve or to attempt to reserve
during the absence of such person or persons any seating space at the Redlands
Bowl in Smiley park by placing any object or objects, including blankets, seat
cushions and articles of clothing, in or upon such seating space. This section
shall not apply to the "saving" or "holding" of any seating space by any person
or persons for one or more other persons while any entertainment presentation
is in progress. (Ord. 1952 § 1, 1986: prior code § 72304)
CHAPTER 12.49
HILLSIDE MEMORIAL PARK
SECTION:
12.49.010: Governing Regulations
12.49.020: Dogs Not Allowed On Cemetery Grounds
12.49.030: Violation; Penalty
12.49.010: GOVERNING REGULATIONS:
Except as specified in this code, the use and operation of the Hillside
Memorial park shall be governed by the provisions of resolution 4334 of the
city, as amended, or any later resolution which replaces resolution 4334. As
used in this chapter, "Hillside Memorial park" means the cemetery owned and
operated by the city and located at the intersection of Alessandro Road and
Sunset Drive in the city. (Ord. 2024 § 1, 1988)
12.49.020: DOGS NOT ALLOWED ON CEMETERY GROUNDS:
It is unlawful for any person to cause or allow any dog or dogs to be present
on the grounds of Hillside Memorial park, whether leashed or unleashed, unless
at all times confined within an automobile. (Ord. 2024 § 1, 1988)
12.49.030: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person who wilfully violates any of the provisions of this chapter is
guilty of an infraction punishable as provided in section
1.20.020 of this code. (Ord. 2024 § 1, 1988)
CHAPTER 12.52
TREES AND TREE PROTECTION ALONG STREETS AND IN PUBLIC PLACES
SECTION:
12.52.010: Purpose Of Chapter
12.52.020: Definitions
12.52.030: Applicability
12.52.040: Director Authority
12.52.050: Superintendent Authority
12.52.060: Appeals Of Director Or Superintendent Actions
12.52.070: Tree Protection Guidelines
12.52.080: Consultation Policy
12.52.090: Protection Policy
12.52.100: Designation Of Landmark Trees
12.52.110: Designation Of Native And Specimen Trees
12.52.120: Obstruction; Trees Pruned On Private Property
12.52.130: Abuse Or Mutilation Of Public Trees
12.52.140: Work On Public Trees
12.52.150: Exemptions; No Permit And/Or Fee Required For Certain Planting,
Pruning And Removal
12.52.160: Prohibited Acts
12.52.170: Sidewalk And Street Repair
12.52.180: Placement Of Materials On Public Property
12.52.190: Protection Of Trees During Improvements
12.52.200: Attachments To Public Trees
12.52.210: Interference
12.52.220: Prosecution Of Violations
12.52.230: Remedies Not Exclusive
12.52.010: PURPOSE OF CHAPTER:
Redlands is graced by the presence of thousands of mature trees that contribute
long term aesthetic, environmental and economic benefits to the city.
Aesthetically, trees offer dimensions in the form of color, shape, texture,
scale and variety. Mature trees are often integral components of many historic
sites and their presence contributes to the site's cultural and historic
significance. Environmental benefits derived from trees include the filtering
of air pollutants, increasing atmospheric oxygen levels, the stabilization of
soils, reducing heat convection, decreasing wind speed and reducing the
negative effects of solar glare. The biological diversity of wildlife and plant
communities is enhanced by the favorable conditions created by trees. The
economic benefits derived from trees include increased property values and
additional revenue generated by businesses, visitors and new residents
attracted to the urban forest image of the city. Trees are a major capital
asset of the city and like any valuable community asset, they require
appropriate care and protection. Therefore, it is the purpose of this chapter
to:
   A.   Preserve and grow Redlands' canopy cover by protecting landmark, native
and specimen, and public trees in specified areas and expanding the protection
of street trees and trees on public property.
   B.   Safeguard the city's urban forest by providing for the regulation of
the protection, planting, maintenance and removal of public trees in the city.
   C.   Protect the visual and aesthetic character of the city.
   D.   Improve and enhance property values by conserving and adding to the
distinctive and unique aesthetic character of the many areas of the city.
   E.   Improve the quality of life for residents, visitors and wildlife.
   F.   Create favorable conditions for the protection of designated landmark,
native and specimen, and public trees for the benefit of current and future
residents of the city.
   G.   Maintain and enhance the general health, safety and welfare of the city
and its residents by assisting in counteracting air pollution and in minimizing
soil erosion and other related environmental damage. (Ord. 2554 § 1, 2004)
12.52.020: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms are defined as follows:
   CITY: The city of Redlands.
   CITY MANAGER: The city manager of the city or the city manager's designee.
   DIRECTOR: The public works director of the city or the director's authorized
designee.
   HAZARD OR HAZARDOUS: A tree, or part of a tree, that has a potential for
failure and falling because of dead, or dying or diseased branches, roots or
trunk.
   INJURE: Any act or omission which substantially affects or seriously
jeopardizes the health of a living tree, in the determination of the director.
   LANDMARK TREE: A public tree designated as a historic resource under chapter
2.62 of this code as a tree of historic or cultural significance and of
importance to the community due to any of the following factors: it is one of
the largest or oldest public trees of the species located in the city, it has
historical significance due to an association with a historic building, site,
street, person or event, or it is a significant outstanding feature of a
neighborhood.
   LOCATED OR LOCATION OF A TREE: That place where any portion of the trunk of
a tree is found at natural grade.
   MAINTAIN OR MAINTENANCE: Pruning, trimming, spraying, fertilizing, watering,
and/or treating for disease or injury or any other similar act which promotes
growth, health, beauty and the life of trees.
   MASTER STREET TREE PLAN: The comprehensive street tree plan, approved by the
city council, which lists the official street trees to be planted or replaced
for all streets or sections of streets within the city.
   MEDIAN OR TRAFFIC ISLAND: A raised area within a street not used for
vehicular traffic.
   MEDIUM TREES: Those trees attaining a height of thirty (30) to forty five
feet (45').
   MULTITRUNK: Any tree with multiple trunks attributed to a single tree. Each
trunk shall be measured at a height of four and one- half feet (41/2') above
natural grade, and the combined diameters of the trunks shall be used to
determine the tree's size for the purposes of this chapter.
   NATIVE TREE: Any tree, identified by a certified arborist as native to the
local area, with a trunk more than eight inches (8") in diameter at a height of
four and one-half feet (41/2') above natural grade that is identified on a list
of native trees approved by the city council.
   OFFICIAL STREET TREE: An approved species of street tree designated in the
master street tree plan.
   PARK: All public parks within the city.
   PARKWAY OR TREE LAWN: That part of a street or highway, not covered by
sidewalk or other paving, lying between the property line and the curb or edge
of pavement on that portion of the street or highway used for vehicular
traffic.
   PERSON: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind.
   PROPERTY OWNER: The person owning any property shown by record in the
official records of the county of San Bernardino.
   PRUNING: The appropriate shaping and the removal of dead, dying, diseased,
life interfering and weak branches according to the most recent standards of
the International Society of Arboriculture.
   PUBLIC PLACE: Streets and public right of way, all parks and other grounds
owned by the city.
   PUBLIC TREE: A tree located in a public place or area under ownership or
control of the city, including, but without limitation, city streets, parkways,
open space and park lands.
   SPECIMEN TREE: Any public tree meeting the criteria established by
resolution of the city council by species and size of tree which is thereby
presumed to possess distinctive form, size or age and to be an outstanding
specimen of a desirable species and to warrant the protections of this chapter.
   STREET: Any public right of way regardless of whether it is described as a
street, avenue, road, boulevard, drive, lane, court, place, alley or by any
other such designation. This includes the entire width of every public way or
right of way when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for
purposes of vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
   STREET TREE: Any public tree whose trunk is located primarily within any
parkway, public sidewalk, street median, traffic island or other right of way
under the ownership or control of the city by easement, license, fee title or
other permissive grant of use.
   SUPERINTENDENT: The city's public works operations manager, the urban
forester or any other person designated by the public works director to
administer and supervise the city's public tree programs. (Ord. 2554 § 1, 2004)
12.52.030: APPLICABILITY:
The provisions of this chapter providing protection for specific trees shall
apply as follows, unless otherwise excepted by provisions of this chapter:
   A.   Native and specimen trees, as defined herein.
   B.   Landmark trees, as defined herein.
   C.   Public trees, as defined herein. (Ord. 2554 § 1, 2004)
12.52.040: DIRECTOR AUTHORITY:
The director shall have the authority to:
   A.   Recommend to the city council changes or additions to the master street
tree plan;
   B.   Recommend to the city's planning commission and city council the size,
species and location of street trees required to be planted by development
projects seeking planning commission and city council approvals;
   C.   Make determinations on public tree planting, pruning, trimming and
removal based upon evaluations made by a certified arborist, other relevant
facts, public health, welfare and safety concerns and upon established public
tree removal criteria;
   D.   Recommend enforcement of this chapter through the code enforcement
division of the Redlands police department for alleged violations of this
chapter;
   E.   Affix reasonable conditions, to protect the public health, safety, and
welfare to any approval issued pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 2554 § 1, 2004)
12.52.050: SUPERINTENDENT AUTHORITY:
The superintendent shall have the authority to:
   A.   Administer rules and regulations of the arboricultural specifications
and standards of practice, to govern the planting, maintenance, removal,
fertilization, pruning and bracing of trees on the streets or other public
places in the city.
   B.   The superintendent shall further have the authority to enforce the
provisions of this chapter and, in the superintendent's absence, these duties
may be delegated to a qualified alternate designated by the director.
   C.   Formulate a master street tree plan with the advice and recommendation
of the parks and recreation advisory commission and the street tree committee.
The master street tree plan shall specify the species of trees to be planted on
each of the streets and other public places within the city. From and after the
effective date of the city council's adoption of the master street tree plan,
and any amendment thereof, all planting shall conform thereto. The
superintendent shall consider all existing and future utility and environmental
factors when recommending a specific tree species for streets and other public
places within the city. The superintendent, with the advice and recommendation
of the parks and recreation advisory commission and the city's street tree
committee, shall have the authority to recommend amendments to the master
street tree plan to the city council at any time.
   D.   Regulate and inspect all planting, trimming, maintenance and removal of
trees on streets and other public places within the city to ensure public
safety and preserve the aesthetic character of the city.
   E.   Regulate and inspect all work done under any approval for tree work
issued pursuant to this chapter.
   F.   Affix reasonable conditions, to protect the public health, safety and
welfare, to any approval issued pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 2745, 2011:
Ord. 2554 § 1, 2004)
12.52.060: APPEALS OF DIRECTOR OR SUPERINTENDENT ACTIONS:
Any person aggrieved by any administrative action taken by the director or the
superintendent under this chapter may appeal from the action, in writing, to
the city manager. If the action appealed from arises in connection with a
request for a permit pursuant to subsection
12.52.140C2 of this chapter, the city manager shall render his or her decision
within four (4) hours of receipt of the appeal. In the appeal of all other
matters, the city manager shall render his or her decision within three (3)
working days of receipt of the appeal. The decision of the city manager shall
be final. (Ord. 2554 § 1, 2004)
12.52.070: TREE PROTECTION GUIDELINES:
Tree protection guidelines are the standards and specifications for the
protection of trees under this chapter. The tree protection guidelines, and any
revision thereto, shall be effective as of the date of their adoption by
resolution of the city council. (Ord. 2554 § 1, 2004)
12.52.080: CONSULTATION POLICY:
All departments, agencies and personnel of the city shall consult with the
director prior to engaging in any action which would require the removal of, or
which would otherwise substantially affect or jeopardize the health of, any
public tree. Citrus trees in designated public citrus groves, under the
direction of the citrus preservation commission, are exempt from this
consultation policy. (Ord. 2554 § 1, 2004)
12.52.090: PROTECTION POLICY:
It shall be the policy of the city to protect and maintain mature and healthy
public trees. Special consideration shall be afforded public, landmark, native
and specimen trees as set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 2554 § 1, 2004)
12.52.100: DESIGNATION OF LANDMARK TREES:
Any person or city agency may propose to the director that a public tree meets
the criteria set forth in the definition of "landmark tree" in section
12.52.020 of this chapter and should be designated as a city landmark. (Ord.
2554 § 1, 2004)
12.52.110: DESIGNATION OF NATIVE AND SPECIMEN TREES:
All public trees meeting the definition of native or specimen trees in section
12.52.020 of this chapter are automatically subject to the protections of this
chapter as of the effective date hereof. (Ord. 2554 § 1, 2004)
12.52.120: OBSTRUCTION; TREES PRUNED ON PRIVATE PROPERTY:
It shall be a violation of this chapter to allow any tree, shrub or plant
located primarily on private property to create a hazard or to create danger or
likelihood of harm to any public place, public area, parkway or street or to
public health, safety or welfare. It shall be the duty of any person owning or
occupying real property bordering on any street upon which property there may
be trees, to prune such trees in such manner that they will not obstruct or
shade the streetlights, obstruct the passage of pedestrians on sidewalks,
obstruct vision of traffic signs, or obstruct the view of any street or alley
intersection. The minimum clearance of any overhanging portion thereof shall be
ten feet (10') over sidewalks and twelve feet (12') over all streets except
truck thoroughfares, which shall have a clearance of sixteen feet (16').
   A.   Notice To Prune: Should any person owning real property bordering on
any street fail to prune trees as hereinabove provided, the superintendent
shall order such person, within ten (10) days after receipt of written notice,
to so prune such trees.
   B.   Order Required: The order required herein shall be served by mailing a
copy of the order to the last known address of the property owner, by certified
mail.
   C.   Failure To Comply: When a person to whom an order is directed shall
fail to comply within the specified time, it shall be lawful for the city to
prune such trees, and the exact cost thereof shall be assessed to the owner as
may be provided for by law. (Ord. 2554 § 1, 2004)
12.52.130: ABUSE OR MUTILATION OF PUBLIC TREES:
Unless specifically authorized by the superintendent, no person shall
intentionally damage, cut, carve, allow any vines to grow more than three feet
(3') in height on trunk, transplant, or remove any publicly owned tree, allow
any rope, wire, nails, advertising posters or other contrivance to be attached
to any publicly owned tree; allow any gaseous liquid, or solid substance which
is harmful to such trees to come in contact with them; or set fire or permit
any fire to burn when such fire or the heat thereof will injure any portion of
any tree. (Ord. 2554 § 1, 2004)
12.52.140: WORK ON PUBLIC TREES:
   A.   Planting, Maintenance And Removal Of Trees: No person shall plant,
chemically spray, fertilize, preserve, prune, remove, cut or otherwise disturb
any public tree without first procuring a permit from the director. All
persons/companies obtaining such permits shall abide by the arboricultural
specifications and standards of practice and any other rules promulgated by the
superintendent.
   B.   Contract Tree Trimming: For those persons willing to bear the cost of
trimming street trees, a licensed tree trimming company may be hired. A
"license" is defined as an appropriate class C-27 or related state of
California contractor's license and a city business license. Such tree trimming
companies shall have been in business for a minimum of five (5) years and shall
have no verified complaints filed against them to the Better Business Bureau or
the contractor's state license board. Such tree trimming companies shall also
have a certified arborist on staff. Persons may contract with such tree
trimming companies, to trim public trees fronting their property provided said
person or tree trimming company obtains the required permit from the city.
Permits for tree trimming and removals shall only be issued to authorized tree
trimming companies pursuant to this chapter.
   C.   Issuance Of Permits: The director or the superintendent may issue a
permit provided for herein if the proposed work complies with the following
criteria:
      1.   It is desirable for the aesthetics of the area or neighborhood and
the proposed method of workmanship is of a satisfactory nature; or
      2.   It addresses a defined and verified public health, welfare and
safety concern, including the removal of dead, dying or diseased trees, trees
or branches within the defined limits of the California public utilities
commission clearance requirements from electrical facilities, trees damaged as
a result of a traffic accident or other accidental cause, and trees causing
damage to private or public property where such damage cannot be remedied
without removal of the tree; or
      3.   It relates to an approved development project where the subject
trees interfere with the ability of the developer to comply with and implement
the approved conditions of approval; and
      4.   All work shall comply with the standards established by the
International Society of Arboriculture.
Any permit granted may contain a definite date of expiration and the work shall
be completed in the time and manner provided in the approval. Any permit shall
be void if its terms are violated. Permits are required for any work on public
trees unless specifically exempt under this chapter.
   D.   Notice: Notice of completion of the tree work shall be given within
five (5) working days to the superintendent for his inspection of the work.
   E.   Improper Planting: Whenever any tree is planted or set out in conflict
with the provisions of this chapter, it shall be lawful for the superintendent
to remove or cause removal of the same, and the cost thereof shall be assessed
to the owner as provided by law.
   F.   Removal, Replanting And Replacement: Wherever it is necessary to remove
a tree or trees from a parkway or tree lawn in connection with the paving of a
sidewalk, or the paving or widening of the portion of a street or highway used
for vehicular traffic, the city shall require that such trees be replanted or
replaced. In the event conditions prevent planting on the parkway or tree lawn,
this requirement will be satisfied if any equivalent number of trees, at least
fifteen (15) gallon or greater in size as determined by the director, and
species as approved by the director, are planted in an attractive manner on the
adjoining property or location designated by the director.
   G.   Prohibition Against Removal: No person shall remove a tree from a
parkway or tree lawn for the purpose of construction, or for any other reason,
without first filing an application and being issued a permit from the director
or the superintendent, and without replacing the removed tree or trees in
accordance with this chapter. Such replacement shall meet the standards of
species and placement as provided for in the permit issued by the director or
the superintendent. The person proposing to remove any tree shall bear the cost
of removal and replacement of all trees removed.
   H.   Permit Fee Required: Before the director or superintendent shall issue
any permit to any individual or firm, a permit fee, in the amount established
by resolution of the city council shall be paid by the applicant, unless the
permit fee is specifically waived by this chapter. (Ord. 2554 § 1, 2004)
12.52.150: EXEMPTIONS; NO PERMIT AND/OR FEE REQUIRED FOR CERTAIN PLANTING,
PRUNING AND REMOVAL:
   A.   No permit is required to prune or remove a tree that is not protected
by this chapter.
   B.   Where immediate action is required for the protection of life or
property, no permit is required to remove or to injure a public tree which has
been determined to be hazardous by the director, any police officer or any
firefighter, after inspection of the tree.
   C.   No permit is required for city employees or its contractors to do the
following: to prune any public trees under the direction of the director; and
to injure or remove any public trees as the director has determined is
necessary or prudent for the public health, safety or welfare. All tree removal
shall be otherwise consistent with adopted public tree removal criteria.
   D.   No permit is required to prune, injure or remove a public tree on a
project for which a variance, conditional use permit or design review approval
has been obtained from the city prior to the effective date hereof or for a
project for which a valid building permit has been lawfully issued by the city
prior to the effective date hereof.
   E.   No permit fee shall be required from persons or entities who donate and
plant public trees in parkways or other public places, provided there is no
city requirement through a discretionary permit process to plant such public
trees. Any trees planted shall conform to the approved street tree list and
master street tree plan. The donation of a tree and planting shall be
considered a gift to the city. (Ord. 2554 § 1, 2004)
12.52.160: PROHIBITED ACTS:
The following are prohibited acts under this chapter unless expressly exempted:
   A.   To prune, injure or remove a public tree located anywhere in the city
without a permit issued by the director.
   B.   To plant a tree of a species other than an official street tree in a
parkway, median or traffic island.
   C.   To fail to adhere to the terms and conditions of any permit issued
under this chapter.
   D.   To fail to adhere to the terms of any public tree protection plan
imposed as a condition of any discretionary land use approval or development
agreement with the city. (Ord. 2554 § 1, 2004)
12.52.170: SIDEWALK AND STREET REPAIR:
The repair of sidewalks, curbs, gutters or streets may create a need to prune
tree roots to the extent that the tree is damaged or becomes unstable. When
this occurs, the director, whose decision shall be final, shall provide for the
general health, safety and welfare of the public and remove the tree as
necessary. Sidewalks, curbs, gutters and other infrastructure shall be
maintained by placement of a temporary asphaltic concrete patch or other
suitable material until such times as permanent repairs can be made. (Ord. 2554
§ 1, 2004)
12.52.180: PLACEMENT OF MATERIALS ON PUBLIC PROPERTY:
No person shall deposit, place, store or maintain upon any public place within
the city, any stone, brick, sand, concrete or other material which may impede
the free passage of water, air and fertilizer to the roots of any tree growing
therein, unless issued a permit by the director. (Ord. 2554 § 1, 2004)
12.52.190: PROTECTION OF TREES DURING IMPROVEMENTS:
During the construction, repair, alteration, relocation or removal of any
building or structure in the city, no person in control of such work shall
leave any landmark, native, specimen or other public tree without sufficient
guards or protections to prevent injury to the public landmark, native,
specimen or other public tree, in connection with such construction, repair,
alteration, relocation or removal and it shall be a violation of this chapter
to do so. All trees on any street or other public place near any excavation or
construction of any building, structure or street work, shall be guarded with a
substantial fence, frame or box not less than four feet (4') high and eight
feet (8') square, or at a distance in feet from the tree equal to the diameter
of the trunk in inches at breast height, whichever is greater, and all building
material, dirt or other debris shall be kept outside that barrier. No person
shall excavate any ditches, tunnels, trenches, or lay any driveway within a
radius of ten feet (10') from any public tree without first obtaining a permit
from the director. (Ord. 2554 § 1, 2004)
12.52.200: ATTACHMENTS TO PUBLIC TREES:
No person shall, without a permit issued by the director, attach or keep
attached to any public tree, street tree, shrub or plant in any street, park or
other public place of the city, or to the guard or stake intended for the
protection thereof, any wire, rope, sign, nail or any other device. (Ord. 2554
§ 1, 2004)
12.52.210: INTERFERENCE:
No person shall hinder, prevent, delay or interfere with any city employee or
city contractor acting under this chapter. (Ord. 2554 § 1, 2004)
12.52.220: PROSECUTION OF VIOLATIONS:
A violation of any provision of this chapter may be prosecuted as a misdemeanor
or infraction, at the option of the city attorney, as the interests of justice
warrant. (Ord. 2554 § 1, 2004)
12.52.230: REMEDIES NOT EXCLUSIVE:
To the maximum extent permitted by law, the administrative remedies specified
in this chapter are in addition to, and do not supersede or limit, any and all
other remedies of the city for violation of this chapter whether civil or
criminal. The remedies provided for herein shall be cumulative and not
exclusive. (Ord. 2554 § 1, 2004)
CHAPTER 12.54
PUBLIC PLACES; SMOKING PROHIBITED
SECTION:
12.54.010: Definitions
12.54.020: Public Parks
12.54.030: Public Notice
12.54.040: Disposal
12.54.050: Reprisal
12.54.060: Enforcement And Penalty
12.54.010: DEFINITIONS:
   A.   For purposes of this chapter, "park" means any public park or portion
of a public park, such as picnic areas, located within the city and includes
any city owned recreational areas including, for example, the Redlands Bowl,
the Avice Meeker Sewall Theater and the Redlands sports park.
   B.   For purposes of this chapter, "smoking" means inhaling, exhaling,
burning or carrying any lighted cigar, cigarette, weed, plant or other
combustible substance that is inhaled or exhaled in any form or manner.
   C.   For purposes of this chapter, "tobacco products" mean any substance
containing tobacco leaf, including, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars,
pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco, dipping tobacco, bidis or any other
preparation of tobacco. (Ord. 2546 § 1, 2003)
12.54.020: PUBLIC PARKS:
Except for those persons participating in an authorized performance at the
Redlands Bowl or at the Avice Meeker Sewall Theater, smoking is prohibited
within all public parks in the city. (Ord. 2546 § 1, 2003)
12.54.030: PUBLIC NOTICE:
"No smoking" or "smoke free" signs, with letters of no less than one inch (1")
in height, or with the international "no smoking" symbol (consisting of a
pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a
bar across it), shall be clearly, sufficiently and conspicuously posted by the
city in every public park in which smoking is prohibited by this chapter.
Signage shall include the city phone number where complaints may be directed.
(Ord. 2546 § 1, 2003)
12.54.040: DISPOSAL:
No person shall dispose of smoking waste or tobacco product waste within the
boundaries of a public park except in a designated waste disposal container.
(Ord. 2546 § 1, 2003)
12.54.050: REPRISAL:
No person shall intimidate, threaten any reprisal, or effect any reprisal, for
the purpose of retaliating against another person who seeks to attain
compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 2546 § 1, 2003)
12.54.060: ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTY:
The remedies provided by this chapter are cumulative and in addition to any
other remedies available at law or in equity.
   A.   Causing, permitting, aiding, abetting or concealing a violation of this
chapter shall also constitute a violation of this chapter.
   B.   All violations of this chapter shall be misdemeanors.
   C.   Violations of this chapter are hereby declared to be public nuisances.
(Ord. 2546 § 1, 2003)
CHAPTER 12.55
SIGNS ON PUBLIC PROPERTY
SECTION:
12.55.010: Proprietary Capacity
12.55.020: Intent As To Public Forum
12.55.030: Signs Must Be Permitted Or Exempted
12.55.040: Temporary Political, Religious, Labor Protest And Other
Noncommercial Signs In Traditional Public Forum Areas
12.55.050: Public Property Sign Permits; Application Forms And Procedures
12.55.060: Exemptions From Permit Requirement
12.55.070: Permits For A-Frame And Vertical Pole Banner Signs
12.55.080: Real Estate For Sale "Kiosk" Signs In Particular Locations
12.55.090: Signage Associated With Use Of Public Property For Special Events
12.55.100: Use Of City Property For Banners
12.55.110: Permits For Commercial Freeway; Visible Signs On City Armory
Property
12.55.120: Directional Signs
12.55.130: Signs For Bus Shelters On City Property
12.55.010: PROPRIETARY CAPACITY:
In adopting this chapter, the city council acts in its proprietary capacity as
to public property within the city. (Ord. 2520 § 1, 2002)
12.55.020: INTENT AS TO PUBLIC FORUM:
The city declares its intent that all city owned public property in the city
(public property) shall not function as a designated public forum unless some
specific portion of public property is designated herein as a public forum of
one particular type. In such case, the declaration as to public forum type
shall apply strictly, and only to the specified area and the specified time
period, if any. (Ord. 2520 § 1, 2002)
12.55.030: SIGNS MUST BE PERMITTED OR EXEMPTED:
   A.   No "sign", as defined in this code, may be displayed on public property
unless a public property sign permit therefor has first been issued, or the
sign is expressly exempted from the public property sign permit requirement by
this chapter.
   B.   All public property sign permits shall be consistent with this chapter.
Any sign posted on public property contrary to the provisions of this chapter
may be summarily removed as a trespass and a nuisance by the city. (Ord. 2520 §
1, 2002)
12.55.040: TEMPORARY POLITICAL, RELIGIOUS, LABOR PROTEST AND OTHER
NONCOMMERCIAL SIGNS IN TRADITIONAL PUBLIC FORUM AREAS:
   A.   In areas qualifying as traditional public forums, such as streets,
parks and sidewalks, persons may display noncommercial message signs thereon
without first obtaining a public property sign permit, provided that the sign
display on public property conforms to all of the following:
      1.   Signs must be personally held by a person, or personally attended by
one or more persons. "Personally attended" means that a person is physically
present within five feet (5') of the sign at all times.
      2.   Signs may be displayed only during the time period of sunrise to
sunset.
      3.   The maximum aggregate size of all signs held by a single person is
ten (10) square feet.
      4.   The maximum size of any one sign which is personally attended by one
or more persons is fifty (50) square feet.
      5.   Displayed signs may not be inflatable or air activated.
      6.   To protect the city's interests in traffic flow and safety, persons
displaying signs under this section may not stand in any vehicular traffic lane
when a roadway is open for use by vehicles, and persons displaying signs on
public sidewalks must give at least five feet (5') width clearance for
pedestrians to pass by. (Ord. 2520 § 1, 2002)
12.55.050: PUBLIC PROPERTY SIGN PERMITS; APPLICATION FORMS AND PROCEDURES:
   A.   The community development director shall prepare and make available to
the public a form of application for a public property sign permit which shall,
when fully approved by the community development director, constitute a public
property sign permit ("permit") and indicate the city's consent, in its
proprietary capacity, for placement of a sign. The applicant for the permit
must be the same person or entity who is to be the owner of the sign. The
processing fee for each application, which shall not be refundable even if the
application is denied, shall be the same as the fee for a private sign permit
under this code or as established by resolution of the city council. The
application form shall require the applicant to indicate that he or she has
read this chapter and that the applicant shall abide by its terms, as well as
any special terms or conditions which may be stated on the permit, and to abide
by any new or different conditions which may be imposed on all permittees who
are similarly situated.
   B.   Any public property sign permit issued in error may be summarily
revoked by any officer of the city by simply informing the applicant of the
nature of the error in issuance. Any applicant whose permit is revoked as
issued in error may, at any time thereafter, submit a new permit application
which cures any deficiencies in the original application. The application fee
shall apply separately to each new application. Applications which fully comply
with the terms and conditions of this chapter shall be duly issued.
Applications which are denied, or permits which are revoked or suspended, may
be appealed in the same manner as denials of sign permits, as described in this
code.
   C.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, an application for
a public property sign permit for a sign on city armory property pursuant to
section
12.55.110 of this chapter shall be approved by the city council. (Ord. 2520 §
1, 2002)
12.55.060: EXEMPTIONS FROM PERMIT REQUIREMENT:
The following signs are exempted from the permit requirement of this chapter:
traffic control and traffic directional signs erected by the city or another
governmental unit; official notices required by law; signs placed by the city
in furtherance of its governmental functions; and signs allowable under section
12.55.040 of this chapter. (Ord. 2520 § 1, 2002)
12.55.070: PERMITS FOR A-FRAME AND VERTICAL POLE BANNER SIGNS:
   A.   The public right of way areas and display sign times regulated by this
section are designated to constitute a limited access, public forum which is
strictly limited and open only to those persons and entities described in this
section, and on the terms stated in this section.
   B.   An "A-frame" or a "freestanding vertical pole banner" sign may be
placed in the public right of way, on the public sidewalk directly in front of
the store or other establishment displaying the sign. Such signs may have no
more than two (2) display faces, and each display face shall be a flat, smooth
surface, and remain completely free of dangerous protrusions such as tacks,
nails or wires; however, cutouts of any shape are allowed. Sign faces shall be
back to back. No ribbons, streamers, balloons or attachments of any kind may be
affixed to the sign. Signs may not consist of any moving parts or include a
display face which is hinged, or which otherwise swings or hangs from the "A-
frame", and must be stretched taut on the "freestanding vertical pole banner".
No glass, breakable materials or illumination is allowed for such signs. Signs
shall be physically stable and balanced flat on the sidewalk, and must be self-
supporting, stable and weighted, and constructed to withstand overturning by
wind or contact.
   C.   An "A-frame" or a "freestanding vertical pole banner" sign may be
located within the following zoning districts and specific plans:
      1.   Neighborhood stores district (C-1);
      2.   Neighborhood convenience center district (C-2);
      3.   General commercial district (C-3);
      4.   Highway commercial district (C-4);
      5.   Commercial industrial district (C-M);
      6.   Transitional district (T);
      7.   Administrative and professional office district (A-P);
      8.   Administrative-professional-commercial district (A-P-C);
      9.   Town center (TC), service commercial (SC), and town center- historic
(TC-H) land use districts within specific plan 45;
      10.   General commercial (CG), commercial industrial (IC), administrative
professional (AP), regional commercial (CR), and commercial transition (TC)
land use districts within the east valley corridor specific plan;
      11.   Specific plan 25; and
      12.   Specific plan 33.
   D.   An "A-frame" or a "freestanding vertical pole banner" sign may be
placed in the public right of way only when the business establishment for
which such sign is permitted is open. The sign must be placed on the public
sidewalk, directly in front of such business.
   E.   Each display face shall have a maximum area of six (6) square feet. An
"A-frame" sign shall not exceed three feet (3') in height or two feet (2') in
width. A "freestanding vertical pole banner" sign shall not exceed six feet
(6') in height at its highest point, including structural mechanism, or two
feet (2') in width. Changeable copy area of the sign is permitted for one
hundred percent (100%) of the display face. No such sign may have special
illumination and the display portion may have no parts which move, flash, blink
or fluoresce. Fluorescent or "Day-Glo" colors are not allowed. No paper or
nonrigid changeable copy areas are allowed.
   F.   An "A-frame" or a "freestanding vertical pole banner" sign shall not be
permanently affixed to any object, structure or the ground, including utility
poles, light poles, trees or other plants, or any merchandise or products
displayed outside buildings. At no time shall a sign be placed in the street or
in any position which impedes the smooth and safe flow of vehicular and
pedestrian traffic, or which interferes with driver or pedestrian sightlines or
corner clear zone requirements as specified by the city. No sign shall be
placed in such a manner as to obstruct access to a public sidewalk, public
street, driveway, parking space, fire door, fire escape or handicapped person
access. A clear area of at least six feet (6') in width shall be maintained for
pedestrian use over the entire length of the sidewalk in front of the business,
and no sign shall be placed within eight feet (8') of a permanent pedestrian
seating structure or area, or placed within a city parkway.
   G.   Signs shall not obscure or interfere with the effectiveness of any
official notice or public safety device. Signs shall not simulate in color or
design a traffic sign or signal, or make use of words, symbols or characters in
such a manner as may confuse pedestrians or drivers.
   H.   Every sign and all parts thereof shall be kept in good repair. The
display surface shall be kept clean, neatly painted and free from dust, rust
and corrosion. Any cracked, broken surfaces, missing sign copy or other
unmaintained or damaged portion of a sign shall be repaired or replaced or
removed within twenty (20) days following notice by the city.
   I.   The "A-frame" and "freestanding vertical pole banner" signs allowed by
this section may be displayed only by business establishments with ground floor
frontage on streets, whose business is not already identified on a multiple-
tenant street sign, who hold a currently valid city business license, who are
not currently in violation of, or nonconformance with, any of the zoning, land
use, environmental or business laws of the city, and who do not have a
freestanding sign.
   J.   An application (in a form to be supplied by the city) and application
fee (as established by resolution of the city council) will be required prior
to the issuance of permit to allow a sign on the sidewalk in the public right
of way. The permit will be issued by the city of Redlands municipal utilities
and engineering department. The permit attaches to the business at the location
specified. If the business is sold or transferred, and remains at the same
location, then the permit shall automatically transfer to the new owner or
transferee, who shall be bound to the terms and conditions of the original
permit. However, if the business which first obtained the permit moves to a
different location, or if the location is then taken by a new business, a new
application and permit shall be required.
   K.   A permit is issued for one year, but may be revoked or canceled at will
by the city. Any permit may be revoked for noncompliance, thirty (30) calendar
days after notice of noncompliance remains uncured, or in the case where the
sign constitutes a threat to the public health, safety or welfare. When a
permit is revoked, the owner of the sign must physically remove it from the
public right of way within twenty four (24) hours of notice of revocation. Upon
failure to do so, the city may summarily remove the sign and hold it in storage
for a maximum of thirty (30) days, during which time the owner may reclaim the
sign upon payment of costs of removal and storage.
   L.   There is no guarantee that the city will continue the program stated
herein. Permittees hold no expectation of renewal of any given permit, acquire
no vested right to continue displaying the sign on public property, and waive
all claims of uncompensated taking of private property as to the permitted sign
when they submit an application for such sign. Each permittee must apply for
permit renewal within sixty (60) days before the annual date of original
issuance. Renewal may be sought on a form prepared by the city for that purpose
with a fee as established by resolution of the city council. The city has no
duty to remind or notify any permittee of the need to renew. Failure to timely
seek renewal means that a new application must be submitted, with the new
application fee. At the city's option, any given permit may be renewed by a
stamp, sticker or official notation on the original permit, or by an entirely
new permit, or by a letter indicating renewal.
   M.   The city may give notice, by any reasonable means, that consent to
display an "A-frame" and "freestanding vertical pole banner" sign is or shall
be withdrawn temporarily so as to serve a more urgent or more important public
need, such as, without limitation, dealing with a natural disaster, a traffic
emergency, a temporary need to make more space available on the public right of
way, a civil disturbance, a parade, an election or other special event. In
urgent situations, the city may summarily remove a permitted sign without
notice, for a time sufficient to deal with the urgency. All permittees shall
comply with all notices to temporarily remove the permitted signs, and to
return them to display only in accordance with the city's directions.
   N.   A business issued a permit under this section shall obtain public
liability insurance from an insurance company licensed to do business in the
state of California which provides "occurrence" coverage against liability for
death, personal injury or property damage arising out of or in any way
connected with such event. Such insurance shall be in the amount of at least
one million dollars ($1,000,000.00), combined single limit, and shall name the
city and the city's elected officials, employees and agents as additional
insureds under the coverage afforded. In addition, such insurance shall be
primary and noncontributing with respect to any other insurance available to
city. Proof of such insurance with endorsements, in a form approved by the
city's risk manager, shall be filed with the city prior to the issuance of the
permit, and such insurance shall be maintained in full force and effect as long
as the "A-frame" or "freestanding vertical pole banner" is displayed.
   O.   The city may, at any time and for any reason, cancel or modify this
program allowing "A-frame" and "freestanding vertical pole banner" signs in the
public right of way. (Ord. 2785, 2013)
12.55.080: REAL ESTATE FOR SALE "KIOSK" SIGNS IN PARTICULAR LOCATIONS:
   A.   Intent As To Public Forum: The city's intent as to this section is to
designate a strictly limited nonpublic forum, which allows only the posting, in
places deemed convenient by the city, of directional information regarding
tract housing developments which are currently selling homes located within the
city.
   B.   Kiosk Signs: Kiosk signs are permanent freestanding structures, not
exceeding ten (10) square feet in area, which contain modular information
strips providing information about tract housing developments which are
currently selling new homes located within the city. Such signs may display
only the following information: the name of the development, developer and/or
marketer thereof, and the direction and distance to the development from the
sign.
   C.   Contract For Signs: The city may enter into a contract with a private
contractor to design, erect, modify, replace, maintain and manage the kiosk
signs allowed by this section.
   D.   Kiosk Management: In the event the city selects a contractor to manage
the kiosks, the city may require the contractor to provide evidence of
comprehensive general liability insurance coverage, in a form satisfactory to
the city, which shall name the city as an additional insured and provide thirty
(30) day notice to the city of modification or cancellation. The minimum
liability coverage on such policy shall be one million dollars ($1,000,000.00).
Any management contract shall include a provision for the contractor to hold
harmless, defend and indemnify the city against all claims relating to property
damage or personal injury, including death, which assert that the kiosk sign
played any legally significant role in the creation of the liability.
   E.   Location Designations: The kiosks allowed by this section may be
located only in areas designated by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 2520
§ 1, 2002)
12.55.090: SIGNAGE ASSOCIATED WITH USE OF PUBLIC PROPERTY FOR SPECIAL EVENTS:
When the city allows a special event, sponsored by a private entity, the city
shall state only the time, place, manner and quantity of signage allowed, and
leave decisions as to which signs may be displayed as part of the event to the
private party sponsor. When the city sponsors a special event, public property
may be used to promote and identify the special event, but cosponsors, if any,
shall be limited to commercial entities and commercial sign messages only.
(Ord. 2520 § 1, 2002)
12.55.100: USE OF CITY PROPERTY FOR BANNERS:
   A.   The city's intent as to this section is to designate a strictly limited
public forum. Banners may be placed on city property at the city's designated
locations on Citrus Avenue at Fifth Street and Cajon Street near Vine Street,
along Terracina Boulevard from Fern Avenue to Olive Avenue, along Colton
Avenue, from University Street to Grove Street, and within the downtown
business district, as that area is defined in section
15.36.240, figure 14 of this code. Banners are subject to the size,
construction and insurance criteria established by resolution of the city
council. In addition, banners proposed to be located on streetlights and other
city property shall be subject to the following:
      1.   An application for a staff sign review shall be submitted to, and
approved by, the community development director.
      2.   All banners placed on city streetlights shall have a minimum
clearance of eight feet (8') from the bottom of the banner to the ground.
      3.   The area of any individual banner shall not exceed twelve and one-
half (121/2) square feet. (Ord. 2576 § 1, 2004: Ord. 2561 § 4, 2003: Ord. 2520
§ 1, 2002)
12.55.110: PERMITS FOR COMMERCIAL FREEWAY; VISIBLE SIGNS ON CITY ARMORY
PROPERTY:
   A.   The areas and times controlled by this section are designated to
constitute a limited access, nonpublic forum which is strictly limited to
commercial messages, and which is open only to those persons described in this
section and on the terms stated in this section.
   B.   Freeway visible commercial signs relating to automobile businesses
located within the city may be placed on particular portions of the city's
armory site where they do not interfere with existing or reasonably foreseeable
uses of the armory, and are subject to the consent of the state of California
as lessee of the armory and the city. Signs shall not exceed ninety feet (90')
in height; provided, however, the actual height of any sign shall be determined
by a "balloon" or "flag" test and such height may exceed ninety feet (90') if
necessary to provide reasonable visibility from the freeway. Signs shall not
exceed an area of six hundred (600) square feet. The structure of a sign shall
not endanger the health and safety by causing distractions to operators of
motor vehicles.
   C.   A permit under this section will be issued only to an applicant doing
automobile business within the city and who provides evidence of comprehensive
general liability insurance coverage, in a form satisfactory to the finance
director, which shall name the city as an additional insured and provide thirty
(30) day notice of cancellation. The minimum liability coverage on such policy
shall be one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) and coverage shall apply to claims
of personal injury including death, property damage and advertising injury.
Application for a permit shall be made to the city council and shall constitute
an agreement to hold harmless, defend and indemnify the city against all claims
relating to property damage or personal injury, including death, which assert
that the permitted sign played any legally significant role in the creation of
the liability. (Ord. 2520 § 1, 2002)
12.55.120: DIRECTIONAL SIGNS:
   A.   Intent As To Public Forum: The city's intent for this section is to
designate a strictly limited nonpublic forum which allows the posting, only in
places deemed convenient by the city, of directional information signs relating
to certain institutional and nonprofit organization uses in the city.
   B.   Definitions: For purposes of this section, shall mean:
   INSTITUTION: Public or private, state accredited four (4) year universities
or colleges and full service state accredited public hospitals within the city
limits.
   NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS: Nonprofit organizations, in good standing under the
law, which have established educational or cultural facilities in the city that
enhance tourism.
   C.   Size Of Signs: Directional signs shall not exceed fifteen (15) square
feet in area, and may contain the following information:
      1.   The name of the institution or nonprofit organization,
      2.   Facilities within the institution or nonprofit organization,
      3.   Location of parking lots within the institution or nonprofit
organization, and
      4.   Direction and distance to an institution's or nonprofit
organization's designated parking lot or other facilities from the sign.
   D.   Directional Sign Permits; Application Forms And Procedures:
      1.   The development services director shall prepare and make available
to the public a form of application for a directional sign permit which shall,
when fully approved by the development services director, constitute a
directional sign permit ("permit") and indicate the city's consent, in its
proprietary capacity, for placement of a sign. The applicant for the permit
must be the same person or entity who is to be the owner of the sign. The
processing fee for each application, which shall not be refundable even if the
application is denied, shall be the same as the fee for a private sign permit
under this code or as established by resolution of the city council. The
application form shall require the applicant to indicate that he or she has
read this chapter and that the applicant shall abide by its terms, as well as
any special terms or conditions which may be stated on the permit, and to abide
by any new or different conditions which may be imposed on all permittees who
are similarly situated.
      2.   Any sign permit issued in error may be summarily revoked by any
officer of the city by simply informing the applicant of the nature of the
error in issuance. Any applicant whose permit is revoked as issued in error
may, at any time thereafter, submit a new permit application which cures any
deficiencies in the original application. The application fee shall apply
separately to each new application. Applications which fully comply with the
terms and conditions of this chapter shall be duly issued. Applications which
are denied, or permits which are revoked or suspended, may be appealed in the
same manner as denials of sign permits, as described in this code.
      3.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, an application
for a directional sign permit shall be approved by the development services
director. (Ord. 2758, 2011)
12.55.130: SIGNS FOR BUS SHELTERS ON CITY PROPERTY:
   A.   The intent of this section is to designate a strictly limited nonpublic
forum which allows only posting, in places deemed convenient by the city, and
in conjunction with Omnitrans or the appropriate designated areawide
transportation company, of signs on bus shelters on city property.
   B.   "Bus shelters" are permanent freestanding structures, not exceeding
eighty (80) square feet in area, which contain modular information about bus
schedules as well as signs as provided by agreement between the city and
Omnitrans.
   C.   Omnitrans is to construct the bus shelters in accordance with all
applicable Americans with disabilities act guidelines and other federal, state
and local laws, codes and ordinances. The type of shelter to be used at each
location will be mutually agreed upon by city and Omnitrans.
   D.   Omnitrans shall maintain and clean the shelters, not less than once per
month and within a fifteen foot (15') radius of the shelters not less than
twice per week as required. Benches within said shelters are to be cleaned not
less than once per week.
   E.   Omnitrans will also maintain receptacles for trash at the bus shelters
and have them emptied at least twice per week.
   F.   Four (4) sign panels from the bus shelter's inventory shall be reserved
for the city's use for public service announcements. The sign panels shall not
exceed twenty eight (28) square feet.
   G.   Omnitrans and the city shall work cooperatively to identify bus shelter
locations. No bus shelter shall be placed on public property without first
obtaining all necessary approvals and permits from the city as set forth
herein. (Ord. 2561 § 5, 2003)
DIVISION V. AIRPORTS
CHAPTER 12.56
MUNICIPAL AIRPORT
SECTION:
12.56.010: Purpose And Authority
12.56.020: General Responsibility Of Owners, Operators And Users
12.56.030: Permitted Activities Generally
12.56.040: Prohibited Activities
12.56.050: Damage To Facilities
12.56.060: Adoption Of Rules And Regulations
12.56.070: Conformance With Rules Governing Aircraft Operation
12.56.080: Authority Of Director To Suspend Flights And Close Airport
12.56.090: Use Of Intoxicating Liquor Or Drugs
12.56.100: Certified Aircraft And Personnel Required
12.56.110: Aircraft Taxiing Regulations
12.56.120: Reserved
12.56.130: Reserved
12.56.140: Reserved
12.56.150: Reserved
12.56.160: Traffic Pattern Operations
12.56.170: Reserved
12.56.180: Reserved
12.56.190: Boarding Or Disembarking
12.56.200: Repair Areas
12.56.210: Starting Of Aircraft
12.56.220: Entrance Or Exit Of Airplane From Hangar
12.56.230: Authority Of Director To Move Aircraft
12.56.240: Director Approval Required To Store Materials
12.56.250: Accidents; Removal Of Damaged Aircraft
12.56.260: Accidents; Report
12.56.270: Securing Of Unattended Aircraft
12.56.280: Registering Airport Based Aircraft
12.56.290: Parking Of Transient Aircraft
12.56.300: Aircraft Parking For Airport Tenants
12.56.310: Vehicles; Operation Allowed Where
12.56.320: Vehicles; Negligent Operation Prohibited
12.56.330: Vehicles; Yield Of Right Of Way To Aircraft
12.56.340: Vehicles; Parking
12.56.350: Vehicles Bearing Flammable Materials
12.56.360: Vehicles; Illegal Parking
12.56.370: Fire Regulations
12.56.380: Landing Fees
12.56.390: Tie Down And Hangar Fees
12.56.400: Liability Of City
12.56.410: Violation; Penalty
12.56.010: PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish policies and procedures to be
followed by persons operating aircraft, ground vehicles, and equipment on and
in the vicinity of the Redlands Municipal Airport both in the air and on the
ground. The City’s Facilities and Community Services Director (hereinafter
“Director”) and his or her authorized designees, shall have authority for the
oversight and operations of the Redlands Municipal Airport. Deviations from
these policies and procedures are permitted only during periods of emergency or
as approved by the Director. (Ord. 2906, 2020: Ord. 1431 § A(1), 1971)
12.56.020: GENERAL RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNERS, OPERATORS AND USERS:
It shall be the responsibility of aircraft owners, aircraft operators, and
users of the airfield and surrounding support facilities to become familiar
with the provisions of this chapter and adhere to its intent in the interests
of safe and efficient utilization of the Redlands airport. (Ord. 1431 § A(2),
1971)
12.56.030: PERMITTED ACTIVITIES GENERALLY:
With the exception of properly authorized special activities, all airport
facilities are provided for the primary purpose of promoting commercial,
general, private and recreational flying activities. The airport shall be open
for these uses at all reasonable hours of the day and night, subject to
restrictions created by special events, emergencies, or like causes so
designated by the Director. (Ord. 2906, 2020: Ord. 1431 § B(1), 1971)
12.56.040: PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES:
The airport shall not be used as a base for conducting commercial and business
activities, for the carrying for hire of passengers, freight, express or mail,
for instruction in aviation in any of its phases, for the sale of fuels,
refreshments or any commodity or service or for any other commercial purpose
unless a lease, permit or license to conduct such business has been granted by
the City. No signs, posters or other advertising material will be posted or
distributed on airport property without prior approval from the Director. (Ord.
2906, 2020: Ord. 1431 § B(2), 1971)
12.56.050: DAMAGE TO FACILITIES:
Damage to airport facilities, buildings, or other city properties must be
reported immediately to the Director. Repair or replacement cost will be levied
against the party deemed responsible. (Ord. 2906, 2020: Ord. 1431 § B(3), 1971)
12.56.060: ADOPTION OF RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The rules and regulations promulgated by the federal aviation administration
and presently in effect and all additions or amendments thereto are hereby
referred to, adopted and made a part of these regulations in every respect as
if they were fully set forth herein. (Ord. 1431 § C(1), 1971)
12.56.070: CONFORMANCE WITH RULES GOVERNING AIRCRAFT OPERATION:
No person shall navigate any aircraft over, land upon, or take off from, or
service, repair, or maintain any aircraft on the airport, or conduct any
operation on or from the airport otherwise than in conformity with this chapter
and the rules and regulations of the federal aviation administration. (Ord.
1431 § C(2), 1971)
12.56.080: AUTHORITY OF DIRECTOR TO SUSPEND FLIGHTS AND CLOSE AIRPORT:
The Director may restrict or suspend any or all flight operations and/or close
the airport when required in the interest of safety, military need or special
circumstances. Closure shall be accompanied, as appropriate, with the issuance
of FAA notices to persons using the airport and notice to appropriate Air
Traffic Control agencies, with such persons and agencies receiving similar
notices of the re-opening of the airport. (Ord. 2906, 2020: Ord. 1431 § C(3),
1971)
12.56.090: USE OF INTOXICATING LIQUOR OR DRUGS:
No person shall operate or assist in the operation of any aircraft while
illegally under the influence of, or using, any intoxicating liquor or habit
forming or hallucinatory or narcotic drug. No alcoholic beverage may be
consumed or sold on the airport unless the City Council shall have approved and
designated the place for the sale and consumption thereof. (Ord. 2906, 2020:
Ord. 1431 § C(4), 1971)
12.56.100: CERTIFIED AIRCRAFT AND PERSONNEL REQUIRED:
Only properly licensed aircraft, operated by properly licensed personnel or
aircraft operating under part 103 of the Federal Aviation Regulations are
authorized on the airport landing areas or areas designated for aircraft
taxiing and parking. (Ord. 2906, 2020: Ord. 1431 § C(5), 1971)
12.56.110: AIRCRAFT TAXIING REGULATIONS:
No person shall taxi any aircraft unless there will be no danger of collision
with any person or object. Aircraft shall taxi at a safe speed and will be
under complete control at all times. No taxiing shall be done except on areas
designated for taxiing. (Ord. 2906, 2020: Ord. 1431 § C(6), 1971)
12.56.120: RESERVED:
12.56.130: RESERVED:
12.56.140: RESERVED:
12.56.150: RESERVED:
12.56.160: TRAFFIC PATTERN OPERATIONS:
Aircraft shall enter into the traffic pattern in compliance with the
Aeronautical Information Manual (AIM) or as listed in the Federal Aviation
Administration Aeronautical Information Services Chart Supplement. (Ord. 2906,
2020: Ord. 1431 § C(11), 1971)
12.56.170: RESERVED:
12.56.180: RESERVED:
12.56.190: BOARDING OR DISEMBARKING:
Except in an emergency, no person shall board or disembark from any aircraft on
the taxiway, landing or takeoff area of the airport. (Ord. 1431 § C(14), 1971)
12.56.200: REPAIR AREAS:
Except in an emergency, no aircraft shall be permitted to remain on any part of
the taxiway, landing or takeoff area for the purpose of repairs. All repairs
shall be effected at places designated therefor. (Ord. 2906, 2020: Ord. 1431 §
C(15), 1971)
12.56.210: STARTING OF AIRCRAFT:
An aircraft engine shall not be started unless a competent operator is at the
controls and adequate brakes are fully set or the wheels are set with blocks.
Aircraft engines may be run up only after it is determined that prop wash will
not endanger other aircraft, property, or persons. (Ord. 1431 § C(16), 1971)
12.56.220: ENTRANCE OR EXIT OF AIRPLANE FROM HANGAR:
No aircraft shall be taxied into or out of any hangar. Approved power operated
industrial trucks may be used to move aircraft into, about and out of hangars.
Aircraft engines shall not be operated within hangars, but may beturned over
during servicing operations. (Ord. 2906, 2020: Ord. 1431 § C(17), 1971)
12.56.230: AUTHORITY OF DIRECTOR TO MOVE AIRCRAFT:
Upon the direction of the Director, when required for public health, safety, or
welfare, or the proper operation of the airport, the operator, owner or pilot
of any aircraft on the airport shall move the aircraft to any place designated
on the airport; if the operator, owner, or pilot refuses to comply with the
directions, or the operator, owner, or pilot cannot be located after a
reasonable effort has been made to do so, the aircraft may be moved to such
place at the owner's expense and without liability for any damage that may
result from such moving. (Ord. 2906, 2020: Ord 1431 § C(18), 1971)
12.56.240: DIRECTOR APPROVAL REQUIRED TO STORE MATERIALS:
No ladders, cans, boxes, etc., of any nature may be left in tie-down areas
without prior approval of the Director. (Ord. 2906, 2020)
12.56.250: ACCIDENTS; REMOVAL OF DAMAGED AIRCRAFT:
In the event of an accident, the damaged aircraft may be removed from the
landing areas, ramps, aprons, or other areas at the expense of the owner and
without liability for damage resulting from such moving. (Ord. 2906, 2020: Ord.
1431 § C(19), 1971)
12.56.260: ACCIDENTS; REPORT:
Accidents of any nature occurring on the airport shall be reported as soon as
practicable to the Director together with names and addresses of persons
involved and witnesses. (Ord. 2906, 2020: Ord. 1431 § C(20), 1971)
12.56.270: SECURING OF UNATTENDED AIRCRAFT:
No aircraft shall be left unattended unless properly tied down, chocked or
placed in a hangar. (Ord. 2906, 2020: Ord. 1431 § C(21), 1971)
12.56.280: REGISTERING AIRPORT BASED AIRCRAFT:
Any person electing to base their aircraft on the airport shall register the
aircraft with the Director. Change of ownership or removal of the aircraft from
the airport shall not relieve the registered owner from payment of applicable
fees unless prior written notice is given. (Ord. 2906, 2020: Ord. 1431 § C(22),
1971)
12.56.290: PARKING OF TRANSIENT AIRCRAFT:
Transient aircraft shall be parked only in designated transient parking areas.
(Ord. 2906, 2020: Ord. 1431 § C(24), 1971)
12.56.300: AIRCRAFT PARKING FOR AIRPORT TENANTS:
Airport tenants shall park aircraft owned by them, in their use, or in their
custody, only on approved parking areas leased by them. (Ord. 2906, 2020: Ord.
2802, 2013)
12.56.310: VEHICLES; OPERATION ALLOWED WHERE:
Unless authorized in writing by the Director, or his or her designee, no motor
driven vehicles shall be operated on the airport, except on roadways, in
vehicle parking areas, or in places that are designated for such vehicles.
Motor driven vehicles operated on the airport shall be appropriately licensed
and shall comply with the insurance requirements imposed by the state of
California for the operation of motor driven vehicles on the public street. Any
operator of a motor driven vehicle on the airport, if requested by the
Director, shall furnish evidence of compliance with state of California
insurance requirements. (Ord. 2906, 2020: Ord. 2802, 2013)
12.56.320: VEHICLES; NEGLIGENT OPERATION PROHIBITED:
No person shall operate any vehicle on the airport in a careless or negligent
manner, in disregard for the safety of others, or in excess of posted speed
traffic signs, and in no event in excess of twenty five (25) miles per hour. On
ramps and around or near building areas, the maximum speed shall not exceed ten
(10) miles per hour. (Ord. 2906, 2020: Ord. 2802, 2013)
12.56.330: VEHICLES; YIELD OF RIGHT OF WAY TO AIRCRAFT:
All pedestrians and vehicles shall always yield the right of way to aircraft on
the ground or in the process of landing or taking off. No motor vehicles,
bicycles, scooters, or pedestrians shall be out on the runway or parallel
taxiway. However, this shall not apply to vehicles used for airport
emergencies, service work or for periodic runway and taxiway pavement checks/
inspections. The drivers of all such vehicles must obtain permission from the
Director for these operations. All vehicles operating in the runway safety
area, runway and taxiway shall be properly marked and equipped with a two-way
radio enabling communication with the airport CTAF frequency. This operator
must be familiar with the FAA’s Guide to Ground Vehicle Operations. The
Director shall cause a FAA notice to airmen for these vehicle operations if
deemed appropriate. (Ord. 2906, 2020: Ord. 2802, 2013)
12.56.340: VEHICLES; PARKING:
Vehicles on the airport shall only be parked in areas so designated for such
purpose. Fuel and service vehicles owned and operated by fixed base operators
may be parked in their leased areas. Aircraft owners who rent tie-down or
hangar space may be permitted to park vehicles within that tie-down or hangar
space. No motor driven vehicle shall be left unattended in any area designated
as a taxiway between hangar rows that may block or restrict the taxiing of
aircraft. (Ord. 2906, 2020: Ord. 2802, 2013)
12.56.350: VEHICLES BEARING FLAMMABLE MATERIALS:
Fuel tank trucks, service vehicles, automotive or aircraft gas tenders, and
trucks delivering flammable materials are prohibited from entry, parking or
storage in hangars. (Ord. 2906, 2020: Ord. 2802, 2013)
12.56.360: VEHICLES; ILLEGAL PARKING:
Illegally parked vehicles may be issued parking violation citations or moved by
towing to designated tow yards. A charge for such towing will be levied and the
City shall not assume any towing charges or liability for damage while moving
such vehicles. Recreational vehicles and motorhomes can only be parked in
designated parking areas for short periods. Spending the night in such vehicles
while parked at the airport is prohibited. Exceptions for security or in
support of firefighting activities may be allowed with prior approval from the
Director. All other vehicles that are not parked in hangars or tie-downs shall
be parked only in designated areas for no more than seventy-two (72) hours.
(Ord. 2906, 2020: Ord. 2802, 2013)
12.56.370: FIRE REGULATIONS:
   A.   No aircraft shall be fueled or drained while the engine is running or
while the aircraft is in a hangar.
   B.   During all fuel operations the aircraft and appurtenances used in
fueling shall be grounded by an approved method.
   C.   Passengers shall deplane from any aircraft being fueled unless an
attendant is stationed at the cabin door during such operation.
   D.   Personnel engaged in fueling operations shall exercise care to prevent
overflow of fuel.
   E.   Smoking or the lighting of any open flame shall be prohibited within
fifty feet (50') of any fuel operation.
   F.   Refueling vehicles shall not refuel aircraft within any hangar.
   G.   Flammable liquid type fire extinguishers shall be within ready reach of
personnel engaged in fuel operations.
   H.   No electrical or radio equipment shall be operated during fuel
operations.
   I.   All fuel dispensing equipment shall be kept in a safe and nonleaking
condition.
   J.   No aircraft shall be started when there is fuel on the ground, under or
near the aircraft.
   K.   Hangar floors shall be kept clean and free from oil, and no flammable
solvent shall be used for cleaning purposes in shops, hangars or other
buildings unless such operations are conducted in open air, or in a room
specifically set aside for that purpose, which room must be properly
fireproofed and equipped with adequate and readily accessible fire
extinguishing apparatus.
   L.   No boxes, crates, rubbish, paper, or other litter shall be permitted to
accumulate on the airport or in any hangar, and all oil, paint, dope, and
varnish containers shall be removed from hangars immediately upon being
emptied.
   M.   Degreasing of aircraft and/or aircraft engines shall be permitted only
in maintenance shops or in areas so designated.
   N.   No material of any nature shall be stored in such a manner so as to
constitute a fire hazard.
   O.   Lessees of hangars or other airport areas shall provide suitable metal
receptacles with hinged lid for the storage of oily waste rags and other
flammable rubbish.
   P.   No smoking shall be permitted in any hangars where it is hazardous to
do so or where no smoking signs are posted.
   Q.   The fixed base operator and his sublessees, shall maintain, in proper
working order, adequate and readily accessible fire extinguishers in accordance
with City fire department requirements. Extinguishers shall carry a tag showing
date of most recent inspection.
   R.   Hangar entrances shall be kept sufficiently clear to permit ready
access to buildings to combat fires.
   S.   The storage, handling and use of all flammable liquids shall be in
accordance with the fire code of the City.
   T.   Whenever the provisions of City ordinances, or state and federal laws
are not applicable for any reason to any situation involving the protection of
persons and property from the hazards of fire and explosions, the materials,
methods of construction, installations, practices or operation necessary to
provide such protection shall be in accordance with nationally recognized and
accepted standards. (Ord. 2906, 2020: Ord. 2419 § 2, 1999: Ord. 1431 § E, 1971)
12.56.380: LANDING FEES:
Privately owned aircraft are not charged landing fees. Operations of aircraft
engaged in the business of transporting persons or things for a profit, may be
charged landing fees as determined by the council. (Ord. 2906, 2020: Ord. 2419
§ 2, 1999: Ord. 1431 § H, 1971)
12.56.390: TIE DOWN AND HANGAR FEES:
   A.   Monthly tie down, transient tie down and hangar rental fees on city
land not leased to base operations will be as established by the resolution of
the City Council.
   B.   Monthly tie down, transient tie down and hangar rental fees on city
land not leased to base operations will be as established by the director of
aviation. (Ord. 2906, 2020: Ord. 2419 § 2, 1999: Ord. 1431 § I, 1971)
12.56.400: LIABILITY OF CITY:
The privilege of using the airport and its facilities shall be conditioned upon
the assumption of full responsibility and risk by the user thereof, and he
shall release, hold harmless and indemnify the city, its officers and employees
from any liability or loss resulting from such use, as well as against claims
of third persons so using the airport. The exercise of the privilege of use
shall constitute an acknowledgment that the city maintains the airport in a
governmental capacity. (Ord. 2906, 2020: Ord. 2419 § 2, 1999: Ord. 1431 § G,
1971)
12.56.410: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Unless a different penalty is prescribed for violation of a specific provision
of this chapter, every act prohibited or declared unlawful, and every failure
to perform an act made mandatory by this chapter, is punishable as a
misdemeanor. Every person who causes, aids, abets, or conceals a violation of
this chapter is guilty of violating this chapter. Each person, firm or
corporation shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each day or
portion thereof during which any violation of any provision of this chapter is
committed, continued or permitted by such person, firm, or corporation and
shall be punishable therefor as provided in this chapter. The remedies provided
by this chapter are cumulative and in addition to any other remedies available
at law or in equity. All violations of this chapter, at the discretion of the
City, shall be punishable misdemeanors. (Ord. 2906, 2020: Ord. 2419 § 2, 1999:
Ord. 1431 § F, 1971)
CHAPTER 12.60
WIRELESS FACILITIES IN PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
SECTION:
12.60.010: Purpose
12.60.020: Definitions
12.60.030: Scope
12.60.010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a process for managing, and uniform
standards for acting upon, requests for the placement of wireless facilities
within the public rights-of-way of the City consistent with the City's
obligation to promote the public health, safety, and welfare, to manage the
public rights-of-way, and to ensure that the public is not incommoded by the
use of the public rights-of-way for the placement of wireless facilities. The
City recognizes the importance of wireless facilities to provide high-quality
communications service to the residents and businesses within the City, and the
City also recognizes its obligation to comply with applicable Federal and State
law regarding the placement of personal wireless services facilities in its
public rights-of-way. This chapter shall be interpreted consistent with those
provisions. (Ord. 2894 §2, 2019)
12.60.020: DEFINITIONS:
The terms used in this chapter shall have the following meanings:
                                   A formal request, including all required and
A. APPLICATION:                    requested documentation and information,
                                   submitted by an applicant to the City for a
                                   wireless encroachment permit.
                                   A person filing an application for placement
B. APPLICANT:                      or modification of a wireless facility in
                                   the public rights-of-way.
                                   Shall have the meaning as set forth in 47
C. BASE STATION:                   C.F.R. Section 1.6100(b)(1), or any
                                   successor provision.
D. DIRECTOR:                       The City's Facilities and Community Services
                                   Department Director, or his or her designee.
                                   Shall have the meaning as set forth in 47
E. ELIGIBLE FACILITIES REQUEST:    C.F.R. Section 1.6100(b)(3), or any
                                   successor provision.
F. FCC:                            The Federal Communications Commission or its
                                   lawful successor.
                                   City-owned or controlled property,
                                   structures, objects, and equipment in the
                                   ROW, including, but not limited to, street
G. MUNICIPAL INFRASTRUCTURE:       lights, traffic control structures, banners,
                                   street furniture, bus stops, billboards, or
                                   other poles, lighting fixtures, or
                                   electroliers located within the ROW.
                                   Any person or entity granted a wireless
H. PERMITTEE:                      encroachment permit pursuant to this
                                   chapter.
I. PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES:     Shall have the same meaning as set forth in
                                   47 U.S.C. Section 332(c)(7)(C)(i).
J. PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES      A wireless facility used for the provision
FACILITY:                          of personal wireless services.
                                   Shall have the same meaning as "Street" in
                                   Chapter 12 of this Code, and shall also
K. PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY, OR ROW:    include any portion of any road or public
                                   way which the City has the responsibility to
                                   maintain or manage.
                                   Shall have the same meaning as "small
                                   wireless facility" in 47 C.F.R. 1.6002(l),
L. SMALL CELL FACILITY:            or any successor provision (which is a
                                   personal wireless services facility that
                                   meets the following conditions that, solely
                                   for convenience, have been set forth below):
                                  (1) The facility -
                                   (i) is mounted on a structure fifty feet
                                  (50') or less in height, including antennas,
                                   as defined in 47 C.F.R. Section 1.1320(d),
                                   or
                                   (ii) is mounted on a structure no more than
                                   ten percent (10%) taller than other adjacent
                                   structures, or
                                   (iii) does not extend an existing structure
                                  on which it is located to a height of more
                                   than fifty feet (50') or by more than ten
                                   percent (10%), whichever is greater;
                                   (2) Each antenna associated with the
                                   deployment, excluding associated antenna
                                  equipment (as defined in the definition of
                                   antenna in 47 C.F.R. Section 1.1320(d)), is
                                   no more than three (3) cubic feet in volume;
                                   (3) All other wireless equipment associated
                                   with the structure, including the wireless
                                  equipment associated with the antenna and
                                   any pre-existing associated equipment on the
                                   structure, is no more than twenty eight (28)
                                   cubic feet in volume;
                                   (4) The facility does not require antenna
                                  structure registration under 47 C.F.R. Part
                                   17;
                                   (5) The facility is not located on Tribal
                                  lands, as defined under 36 C.F.R. Section
                                   800.16(x); and
                                   (6) The facility does not result in human
                                  exposure to radiofrequency radiation in
                                   excess of the applicable safety standards
                                   specified in 47 C.F.R. Section 1.1307(b).
M. SUPPORT STRUCTURE:              Any structure capable of supporting a base
                                   station.
                                   Any structure built for the sole or primary
                                   purpose of supporting any FCC-licensed or
                                   authorized antennas and their associated
                                   facilities, including structures that are
                                   constructed for personal wireless services
N. TOWER:                          including, but not limited to, private,
                                   broadcast, and public safety services, as
                                   well as unlicensed wireless services and
                                   fixed wireless services such as microwave
                                   backhaul, and the associated site. This
                                   definition does not include utility poles.
                                   Those areas where there are no electrical
                                   facilities or facilities of the incumbent
                                   local exchange carrier in the right-of-way;
                                   or where the wires associated with the same
                                   are or are required to be located
                                   underground; or where the same are scheduled
O. UNDERGROUND AREAS:              to be converted from overhead to
                                   underground. Electrical facilities are
                                   distribution facilities owned by an electric
                                   utility and do not include transmission
                                   facilities used or intended to be used to
                                   transmit electricity at nominal voltages in
                                   excess of 35,000 volts.
                                   A structure in the ROW designed to support
P. UTILITY POLE:                   electric, telephone and similar utility
                                   lines. A tower is not a utility pole.
                                   A permit issued pursuant to this chapter
                                   authorizing the placement or modification of
                                   a wireless facility of a design specified in
Q. WIRELESS ENCROACHMENT PERMIT:   the permit at a particular location within
                                   the ROW; and the modification of any
                                   existing support structure to which the
                                   wireless facility is proposed to be
                                   attached.
                                   The transmitters, antenna structures and
                                   other types of installations used for the
R. WIRELESS FACILITY, OR FACILITY: provision of wireless services at a fixed
                                   location, including, without limitation, any
                                   associated towers, support structures, and
                                   base stations.
S. WIRELESS INFRASTRUCTURE         A person that owns, controls, operates or
PROVIDER:                          manages a wireless facility or portion
                                   thereof within the ROW.
                                   Those regulations adopted pursuant to
T. WIRELESS REGULATIONS:           Section 5 and implementing the provisions of
                                   this chapter.
U. WIRELESS SERVICE PROVIDER:      An entity that provides personal wireless
                                   services to end users. (Ord. 2894 §2, 2019)
12.60.030: SCOPE:
   A.   In General: There shall be a type of encroachment permit entitled a
"wireless encroachment permit," which shall be subject to all of the same
requirements as an encroachment permit would under
Chapter 12.16 in addition to all of the requirements of this chapter. Unless
exempted, every person who desires to place a wireless facility in the public
rights-of-way or modify an existing wireless facility in the public rights-of-
way must obtain a wireless encroachment permit authorizing the placement or
modification in accordance with this chapter. Except for small cell facilities,
facilities qualifying as eligible facilities requests, or any other type of
facility expressly allowed in the public rights-of-way by state or federal law,
no other wireless facilities shall be permitted pursuant to this chapter.
   B.   Exemptions: This chapter does not apply to:
      1)   The placement or modification of facilities by the City or by any
other agency of the state solely for public safety purposes.
      2)   Installation of a "cell on wheels," "cell on truck" or a similar
structure for a temporary period in connection with an emergency or event, but
no longer than required for the emergency or event, provided that installation
does not involve excavation, movement, or removal of existing facilities.
   C.   Other Applicable Requirements: In addition to the wireless encroachment
permit required herein, the placement of a wireless facility in the ROW
requires the persons who will own or control those facilities to obtain all
permits required by applicable law, and to comply with applicable law,
including, but not limited to, applicable law governing radio frequency (RF)
emissions.
   D.   Pre-existing Facilities In The ROW: Any wireless facility already
existing in the ROW as of the date of this chapter's adoption shall remain,
subject to the provisions of this Code in effect prior to the effective date of
this chapter, unless and until an extension of such facility's then-existing
permit is granted, at which time the provisions of this chapter shall apply in
full force going forward as to such facility. The review of any request for a
renewal of a permit for such pre-existing facilities shall be conducted
pursuant to this chapter, rather than the portions of this Code that it was
previously reviewed under.
   E.   Public Use: Except as otherwise provided by California law, any use of
the public right-of-way authorized pursuant to this chapter will be subordinate
to the City's use and use by the public.
   F.   Administration:
      1)   Director: The Director is responsible for administering this
chapter. As part of the administration of this chapter, the Director may:
         i.   Interpret the provisions of this chapter;
         ii.   Develop and implement standards governing the placement and
modification of wireless facilities consistent with the requirements of this
chapter, including regulations governing collocation and resolution of
conflicting applications for placement of wireless facilities;
         iii.   Implement acceptable designs and development standards for
wireless facilities in the public rights-of-way, taking into account the zoning
districts bounding the public rights-of-way;
         iv.   Develop forms and procedures for submission of applications for
placement or modification of wireless facilities, and proposed changes to any
support structure consistent with this chapter;
         v.   Collect, as a condition of the completeness of any application,
any fee established by this chapter;
         vi.   Establish deadlines for submission of information related to an
application, and extend or shorten deadlines where appropriate and consistent
with state and federal laws and regulations;
         vii.   Issue any notices of incompleteness, requests for information,
or conduct or commission such studies as may be required to determine whether a
permit should be issued;
         viii.   Require, as part of, and as a condition of completeness of any
application, mailing labels sufficient to notify the owners of all adjacent
properties of the placement or modification of the wireless facility and
proposed changes to any support structure by letter. "Adjacent properties"
shall include all lots which directly abut or are directly across any public or
private right-of-way from the subject location;
         ix.   Subject to appeal as provided herein, determine whether to
approve, approve subject to conditions, or deny an application; and
         x.   Take such other steps as may be required to timely act upon
applications for placement of wireless facilities, including issuing written
decisions and entering into agreements to mutually extend the time for action
on an application.
      2)   Appeal:
         i.   Any  person adversely affected by the decision of the Director
pursuant to this chapter may, upon completion of the City's form of appeal and
payment of the fee established by resolution of the City Council, appeal the
Director's decision to the City Manager, which may decide the issues de novo,
and whose written decision will be the final decision of the City. An appeal by
a wireless infrastructure provider must be taken jointly with the wireless
service provider that intends to use the personal wireless services facility.
         ii.   Where the Director grants an application based on a finding that
denial would result in a prohibition or effective prohibition under applicable
federal law, the decision shall be automatically appealed to the City Manager.
All appeals must be filed within five (5) business days of the written decision
of the Director, unless the Director extends the time therefor. An extension
may not be granted where extension would result in approval of the application
by operation of law.
         iii.   Any appeal shall be conducted so that a timely written decision
may be issued in accordance with applicable law.
   G.   General Standards For Wireless Facilities In The Public Rights-of-Way:
      1)   Generally: Wireless facilities in the ROW shall meet the minimum
requirements set forth in this chapter and the wireless regulations, in
addition to the requirements of any other applicable law.
      2)   Regulations: The wireless regulations and decisions on applications
for placement of wireless facilities in the ROW shall, at a minimum, ensure
that the requirements of this section are satisfied, unless it is determined
that applicant has established that denial of an application would, within the
meaning of federal law, prohibit or effectively prohibit the provision of
personal wireless services, or otherwise violate applicable laws or
regulations. If that determination is made, the requirements of this chapter
may be waived, but only to the minimum extent required to avoid the prohibition
or violation.
      3)   Minimum Standards: All applicants shall design and locate wireless
facilities in accordance with the design standards and wireless regulations set
forth separately by resolution adopted by the City Council.
   H.   Applications:
      1)   Submission: Unless the wireless regulations provide otherwise, an
applicant shall submit a paper copy and an electronic copy of any application,
amendments, or supplements to an application, or responses to requests for
information regarding an application to the Director.
      2)   Pre-application Meeting: Prior to filing an application for a
wireless encroachment permit, an applicant is encouraged to schedule a pre-
application meeting with the Director to discuss the proposed facility, the
requirements of this chapter, and any potential impacts of the proposed
facility.
      3)   Content: An applicant shall submit an application on the form
approved by the Director, which may be updated from time-to-time, but in any
event shall require the submission of all required fees, documents,
information, and any other materials necessary to allow the Director to make
required findings and ensure that the proposed facility will comply with
applicable federal and state law, this Code, and will not endanger the public
health, safety, or welfare. If no form has been approved, applications must
contain all information necessary to show that applicant is entitled to the
wireless encroachment permit requested, and must specify whether the applicant
believes state or federal law requires action on the application within a
specified time period.
      4)   Fees: Application fees shall be required to be submitted with any
application for a wireless encroachment permit. The City Council is hereby
authorized to determine, or cause to be determined, the amount, type, and other
terms of such fees from time to time by means of resolution. Notwithstanding
the foregoing, no application fee shall be refundable, in whole or in part, to
an applicant for a wireless encroachment permit unless paid as a refundable
deposit.
      5)   Waivers: Requests for waivers from any requirement of this section
shall be made in writing to the Director or his or her designee. The Director
may grant or deny a request for a waiver pursuant to this subsection. The
Director may grant a request for waiver if it is demonstrated that,
notwithstanding the issuance of a waiver, the City will be provided all
information necessary to understand the nature of the construction or other
activity to be conducted pursuant to the permit sought. All waivers approved
pursuant to this subsection shall be (1) granted only on a case-by-case basis,
and (2) narrowly-tailored to minimize deviation from the requirements of this
Code.
      6)   Incompleteness: For personal wireless facilities and eligible
facilities requests, applications will be processed, and notices of
incompleteness provided, in conformity with state, local, and federal law. If
such an application is incomplete, the Director may notify the applicant in
writing, and specifying the material omitted from the application.
   I.   Findings; Decisions; Consultants:
      1)   Findings Required For Approval:
         i.   Except for eligible facilities requests, the Director or the City
Manager, as the case may be, shall approve an application if, on the basis of
the application and other materials or evidence provided in review thereof, it
finds the following:
            a.   The facility is not detrimental to the public health, safety,
and welfare;
            b.   The facility complies with this chapter and all applicable
design and development standards;
            c.   The facility meets applicable requirements and standards of
state and federal law; and
         ii.   For eligible facilities requests, the Director or the City
Manager, as the case may be, shall approve an application if, on the basis of
the application and other materials or evidence provided in review thereof, it
finds the following:
            a.   That the application qualifies as an eligible facilities
request; and
            b.   That the proposed facility will comply with all generally-
applicable laws.
      2)   Decisions: Decisions on an application by the Director or the City
Manager shall be in writing and include the reasons for the decision.
      3)   Independent Consultants: The Director or the City Manager, as the
case may be, is authorized, in its discretion, to select and retain independent
consultants with expertise in telecommunications in connection with the review
of any application under this chapter. Such independent consultant review may
be retained on any issue that involves specialized or expert knowledge in
connection with an application, including, but not limited to, application
completeness or accuracy, structural engineering analysis, or compliance with
FCC radio frequency emissions standards.
   J.   Conditions Of Approval:
      1)   Generally: In addition to any supplemental conditions imposed by the
Director or the City Manager, as the case may be, all permits granted pursuant
to this chapter shall be subject to the following conditions, unless modified
by the approving authority:
         i.   Code Compliance: The permittee shall at all times maintain
compliance with all applicable federal, state and local laws, regulations and
other rules, including, without limitation, those applying to use of public
rights-of-way.
         ii.   Permit Duration: A wireless encroachment permit shall be valid
for a period of ten (10) years, unless pursuant to another provision of the
Code or these conditions, it expires sooner or is terminated. At the end of ten
(10) years from the date of issuance, such permit shall automatically expire,
unless an extension or renewal has been granted. A person holding a wireless
encroachment permit must either (1) remove the facility within thirty (30) days
following the permit's expiration (provided that removal of support structure
owned by the City, a utility, or another entity authorized to maintain a
support structure in the right-of-way need not be removed, but must be restored
to its prior condition, except as specifically permitted by the City); or (2)
at least ninety (90) days prior to expiration, submit an application to renew
the permit, which application must, among all other requirements, demonstrate
that the impact of the wireless facility cannot be reduced. The wireless
facility must remain in place until it is acted upon by the City and all
appeals from the City's decision exhausted.
         iii.   Public Notice: Upon issuance of a permit, the City shall mail
notice of the approved wireless telecommunications facility to all adjacent
property owners.
         iv.   Timing Of Installation: The installation and construction
authorized by a wireless encroachment permit shall begin within one (1) year
after its approval, or it will expire without further action by the City. The
installation and construction authorized by a wireless encroachment permit
shall conclude, including any necessary post-installation repairs and/or
restoration to the ROW, within thirty (30) days following the day construction
commenced.
         v.   Commencement Of Operations: The operation of the approved
facility shall commence no later than one (1) month after the completion of
installation, or the wireless encroachment permit will expire without further
action by the City.
         vi.   As-Built Drawings: The permittee shall submit an as-built
drawing within ninety (90) days after installation of the facility. As-built
drawings shall be in an electronic format acceptable to the City.
         vii.   Inspections; Emergencies: The City or its designee may enter
onto the facility area to inspect the facility upon 48 hours prior notice to
the permittee. The permittee shall cooperate with all inspections and may be
present for any inspection of its facility by the City. The City reserves the
right to enter or direct its designee to enter the facility and support,
repair, disable, or remove any elements of the facility in emergencies or when
the facility threatens imminent harm to persons or property. The City shall
make an effort to contact the permittee prior to disabling or removing any
facility elements, but in any case shall notify permittee within twenty four
(24) hours of doing so.
         viii.   Contact: The permittee shall at all times maintain accurate
contact information for all parties responsible for the facility, which shall
include a phone number, street mailing address and email address for at least
one (1) natural person.
         ix.   Insurance: The permittee shall obtain and maintain throughout
the term of the permit commercial general liability insurance with a limit of
one million dollars ($1,000,000) per occurrence for bodily injury and property
damage and two million dollars ($2,000,000) general aggregate including
premises operations, contractual liability, personal injury, and products
completed operations. The relevant policies shall name the City, its elected
and appointed officials, officers, representatives, agents, and employees as
additional insureds. The permittee shall use its best efforts to provide thirty
(30) days' prior notice to the City of the cancellation or material
modification of any applicable insurance policy.
         x.   Indemnities: The permittee and, if applicable, the owner of the
property upon which the wireless facility is installed shall defend, indemnify
and hold harmless the City, its agents, officers, officials, and employees (i)
from any and all damages, liabilities, injuries, losses, costs, and expenses,
and from any and all claims, demands, law suits, writs of mandamus, and other
actions or proceedings brought against the city or its agents, officers,
officials, or employees to challenge, attack, seek to modify, set aside, void
or annul the city's approval of the permit, and (ii) from any and all damages,
liabilities, injuries, losses, costs, and expenses, and any and all claims,
demands, law suits, or causes of action and other actions or proceedings of any
kind or form, whether for personal injury, death or property damage, arising
out of or in connection with the activities or performance of the permittee or,
if applicable, the property owner or any of each one's agents, employees,
licensees, contractors, subcontractors, or independent contractors. In the
event the city becomes aware of any such actions or claims the city shall
promptly notify the permittee and, if applicable, the property owner and shall
reasonably cooperate in the defense. The City shall have the right to approve,
which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld, the legal counsel providing
the City's defense, and the property owner and/or the permittee (as applicable)
shall reimburse City for any costs and expenses directly and necessarily
incurred by the City in the course of the defense.
         xi.   Performance Bond: Prior to issuance of a wireless encroachment
permit, the permittee shall file with the City, and shall maintain in good
standing throughout the term of the approval, a performance bond or other
surety or another form of security for the removal of the facility in the event
that the use is abandoned or the permit expires, or is revoked, or is otherwise
terminated. The security shall be in the amount equal to one hundred percent
(100%) of the cost of physically removing the facility and all related
facilities and equipment on the site, based on the higher of two (2)
contractor's quotes for removal that are provided by the permittee. The
permittee shall reimburse the City for staff time associated with the
processing and tracking of the bond, based on the hourly rate adopted by the
City Council. Reimbursement shall be paid when the security is posted and
during each administrative review.
         xii.   Adverse Impacts On Adjacent Properties: The permittee shall
undertake all reasonable efforts to avoid undue adverse impacts to adjacent
properties and/or uses that may arise from the construction, operation,
maintenance, modification, and removal of the facility.
         xiii.   Noninterference: The permittee shall not move, alter,
temporarily relocate, change, or interfere with any existing structure,
improvement, or property without the prior consent of the owner of that
structure, improvement, or property. No structure, improvement, or property
owned by the City shall be moved to accommodate a permitted activity or
encroachment, unless the City determines that such movement will not adversely
affect the City or any surrounding businesses or residents, and the permittee
pays all costs and expenses related to the relocation of the City's structure,
improvement, or property. Prior to commencement of any work pursuant to a
wireless encroachment permit, the permittee shall provide the City with
documentation establishing to the city's satisfaction that the permittee has
the legal right to use or interfere with any other structure, improvement, or
property within the public right-of-way or city utility easement to be affected
by the permittee's facilities.
         xiv.   No Right, Title, Or Interest: The permission granted by a
wireless encroachment permit shall not in any event constitute an easement on
or an encumbrance against the public right-of-way. No right, title, or interest
(including franchise interest) in the public right-of-way, or any part thereof,
shall vest or accrue in the Permittee by reason of a wireless encroachment
permit or the issuance of any other permit or exercise of any privilege given
thereby.
         xv.   No Possessory Interest: No possessory interest is created by a
wireless encroachment permit. However, to the extent that a possessory interest
is deemed created by a governmental entity with taxation authority, the
permittee acknowledges that the City has given to permittee notice pursuant to
California Revenue and Taxation Code Section 107.6 that the use or occupancy of
any public property pursuant to a wireless encroachment permit may create a
possessory interest which may be subject to the payment of property taxes
levied upon such interest. Permittee shall be solely liable for, and shall pay
and discharge prior to delinquency, any and all possessory interact taxes or
other taxes, fees, and assessments levied against the permittee's right to
possession, occupancy, or use of any public property pursuant to any right of
possession, occupancy, or use created by this permit.
         xvi.   General Maintenance: The site and the facility, including, but
not limited to, all screening, camouflaging or paint materials, landscaping,
fencing, and related transmission equipment, must be maintained in a neat and
clean manner and in accordance with all approved plans. All graffiti on
facilities must be removed at the sole expense of the permittee within forty
eight (48) hours after notification from the City.
         xvii.   RF Exposure Compliance: All facilities must comply with all
standards and regulations of the FCC and any other state or federal government
agency with the authority to regulate RF exposure standards. After transmitter
and antenna system optimization, but prior to unattended operations of the
facility, permittee or its representative must conduct on-site post-
installation RF emissions testing to demonstrate actual compliance with the FCC
OET Bulletin 65 RF emissions safety rules for general population/uncontrolled
RF exposure in all sectors. For this testing, the transmitter shall be
operating at maximum operating power, and the testing shall occur outwards to a
distance where the RF emissions no longer exceed the uncontrolled/general
population limit. The permittee shall submit documentation of this testing
within ninety (90) days after installation of the facility.
         xviii.   Testing: Testing of any equipment shall take place on
weekdays only, and only between the hours of 8:30 A.M. and 4:30 P.M., except
that testing is prohibited on holidays that fall on a weekday. In addition,
testing is prohibited on weekend days.
         xix.   Modifications: No changes shall be made to the approved plans
without review and approval in accordance with this chapter.
         xx.   Agreement With City: If not already completed, the permittee
shall enter into the appropriate agreement with the City, as determined by the
City, prior to constructing, attaching, or operating a facility on municipal
infrastructure. This permit is not a substitute for such agreement.
         xxi.   Conflicts With Improvements: For all facilities located within
the ROW, the permittee shall remove or relocate, at its expense and without
expense to the City, any or all of its facilities when such removal or
relocation is deemed necessary by the city by reason of any change of grade,
alignment, or width of any right-of-way, for installation of services, water
pipes, drains, storm drains, power or signal lines, traffic control devices,
right-of-way improvements, or for any other construction, repair, or
improvement to the right-of-way.
         xxii.   Abandonment: If a facility is not operated for a continuous
period of six (6) months, the wireless encroachment permit and any other permit
or approval therefor shall be deemed abandoned and terminated automatically,
unless before the end of the six (6) month period (i) the Director has
determined that the facility has resumed operations, or (ii) the City has
received an application to transfer the permit to another service provider. No
later than ninety (90) days from the date the facility is determined to have
ceased operation or the permittee has notified the Director of its intent to
vacate the site, the permittee shall remove all equipment and improvements
associated with the use and shall restore the site to its original condition to
the satisfaction of the Director. The permittee shall provide written
verification of the removal of the facilities within thirty (30) days of the
date the removal is completed. If the facility is not removed within thirty
(30) days after the permit has been discontinued pursuant to this subsection,
the site shall be deemed to be a nuisance, and the City may cause the facility
to be removed at permittee's expense or by calling any bond or other financial
assurance to pay for removal. If there are two (2) or more users of a single
facility or support structure, then this provision shall apply to the specific
elements or parts thereof that were abandoned, but will not be effective for
the entirety thereof until all users cease use thereof.
         xxiii.   Encourage Co-location: Where the facility site is capable of
accommodating a co-located facility upon the same site in a manner consistent
with the permit conditions for the existing facility, the owner and operator of
the existing facility shall allow co-location of third party facilities,
provided the parties can mutually agree upon reasonable terms and conditions.
         xxiv.   Records: The permittee must maintain complete and accurate
copies of all permits and other regulatory approvals issued in connection with
the facility, which includes without limitation this approval, the approved
plans and photo simulations incorporated into this approval, all conditions
associated with this approval and any ministerial permits or approvals issued
in connection with this approval. In the event that the permittee does not
maintain such records as required in this condition or fails to produce true
and complete copies of such records within a reasonable time after a written
request from the City, any ambiguities or uncertainties that would be resolved
through an inspection of the missing records will be construed against the
permittee.
         xxv.   Attorneys' Fees: In the event the City determines that it is
necessary to take legal action to enforce any of these conditions, or to revoke
a permit, and such legal action is taken, the permittee shall be required to
pay any and all costs of such legal action, including reasonable attorneys'
fees, incurred by the City, even if the matter is not prosecuted to a final
judgment or is amicably resolved, unless the City should otherwise agree with
permittee to waive said fees or any part thereof. The foregoing shall not apply
if the permittee prevails in the enforcement proceeding.
      2)   Eligible Facilities Requests: In addition to the conditions provided
in Section 9(a) of this chapter and any supplemental conditions imposed by the
Director or the City Manager, as the case may be, all permits for an eligible
facility requests granted pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to the
following additional conditions, unless modified by the approving authority:
         i.   Permit Subject To Conditions Of Underlying Permit: Any permit
granted in response to an application qualifying as an eligible facilities
request shall be subject to the terms and conditions of the underlying permit.
         ii.   No Permit Term Extension: The City's grant or grant by operation
of law of an eligible facilities request permit constitutes a federally-
mandated modification to the underlying permit or approval for the subject
tower or base station. Notwithstanding any permit duration established in
another permit condition, the city's grant or grant by operation of law of an
eligible facilities request permit will not extend the permit term for the
underlying permit or any other underlying regulatory approval, and its term
shall be coterminous with the underlying permit or other regulatory approval
for the subject tower or base station.
         iii.   No Waiver Of Standing: The city's grant or grant by operation
of law of an eligible facilities request does not waive, and shall not be
construed to waive, any standing by the city to challenge Section 6409(a) of
the Spectrum Act, any FCC rules that interpret Section 6409(a) of the Spectrum
Act, or any modification to Section 6409(a) of the Spectrum Act.
      3)   Small Cell Facilities Requests: In addition to the conditions
provided in Section 9(a) of this chapter and any supplemental conditions
imposed by the Director or the City Manager, as the case may be, all permits
for a small cell facility granted pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to
the following condition, unless modified by the approving authority:
         i.   No Waiver Of Standing: The city's grant of a permit for a small
cell facility request does not waive, and shall not be construed to waive, any
standing by the city to challenge any FCC orders or rules related to small cell
facilities, or any modification to those FCC orders or rules.
   K.    Breach; Termination Of Permit:
      1)    For Breach: A wireless encroachment permit may be revoked for
failure to comply with the conditions of the permit or applicable law. Upon
revocation, the wireless facility must be removed; provided that removal of a
support structure owned by City, a utility, or another entity authorized to
maintain a support structure in the right-of-way need not be removed, but must
be restored to its prior condition, except as specifically permitted by the
City. All costs incurred by the City in connection with the revocation and
removal shall be paid by entities who own or control any part of the wireless
facility.
      2)   For Installation Without A Permit: Any wireless facility installed
without a wireless encroachment permit (except for those exempted by this
chapter) must be removed; provided that removal of support structure owned by
City, a utility, or another entity authorized to maintain a support structure
in the right-of-way need not be removed, but must be restored to its prior
condition, except as specifically permitted by the City. All costs incurred by
the City in connection with the revocation and removal shall be paid by
entities who own or control any part of the wireless facility.
      3)   Violation: Any violation of this chapter will be subject to the same
penalties as a violation of
Chapter 1.20 of this Code.
   L.   Infrastructure Controlled By City: The City, as a matter of policy,
will negotiate agreements for use of municipal infrastructure. The placement of
wireless facilities on those structures shall be subject to the agreement. The
agreement shall specify the compensation to the City for use of the structures.
The person seeking the agreement shall additionally reimburse the City for all
costs the City incurs in connection with its review of, and action upon the
person's request for, an agreement.
   M.   Nondiscrimination: In establishing the rights, obligations and
conditions set forth in this chapter, it is the intent of the City to treat
each applicant or public right-of-way user in a competitively neutral and
nondiscriminatory manner, to the extent required by law, and with
considerations that may be unique to the technologies, situation and legal
status of each particular applicant or request for use of the public rights-of-
way. (Ord. 2894 §2, 2019)
TITLE 13
PUBLIC SERVICES
DIVISION I. WATER
CHAPTER 13.04
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
13.04.010: Definitions
13.04.010: DEFINITIONS:
   A.   For the purpose of this division all words used herein in the present
tense shall include the future; all words in the plural number shall include
the singular number; and all words in the singular number shall include the
plural number.
   B.   Whenever in this chapter the following words and phrases set forth in
this section are used, they shall, for the purpose of this chapter, have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section:
   BOARD: The assistant city manager and two (2) city manager appointed city
department directors, exclusive of the finance and municipal utilities and
engineering departments.
   COST: Labor, material, transportation expenses, supervision, engineering and
all other necessary overhead expenses.
   DIVISION: The water division of the city, its superintendent and engineer,
appointed officers and any other persons or bodies invested with responsibility
and jurisdiction in matters pertinent to the water division.
   FIRE CONNECTION: The tapping of water mains and the laying of pipes from the
main to the curb line and the setting of the shutoff valve, flow detection
device and vault.
   SERVICE CHARGES: Service charges for use of water from the Redlands domestic
water system based on water rates. This may also be referred to, herein, as the
water billing.
   SERVICE CONNECTION: The tapping of water mains and the laying of pipes from
the main to the curb line and the setting of the meter and meter box.
   WATER RATES: The water rates, water rate structures and water rate classes
to be established by resolution of the city council to be used as a basis for
charging users for service from the Redlands domestic water system.
(Ord. 2903 § 1, 2019: Ord. 2751, 2011: Ord. 1949, 1986: prior code § 59100)
CHAPTER 13.06
WATER CONSERVATION PLAN
SECTION:
13.06.010: Title
13.06.020: Intent
13.06.030: Purpose And Scope
13.06.040: Authorization
13.06.050: Application
13.06.060: General Prohibition
13.06.070: Mandatory Conservation; Stage Criteria
13.06.080: Mandatory Conservation; Phase Implementation
13.06.090: Relief From Compliance
13.06.100: Failure To Comply
13.06.110: Hearing Regarding Violations
13.06.120: City Manager Delegation
13.06.130: Severability
13.06.140: Incompatible Provisions
13.06.150: Public Health And Safety Not To Be Affected
13.06.160: Exemption From California Environmental Quality Act
13.06.010: TITLE:
This chapter establishes the CITY OF REDLANDS WATER CONSERVATION PLAN. (Ord.
2151 § 1, 1991)
13.06.020: INTENT:
The city council of the city of Redlands declares that the public health,
safety and general welfare requires that water resources available to the city
be put to maximum beneficial use, that the waste or unreasonable use of water
be prevented, and that the conservation of such water must occur to protect the
people and property of the city of Redlands. (Ord. 2151 § 1, 1991)
13.06.030: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
   A.   The purpose of this chapter is to reduce the nonessential use of water
to conserve city water supplies, thereby minimizing the effect of a shortage of
water supplies on city users. The water conservation plan here established is
to:
      1.   Protect the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens and property
owners of the city;
      2.   Assure the maximum beneficial use of city water supplies; and
      3.   Attempt to provide sufficient water supplies to meet the basic needs
of human consumption, sanitation and fire protection.
   B.   This chapter shall remain in effect until the city council declares by
ordinance that the provisions of this chapter are no longer applicable to
existing water supply conditions and the supply of water available for
distribution within the city's service area has been replenished or augmented.
(Ord. 2151 § 1, 1991)
13.06.040: AUTHORIZATION:
   A.   The city is authorized to implement the provisions of this chapter
following a public hearing as specified below upon the city council's
determination by majority vote of the entire council that such implementation
is necessary to protect the public health and safety.
   B.   A public hearing shall be held to determine whether to adopt a water
conservation plan, and, if so, which measures provided herein should be
implemented. A similar public hearing shall be held by the city council prior
to the implementation or termination of each incremental water conservation
stage pursuant to section
13.06.080 of this chapter. Notice of the time and place of these public
hearings shall be published not less than ten (10) days before the hearing in a
newspaper of general circulation.
   C.   Upon adoption by the city council, the provisions of this chapter shall
become effective immediately. Notice of the implementation of successive stages
of water conservation shall be given to water users immediately both by
publication at least once in a newspaper of general circulation within ten (10)
days after adoption, and by a notice enclosed with the next regular city
invoice for water or utility service.
   D.   If the city council cannot meet in time to act to protect the public
interest pursuant to this chapter, the city manager or his designee is hereby
authorized and directed to implement such provisions of this chapter upon his
or her written determination that the city cannot supply adequate water to meet
the ordinary demands of water consumers, and that such implementation is
necessary to protect the public health or safety. Such written determination
shall be presented to the city council at its next meeting for review,
revocation or ratification. Such meeting shall be held as soon as possible.
(Ord. 2151 § 1, 1991)
13.06.050: APPLICATION:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all persons, customers, and
property served water by the city wherever situated. (Ord. 2151 § 1, 1991)
13.06.060: GENERAL PROHIBITION:
No water user shall make, cause, use, or permit the use of water supplied by
the city for residential, commercial, industrial, agricultural, governmental or
any other use in a manner contrary to this chapter. Waste or the unreasonable
or nonbeneficial use of water is prohibited in the city of Redlands. (Ord. 2151
§ 1, 1991)
13.06.070: MANDATORY CONSERVATION; STAGE CRITERIA:
The director of the public works department shall recommend guidelines for
adoption by the city council setting forth the criteria to determine when water
supply conditions in the city require the implementation or termination of each
water conservation stage. Such guidelines shall be updated when the director
determines that water availability so requires. The director shall include in
such guidelines a calendar symbol system designating allowed days for
irrigation. (Ord. 2151 § 1, 1991)
13.06.080: MANDATORY CONSERVATION; PHASE IMPLEMENTATION:
The public works department shall monitor the projected supply and demand for
water by its customers on a daily basis during the months of June, July,
August, September, and October and shall recommend to the city manager the
extent of conservation required through the implementation and/or termination
of particular conservation stages to allow the department to prudently plan for
and supply water to its customers. Thereafter, the city manager may recommend
to the city council the implementation or termination of the appropriate stage
of water conservation in accordance with the applicable provisions of this
chapter. The city council may implement or terminate the appropriate stage
pursuant to section
13.06.040 of this chapter. Notice of the implementation or termination of each
stage shall be given pursuant to subsection
13.06.040C of this chapter.
   A.   Stage I, Voluntary Conservation Measures: Water users are requested to
limit their water use from June 1 to October 1 of each year to an amount
necessary for health, safety, economic necessity and irrigation. Water users
should use water wisely and prevent its waste or unreasonable use.
The following actions are recommended:
      1.   Adjust sprinklers and irrigation systems to avoid overspray, runoff,
and waste. Avoid watering on windy days;
      2.   Install water saving devices, such as low flow showerheads and
faucet aerators;
      3.   Select low water demand shrubs, ground covers and trees for new
landscaping;
      4.   Restrict water service in restaurants.
   B.   Stage II, Mandatory Compliance; Water Alert: When implemented pursuant
to subsection
13.06.040B of this chapter and noticed pursuant to subsection
13.06.040C of this chapter, the following restrictions shall apply to the use
of water supplied by the city in addition to the recommendations of stage I:
      1.   Irrigation of lawns, gardens, landscaped areas, trees, shrubs, or
other plants utilizing individual sprinklers or sprinkler systems is allowed
only on an irrigation day designated by the city and is prohibited between the
hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) noon and eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. However,
irrigation is permitted at any time if:
         a.   A handheld hose is used, or
         b.   A handheld, faucet filled bucket containing five (5) gallons or
less is used, or
         c.   A drip irrigation system is used.
Commercial nurseries, commercial farmers, and grove settings requiring twenty
four (24) hour irrigation cycles, are exempt from stage II irrigation
restrictions, but shall curtail all nonessential water use.
      2.   The washing of automobiles, trucks, trailers, boats, aircraft and
other types of mobile equipment is allowed only on designated irrigation days
and is prohibited between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) noon and eight
o'clock (8:00) P.M. Mobile equipment washing shall be done only with a handheld
bucket or a handheld hose equipped with a positive shutoff nozzle for quick
rinses.
Notwithstanding the above, washing of such equipment may be done at any time on
the immediate premises of a commercial car wash or commercial service station
with washwater recycling facilities. Garbage trucks and vehicles to transport
food and perishables are exempt from these regulations if the public health or
safety requires frequent vehicle cleaning.
      3.   The washing or sprinkling of foundations or structures shall be
allowed only by city permit. Regulations for such permit shall be enacted by
resolution.
      4.   The refilling or adding of water to uncovered swimming or wading
pools or spas is allowed only on designated irrigation days and is prohibited
between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) noon and eight o'clock (8:00) P.M.
      5.   The operation of any ornamental fountain or other structure making
similar decorative use of water is prohibited, unless the fountain or structure
has a recycling system.
      6.   The use of water for irrigation of golf greens and tees is allowed
only on designated irrigation days and is prohibited between twelve o'clock
(12:00) noon and eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. The irrigation of golf course
fairways is absolutely prohibited. The irrigation of golf courses utilizing
treated wastewater or reused water is not subject to these prohibitions.
      7.   Restaurants shall not serve water to customers except upon specific
customer request.
      8.   Failure to repair controllable leaks is prohibited.
      9.   Use of running water to wash driveways, sidewalks, parking areas,
patios, tennis courts and other paved areas is prohibited.
      10.   Failure to prevent excessive runoff from irrigation activities is
prohibited.
      11.   Use of water from fire hydrants is limited to firefighting and
other activities necessary to maintain the health, safety, and welfare of the
citizens of Redlands. The use of water piped from fire hydrants and sprinkled
for construction purposes is prohibited.
   C.   Stage III, Mandatory Compliance; Water Warning: When implemented
pursuant to subsection
 13.06.040B of this chapter and noticed pursuant to subsection
13.06.040C of this chapter, the following restrictions, in addition to all
elements of stages I and II, shall apply:
      1.   All outdoor irrigation of vegetation shall occur only on designated
days using handheld hoses, drip irrigation, or handheld buckets and is
prohibited between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) noon and eight o'clock
(8:00) P.M.
Exemption: Permanently installed automatic sprinkler systems may be used on
designated irrigation days but are prohibited between the hours of twelve
o'clock (12:00) noon and eight o'clock (8:00) P.M.
      2.   The watering of golf tee areas is prohibited except with treated
wastewater or reused water.
   D.   Stage IV, Mandatory Compliance; Water Emergency: Pursuant to California
Water Code section 350 et seq., the city council may declare a water shortage
emergency upon its determination that the ordinary demands of city water users
cannot be satisfied without depleting the city water supply to a point of
insufficient water for human consumption, sanitation and fire protection. When
implemented pursuant to subsection
13.06.040B of this chapter and noticed pursuant to subsection
13.06.040C of this chapter, the following restrictions, in addition to all
elements of stages I, II and III, shall apply:
      1.   All outdoor irrigation of vegetation shall be allowed only between
the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. and twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight on
designated irrigation days.
      2.   The washing of automobiles, trucks, trailers, boats, airplanes, and
other types of mobile equipment not occurring upon the immediate premises of
commercial car washes and commercial service stations and not in the immediate
interest of the public health or safety is prohibited.
      3.   The washing of automobiles, trucks, trailers, boats, airplanes, or
other types of mobile equipment upon the immediate premises of commercial car
washes and commercial service stations shall occur only between the hours of
twelve o'clock (12:00) noon and six o'clock (6:00) P.M.
      4.   Commercial nurseries and commercial farmers using city water shall
water only on designated irrigation days between the hours of ten o'clock (10:
00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M. and shall use only handheld hoses, drip
irrigation systems, or handheld buckets.
      5.   The filling, refilling, or adding of water to uncovered swimming or
wading pools and spas is prohibited at any time of day or night.
      6.   The operation of any ornamental fountain or similar structure is
prohibited.
      7.   The issuance of new service connections and meters is prohibited.
(Ord. 2151 § 1, 1991)
13.06.090: RELIEF FROM COMPLIANCE:
A city water user may file a request for relief from any provision of this
chapter. The city manager shall review all requests and hold a hearing with
each applicant. The city manager may grant relief from the provisions of this
chapter if he determines that special circumstances make compliance not
reasonably possible, or that the restrictions herein would either:
   A.   Cause an unnecessary and undue hardship to the water user or the
public; or
   B.   Cause an emergency condition affecting the health, sanitation, fire
protection or safety of the water user or of the public.
Such relief may be granted only upon written request to the city. Upon granting
such relief, the city manager may impose any conditions he determines to be
just and proper. The city manager shall make his determination within fourteen
(14) days of receipt of the request for relief and shall inform the applicant
of the decision in writing.
An applicant shall have the right to appeal the city manager's decision
regarding his or her application to the city council or its designee. The
appeal must be in writing and received by the city within ten (10) days of the
date of the city manager's written decision. The appeal shall be heard by the
city council or its designee within a reasonable period of time from the date
the appeal is filed. The city shall provide written notice to the applicant of
the time and date of the hearing. The city council or its designee, at its
discretion, may affirm, reverse or modify the city manager's decision and
impose any conditions it deems proper. The decision of the city council shall
be final. (Ord. 2151 § 1, 1991)
13.06.100: FAILURE TO COMPLY:
Violation by any customer of the water use prohibitions of this chapter shall
be penalized as follows:
   A.   First Violation; Notice Of Noncompliance: The city manager is
authorized and directed to issue a written notice of noncompliance to any water
user who, in the reasonable judgment of the city manager, has failed or refused
in a significant way to comply with those water use curtailment provisions of
this chapter currently in effect. Any such notice of violation shall specify
the time, place and manner of noncompliance, and shall specify a reasonable
period to achieve compliance. Any notice of noncompliance shall be directed to
the customer of record for the premises where the noncompliance was observed.
Delivery may be through regular mail or by personal delivery with a declaration
of delivery returned to the city manager.
   B.   Second Violation; Warning Of Penalties: For a second violation by any
customer of the water use curtailment provisions of this chapter currently in
effect, a written warning notice of the future imposition of penalties on the
customer's water bill shall be issued. Any such warning notice shall specify
the time, place and manner of noncompliance and shall require compliance within
two (2) days. Any warning notice shall be directed to the customer of record
for the premises where the violation has occurred. Delivery will be made by
personal delivery with a declaration of delivery returned to the city manager.
   C.   Third Violation; Imposition Of Penalties:
      1.   For a third violation by any customer of this chapter, a citation
shall be issued and a surcharge imposed on the customer's next regular water
bill. The surcharge shall consist of a percentage of the customer's commodity
charge as shown on the most recent water bill, based upon the water
conservation stage then in effect at the time of the most recent violation. The
penalty surcharge for each stage is shown below:
 
Stage II  25 percent
Stage III 50 percent
Stage IV  75 percent
 
As an example, if a water user's most recent commodity charge is twenty five
dollars ($25.00), a third violation while the city is in stage III would result
in the imposition of a twelve dollar fifty cent ($12.50) surcharge.
      2.   If a water customer cited for a third violation fails or refuses to
comply with the requirements of this chapter or to pay any outstanding water
bills including surcharges, the city manager is hereby granted discretionary
authority pursuant to California Water Code section 375 to cause a flow
restricting device to be installed at the meter to reduce water availability to
the customer's service address. Pursuant to California Water Code section
35423, if installation of a flow restrictor is infeasible, impractical or is
unlikely to induce compliance with this chapter, the city manager may authorize
a shutoff of service to the premises involved. (Ord. 2151 § 1, 1991)
13.06.110: HEARING REGARDING VIOLATIONS:
   A.   Any customer receiving notice of a second or subsequent violation
pursuant to section
13.06.100 of this chapter shall have a right to a hearing by the city manager
within fifteen (15) days of mailing or other delivery of the notice of
violation.
   B.   The customer's written request for a hearing within the fifteen (15)
day period shall automatically stay the imposition of monetary penalties on the
customer's water bill until the city manager renders his decision. The decision
of the city manager shall be final and not subject to further appeal pursuant
to this code. (Ord. 2751, 2011)
13.06.120: CITY MANAGER DELEGATION:
The city manager may delegate all duties and responsibilities hereunder. (Ord.
2151 § 1, 1991)
13.06.130: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision, section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this
chapter, or the application of same to any person or set of circumstances is
held to be unconstitutional, void, or invalid, such decision shall not affect
the remaining portions of this chapter which shall remain in full force and
effect, and all provisions of this chapter are declared to be severable for
that purpose. (Ord. 2151 § 1, 1991)
13.06.140: INCOMPATIBLE PROVISIONS:
To the extent any provision of this chapter is incompatible with or at variance
with any prior adopted ordinance or resolution, the provisions of this chapter
shall take precedence, and all prior ordinances and resolutions shall be
interpreted to harmonize with and not change the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 2151 § 1, 1991)
13.06.150: PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY NOT TO BE AFFECTED:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to require the city to curtail the
supply of water to any customer when such water is required by that customer to
maintain an adequate level of public health or public safety. (Ord. 2151 § 1,
1991)
13.06.160: EXEMPTION FROM CALIFORNIA ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY ACT:
The city council determines that the adoption of this chapter and
implementation of the measures set forth herein are exempt from review under
the California environmental quality act 1  because it is an action taken to
mitigate or prevent a water shortage emergency, and to protect natural
resources. The city council directs the city manager or his designee to prepare
and file a notice of exemption as soon as possible following adoption of the
ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 2151 § 1, 1991)
 
Notes
1 1. Pub.Res.C. § 21000 et seq.
CHAPTER 13.08
SERVICE CONNECTIONS
SECTION:
13.08.010: Size And Location
13.08.020: Curb Cock
13.08.030: Pressure Conditions
13.08.040: Maintenance
13.08.050: Damages Through Leaking Pipes And Fixtures
13.08.060: Pressure Maintenance And Emergency Repair Shutdowns
13.08.070: Separate Service Required For Each Connection
13.08.080: Fire And Protective Service Connection
13.08.090: Application For Service
13.08.010: SIZE AND LOCATION:
The board reserves the right to determine the size of service connections and
their location with respect to the boundaries of the premises to be served. The
laying of consumer's pipeline to the meter shall not be done until the location
of the service connection has been approved by the board. (Ord. 1949 § 1, 1986:
prior code § 59101(1))
13.08.020: CURB COCK:
   A.   Every service connection installed by the city shall be equipped with a
curb cock or valve on the inlet side of the meter, which valve or curb cock
shall be for the exclusive use of the board in controlling the water supply
through the service lateral.
   B.   It is further provided that, if the curb cock or valve is damaged by
the consumer's use to an extent requiring replacement, such replacement shall
be made at the consumer's expense. (Ord. 1949 § 1, 1986: prior code § 59101(2))
13.08.030: PRESSURE CONDITIONS:
All applicants for service connections or water service shall be required to
accept such conditions of pressure and service as are provided by the
distributing system at the location of the proposed connection, and shall agree
to hold the city blameless for any damages arising out of low pressure or high
pressure conditions or interruptions of service. (Ord. 1949 § 1, 1986: prior
code § 59101(3))
13.08.040: MAINTENANCE:
   A.   The services and connections extending from the water main to the meter
and including the meter shall be maintained by the division. All pipes and
fixtures extending from the meter or lying beyond the meter shall be installed
and maintained by the owner of the property.
   B.   In the event that a property owner who has service from more than one
water supplier elects to discontinue service from the city, the service lateral
shall be removed and service will be resumed by the city upon payment of the
rate established by the city council for a new service connection.
   C.   In the event that water service is maintained from two (2) water
agencies, adequate backflow protection shall be provided for the city system as
provided for in sections
13.20.030 through
13.20.080, inclusive, and
13.32.010 of this title. (Prior code § 59105)
13.08.050: DAMAGES THROUGH LEAKING PIPES AND FIXTURES:
When turning on the water supply as requested and the house or property is
vacant, the division will endeavor to ascertain if water is running on the
inside of the building. If such is found to be the case, the water will be left
shut off at the curb cock on the inlet side of the meter. The jurisdiction and
responsibility of the division shall end at the meter and the division will in
no case be liable for damages beyond the meter. (Prior code § 59109)
13.08.060: PRESSURE MAINTENANCE AND EMERGENCY REPAIR SHUTDOWNS:
The division shall not accept any responsibility for the maintenance of
pressure and it reserves the right to discontinue service while making
emergency repairs or for other cause, which in the discretion of the division
necessitates such discontinuance. Consumers dependent upon continuous water
supply should provide their own emergency storage of water. (Prior code §
59110)
13.08.070: SEPARATE SERVICE REQUIRED FOR EACH CONNECTION:
   A.   Each parcel of land under separate ownership must be provided with a
separate service, and any violation thereof will be sufficient cause for the
board to remove the service until the said violation is corrected and a fee of
five dollars ($5.00) paid for reconnecting the service. Two (2) or more
dwelling units under one ownership and on the same lot or parcel of land may be
supplied through the same service; provided, however, that the board shall
reserve the right to limit the number of dwelling units or the area of land
under one ownership to be supplied by one service.
   B.   Not more than one service for domestic, commercial, irrigation or
industrial supply shall be installed or used for one business or parcel of
land, except under special conditions, and by consent of the board.
   C.   When property provided with a service is subdivided, each service shall
be considered as belonging to the lot or parcel of land upon which it fronts.
(Prior code § 59111)
13.08.080: FIRE AND PROTECTIVE SERVICE CONNECTION:
   A.   This service shall be used only for water consumed in the extinguishing
of fires. Upon the completion of the installation, the valve governing the same
will be closed and sealed and shall remain so until a written order is received
from the owner of the premises to have the water turned on. The board shall not
be held liable for damages of any kind whatsoever that may occur to the
premises served by reason of the installation, maintenance, use, fluctuation of
pressure, or interruption of supply.
   B.   If water is used through a fire connection for any other purpose than
the extinguishing of fires, the board shall have the right to place a meter on
the fire connection at the owner's expense or to shut off the entire water
supply from such premises. Upon the installation of such meter, the water rates
as adopted by resolution under provisions of
chapter 13.12 of this title shall apply.
   C.   The board shall have the right to take a domestic, commercial or
industrial service from the fire connection at the curb to supply the same
premises as those to which the fire service connection belongs. The board shall
also have the right to determine the proportion of the installation costs
properly chargeable to each connection, if such segregation of costs shall
become necessary.
   D.   The board reserves the right to install on all fire connections a check
valve of a type approved by the National Board of Fire Underwriters and to
equip the same with a bypass meter; such installations shall be at the expense
of the owner of the property and the regular domestic water rates as set forth
by resolution hereof shall apply for all water used through such service except
for fire protection purposes only. (Prior code § 59112)
13.08.090: APPLICATION FOR SERVICE:
   A.   Upon application for water service, each applicant shall be required to
sign an application for service, wherein the city is released from all
liability by applicant that may be caused by water escaping or flowing from any
water pipe, hose, water conduit, faucet, hydrant, valve, or other connections
or appliance at any point within said premises, and wherein applicant also
guarantees payment of all sums to become due for water service furnished in
pursuance of the said application until notification to the water division to
discontinue or transfer such service.
   B.   If upon application for water service, a service connection is found to
have produced no revenue in the twenty (20) years immediately prior to date of
application and the service has been physically disconnected from the main,
such connection will be considered abandoned and all requirements under this
chapter through chapter 13.32 of this title shall be in effect in establishing
a new service connection. (Prior code § 59118)
CHAPTER 13.12
WATER CHARGES
SECTION:
13.12.010: Frontage Charges
13.12.020: Due Date
13.12.025: Alternative Payment Plan
13.12.030: Guarantee Of Future Payment
13.12.040: Water Use Without Making Regular Application
13.12.050: Turning On And Off Of Water Supply
13.12.060: Refunds And Adjustments
13.12.070: Disputed Bills
13.12.080: Prepayment
13.12.010: FRONTAGE CHARGES:
   A.   The water main frontage charge is established to implement the Redlands
general plan and to finance the construction of local water distribution mains
and main extensions, by providing for more equitable sharing of costs of those
mains. Included are eight inch (8") minimum size water mains or twelve inch
(12") minimum size water mains if required for fire flow, required within the
development and/or along the frontage of the development and water main
extensions from the development to a point where the new mains can tie into two
(2) existing water mains.
The frontage charge shall be equal to the frontage charge per foot, as
specified by subsection D of this section, multiplied by the total length of
all property lines contiguous to street right of way or easement wherein there
are water mains accessible to the property.
   B.   A percentage of the frontage charge collected, set by section
13.24.050 of this title, shall be refunded to the person, or persons,
corporation or agency originally paying for said water main to which the
connection has been made. See section
13.24.050 of this title for rules governing application for refunds.
   C.   Twenty five percent (25%) of the sum collected as frontage charges
shall be credited to the water fund balance. Seventy five percent (75%) of the
sum collected in frontage charges in accordance with this section shall be
credited to the reserve for frontage charge reimbursement which shall be
established in the water fund. Reimbursements shall be paid out of this
reserve. Any accumulation of funds beyond the amount necessary to meet refund
obligations shall be credited from time to time, to the reserve for capital in
the water fund.
   D.   Water main frontage charge per foot shall be:
 
6 inch nonpotable water main $23.00
8 inch potable water main    30.00
12 inch potable water main   46.00
 
(Ord. 2682 § 4, 2007: Ord. 2655 § 3, 2007: Ord. 2608 § 5, 2005: Ord. 2079 §§ 9,
10, 1989: Ord. 1944 § 1, 1986: prior code § 59103)
13.12.020: DUE DATE:
   A.   The city may use a unified billing system for city provided services.
The charges for water, wastewater, and refuse service, or any other city
provided services, may be billed on one bill and collected as one item. Failure
to pay the amount due in full for any of the services may result in the
discontinuation of water services.
   B.   All bills and charges for service shall be due and payable upon
presentation and shall become delinquent twenty six (26) days thereafter. If
the bill is not paid on, or prior to, said due date, the billing shall be
considered delinquent and a late charge shall be levied upon the unpaid balance
as follows:
      1.   For any account with an unpaid balance, a onetime charge of ten
percent (10%) of the unpaid balance per service shall be assessed.
      2.   This charge shall be due and payable immediately upon accrual.
      3.   Upon request from the customer, one (1) late charge may be waived by
city staff once every twelve (12) months.
      4.   In lieu of imposing a late charge upon a customer's delinquent water
service billings, the City may offer to any customer of the city's water
service who has a delinquent water service billing the option to participate in
the city's automatic payment plan rather than be responsible for the payment of
late charges pursuant to subsection 1, above. Such participation, if agreed to
by the water service customer, shall be for a period of one (1) year. In the
event the customer terminates his or her participation in the automatic payment
plan during such one (1) year period, the customer shall immediately become
liable for the late charges and penalties that would otherwise have been
imposed on the customer's delinquent water service account.
   C.   Service may be discontinued upon written notice required by law if
payment of all charges is not made prior to the date such service becomes
delinquent, to the extent authorized by law.
   D.   If any owner or agent pays for water service on more than one property
or unit, service may be discontinued on all properties for failure to pay on
any one property. Procedures and charges for restoration of service are set
forth by resolution and section
13.12.050 of this chapter.
   E.   Failure to receive a bill shall not relieve the customer of liability.
Any amount due shall be deemed a debt to the city, and any person, firm or
corporation failing, neglecting, or refusing to pay said indebtedness shall be
liable in a civil action brought by the city in any court of competent
jurisdiction for the amount thereof.
   F.   In addition to any other remedies it may have for the collection of
delinquent accounts, the city may cause notice of a hearing on delinquent
accounts in accordance with Government Code sections 25831 and 38790.1. Such
notice shall be mailed to property owners listed as delinquent accounts not
less than ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing. At the hearing, the
city council shall hear any objections or protests of such property owners. The
city council may make such revisions, corrections or deletions to the report of
delinquent accounts as it deems just, after which, by resolution, the report
shall be confirmed. The delinquent charges set forth in the delinquent account
report may be placed as a lien on such properties for the amount of such
delinquent charges plus legal fees and administration costs. A certified copy
of the confirmed report shall be filed with the city clerk for the current tax
roll. The lien created attaches upon recordation, in the office of the county
recorder, of a certified copy of the resolution of confirmation. All laws
applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of city ad valorem property
taxes shall be applicable to such liens. (Ord. 2944 § 1, 2022: Ord. 2903 § 2,
2019: Ord. 2800, 2013)
13.12.025: ALTERNATIVE PAYMENT PLAN:
   A.   The City shall offer an alternative payment plan to a water service
customer under certain circumstances and under terms and conditions set by
resolution of the city council. A customer shall be eligible for an alternative
payment plan if all three (3) of the following circumstances are satisfied:
      1.   The customer is willing to enter into an alternative payment
schedule with respect to all delinquent charges.
      2.   The customer is not currently in default on any other pre-existing
alternative payment plan under this section.
      3.   The customer has not been in default on their municipal services
account for longer than sixty (60) days.
   B.   The customer must comply with the payment plan and remain current as
charges accrue in each subsequent billing period. The customer may not request
further payment plans for any subsequent unpaid charges while paying delinquent
charges pursuant to a payment plan. Where the customer fails to comply with the
terms of the payment plan for sixty (60) days or more, meaning that the full
agreed upon payment is not made toward the unpaid delinquent balance on his or
her account, the City may discontinue water service per Section 13.12.020C to
the extent authorized by law. (Ord. 2975 § 1, 2025: Ord. 2903 § 3, 2019)
13.12.030: GUARANTEE OF FUTURE PAYMENT:
The water charge shall begin when a service is installed and the meter is set.
Before the water shall be turned on by the division for any purposes
whatsoever, the property owner or his authorized agent shall first sign a form
in which he guarantees the payment of future water bills for the services
required. The property owner or his authorized agent will be held liable for
water used until the division is notified in writing to discontinue the
service. (Prior code § 59106)
13.12.040: WATER USE WITHOUT MAKING REGULAR APPLICATION:
A person, firm or corporation taking possession of premises and using water
from an active service connection without having made application to the
division for water service, shall be held liable for the water delivered from
the date of the last recorded meter reading, and if the meter is found
inoperative, the quantity consumed will be estimated. If proper application for
water service is not made upon notification to do so by the division, and if
accumulated bills for service are not paid immediately, the service may be
discontinued by the division without further notice. (Prior code § 59107)
13.12.050: TURNING ON AND OFF OF WATER SUPPLY:
   A.   A charge to establish a new account will be collected by the city. The
amount shall be established by resolution.
   B.   Upon request, the city will shut off the water supply without charge
for emergency purposes, and it is understood that the city will turn on the
water supply after repairs have been made.
   C.   If the service must be discontinued for nonpayment of bill(s), a charge
as set by resolution will be made by the city which must be paid in full prior
to restoration of service, including the minimum amount of prepayment as set by
this chapter in the event any previous prepayments have already been applied.
   D.   Any person requesting water service for a premises for which a notice
of violation of the California Health And Safety Code or a notice of
substandard building has been issued must provide evidence of a current legal
right to occupy the premises and clearance by either the development services
director or the quality of life director before the restoration of service.
   E.   If a city representative is prevented from discontinuing service, or if
service is turned back on by anyone other than an authorized representative,
the city may take any further steps it deems necessary to effect the
disconnection and prior to the restoration of service, all delinquent charges
and applicable miscellaneous charges must be paid in full before service will
be restored as set by resolution, including the minimum amount of prepayment as
set by this chapter in the event any previous prepayments have already been
applied. (Ord. 2834, 2016)
13.12.060: REFUNDS AND ADJUSTMENTS:
This section shall apply to sewer and water billings. If a customer is entitled
to a refund for any reason, such as overpayment of a closing bill or other just
cause, a demand shall be made by the customer for a refund of such overpayment,
and subject to verification by the city, a city warrant shall be issued to the
customer in the amount of the overcharge. In the event the overpayment was made
on a bill which is not a closing bill, the amount overpaid shall be credited to
the customer's account.
   A.   Undercharge: In the case of a discovered sewer or water undercharge,
when the undercharge is the result of a city error or omission, there shall be
no back charge adjustment for services with meters smaller than or equal to one
inch (1") in size. Proper billing shall begin with the first cycle billing
after the discovered error and the customer shall be notified in writing of the
charge and the reason for the charge. For services with meters which are
greater than one inch (1") in size, discovered sewer or water undercharges
shall be referred to the director of public works for determination of back
charges due.
   B.   Overcharge: In the case of a detected overcharge, the overcharge shall
be adjusted back for a period of up to four (4) years. The customer shall be
notified of the charge and the reason for the charge. No interest will be paid
on the adjustment.
(Ord. 2903 § 4, 2019: Ord. 1948 § 1, 1986: prior code § 59119)
13.12.070: DISPUTED BILLS:
   A.   In the event of a complaint by a customer that his or her water bill is
excessive, a reread shall be made on the meter and a check shall be made to
determine in particular if there are leaks in the meter. Should no leak in the
meter be found, then, upon request of the customer, the meter shall be removed
and be subject to a test upon it as set forth in detail in section
13.16.030 of this title. In the event the meter tests within the approved
limitations, and the customer continues to question the water bill, a personal
investigation of said premises served by the meter shall be made by the water
superintendent or his appointed representative. Should such investigation find
no reason to adjust said bill, the customer may make application (including
payment of the application fee established by resolution of the city council)
to the board for a final and binding, non-appealable ruling.
   B.   In the event a customer disputes his or her water bill for any other
reason than such bill being excessive for disputed usage, the customer may make
application (including payment of the application fee established by resolution
of the city council) to the board for a final and binding, non-appealable
ruling.
(Ord. 2903 § 5, 2019: prior code § 59120)
13.12.080: PREPAYMENT:
   A.   Prepayment Deposit Required: The city shall require a prepayment from
all customers for municipal utility service who have not established credit
with the city by having a satisfactory payment record for a one (1) year
period. A "satisfactory payment record" means that all payments have been made
in full to the city on or before the original due date. The prepayment amount
required shall be three (3) times the cost of the estimated monthly service to
the customer, or seventy dollars ($70.00), whichever is greater. The prepayment
amount shall be applied as a credit to the customer's account at the end of one
(1) year, provided the customer has maintained a payment record for water
service satisfactory to the city. If the customer's payment record is not
satisfactory at the end of the one (1) year period, the prepayment shall be
held for a second year, or as long as necessary, to establish a satisfactory
twelve (12) month payment record. Any prepayment amount being held will be
applied against the customer's closing bill if the customer orders the service
discontinued, and any credit balance refunded to the customer. If requested by
the customer, the prepayment may be made in two (2) equal payments, one at the
establishment of service, and the second within thirty (30) days of the
establishment of service.
   B.   Deposit Waiver: The requirement for establishing and maintaining credit
may not be waived or reduced except upon a finding of good credit by the
municipal utilities and engineering director and the management services/
finance director. In such cases where the prepayment deposit waiver is granted,
the customer must authorize auto deduction of bill amounts on a monthly basis
from a bank account.
   C.   Findings of good credit may be established by the new customer if he or
she presents a valid letter of reference from another utility for services
received in the previous twenty four (24) months demonstrating no
disconnections for non-payment, no late payments and no outstanding balances
during the last twelve (12) consecutive billing cycles.
(Ord. 2903 § 6, 2019: Ord. 2800, 2013)
CHAPTER 13.16
WATER EQUIPMENT REGULATIONS
SECTION:
13.16.010: Supply From Fire Hydrant
13.16.020: Damage To Meters
13.16.030: Meter Testing
13.16.040: Tampering With City Property
13.16.010: SUPPLY FROM FIRE HYDRANT:
   A.   An applicant for temporary use of water from a fire hydrant must secure
a permit therefor from the city. The city shall require a prepayment in the
amount set by resolution from all applicants prior to issuance of a fire
hydrant construction meter. In the event the meter is lost or stolen, the
entire prepayment will be forfeited.
   B.   Each applicant shall provide himself with a hydrant wrench necessary to
operate such fire hydrant, and install a separate shutoff with restricting
orifice to minimize damage to fire hydrant and mains. If a fire hydrant or a
fire hydrant construction meter is damaged by the consumer's use to an extent
requiring repair or replacement such repair or replacement shall be made at the
consumer's expense. (Ord. 2608 § 8, 2005: prior code § 59113)
13.16.020: DAMAGE TO METERS:
The board reserves the right to set and maintain a meter on any connection. The
water consumer shall be held liable, however, for any damage to the meter due
to his negligence or carelessness and particularly for damage caused by hot
water or steam from the premises. It shall be the responsibility of the owner
of the property to protect the meter and the inlet valve to the meter from
physical damage. The cost of repairs to the meter or inlet valve as a result of
such physical damage shall be included in the next water bill. (Prior code §
59114)
13.16.030: METER TESTING:
When the accuracy of a water meter is questioned, the city, upon request of the
customer, will cause an official test of the meter to be made for a charge as
set forth by resolution. The meter will be tested on variable rates of delivery
and if the average registration is more than two percent (2%) in excess of the
actual quantity of water passing through the meter, the division shall refund
to the customer the overcharge based upon the test, for the prior twelve (12)
months, unless it can be shown that the error was due to some cause for which
the date can be fixed. In the latter case, the overcharge shall be computed
back and not beyond such times. In the event the accuracy of the meter is
determined to be in error, then all testing and meter replacement charges shall
be at the city's expense. (Ord. 2655 § 5, 2007: prior code § 59115)
13.16.040: TAMPERING WITH CITY PROPERTY:
No one except an employee or representative of the board shall at any time in
any manner operate the curb cocks or valves, main cocks, gates or valves of the
city's system, or interfere with meters or their connections, street mains or
other parts of the water system. (Prior code § 59116)
CHAPTER 13.20
CROSS CONNECTIONS AND BACKFLOW PREVENTION
SECTION:
13.20.010: Cross Connection Unlawful; Exception
13.20.020: Purpose And Intent
13.20.030: Definitions
13.20.040: Protection Required; Where
13.20.050: Protection Required; Type
13.20.060: Responsibilities
13.20.070: Discontinuance Of Service
13.20.080: Right Of Entry
13.20.010: CROSS CONNECTION UNLAWFUL; EXCEPTION:
No person, firm or corporation shall install or maintain any physical
connection between any private source of water supply and the city water
supply; provided, however, that subject to the approval of the board of health
of the state, the city may maintain emergency connections with other public
utilities serving water. (Prior code § 59123)
13.20.020: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
   A.   The purpose of these regulations is:
      1.   To protect the public water supply against actual or potential cross
connections by isolating within the premises contamination or pollution that
may occur because of some undiscovered or unauthorized cross connection on the
premises;
      2.   To eliminate existing connections between drinking water systems and
other sources of water that are not approved as safe and potable for human
consumption;
      3.   To eliminate cross connections between drinking water systems and
other sources of water or process water used for any purpose whatsoever which
jeopardize the safety of the drinking water supply;
      4.   To prevent the making of cross connections in the future.
   B.   These regulations are in accordance with the state of California
department of public health Administrative Code, title 17 entitled "Regulations
Relating To Cross Connections".
   C.   It is the intent of these regulations to recognize that there are
varying degrees of hazard and to apply the principle that the degree of
protection should be commensurate with the degree of hazard. (Prior code §
59125)
13.20.030: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
   AIR GAP SEPARATION: A physical break between a supply pipe and a receiving
vessel. The air gap shall be at least double the diameter of the supply pipe,
measured vertically above the top rim of the vessel, in no case less than one
inch (1").
   APPROVED CHECK VALVE: A check valve that seats readily and completely and
has been previously approved for use in this service by the city. It must be
carefully machined to have free moving parts and assured watertightness. The
face of the closure element and valve seat must be bronze, composition, or
other noncorrodible material which will seat tightly under all prevailing
conditions of field use. Pins and bushings shall be of bronze or other
noncorrodible, nonsticking material, machined for easy, dependable operation.
The closure element (e.g., clapper) shall be internally weighted or otherwise
internally equipped to promote rapid and positive closure in all sizes where
this feature is obtainable.
   APPROVED DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY: An assembly which has previously been
approved for use in this service by the city and consists of at least two (2)
independently acting approved check valves including tightly closing shutoff
valves on each side of the check valve assembly and suitable leak detector
drains plus connections available for testing the watertightness of each check
valve.
   APPROVED REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE: A device
which has previously been approved for use in this service by the city and
consists of incorporating two (2) or more check valves and an automatically
operating differential relief valve located between the two (2) checks, two (2)
shutoff valves, and equipped with necessary appurtenances for testing. The
device shall operate to maintain the pressure in the zone between the two (2)
check valves, less than the pressure on the public water supply side of the
device.
At cessation of normal flow, the pressure between check valves shall be less
than the supply pressure. In case of leakage of either check valve the
differential relief valve shall operate to maintain this reduced pressure by
discharging to the atmosphere. When the inlet pressure is two (2) pounds per
square inch or less the relief valve shall open to the atmosphere, thereby
providing an air gap in the device. To be approved, these devices must be
readily accessible for maintenance and testing and installed in a location
where no part of the valve will be submerged.
   APPROVED WATER SUPPLY: Any water supply approved by or under the public
health supervision of a public health agency of the state of California, or its
political subdivisions. In determining what constitutes an approved water
supply, the state department of public health reserves final judgment as to its
safety and potability.
   AUXILIARY SUPPLY: Any water supply on or available to the premises other
than the public water supply.
   CITY: As used in chapters 13.08 through 13.32 of this title, means the cross
connection control board of the city which is herein established and shall
consist of the city manager, the director of public works and the water
superintendent and engineer.
   CROSS CONNECTIONS: Any unprotected connection between any part of a water
system used or intended to supply water for drinking purposes and any source or
system containing water or substance that is not or cannot be approved as safe,
wholesome, and potable for human consumption. (Prior code § 59126)
13.20.040: PROTECTION REQUIRED; WHERE:
   A.   Each service connection from the city water system for supplying water
to premises having an auxiliary water supply shall be protected against
backflow of water from the premises into the public water system, unless the
auxiliary water supply is accepted as an additional source by the water
purveyor, and is approved by the public health agency having jurisdiction.
   B.   Each service connection from the city water system for supplying water
to premises on which any substance is handled in such a fashion as to permit
its entry into the water system, shall be protected against backflow of the
water from the premises into the public system. This shall include the handling
of process waters and waters originating from the city water supply system
which have been subject to deterioration in sanitary quality.
   C.   Backflow prevention devices shall be installed on the service
connection to any premises that have internal cross connections unless such
cross connections are abated to the satisfaction of the city and approved by
the state or local health department. (Prior code § 59127)
13.20.050: PROTECTION REQUIRED; TYPE:
The protective device required shall depend on the degree of hazard as
tabulated in this section:
   A.   At the service connection to any premises where there is an auxiliary
water supply handled in a separate piping system with no known cross
connection, the city water supply shall be protected by an approved double
check valve assembly.
   B.   At the service connection to any premises on which a substance that
would be objectionable (but not necessarily hazardous to health), if introduced
into the public water supply, is handled so as to constitute a cross
connection, the city water supply shall be protected by an approved double
check valve assembly.
   C.   At the service connection on any premises on which there is an
auxiliary water supply where cross connections are known to exist which cannot
be presently eliminated, the public water supply system shall be protected by
an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device. A double
check valve assembly may be used in lieu of such device if local experience
indicates that double check valves are reliably operated and if approved by the
water purveyor and local health agency.
   D.   At the service connection to any premises on which any material
dangerous to health or toxic substance in toxic concentration is or may be
handled, the public water supply shall be protected by an air gap separation.
The air gap shall be located as close as practicable to the service cock and
all piping between the service cock and receiving tank shall be entirely
visible. If these conditions cannot reasonably be met, the public water supply
shall be protected with either an approved reduced pressure principle backflow
prevention device, or an approved double check valve assembly, providing the
alternative is acceptable to both the water purveyor and the local health
agency.
   E.   At the service connection to any sewage treatment plant or sewage
pumping station the city water supply shall be protected by an air gap
separation. The air gap shall be located as close as practicable to the service
cock and all piping between the service cock and receiving tank shall be
entirely visible. If these conditions cannot be reasonably met, the public
water supply shall be protected with an approved reduced pressure principle
backflow prevention device, providing this alternative is acceptable to both
the water purveyor and local health agency. Final decision in this matter shall
rest with the state department of public health. (Prior code § 59128)
13.20.060: RESPONSIBILITIES:
   A.   It shall be the responsibility of the city to make the determination if
any service connection or the handling of substances within the premises served
is deemed to constitute a hazard to the city water system and to determine the
degree of hazard and establish the requirements for protection. The city shall
accomplish this in conjunction with the local health agency.
   B.   It shall be the responsibility of the user of the water to install and
maintain the required protective device as specified by the city and to have
the device inspected and tested periodically by a person approved as qualified
by the city. Inspection intervals shall be one year maximum. Required interval
may be less if determined by the city that a history of malfunctioning has been
established or if the degree of hazard makes more frequent inspections
advisable. All devices shall be disassembled for maintenance and repair at
least every five (5) years. All test results and all maintenance steps taken
shall be reported regularly in forms to be provided by the city and maintained
on file at the city offices. Failure to file with the city the required test
and maintenance reports will require the city to consider the connection
unprotected and service may be discontinued. (Prior code § 59129)
13.20.070: DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE:
   A.   Service of water to any premises may be discontinued by the water
division after reasonable notification if unprotected cross connections exist
on the premises, or if any defect is found in an installed backflow preventive
device has been removed or bypassed, and service will not be restored until
such conditions or defects are corrected.
   B.   Discontinuance of service may be summary, immediate and without notice
whenever, in the judgment of the water superintendent of the water division,
such action is necessary to protect the purity of the water supply or the
safety of the water system, and the water superintendent's determination shall
be final and conclusive. (Prior code § 59130)
13.20.080: RIGHT OF ENTRY:
The city representative assigned to inspect premises relative to possible
hazards shall carry proper credentials of his office, upon exhibition of which
he shall have the right of entry, during usual business hours, to inspect any
and all buildings and premises in the performance of his duty. This right of
entry shall be a condition of water service in order to provide assurance that
the continuation of service to the premises will not constitute a menace to the
health, safety and welfare of the people throughout the city's water system.
(Prior code § 59131)
CHAPTER 13.24
MAIN EXTENSIONS
SECTION:
13.24.010: Application; Required
13.24.020: Application; Procedure
13.24.030: Size Of Mains
13.24.040: All Mains To Become City Property
13.24.050: Refund Of Costs
13.24.060: Main Extensions To Lots Or Tracts Outside City Limits
13.24.070: Miscellaneous Requirements
13.24.010: APPLICATION; REQUIRED:
Any owner or owners or subdivider of a single lot, subdivision or tract of land
desiring the extension of water mains and services to each lot, subdivision or
tract of land shall make such application to the board. (Prior code § 59117)
13.24.020: APPLICATION; PROCEDURE:
Any owner or owners or subdivider of a single lot, or subdivision or tract of
land within the city limits desiring the extension of water mains and services
to each lot, subdivision, or tract of land shall make application to the city
water division and after initial application the applicant shall be subject to
the following procedure:
   A.   The division shall design the water system to serve such lot,
subdivision, or tract and make available such design and specifications to the
applicant. Plans shall be prepared by a civil engineer incorporating such
design and specifications and present same to the water division for approval.
Upon approval such plans become the property of the division.
   B.   The applicant shall lay all mains within the tract, contiguous to and
the full length of the tract, and such connecting lines as may be needed to
connect such lot, subdivision, or tract to the nearest main of suitable size
and pressure. This shall include all control valves and fire hydrants, and a
connecting lateral to each lot within the subdivision, tract, or lots owned by
the applicant adjacent to the new main. The applicant shall notify the water
division and furnish bond in the amount of the estimated cost, prior to the
construction of such mains, and pay the division a fee as established by the
city council in a resolution, for inspection of all such mains installed. This
payment to be made before the beginning of the installation.
   C.   In lieu of the applicant making such installations, he may request the
city to do all the work and supply all the materials, and the said board at its
sole discretion shall accept or reject such installation job. If the city
agrees to do such work and to supply the materials thereof, the subdivider or
owner will pay to the city water division, the total estimated cost of such
installation plus ten percent (10%) before commencement of such work. (Prior
code § 59117(a))
13.24.030: SIZE OF MAINS:
The subdivider or lot owner shall pay the full cost of the mains installed not
to exceed eight inches (8") nominal diameter, unless the size of the
subdivision or other requirements of the development requires a larger main. In
such case, the owner or subdivider will pay the total cost, regardless of size.
If the city requires a line larger than eight inches (8") to be used as a
transmission line, such transmission line shall be laid by the city and paid
for by the owner or subdivider with an allowance made by the city to cover the
difference in cost of the materials used between eight inches (8") and the size
actually used. To compensate for the additional cost due to labor and other
reasons as a result of installing lines greater than eight inches (8") in size,
the allowance for the difference in material cost will be increased by thirty
percent (30%). If for any reason the city cannot make the installation of any
line over eight inches (8") in size, the owner or subdivider may have a
properly qualified licensed contractor make the installation. The city shall
determine the amount of allowance for lines over eight inches (8") in size
according to the material costs available to the city. (Prior code § 59117(b))
13.24.040: ALL MAINS TO BECOME CITY PROPERTY:
All mains laid shall become the property of the city water division after final
inspection and acceptance. (Prior code § 59117(c))
13.24.050: REFUND OF COSTS:
There shall be no refunding of costs for the installation of any water mains
within any development or for water connections to lots within any development
or for connections to any lot contiguous to the mains that had a water
connection prior to the installation of the new main. For all new water
connections to lots contiguous to all such mains installed by the owner or
developer and not within the development, tract, or subdivision, the city water
division shall refund to the original owner or developer that installed the
water main seventy five percent (75%) of sum collected as frontage charges in
accordance with section
13.12.010 of this title, which refund agreement shall not be transferable
except to legal heirs and assigns, and in any event no refunds shall be made,
and the agreement shall terminate ten (10) years from completion of such new
water main.
Any person or persons entitled to any refund under the provision of this
division shall make application for refund to the public works director. All
applications shall be in writing and shall be made annually within the calendar
year for which the refund is requested. (Prior code § 59117(d))
13.24.060: MAIN EXTENSIONS TO LOTS OR TRACTS OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS:
The lot owner or subdivider of any approved lot, tract, or subdivision outside
the city shall install all mains, laterals, connecting lines, and other
installations as may be needed to serve water under proper pressure and volume
to each lot within the tract or subdivision. Before commencement of
construction, the applicant shall furnish bond for the estimated costs and
shall pay to the city a fee as established by the city council in a resolution
for inspection for all mains to be laid. The applicant shall give free and
clear to the city any and all water stocks or well rights used on the lot or
tract desiring service before any services or extension are made, pursuant to
the rules and regulations as set forth in chapter 13.40 of this title. Any
person constructing water lines for service outside the city limits shall be
refunded their costs on the same basis as set forth in section
13.24.050 of this chapter. (Prior code § 59117(e))
13.24.070: MISCELLANEOUS REQUIREMENTS:
If, for any reason, the development of any lot or tract makes it necessary to
move, lower, or in any manner change any existing water lines, such moving,
lowering, or changing shall be done by the developer at his expense. It shall
be the responsibility of the developer of the land to furnish a drawing by a
civil engineer showing all water lines, both new and existing, in their
location in relation to the finished development. Any damage done to existing
lines during the development of the lot or tract shall be paid for by the
developer. Failure to make or pay for such changes or repairs shall be reason
for the division to refuse water service to the lot or tract until such changes
or repairs are made or paid for in full. (Prior code § 59117(f))
   DIVISION I. WATER
CHAPTER 13.28
IRRIGATION
SECTION:
13.28.010: Irrigation Service
13.28.010: IRRIGATION SERVICE:
   A.   There shall be no new connections made for irrigation services, nor
shall there be any connections made to serve water at any reduced rate below
the regular domestic rate as set forth in this division. Any existing
irrigation connections will continue to be served, as provided any one of the
following conditions are continuously fulfilled:
      1.   Consumer shall have forty (40) or more edible fruitbearing trees on
the property served by the existing meter.
      2.   Consumer shall have a minimum of three-fourths (3/4) of an acre
under cultivation and producing commercial crops.
      3.   Consumer shall have a minimum of one acre in pasture and such
pasture shall be used for the feeding of animals raised for commercial
purposes.
   B.   All irrigation rates shall be subject to study and annual revision.
Should an irrigation service be discontinued for any reason, the service when
resumed shall be charged at the domestic rate. (Prior code § 59122)
CHAPTER 13.32
ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
13.32.010: Violation; Penalty
13.32.010: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of chapters
13.08 through 13.28 of this division shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor
and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding five
hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding six (6)
months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Prior code § 59132)
CHAPTER 13.36
WATER SUPPLY AND FIRE HYDRANT IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION:
13.36.010: Findings
13.36.020: Required For Changes In Occupancy Or Use
13.36.030: Authorization; Fee Payment
13.36.010: FINDINGS:
The council finds that adequate fire hydrants with sufficient water pressure
and volume are necessary prerequisites for the public health, safety, welfare
and enjoyment of property within the city, and conversely, that the lack of
these improvements is injurious to the safety and welfare of the inhabitants of
Redlands. (Ord. 1772 § 1, 1982)
13.36.020: REQUIRED FOR CHANGES IN OCCUPANCY OR USE:
No change may be made in the occupancy or use of any building which would place
the building in a different division of the same group of occupancies or in a
different group of occupancies, as defined by the edition of the uniform
building code then in effect, nor may any building permit be issued for any
addition to a building which will increase the area of the building by more
than twenty five percent (25%) of its existing area, nor shall any permit be
issued for the construction of a building, structure, or dwelling unless
provisions are made for the construction and installation of such water lines
and fire hydrants as are determined by the department of public works to be
necessary to provide necessary fire flow in accordance with city standards.
(Ord. 1772 § 2, 1982)
13.36.030: AUTHORIZATION; FEE PAYMENT:
Upon written recommendation of the city fire chief, the city engineer may in
his discretion authorize the construction and installation of water lines and
fire hydrants by the property owner at a later date upon notification from the
city pursuant to the terms of a lien agreement prepared by the city to secure
performance of the work. In such event, the property owner shall pay a fee for
preparation of the lien agreement in an amount determined by resolution of the
city council. (Ord. 1772 § 3, 1982)
CHAPTER 13.40
ACQUISITION OF WATER STOCKS AND WATER RIGHTS
SECTION:
13.40.010: Purpose
13.40.020: Water Source Acquisition Fund
13.40.022: Definitions
13.40.030: Developer Requirements
13.40.040: Adjustment Of Charges
13.40.010: PURPOSE:
In order to provide an adequate water supply for new dwellings, subdivisions,
other land developments within the City, approved developments outside the
City, and to conserve the water supply, landowners, subdividers, and
developers, before receiving final approval or securing water service, shall
first pay to the City certain fees. The fees received by the City are to be
utilized for the purpose of obtaining approved water stock and water rights.
(Ord. 2880, 2019)
13.40.020: WATER SOURCE ACQUISITION FUND:
The "Water Source Acquisition Fund" shall be established to implement the
Redlands general plan and finance acquisition of approved water stock and water
rights to assist the City in maintaining an adequate supply of water to meet
the needs of development requiring water service from the City. All revenue
collected in accordance with this chapter shall be deposited into the Water
Source Acquisition Fund. All interest on the cash balance of the fund shall
accrue to the Water Source Acquisition Fund. (Ord. 2880, 2019)
13.40.022: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of carrying out the intent of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply:
   ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT: An attached or a detached residential dwelling unit
which provides complete independent living facilities for one or more persons.
It shall include permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking,
and sanitation on the same parcel as the single-family dwelling is situated. An
accessory dwelling unit also includes the following:
   A.   An efficiency unit, as defined in section 17958.1 of the Health and
Safety Code.
   B.   A manufactured home, as defined in section 18007 of the Health and
Safety Code.
   ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY: The Director of Municipal Utilities and
Engineering of the City.
   DEVELOPMENT: Any use to which land is put, building or other alteration of
land and construction incidental thereto.
   SENIOR RESTRICTED DWELLING UNIT: For purposes of this chapter, is defined
as:
   A.   A unit restricted by a covenant that runs with the land addressing the
required age restriction to the satisfaction of the City.
   B.   The unit's water meter serves only internal water use. Landscape
irrigation shall be provided through a separate water meter service.
   C.   The dwelling unit shall be less than one thousand five hundred (1,500)
square feet of livable area.
Removal of the age restriction or an increase in the size of the unit will
result in a reassessment of the charges.
   WATER STOCK AND WATER RIGHTS: The water stock and water rights identified
and referred to in the "Water and Wastewater Rate Study Update - 1991" as
prepared by the Public Works Department and approved by the City which
identifies water stock and water rights needed to serve new development that
will be required to obtain City water service. (Ord. 2880, 2019)
13.40.030: DEVELOPER REQUIREMENTS:
For any development project that will require water service or incremental
water demand from the City, a water source acquisition charge shall be approved
by the City Council and shall be paid as a condition of final approval of that
development. The charge due shall be that amount in effect on the date approval
of the development is given by the City. ( Ord. 2962, 2024: Ord. 2880, 2019)
13.40.040: ADJUSTMENT OF CHARGES:
On July 1 of each fiscal year, the City's Finance Director, in coordination
with the City's Municipal Utilities and Engineering Director, shall make annual
adjustments to the specific amounts of the water source acquisition fees
approved by the City Council by a percentage equal to the percentage change in
the construction cost index of the Engineering News-Record's "Construction Cost
Index" - twenty (20) cities annual average for the preceding twelve (12) month
period. The purpose of this adjustment is to offset the effects of inflation
related construction cost increases or any deflation related decreases. If this
index should cease publication, the Finance Director shall use any appropriate
official index published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics, or similar agency
as may then exist or may then be most nearly equivalent thereto. (Ord. 2962,
2024: Ord. 2880, 2019)
CHAPTER 13.42
WELL DRILLING
SECTION:
13.42.010: Purpose And Intent
13.42.020: Permits
13.42.030: Licensing And Registration Of Water Well Drillers And Contractors
13.42.040: Standards
13.42.050: Lateral (Horizontal) Well Standards
13.42.060: Approval Of Sites
13.42.070: General Location Of Water Well
13.42.080: Well Logs
13.42.090: Well Surface And Subsurface Construction Features
13.42.100: Disinfection Of Water Wells
13.42.110: Water Quality Standards
13.42.120: Required Inspections Of Wells
13.42.130: Approval By DEHS
13.42.140: Well Abandonment
13.42.150: Declaration Of Proposed Reuse
13.42.160: Violations, Remedies, And Penalties
13.42.010: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide minimum standards for construction,
reconstruction, abandonment and destruction of all wells relating to ground
water protection in order to protect underground water resources, and to
provide safe drinking water. (Ord. 2110 § 1, 1990)
13.42.020: PERMITS:
   A.   Required: No person or entity, as principal agent or employee, shall
dig, drill, bore, drive, reconstruct or destroy: 1) a well that is or has been
used to produce or inject water; 2) a cathodic protection well; 3) an
observation well; or 4) an exploration well; without first filing a written
application to do so with the department of health services (DEHS), receiving,
and retaining a valid permit as provided herein.
   B.   Application For Permit: Applications for permits shall be submitted to
DEHS and shall include the following:
      1.   A plot plan showing the location for the well with respect to the
following items within a radius of five hundred feet (500') from the well:
         a.   Property lines, location and ownership of all parcels and
easements,
         b.   Sewage or waste disposal systems or works for carrying or
containing sewage or waste,
         c.   All intermittent or perennial, natural or artificial bodies of
water or watercourses,
         d.   The approximate drainage pattern of the property,
         e.   Other wells, including abandoned wells,
         f.   Access road(s) to well site;
      2.   Location of the subject property, legal description, assessor's
parcel number and street address;
      3.   The contractor's name and state license classification/number
constructing the well;
      4.   The proposed or probable depth of the well;
      5.   The proposed minimum depths and types of casing and probable minimum
depth of perforations to be used if such data can be reasonably projected;
      6.   The proposed use of the well;
      7.   Where the proposed work is a reconstruction or destruction of a
well, the following, if available: total depth, depth and type of casing used,
depth of perforations, well log, and any other pertinent information available;
      8.   Description of proposed method of reconstruction or destruction of
well;
      9.   Location and classification of any past or present solid, liquid, or
hazardous waste disposal sites within two (2) miles of the proposed well;
      10.   Other information as may be reasonably necessary for DEHS to
determine if the underground waters will be adequately protected.
   C.   Conditions Of Approval: Permits shall be issued after compliance with
the standards provided in this chapter. Plans shall be submitted to DEHS
demonstrating compliance with such standards. Permits may include conditions
and requirements found by DEHS to be reasonably necessary to accomplish the
purposes of this chapter. Completion bonds, contractor's bonds, cash deposits,
or other adequate security may be required to ensure all projects are performed
completely and properly to protect the public's health and safety and the
integrity of underground water resources.
   D.   Denial: Where DEHS determines that the standards of this chapter have
not been met, it shall deny the application. (Ord. 2110 § 1, 1990)
13.42.030: LICENSING AND REGISTRATION OF WATER WELL DRILLERS AND CONTRACTORS:
No person or entity shall engage in any activity listed in section
13.42.020 of this chapter except as provided herein, and where required by
state law with a valid license in accordance with the California state
contractor's license law (chapter 9, division 3 of the Business and Professions
Code), as appropriate to the activity to be engaged in. Such person or entity
shall register with DEHS prior to commencing any activity regulated by this
chapter. (Ord. 2110 § 1, 1990)
13.42.040: STANDARDS:
Standards for the construction, reconstruction, destruction or abandonment of
wells shall be the standards recommended in the "California Department Of Water
Resources Bulletin No. 74-81", chapter II, as may be amended by the state from
time to time and is incorporated herein by reference. For cathodic protection
wells, the standard shall be those recommended in chapter II of the "California
Department Of Water Resources Bulletin No. 74-1", as amended from time to time
and is incorporated herein by reference. (Ord. 2110 § 1, 1990)
13.42.050: LATERAL (HORIZONTAL) WELL STANDARDS:
The location, design and monitoring of lateral wells shall be in accordance
with the standards recommended in the state of California, state department of
health, water sanitation section publication "Requirements For The Use Of
Lateral Wells In Domestic Water Systems", as may be amended and is incorporated
herein by reference. (Ord. 2110 § 1, 1990)
13.42.060: APPROVAL OF SITES:
Domestic water well sites shall be inspected and approved by DEHS before any
construction activities thereat. Wells serving systems under direct
jurisdiction of the state department of health services may receive site
approval from that agency. (Ord. 2110 § 1, 1990)
13.42.070: GENERAL LOCATION OF WATER WELL:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person or entity to drill, dig, excavate or bore
any water well at any location where sources of pollution or contamination are
known to exist, existed, or otherwise substantial risk exists that water from
that location may become contaminated or polluted even though the well may be
properly constructed and maintained. Every well shall be located an adequate
distance from all potential sources of contamination and pollution as follows:
      1.   Sewers, watertight septic tank, or pit privy, fifty foot (50')
minimum;
      2.   Subsurface sewage leach lines or leach fields, one hundred foot
(100') minimum;
      3.   Cesspool or seepage pit, one hundred fifty feet (150') minimum;
      4.   Animal or fowl confined, one hundred feet (100') minimum;
      5.   Any subsurface sewage disposal system discharging five thousand
(5,000) gallons per day or more, two hundred feet (200') minimum;
      6.   Minimum distances from other sources of pollution or contamination
shall be determined by DEHS upon investigation and analyses of the probable
risks involved.
   B.   Where particularly adverse or special hazards are involved, the
foregoing distances shall be increased or special approved means of protection,
particularly in the construction of the well, shall be provided as determined
by DEHS. (Ord. 2110 § 1, 1990)
13.42.080: WELL LOGS:
Any person or entity who has drilled, dug, excavated or bored a well subject to
this chapter shall within thirty (30) days after completion of the drilling,
digging, excavation or boring of such well, furnish DEHS a complete log of such
well. This log shall include depths of formations, character, size
distribution, color for all lithological units penetrated, as well as the type
of casing, the depth of the well, the number and location of the perforations
in the casing and any other data required by DEHS. Where insufficient
subsurface information is available from other reliable sources as to certain
formations, DEHS may require inspection of the well log during any phase of the
well's construction and may require modifications of the remaining planned work
to achieve the purposes of this chapter. (Ord. 2110 § 1, 1990)
13.42.090: WELL SURFACE AND SUBSURFACE CONSTRUCTION FEATURES:
   A.   Water Well Surface And Annular Sealing: All water wells hereafter
drilled, dug, excavated or bored shall be provided with: a watertight
reinforced concrete slab at least six inches (6") thick and with the top being
a minimum of four inches (4") above the higher of the ground level or floor
level at the well site. The slab shall extend horizontally at least three feet
(3') from the center of the well casing in all directions and be adequately
sloped to drain surface water away from the well casing. Annular seals for
agricultural and individual domestic wells shall extend at least twenty feet
(20') below the ground surface. For community water supply wells, annular seals
shall extend at least fifty feet (50') below the ground surface.
   B.   Sample Spigot: A sample spigot shall be provided on the pump discharge
line of any water well used as a public water supply adjacent to the pump and
on the distribution side of the check valve.
   C.   Check Valve: A check valve shall be provided on the pump discharge line
adjacent to the pump for all water wells.
   D.   Water Well Disinfection Pipe: All community water supply wells and
individual domestic wells shall be provided with a pipe or other effective
means through which chlorine or other approved disinfecting agents may be
introduced directly into the well. The pipe shall extend at least four inches
(4") above the finished grade and shall contain a threaded or equivalently
secured cap on it.
   E.   Water Well Master Meter: A master meter or other suitable measuring
device shall be located at each source facility and shall accurately register
the quantity of water delivered to the distribution system from all community
water supply wells serving a public water supply system.
   F.   Air Relief Vent: An air relief vent, if used, shall terminate downward,
be screened, and otherwise be protected from contaminating material entering.
(Ord. 2110 § 1, 1990)
13.42.100: DISINFECTION OF WATER WELLS:
Every new, repaired or reconstructed community water supply well or individual
domestic well, after completion of construction, repair or reconstruction, and
before being placed in service, shall be thoroughly cleaned of all foreign
substances. The well gravel used in gravel packed wells, pipes, pump, pump
column, and all well water contact equipment surfaces shall be disinfected by a
DEHS approved method. Such violation shall remain in the well and upon all
relevant surfaces for at least twenty four (24) hours. Disinfection procedures
shall be repeated until microbiologically safe water is produced, as set forth
by California Administrative Code, title 22, "Domestic Water Quality And
Monitoring". (Ord. 2110 § 1, 1990)
13.42.110: WATER QUALITY STANDARDS:
Water from all new, repaired, and reconstructed community water supply wells
shall be tested for, and meet standards for, microbiological, chemical,
physical, and radiological quality in accordance with California Administrative
Code, title 22, "Domestic Water Quality And Monitoring". (Ord. 2110 § 1, 1990)
13.42.120: REQUIRED INSPECTIONS OF WELLS:
An inspection shall be requested of DEHS at least twenty four (24) hours in
advance of:
   A.   The filling of the annular space or conductor casing. Upon failure to
notify DEHS, approved geophysical tests including sonic log and gamma ray log
tests shall be conducted at the owner's expense to substantiate that an annular
seal has been properly installed;
   B.   After installation of the surface protective slab, pumping, and other
required equipment;
   C.   Immediately before and during the destruction of the well; immediately
after the well destruction;
   D.   Any other operation or condition stipulated on the DEHS permit. (Ord.
2110 § 1, 1990)
13.42.130: APPROVAL BY DEHS:
No water from new, repaired or reconstructed well shall be used until the well
is given a final approval by DEHS. (Ord. 2110 § 1, 1990)
13.42.140: WELL ABANDONMENT:
If after thirty (30) days of abandonment, the owner of an abandoned well has
not declared to DEHS the well for proposed reuse per section
13.42.150 of this chapter, then the well shall be destroyed per section
13.42.020 of this chapter. If any well is found by DEHS to be a hazard, whereby
its continued existence is likely to cause damage to the ground water, or to
the public health and safety, DEHS shall direct the owner to destroy the well
within a stated period. At the time of removal of a pump, the casing shall be
provided with an adequate cap at the surface and shall be maintained so that it
will not be a hazard to health or safety until such time that the abandoned
well is properly sealed from the bottom to the top. (Ord. 2110 § 1, 1990)
13.42.150: DECLARATION OF PROPOSED REUSE:
Where a well is unused or its disuse is anticipated, the owner may apply to
DEHS in writing stating an intention to use the well again for its original or
other approved purpose. DEHS shall review such a declaration and may grant an
exemption from certain of the provisions of section
13.42.140 of this chapter, provided no undue hazard to public health or safety
is created by the continued existence of the well. Thereafter, an amended
declaration shall be filed annually with DEHS. The original or subsequent
exemption may be terminated for cause by DEHS at any time. (Ord. 2110 § 1,
1990)
13.42.160: VIOLATIONS, REMEDIES, AND PENALTIES:
It is unlawful for any person or entity to violate any provision of this
chapter. (Ord. 2110 § 1, 1990)
DIVISION II. SEWERS
CHAPTER 13.44
SEWER EXTENSIONS AND CONNECTIONS
SECTION:
13.44.010: Petition By One Or More Owners
13.44.020: Petition By Two Or More Owners
13.44.030: Contract
13.44.040: Use Of Labor
13.44.050: Payment
13.44.060: Deposit Of Construction Costs
13.44.070: Subdivisions, Lot Splits Or New Residential Buildings
13.44.080: When Sewer Not Available
13.44.090: Oversizing Sewer Lines
13.44.100: Cost Proration
13.44.110: Connections
13.44.120: Frontage Charge
13.44.130: Refunding Of Costs
13.44.140: Assessment Act
13.44.150: Dedications
13.44.160: Private Sewer Laterals
13.44.010: PETITION BY ONE OR MORE OWNERS:
One or more property owners desiring connection to the City sewer system, and
where no sewer main exists adjacent to the property, and where the owner or
owners do not wish to have said sewer main extension constructed under an
assessment district or bond issue, shall petition the City Engineer and deposit
with him a fee to cover the cost of preparation of plans and specifications for
said sewer extension. The fee shall be at six percent (6%) of the City
Engineer's estimate of the cost of construction, but in no case shall be less
than twenty five dollars ($25.00). Such fee shall be refunded when the
construction is completed. Should construction not begin within one year of
such petition or not be completed, such fee shall be forfeited. If in the
opinion of the City Engineer, such sewer extension is necessary and the
construction thereof feasible, he shall prepare plans and specifications for
the construction thereof. (Prior Code § 83100)
13.44.020: PETITION BY TWO OR MORE OWNERS:
Two (2) or more property owners representing at least eighty percent (80%) of
the total property frontage adjacent to the proposed main installation which
can be connected to the City sewer system, and where no sewer main exists
adjacent to the property, and where the owners do not wish to have such sewer
main extension constructed under an assessment district shall petition the City
Engineer and obtain from him a cost estimate of the total of such main
construction, inspection, and engineering. All sewer extensions to be
constructed by this method shall be subject to review by and recommendations of
the City Engineer. If in the opinion of the City Engineer, such sewer is
necessary, in conformity with the extension of the existing sewer system and
the construction thereof feasible, he shall prepare plans and specifications
for the construction thereof. (Prior Code § 83101)
13.44.030: CONTRACT:
After plans and specifications are prepared by the City Engineer, the property
owner, or owners, shall contract with a private contractor for the construction
of such sewer extension. (Prior Code § 83102)
13.44.040: USE OF LABOR:
The property owner, or owners, may request the City Engineer to use force
account labor or call for bids with the approval of the City Council after said
property owner, or owners, have met the requirements as provided in section
13.44.050 of this chapter. (Prior Code § 83103)
13.44.050: PAYMENT:
Payment for sewer construction shall be made as follows:
   A.   The property owner, or owners, shall deposit with the City Engineer an
amount which, in the estimation of the City Engineer, will be sufficient to
cover the entire cost of construction of the sewer extension.
   B.   The property owners representing at least eighty percent (80%) of the
property frontage adjacent to the proposed sewer main shall deposit with the
City Engineer an amount which, in the estimation of the City Engineer, will be
sufficient to cover eighty percent (80%) or more of the entire cost of
engineering, construction, inspection and supervision of the sewer main
extension.
   C.   If the amount estimated by the city engineer as set forth in subsection
A of this section, is not sufficient to cover the entire cost of such completed
sewer construction either at a bid price or by force account, the city engineer
shall notify the property owner, or owners, involved of the additional amount
necessary to complete payment on the work, and within ten (10) days thereafter
such property owner, or owners, shall pay such additional amount with the city
engineer. Should the property owner, or owners, fail to pay such additional
amount, the city engineer shall present a statement to the property owner, or
owners, for their share of the increased cost, and showing all expenditures on
behalf of the proposed sewer construction. Or, if a surplus remains, the city
engineer shall thereafter order the refund to the property owner, or owners, of
all the money deposited by them except that amount shown to have been expended
on behalf of the proposed construction.
   D.   If the total project cost estimated by the city engineer as set forth
in subsection B of this section, is not sufficient to cover the entire
completed cost of engineering, construction, inspection and supervision either
at a bid price or by force account, the city engineer shall notify the property
owners affected of the additional amount necessary to complete payment on such
work, and within ten (10) days thereafter, such property owners shall pay such
additional amount with the city engineer. Should the property owner, or owners,
fail to pay such additional amount, the city engineer shall present a statement
to the property owner, or owners, for their share of the increased cost, and
showing all expenditures on behalf of the proposed sewer construction. Or, if a
surplus remains, the city engineer shall thereafter order the refund to the
property owner, or owners, of all the money deposited by them except that
amount shown to have been expended on behalf of the proposed construction.
(Prior code § 83200)
13.44.060: DEPOSIT OF CONSTRUCTION COSTS:
Where a surety bond or other security has been posted with the city
guaranteeing the construction of a sewerage system in connection with a
subdivision or other development as required, the city engineer shall determine
whether immediate construction of said sewerage system or any other portion
thereof is necessary to promote the public interest. The person posting such
bond shall be referred to herein as "developer". Upon the recommendation from
the city engineer, the city council may require such sewerage system or any
portion thereof to be constructed by contract with the city. The procedure for
making such construction contracts shall be as follows:
   A.   The city shall call for bids based on the developer's construction
plans and award a contract in form satisfactory to the city to the lowest
qualified bidder.
   B.   The city shall administer the contract, inspect construction in
accordance with all rules, regulations, and laws of the city, and pay
construction costs.
   C.   The city shall be reimbursed by developer for all such construction and
inspection costs.
   D.   Reimbursement shall be made to the city prior to issuance of any
building permit to developer for construction of any subdivision or other
development which the sewerage system extension referred to in the bond or
other security, is designed to serve. In no event may reimbursement be made in
accordance herewith more than one year after the effective date of the bond or
other security.
   E.   The principal named in the bond or other security shall be held liable
for any payment due to the city. (Prior code § 83201)
13.44.070: SUBDIVISIONS, LOT SPLITS OR NEW RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS:
If a city sewer is available in a street or right of way adjoining property to
be subdivided, or upon which a new residential building is to be erected, the
owner of the property shall construct a sewer collection system to serve such
residential building or each lot in the subdivision or lot split, in accordance
with the standard specifications approved by the city engineer. (Prior code §
83300)
13.44.080: WHEN SEWER NOT AVAILABLE:
   A.   If a city sewer is not available near a development project, the
applicant for the development project shall construct, at his own expense, a
sewer line to the nearest usable city sewer, except as hereinafter provided, in
accordance with standard specifications, and the provisions of this chapter.
   B.   Where a city sewer is not available, the applicant for the development
project shall construct, or cause to be constructed, at his expense, a sewer
line for a distance of one hundred feet (100') per lot or seventy five feet
(75') per dwelling unit, whichever is greater, from the nearest point of the
property, to the existing sewer line, in accordance with standard
specifications approved by the city engineer. An owner of industrial or
commercial property shall construct, at his expense, a sewer line for a
distance of one hundred feet (100') per four hundred (400) gallons per day of
sewage produced, as estimated by the city engineer, or one hundred feet (100')
per lot, whichever is greater, from the nearest point of the property to the
existing sewer line, in accordance with standard specifications.
   C.   When an applicant for a development project is not required to extend
the sewer in accordance with subsection B of this section, he shall provide
plans for connecting the tract to the nearest public sewer and construct dry
sewers in the subdivision to provide for future service to every parcel,
including the construction of sewer laterals from the sewer main to the
property line. The developer's engineer shall provide the city with an as built
plan showing the location and depth of each lateral. The septic tank and
cesspool shall be constructed in a location and manner as specified by the
chief building official to minimize the expense of a future connection to the
public sewer.
   D.   The city council may waive the requirements of subsection C of this
section upon written request by an applicant for a development project. The
factors which the city council may consider are the following:
      1.   There are no sewer trunk main extensions identified in the city's
capital improvement program for the sewerage tributary area, up gradient of an
available sewer which may reasonably serve the development project;
      2.   If residential in character, the development project is proposed as
very low density as defined in the Redlands general plan and will not adversely
impact local ground water quality;
      3.   The properties between the proposed project and an available sewer
have been developed without sewage facilities and it is unlikely that such
facilities will be constructed for such properties within a reasonably
foreseeable time after construction of the proposed project. (Ord. 2394 § 1,
1999: Ord. 1941 § 1, 1986: prior code § 83400)
13.44.090: OVERSIZING SEWER LINES:
The subdivider or lot owner shall pay the full cost of the mains installed not
to exceed eight inches (8") nominal diameter, unless the size of the
subdivision or other requirements of the development requires a larger main. In
such case, the owner or subdivider will pay the total cost, regardless of size.
Except as provided above, if the city requires a line larger than eight inches
(8") to be used as a trunk line, such trunk line shall be paid for by the owner
or subdivider with an allowance made by the city to cover the difference in
cost of the materials used between eight inches (8") and the size additional
cost due to labor and other reasons as a result of installing lines greater
than eight inches (8") in size; the allowance for the difference in material
cost will be increased by thirty percent (30%). The owner or subdivider shall
have a properly qualified licensed contractor make the installation. The city
shall determine the amount of allowance for lines over eight inches (8") in
size according to the material costs available to the city. (Ord. 1941 § 2,
1986: prior code § 83401)
13.44.100: COST PRORATION:
Immediately after the completion of sewer construction, in accordance with this
chapter the city engineer shall prorate the entire cost thereof against all
lots or property that may ultimately be benefited by direct connection to the
sewer in proportion to the frontage thereof, or if the lots be irregular in
shape, then in such manner as may in the opinion of the city engineer provide
an equitable distribution of costs. (Prior code § 83402)
13.44.110: CONNECTIONS:
In no event shall any owner of property benefited by such sewer be permitted to
connect thereto without first paying the frontage charge or other prorated
charge placed against said property by the city engineer. No person, firm or
corporation shall connect any property with the city sewer without first
obtaining a permit and paying the frontage charge or other prorated charge.
(Ord. 1941 § 3, 1986: prior code § 83403)
13.44.120: FRONTAGE CHARGE:
   A.   The sewer main frontage charge is established to implement the Redlands
general plan and finance the construction of local sewer collection mains and
main extensions, by providing for more equitable sharing of costs of those
mains. Included are eight inch (8") minimum size sewer mains required within
the development, and sewer main extensions from the development to a point
where the new main can tie into an existing main or if an existing sewer is not
available at that point, then to a point a distance from the development as
defined in section
13.44.080 of this chapter.
The frontage charge shall be equal to the frontage charge per foot, as
specified by subsection D of this section, multiplied by the total length of
all property lines contiguous to street right-of-way or easements wherein there
are sewer mains accessible to the property.
   B.   A percentage of the frontage charge collected, set by section
 13.44.130 of this chapter, shall be refunded to the owner or developer
originally paying for said sewer main, to which the connection has been made.
See section
13.44.130 of this chapter for rules governing application for refunds.
   C.   Twenty five percent (25%) of the sum collected as frontage charges
shall be credited to the Sewer Service Fund balance. Seventy five percent (75%)
of the sum collected in frontage charges in accordance with this section and
sections
13.44.110 through
13.44.130 of this chapter shall be credited to the reserve for frontage charge
reimbursement which shall be established in the Sewer Service Fund.
Reimbursements shall be paid out of this reserve. Any accumulation of funds
beyond the amount necessary to meet refund obligations shall be credited from
time to time, to the reserve for capital in the Sewer Service Fund.
   D.   Sewer main frontage charge per foot shall be thirty dollars ($30.00).
(Ord. 2682 § 5, 2007: Ord. 2654 § 2, 2007: Ord. 2608 § 9, 2005: Ord. 2079 §§
11, 12, 1989: Ord. 1941 § 3, 1986: Prior Code § 83404)
13.44.130: REFUNDING OF COSTS:
   A.   There shall be no refunding of costs for the installation of any sewer
mains within any development or for sewer connections to lots within any
development or for connections to any lot contiguous to the mains that had a
sewer connection prior to the installation of the new main. For all new sewer
connections to lots contiguous to all such mains installed by the owner or
developer and not within the development, tract, or subdivision the City shall
refund to the original owner or developer that installed the sewer main seventy
five percent (75%) of the sum collected as frontage charges in accordance with
section
13.44.120 of this chapter, which refund shall not be transferable except to
legal heirs and assigns. No refunds shall be made after ten (10) years from
completion of such new sewer main.
   B.   Any person or persons entitled to any refund under the provisions of
chapter 3.44 of this Code and this division shall make application for refund
to the Public Works Director. All applications shall be in writing and shall be
made annually within the calendar year for which the refund is requested. (Ord.
1941 § 3, 1986: Prior Code § 83405)
13.44.140: ASSESSMENT ACT:
When connecting to a sewer line financed by voluntary assessment or Improvement
Act of 1911 or similar acts, in which the connecting property has shared in the
sewer construction costs, the connection charge shall be only the normal
plumbing connection and street cutting fees. (Prior Code § 83406)
13.44.150: DEDICATIONS:
All sewers constructed under the provisions of the ordinance codified herein or
any other ordinance and located in a right-of- way or easement owned by or
dedicated to the City shall become the property of the City. (Ord. 1941 § 4,
1986: Prior Code § 83407)
13.44.160: PRIVATE SEWER LATERALS:
   A.   Defined: A private sewer lateral (PSL) shall have the same meaning as a
"private sewer" as defined in the California Plumbing Code, and shall more
particularly mean a pipe or pipes and appurtenances that carry wastewater and
liquid waste from the structure(s) served to the point of connection at the
public sewer line located in the City right-of-way or easement, regardless of
whether the structure(s) is [are] publicly or privately owned. A PSL is
associated with a parcel, if it, or any portion of it, is located upon the
parcel or conveys wastewater and liquid waste from any structure located on
that parcel. More than one PSL may be associated with an individual parcel. A
PSL may be located on abutting parcels in order to provide access to an
available public sewer.
   B.   Maintenance: Each property owner shall, at the property owner's
expense, inspect, maintain in good working order, repair and replace, as
necessary, the PSL so that it does not cause or contribute to any sewage
overflow from either the PSL or the public sewer. The PSL shall be free of
displaced joints, open joints, root intrusion, substantial deterioration of the
line, cracks, leaks, inflow, infiltration of extraneous water, fats, oils and
grease, sediment deposits or any other similar conditions, defects or
obstructions likely to cause or contribute to blockage of the PSL or the public
sewer. The owner shall perform such duties as may be required in response to
observed overflows or seepage attributable to the lateral, or as discovered by
smoke testing, televising or other surveys of the lateral. Where such
maintenance requires excavation or replacement of existing sewer facilities,
the owner shall apply for and receive an encroachment permit from the City.
(Ord. 2863, 2018)
CHAPTER 13.48
SEWER CHARGES
SECTION:
13.48.050: Billing And Payment
13.48.050: BILLING AND PAYMENT:
Billing and payment for sewer and wastewater charges shall be in accordance
with section
13.12.020 of this title. (Ord. 2641 § 1, 2006: Ord. 1943 § 1, 1986: prior code
§ 83704)
CHAPTER 13.52
PRETREATMENT AND REGULATION OF WASTES
SECTION:
13.52.010: General Provisions
13.52.020: Definitions
13.52.030: General Sewer Use Provisions
13.52.040: Pretreatment Of Wastewater
13.52.050: Wastewater Discharge Permit Application
13.52.060: Wastewater Discharge Permit Issuance Process
13.52.070: Reporting Requirements
13.52.080: Compliance Monitoring
13.52.090: Confidential Information
13.52.100: Publication Of Users In Significant Noncompliance
13.52.110: Administrative Enforcement Remedies
13.52.120: Judicial Enforcement Remedies
13.52.130: Supplemental Enforcement Action
13.52.140: Miscellaneous Provisions
13.52.010: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Purpose And Policy: This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for
all users of the publicly owned treatment works of the city of Redlands and
enables the city to comply with all applicable state and federal laws,
including the clean water act (33 USC section 1251 et seq.) and the general
pretreatment regulations (40 CFR part 403). The objectives of this chapter are:
      1.   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the city's wastewater
treatment facilities that may interfere with its operation;
      2.   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the wastewater
treatment facilities that will pass through the system, inadequately treated,
into surface waters, ground waters, the atmosphere or otherwise be incompatible
with the facilities;
      3.   To protect both the wastewater treatment facilities personnel who
may be affected by improperly treated wastewater and sludge in the course of
their employment and the general public;
      4.   To promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater and sludge
from the wastewater treatment facilities;
      5.   To authorize the establishment of fees for the equitable
distribution of the cost of operation, maintenance and improvement of the
wastewater treatment facilities; and
      6.   To enable the city to comply with its permit conditions, sludge use
and disposal requirements, and any other federal or state laws to which its
wastewater treatment facilities are subject.
   B.   Administration: This chapter shall apply to all discharges, whether
direct or indirect, to the wastewater treatment facilities, and authorizes the
issuance of wastewater discharge permits; provides for monitoring, compliance,
and enforcement activities; establishes administrative review procedures;
requires user reporting; and provides for the establishment of fees for the
equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein.
Except as otherwise provided herein, the city's director of municipal utilities
shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter. Any
powers granted or duties imposed upon the director by this chapter may be
delegated by the director to other city personnel. (Ord. 2268 § 1, 1995)
13.52.020: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following terms and
phrases, as used in this chapter, shall have the meanings hereinafter
designated. Definitions of all chemical, biological, and other technical terms
shall be the same as defined in the latest edition of "Standard Methods For The
Examination Of Water And Wastewater", published by the American Public Health
Association, American Water Works Association and Water Environment Federation.
   ACT OR THE ACT: The federal water pollution control act, also known as the
clean water act, as amended, 33 USC section 1251 et seq. The act has been
incorporated by reference into California law in the Water Code, chapter 5.5.
   APPROVAL AUTHORITY: The state of California state water resources control
board and/or California regional water quality control board - Santa Ana region
and, for certain oversight functions, the federal environmental protection
agency.
   APPROVED ANALYTICAL METHODS: The sample analysis techniques prescribed in 40
CFR part 136 and amendments thereto. Where 40 CFR part 136 does not contain
sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, or where the
EPA determines that part 136 sampling and analytical techniques are
inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling and analysis shall be
performed using validated analytical methods approved by the city, or any other
applicable sampling and analytical procedures, including procedures suggested
by the city or other parties, as approved by the EPA.
   AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE USER: A. If the user is a corporation: the
president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice president of the corporation in
charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs
similar policy or decision making functions for the corporation;
   B.   If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general partner
or the proprietor, respectively; or
   C.   If the user is a federal, state, or local government facility: a
director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation
and performance of the activities of the government facility or his or her
designee.
   D.   The individuals described in subsections A through C of this definition
may designate another authorized representative if the authorization is in
writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for
the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or
having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company and the
written authorization is submitted to the city.
   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD): The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures
for five (5) days of twenty degrees centigrade (20°C), usually expressed as a
concentration (e.g., mg/l).
   BYPASS: The diversion of waste streams from any point of a user's
pretreatment facility.
   CFR: The code of federal regulations.
   CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD OR CATEGORICAL STANDARD: Any regulation
containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in accordance with
sections 307(b) and (c) of the act which apply to a specific category of users
and which appear in 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N, parts 405–471.
   CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND: The quantity of oxygen required to chemically
oxidize material in a waste sample expressed in mg/l under specified conditions
of oxidizing agent, temperature and time. COD results are not necessarily
related to BOD results.
   CITY: The city of Redlands.
   COMPLIANCE SCHEDULE: A time schedule enforceable under this chapter
containing increments of profess, i.e., milestones, in the form of dates. These
milestones shall be for the commencement and/or completion of major events
leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment facilities
or the implementation of policies, procedures or operational management
techniques required for the user to comply with all applicable federal, state
or local environmental regulations which may directly or indirectly affect the
quality of the user's wastewater effluent.
   CONTROL AUTHORITY: The city of Redlands acting through its municipal
utilities director.
   DOMESTIC WASTEWATER: Wastewater from residences and other premises resulting
from personal use of water for washing and sanitary purposes or the discharge
of human excrement and related matter.
   EPA: The United States environmental protection agency or, where
appropriate, the regional water management division director, or other duly
authorized official of said agency.
   EXCHANGE TYPE WATER CONDITIONING APPARATUS: Water conditioning apparatus
that is removed from the premises upon which it normally operates and is
regenerated at a commercial regeneration plant when in need of regeneration.
   EXISTING SOURCE: Any source of discharge, the construction or operation of
which commenced prior to the publication by EPA of proposed categorical
pretreatment standards, which will be applicable to such source if the standard
is thereafter promulgated in accordance with section 307 of the act.
   INDIRECT DISCHARGE OR DISCHARGE: The introduction of pollutants into the
wastewater treatment facilities from any nondomestic source regulated under
section 307(b), (c) or (d) of the act.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER: Nondomestic wastewater. Industrial wastewater does
not include wastewater from single or multiple residences.
   INSTANTANEOUS MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE DISCHARGE LIMIT: The maximum concentration
of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the
analysis of any discrete or composite sample collected, independent of the
industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event.
   INTERCEPTOR OR GRAVITY SEPARATION INTERCEPTOR: A device designed to provide
a quiescent environment for the separation of deleterious or undesirable matter
from wastewater and permit treated sewage or liquid wastes to discharge into
the public sewer. This pretreatment is often called a trap.
   INTERFERENCE: A discharge, which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or
discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the wastewater treatment
facilities, their treatment processes, operations or their sludge processes,
use or disposal; and therefore, is a cause of a violation of the city's waste
discharge permit or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in
compliance with any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits
issued thereunder, or any more stringent state or local regulations: section
405 of the act; the solid waste disposal act, including title II commonly
referred to as the resource conservation and recovery act ("RCRA"); any state
regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to
subtitle D of the solid waste disposal act; the clean air act; the toxic
substances control act; and the marine protection, research and sanctuaries
act.
   MAY: Is permissive.
   MEDICAL WASTE: Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood
products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding,
surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes and dialysis
wastes.
   MUNICIPAL UTILITIES DIRECTOR OR DIRECTOR: The person designated by the city
to supervise the operation of the POTW, and who is charged with certain duties
and responsibilities by this chapter, or his or her duly authorized
representative.
   NEW SOURCE: A. Any building, structure, facility or installation from which
there is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which
commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under
section 307(c) of the act which will be applicable to such source if such
standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section; provided,
that:
      1.   The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at
a site at which no other source is located; or
      2.   The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces
the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at
an existing source; or
      3.   The production or wastewater generating processes of the building,
structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of an
existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are
substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility
is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source should
be considered.
   B.   Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results
in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create
a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the criteria of
subsection A2 or A3 of this definition but otherwise alters, replaces or adds
to existing process or production equipment.
   C.   Construction of a new source as defined under this paragraph has
commenced if the owner or operator has:
      1.   Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous on site
construction program:
a. Any placement, assembly or installation of facilities or equipment, or
b. Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation or removal
of existing buildings, structures or facilities which is necessary for the
placement, assembly or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or
      2.   Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of
facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a
reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or
modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering
and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this
paragraph.
   NONCONTACT COOLING WATER: Water used for cooling which does not come into
direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product or
finished product.
   NONDOMESTIC WASTEWATER: All wastewater except domestic wastewater and
pollutant free wastewater. Domestic wastewater mixed with nondomestic
wastewater shall be nondomestic wastewater.
   PASS-THROUGH: A discharge which exits the wastewater treatment facilities in
quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or
discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any provision of
the city's waste discharge requirements, including an increase in the magnitude
or duration of a violation.
   PERSON: Any individual, partnership, firm, company, corporation,
association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity or any
other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or assigns. This
definition includes all federal, state and local governmental entities.
   PLUMBING OFFICIALS: The director of building and safety of the city or his
or her duly authorized representative.
   POLLUTANT: Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash,
sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes,
biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural and industrial
wastes and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS,
morbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity or odor).
   PRETREATMENT: The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of
pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in
wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such pollutants into the
wastewater treatment facilities. This reduction or alteration can be obtained
by physical, chemical or biological processes; by process changes; or by other
means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by
an applicable pretreatment standard.
   PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS: Any substantive or procedural requirement related
to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a pretreatment standard.
   PRETREATMENT STANDARD OR STANDARDS: Prohibited discharge standards,
categorical pretreatment standards and local limits.
   PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS OR PROHIBITED DISCHARGES: Absolute
prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances.
   PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS OR POTW: A "treatment works", as defined by
section 212 of the act (33 USC 1292), which is owned by the city. This
definition includes any device or system used in the collection, storage,
treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a
liquid nature and any conveyances which convey wastewater to a treatment
facility.
   SAMPLER: A device used with or without flow measurement to obtain a portion
for analytical purposes which may be designated for taking a single sample
("grab"), composite sample, continuous sample or periodic sample.
   SEPTIC TANK WASTE: Any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical
toilets, campers, trailers and septic tanks.
   SHALL: Is mandatory.
   SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER: A. A user subject to categorical pretreatment
standards; or
   B.   A user that:
      1.   Discharges an average of twenty five thousand (25,000) gallons per
day (gpd) or more of processed wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary,
noncontact cooling, and boiler blowdown wastewater),
      2.   Contributes a process waste stream which makes up five percent (5%)
or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW,
or
      3.   Is designated as such by the city on the basis that it has a
reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for
violating any pretreatment standard or requirement;
   C.   Upon finding that a user meeting the criteria in subsection B of this
definition has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's
operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the city
may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received
from a user, and in accordance with procedures in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine
that such user should not be considered a significant industrial user.
   SLUG LOAD OR SLUG: Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which could
cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards.
   STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC): The system of classifying
industries identified in SIC manual, 1972, or subsequent edition, prepared by
the office of management and budget.
   STORM WATER: Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural
precipitation, or resulting from such precipitation, including snowmelt.
   TOXIC POLLUTANT: Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic
in 40 CFR 401.15 or 40 CFR 403, appendix B.
   USER OR INDUSTRIAL USER: A source of indirect discharge.
   WASTEWATER: Liquid and water carried industrial wastes and sewage from
residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing
facilities, institutions, together with any ground water, surface water, and
storm water that may be present, whether treated or untreated, which are
contributed to the POTW.
   WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT: The regulatory procedure established by this
chapter and enforced by the director to control the flow and quality of wastes
discharged into the POTW.
   WASTEWATER TREATMENT FACILITIES OR TREATMENT FACILITIES: The structures,
equipment and processes maintained by the city which are required to treat and
dispose of domestic and nondomestic wastewater. (Ord. 2268 § 1, 1995)
13.52.030: GENERAL SEWER USE PROVISIONS:
   A.   Prohibited Discharge Standards: Except as hereinafter provided, it is
unlawful for any person to discharge, or cause to be discharged, into any
public sewer or any opening leading to a public sewer of the city any pollutant
or wastewater which causes pass-through or interference, or any material which
will cause significant damage to any part of the city's POTW. This prohibition
shall apply to all users of the POTW whether or not they are subject to
categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, state or local
pretreatment standards or requirements.
The following is a nonexclusive list of other specifically prohibited wastes:
      1.   Any earth, sand, rocks, ashes, gravel, plaster, concrete, semisolid
(partially solid), solid or viscous material in quantities or volume which will
obstruct the flow of sewage in the public sewer or any object that will cause
clogging of sewage pumps or sewage sludge pumps or interfere or cause pass-
through with the normal operation of the wastewater treatment facilities.
      2.   Pollutants, which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or
fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health or
safety problems.
      3.   Any liquids, solids, gases or pollutants that either alone or by
interaction with other substances cause flammable or explosive conditions
including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed cup flashpoint of
less than one hundred forty degrees Fahrenheit (140°F) (60°C) using the test
methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21.
      4.   Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points and in such
manner as designated by the director.
      5.   Any wastewater having a pH less than 6.0 or greater than 10.0, or
any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures
or equipment of the POTW.
      6.   Any substance which will cause the temperature of the sewage in the
city's receiving main of six inches (6") or greater, to rise higher than one
hundred four degrees Fahrenheit (104°F) (40°C), or which will inhibit
biological activity in the treatment facilities resulting in interference.
      7.   Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral
oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass-through.
      8.   Pollutants, including, but not limited to, oxygen demanding
pollutants (biochemical oxygen demand, chemical oxygen demand, etc.), released
in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which, either
singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference with
the POTW.
      9.   Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other wastewater
which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to
create a public nuisance or a hazard to life, or prevent entry into the sewers
for maintenance or repair.
      10.   Storm water, surface water, ground water, artesian well water, roof
runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized
water, noncontact cooling water and unpolluted wastewater, unless specifically
authorized by the director.
      11.   Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except in
compliance with applicable state or federal regulations.
      12.   Any waste containing sufficient amounts of detergents, surface
active agents or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the
POTW.
      13.   Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the director
in a waste discharge permit.
      14.   Sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of
industrial wastes, except as specifically authorized by the director in a waste
discharge permit.
      15.   Any material which causes abnormal sulfide generation or abnormal
maintenance or operation costs of any part of the public sewer system, becomes
a nuisance or menace to public health, or any strongly odorous wastes or wastes
tending to create odors.
      16.   Special restrictions apply to water softening devices. It is
unlawful to install, replace or enlarge apparatus for softening all or any part
of the water supply to any premises when such apparatus is an ion exchange
softener or demineralizer of the type that is regenerated on the site of use.
The owner of an existing water softening or conditioning apparatus may continue
to operate said apparatus after the owner registers and certifies the apparatus
with the city pursuant to the requirements set forth in the California Health
and Safety Code. The certification shall include the following information:
         a.   The name and address of the owner;
         b.   The equipment manufacturer;
         c.   The model number of the apparatus, pounds of salt used per
regeneration, salt efficiency rating at the time of certification and that the
specified water saving devices have been installed;
         d.   Name, address and the specialty contractor's license number of
the class C-55 and C-36 licensee making the certification;
         e.   Any other information required by the director.
Except as provided for in this chapter, no water conditioning equipment in use
after February 15, 1983, may discharge waste into the public sewer or to the
ground if the equipment has a mineral capacity in excess of one and one-half
(11/2) cubic feet. Multiple units installed to supply water to the same
premises shall be considered a single apparatus for the purposes of this
chapter. Any person installing or operating water treating apparatus of any
kind shall make such apparatus accessible to the director for inspection at all
times and shall make such reports and pay any fee relative to such apparatus as
the director may require.
      17.   Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this section
shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged
to the POTW. This includes the prohibition of increased use of process water or
dilution as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve
compliance with federal, state or local limitations, unless expressly
authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement, in accordance
with 40 CFR 403.6(d).
   B.   Pretreatment Standards: The categorical pretreatment standards found at
40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N, parts 405–471 are incorporated.
   C.   Local Limits: The director may develop and implement pollutant
limitations. These limitations are necessary to assure compliance with the
city's waste discharge requirements including the prohibition against pass-
through of any pollutants that cause a violation of a permit or cause
interference with the POTW. Through the issuance of an industrial user permit,
the pollutant allocations may be allocated among industrial user classes or
individual users considering factors such as equity, technical feasibility,
economic feasibility, pollution prevention and waste minimization measures,
anticipated growth and enforcement feasibility. Specific pollutant limits shall
not be developed and enforced without individual public notice to affected
persons or users. The city reserves the right to establish by ordinance,
resolution, or in wastewater discharge permits, more stringent standards or
requirements on discharges to the POTW. (Ord. 2268 § 1, 1995)
13.52.040: PRETREATMENT OF WASTEWATER:
   A.   Pretreatment Facilities: Users shall provide wastewater treatment as
necessary to comply with this chapter and shall achieve compliance with all
categorical pretreatment standards, local limits and the prohibitions of this
chapter within the time limit specified by EPA, the state, or the director,
whichever is more stringent. Any facilities necessary for compliance shall be
provided, operated and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans
describing such facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the
director for review, and shall be approved by the director before such
facilities are constructed. The review of such plans and operating procedures
shall in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying such
facilities as necessary to produce discharge acceptable to the city under the
provisions of this chapter.
   B.   Additional Pretreatment Measures:
      1.   Whenever deemed necessary, the director may require users to
restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain
wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate
points of discharge, separate sewage waste streams from industrial waste
streams, and perform such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the
POTW and ensure the user's compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
      2.   The director may require any person discharging into the POTW to
install and maintain, on its property and at its expense, a suitable storage
and flow control facility to insure equalization of flow. A wastewater
discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization.
      3.   All nondomestic users shall be required to install and maintain a
grease, oil and/or sand interceptor when the director finds that such facility
is necessary for the proper handling of liquid waste containing grease,
flammable wastes, sand, or other harmful constituents which may be properly
eliminated from the collection system by use of an interceptor. An interceptor
is not required for a building used solely for residential purposes except
where common food preparation occurs. All interception units shall be of the
type and capacity approved by the director and shall be so located to be easily
accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such interceptors shall be inspected,
cleaned, and repaired regularly, as needed, by the user at its expense. When an
interceptor is cleaned, the removed sediment, liquid and floating material
shall be legally disposed of other than to the city's POTW or storm drain.
      4.   Users with potential to discharge flammable substances may be
required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter.
   C.   Accidental Discharge/Slug Control Plans: At least once every two (2)
years, the director shall evaluate whether each user needs an accidental
discharge/slug control plan. The director may require any user to develop,
submit for approval and implement such a plan. Alternatively, the director may
develop such a plan for any user. An accidental discharge/slug control plan
shall address, at a minimum, the following:
      1.   Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch
discharges;
      2.   Description of stored chemicals;
      3.   Procedures for immediately notifying the director of any accidental
or slug discharge; and
      4.   Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug
discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and
maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and
unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building
of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic
pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency
response.
   D.   Hauled Wastewater: Hauled waste may be introduced into the POTW only at
locations designated by the director, and at such times as are established by
the director. Such waste shall not violate any provision of this chapter or any
other requirements of the city. The director shall require septic tank waste
haulers to obtain wastewater discharge permits. No load may be discharged
without prior consent of the director. The director may require samples to be
collected from each hauled load to ensure compliance with applicable standards
and may require the waste hauler to provide a waste analysis of any load prior
to discharge. Waste haulers shall complete a waste tracking form provided by
the city for every load. This form shall include, but not be limited to, the
name and address of the waste hauler, permit number, truck identification,
names and addresses of sources of waste and volume and characteristics of the
waste along with the origin and known or suspected waste constituents. (Ord.
2268 § 1, 1995)
13.52.050: WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT APPLICATION:
   A.   Wastewater Analysis: When requested by the director, a user shall
submit information to the city on the nature and characteristics of its
wastewater within sixty (60) days of the request. The director is authorized to
prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically require users to update
this information.
   B.   Wastewater Discharge Permit Requirement:
      1.   No significant industrial user shall discharge wastewater into the
POTW without first obtaining a wastewater discharge permit from the director,
except that a significant industrial user that has filed a timely application
pursuant to this chapter may continue to discharge for the time period
specified therein.
      2.   The director may require other users to obtain wastewater discharge
permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter.
      3.   Any violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater discharge
permit shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and subjects the wastewater
discharge permittee to the sanctions described herein. Obtaining a wastewater
discharge permit shall not relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with
all federal and state pretreatment standards or requirements or with any other
requirements of federal, state and local law.
   C.   Wastewater Discharge Permitting; Existing Connections: Any user
required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who was discharging wastewater
into the POTW prior to February 15, 1983, and who wishes to continue such
discharges in the future, shall, within sixty (60) days after said date, apply
to the director for a wastewater discharge permit.
   D.   Wastewater Discharge Permitting; New Connections: Any user required to
obtain a wastewater discharge permit who proposes to begin or recommence
discharging into the POTW shall obtain such permit prior to the beginning or
recommencing of such discharge. An application for this wastewater discharge
permit shall be filed at least one hundred eighty (180) days prior to the date
upon which any discharge will begin or recommence.
   E.   Wastewater Discharge Permit Application Contents: All users required to
obtain a wastewater discharge permit must submit a permit application. The
director may require all users to submit as part of an application the
following information:
      1.   All information required by this chapter;
      2.   Description of activities, facilities, and plant processes on the
premises, including a list of all raw materials;
      3.   Number and type of employees, hours of operation and proposed or
actual hours of operation;
      4.   Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes and rate
of production;
      5.   Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per
day);
      6.   Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details
to show all sewers; floor drains; and appurtenances by size, location, and
elevation and all points of discharge;
      7.   Time and duration of discharges; and
      8.   Any other information required by the director to evaluate the
wastewater discharge permit application.
Incomplete or inaccurate applications shall not be processed and will be
returned to the user for revision.
   F.   Application Signatories And Certification: All wastewater discharge
permit applications and user reports must be signed by an authorized
representative of the user and contain the following certification statement:
I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were
prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed
to assure that qualified personnel properly gathered and evaluated the
information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage
the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the
information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and
belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant
penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine
and imprisonment for knowing violations.
   G.   Wastewater Discharge Permit Decisions: The director will evaluate the
data furnished by the user and may require additional information. This
additional information may be gathered by inspections of user facilities and/or
the use of a sample to collect wastewater samples to characterize the
pollutants in the user's discharge. This information gathering shall be in
accordance with section
13.52.080 of this chapter. After evaluation of the data furnished, the director
will determine whether or not to issue a wastewater discharge permit. The
director may deny any application for a wastewater discharge permit. (Ord. 2268
§ 1, 1995)
13.52.060: WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT ISSUANCE PROCESS:
   A.   Wastewater Discharge Permit Duration: A wastewater discharge permit
shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five (5) years from
the effective date of the permit. Each wastewater discharge permit shall
indicate a specific date upon which it will expire.
   B.   Wastewater Discharge Permit Contents: A wastewater discharge permit
shall include such conditions as are deemed reasonably necessary by the
director to prevent pass-through or interference, protect the quality of the
water body receiving the treatment plant's effluent, protect worker health and
safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal and protect against damage to
the POTW.
      1.   Wastewater discharge permits shall contain:
         a.   The duration of the wastewater discharge permit;
         b.   A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is
nontransferable without prior written notification to the city in accordance
with this chapter and provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with
a copy of the existing wastewater discharge permit;
         c.   Effluent limits based on applicable pretreatment standards;
         d.   Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification and record
keeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of
pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample
type based on federal, state and local law; and
         e.   A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for
violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable
compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance
beyond that required by applicable federal, state or local law.
      2.   Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be limited
to, the following:
         a.   Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of
discharge and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization;
         b.   Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology,
pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment devices designed
to reduce, eliminate or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the
treatment works;
         c.   Requirements for the development and implementation of spill
control plans or other special conditions including management practices
necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated or nonroutine
discharges;
         d.   Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to
reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW;
         e.   The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the
management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW;
         f.   Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and
sampling facilities and equipment;
         g.   A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit
does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all
applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including those which
become effective during the term of the wastewater discharge permit; and
         h.   Other conditions deemed appropriate by the director to ensure
compliance with this chapter, and state and federal laws, rules and
regulations.
   C.   Wastewater Discharge Permit Appeals: The director shall provide public
notice of the issuance of a wastewater discharge permit. Any person, including
the user, may petition the director to reconsider the terms of a wastewater
discharge permit within ten (10) calendar days of notice of its issuance.
      1.   Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be
a waiver of the administrative appeal.
      2.   In its petition, the appealing party shall indicate the wastewater
discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection, and
the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the wastewater
discharge permit.
      3.   The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit shall not be
stayed pending the appeal.
      4.   If the director fails to act within twenty (20) days after receipt
of an appeal, the appeal shall be deemed denied. Decisions not to reconsider a
wastewater discharge permit, not to issue a wastewater discharge permit, or not
to modify a wastewater discharge permit shall be considered final
administrative actions for purposes of judicial review.
      5.   Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final
administrative wastewater discharge permit decision must do so by filing a
complaint with the appropriate court within the appropriate state statute of
limitations.
   D.   Wastewater Discharge Permit Modification: Wastewater discharge permits
shall not be transferred to a new owner or operator without prior written
approval of the director. The notice of transfer to the director shall include
a written certification by the new owner or operator which:
      1.   States that the new owner or operator has no immediate intent to
change the facility's operations and processes;
      2.   Identifies the specific date on which the transfer will occur; and
      3.   Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing
wastewater discharge permit. Failure to provide advance written notice to the
director of a transfer renders the wastewater discharge permit void as of the
date of facility transfer.
   E.   Wastewater Discharge Permit Revocation: The director may revoke a
wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the
following reasons:
      1.   Failure to notify the director of significant changes to the
wastewater prior to the changed discharge;
      2.   Failure to provide prior notification to the director of changed
conditions pursuant to the requirements of this chapter;
      3.   Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in
the wastewater discharge permit application;
      4.   Falsifying self-monitoring reports;
      5.   Tampering with monitoring equipment;
      6.   Refusing to allow the director timely access to the facility
premises and records;
      7.   Failure to meet effluent limitations;
      8.   Failure to pay fines;
      9.   Failure to pay sewer charges;
      10.   Failure to meet compliance schedules;
      11.   Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge
permit application;
      12.   Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business
ownership of a permitted facility; or
      13.   Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms
of the wastewater discharge permit or this chapter.
Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon cessation of operations or
transfer of business ownership. All wastewater discharge permits issued to a
particular user are void upon the issuance of a new wastewater discharge permit
to that user.
   F.   Wastewater Discharge Permit Reissuance: A user with an expiring
wastewater discharge permit shall apply for wastewater discharge permit
reissuance by submitting a complete permit application to the director, a
minimum of ninety (90) days prior to the expiration of the user's existing
wastewater discharge permit.
   G.   Regulation Of Waste Received From Other Jurisdictions:
      1.   If another municipality, or user located within another
municipality, contributes wastewater to the POTW, the city shall enter into an
agreement with the contributing municipality. Prior to entering into such an
agreement, the director shall request the following information from the
contributing municipality:
         a.   A description of the quality and volume of wastewater discharged
to the POTW by the contributing municipality;
         b.   An inventory of all users located within the contributing
municipality that are discharging to the POTW; and
         c.   Such other information as the director may deem necessary.
      2.   The agreement shall contain the following:
         a.   A requirement for the contributing municipality to adopt a sewer
use ordinance which is at least as stringent as this chapter and local limits
which are at least as stringent as those in this chapter. The requirement shall
specify that such ordinance and limits must be revised as necessary to reflect
changes made to this chapter or local limits;
         b.   A requirement for the contributing municipality to submit a
revised user inventory on at least an annual basis;
         c.   A provision specifying which pretreatment, implementation
activities, including wastewater discharge permit issuance, inspection and
sampling, and enforcement, will be conducted by the contributing municipality;
which of these activities will be conducted by the director; and which of these
activities will be conducted jointly by the contributing municipality and the
director;
         d.   A requirement for the contributing municipality to provide the
director with access to all information that the contributing municipality
obtains as part of its pretreatment activities;
         e.   Limits on the nature, quality, and volume of the contributing
municipality's wastewater at the point where it discharges to the POTW;
         f.   Requirements for monitoring the contributing municipality's
discharge;
         g.   A provision ensuring the director access to the facilities of
users located within the contributing municipality's jurisdictional boundaries
for the purpose of inspection, sampling and any other duties deemed necessary
by the director; and
         h.   A provision specifying remedies available for breach of the terms
of the agreement. (Ord. 2268 § 1, 1995)
13.52.070: REPORTING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Reserved.
   B.   Reporting Requirements For Industrial Users Upon Effective Date Of
Categorical Pretreatment Standard-Baseline Report: Within one hundred eighty
(180) days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or
one hundred eighty (180) days after the final administrative decision made upon
a category determination submission under section 403.6(a)(4), whichever is
later, existing industrial users subject to such categorical pretreatment
standards and currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to a POTW
shall be required to submit to the control authority a report which contains
the information listed in subsections B1 through B7 of this section. At least
ninety (90) days prior to commencement of discharge, new sources, and sources
that become industrial users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable
categorical standard, shall be required to submit to the control authority a
report which contains the information listed in subsections B1 through B5 of
this section.
New sources shall also be required to include in this report information on the
method of pretreatment the source intends to use to meet applicable
pretreatment standards. New sources shall give estimates of the information
requested in subsections B4 and B5 of this section:
      1.   Identifying Information: The user shall submit the name and address
of the facility including the name of the operator and owners;
      2.   Permits: The user shall submit a list of any environmental control
permits held by or for the facility;
      3.   Description Of Operations: The user shall submit a brief description
of the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial
classification of the operation(s) carried out by such industrial user. This
description should include a schematic process diagram which indicates points
of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes;
      4.   Flow Measurement: The user shall submit information showing the
measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW
from each of the following:
         a.   Regulated process streams; and
         b.   Other streams as necessary to allow use of the combined waste
stream formula of section 403.6(e). (See subsection B5d of this section.)
The control authority may allow for verifiable estimates of these flows where
justified by cost or feasibility considerations;
      5.   Measurement Of Pollutants:
         a.   The user shall identify the pretreatment standards applicable to
each regulated process;
         b.   In addition, the user shall submit the results of sampling and
analysis identifying the nature and concentration (or mass, where required by
the standard or control authority) of regulated pollutants in the discharge
from each regulated process. Both daily maximum and average concentration (or
mass, where required) shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of
daily operations. In cases where the standard requires compliance with a best
management practice or pollution prevention alternative, the user shall submit
documentation as required by the control authority or the applicable standards
to determine compliance with the standard;
         c.   The user shall take a minimum of one representative sample to
compile that data necessary to comply with the requirements of this subsection
B5;
         d.   Samples should be taken immediately downstream from pretreatment
facilities if such exist or immediately downstream from the regulated process
if no pretreatment exists. If other wastewaters are mixed with the regulated
wastewater prior to pretreatment the user should measure the flows and
concentrations necessary to allow use of the combined waste stream formula of
section 403.6(e) in order to evaluate compliance with the pretreatment
standards. Where an alternate concentration or mass limit has been calculated
in accordance with section 403.6(e) this adjusted limit along with supporting
data shall be submitted to the control authority;
         e.   Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with the
techniques prescribed in 40 CFR part 136 and amendments thereto. Where 40 CFR
part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant
in question, or where the administrator determines that the part 136 sampling
and analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in question,
sampling and analysis shall be performed by using validated analytical methods
or any other applicable sampling and analytical procedures, including
procedures suggested by the POTW or other parties, approved by the
administrator;
         f.   The control authority may allow the submission of a baseline
report which utilizes only historical data so long as the data provides
information sufficient to determine the need for industrial pretreatment
measures;
         g.   The baseline report shall indicate the time, date and place of
sampling, and methods of analysis, and shall certify that such sampling and
analysis is representative of normal work cycles and expected pollutant
discharges to the POTW;
      6.   Certification: A statement, reviewed by an authorized representative
of the industrial user (as defined in subsection B1 of this section) and
certified to by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment
standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional
operation and maintenance (O and M) and/or additional pretreatment is required
for the industrial user to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements;
and
      7.   Compliance Schedule: If additional pretreatment and/or O and M will
be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which
the industrial user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O and M.
The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance
date established for the applicable pretreatment standard.
         a.   Where the industrial user's categorical pretreatment standard has
been modified by a removal allowance (section 403.7), the combined waste stream
formula (section 403.6(e)), and/or a fundamentally different factors variance
(section 403.13) at the time the user submits the report required by this
subsection B, the information required by subsection B6 of this section and
this subsection B7 shall pertain to the modified limits.
         b.   If the categorical pretreatment standard is modified by a removal
allowance (section 403.7), the combined waste stream formula (section 403.6
(e)), and/or a fundamentally different factors variance (section 403.13) after
the user submits the report required by this subsection B, any necessary
amendments to the information requested by subsection B6 of this section and
this subsection B7 shall be submitted by the user to the control authority
within sixty (60) days after the modified limit is approved.
   C.   Compliance Schedule For Meeting Categorical Pretreatment Standards: The
following conditions shall apply to the schedule required by subsection B7 of
this section:
      1.   The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of
dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the
construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the
industrial user to meet the applicable categorical pretreatment standards
(e.g., hiring an engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final
plans, executing contract for major components, commencing construction,
completing construction, etc.).
      2.   No increment referred to in subsection C1 of this section shall
exceed nine (9) months.
      3.   Not later than fourteen (14) days following each date in the
schedule and the final date for compliance, the industrial user shall submit a
progress report to the control authority including, at a minimum, whether or
not it complied with the increment of progress to be met on such date and, if
not, the date on which it expects to comply with this increment of progress,
the reason for delay, and the steps being taken by the industrial user to
return the construction to the schedule established. In no event shall more
than nine (9) months elapse between such progress reports to the control
authority.
   D.   Report On Compliance With Categorical Pretreatment Standard Deadline:
Within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance with applicable
categorical pretreatment standards or in the case of a new source following
commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any industrial
user subject to pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the
control authority a report containing the information described in subsections
B4 through B6 of this section. For industrial users subject to equivalent mass
or concentration limits established by the control authority in accordance with
the procedures in section 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable
measure of the user's long term production rate. For all other industrial users
subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable
pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation),
this report shall include the user's actual production during the appropriate
sampling period.
   E.   Periodic Reports On Continued Compliance:
      1.   Any industrial user subject to a categorical pretreatment standard
(except a nonsignificant categorical user as defined in section 403.3(v)(2)),
after the compliance date of such pretreatment standard, or, in the case of a
new source, after commencement of the discharge into the POTW, shall submit to
the control authority during the months of June and December, unless required
more frequently in the pretreatment standard or by the control authority or the
approval authority, a report indicating the nature and concentration of
pollutants in the effluent which are limited by such categorical pretreatment
standards. In addition, this report shall include a record of measured or
estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period for the
discharge reported in subsection B4 of this section except that the control
authority may require more detailed reporting of flows. In cases where the
pretreatment standard requires compliance with a best management practice (or
pollution prevention alternative), the user shall submit documentation required
by the control authority or the pretreatment standard necessary to determine
the compliance status of the user. At the discretion of the control authority
and in consideration of such factors as local high or low flow rates, holidays,
budget cycles, etc., the control authority may modify the months during which
the above reports are to be submitted.
      2.   The control authority may authorize the industrial user subject to a
categorical pretreatment standard to forego sampling of a pollutant regulated
by a categorical pretreatment standard if the industrial user has demonstrated
through sampling and other technical factors that the pollutant is neither
present nor expected to be present in the discharge, or is present only at
background levels from intake water and without any increase in the pollutant
due to activities of the industrial user. This authorization is subject to the
following conditions:
         a.   The control authority may authorize a waiver where a pollutant is
determined to be present solely due to sanitary wastewater discharged from the
facility provided that the sanitary wastewater is not regulated by an
applicable categorical standard and otherwise includes no process wastewater.
         b.   The monitoring waiver is valid only for the duration of the
effective period of the permit or other equivalent individual control
mechanism, but in no case longer than five (5) years. The user must submit a
new request for the waiver before the waiver can be granted for each subsequent
control mechanism.
         c.   In making a demonstration that a pollutant is not present, the
industrial user must provide data from at least one sampling of the facility's
process wastewater prior to any treatment present at the facility that is
representative of all wastewater from all processes. The request for a
monitoring waiver must be signed in accordance with subsection K1 of this
section and include the certification statement in section 403.6(a)(2)(ii).
Nondetectable sample results may only be used as a demonstration that a
pollutant is not present if the EPA approved method from 40 CFR part 136 with
the lowest minimum detection level for that pollutant was used in the analysis.
         d.   Any grant of the monitoring waiver by the control authority must
be included as a condition in the user's control mechanism. The reasons
supporting the waiver and any information submitted by the user in its request
for the waiver must be maintained by the control authority for three (3) years
after expiration of the waiver.
         e.   Upon approval of the monitoring waiver and revision of the user's
control mechanism by the control authority, the industrial user must certify on
each report with the statement below, that there has been no increase in the
pollutant in its waste stream due to activities of the industrial user:
Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible for managing
compliance with the Pretreatment Standard for 40 CFR            [specify
applicable National Pretreatment Standard part(s)], I certify that, to the best
of my knowledge and belief, there has been no increase in the level of
           [list pollutant(s)] in the wastewaters due to the activities at the
facility since filing of the last periodic report under 40 CFR 403.12(e)(l).
         f.   In the event that a waived pollutant is found to be present or is
expected to be present based on changes that occur in the user's operations,
the user must immediately comply with the monitoring requirements of subsection
E1 of this section or other more frequent monitoring requirements imposed by
the control authority; and notify the control authority.
         g.   This provision does not supersede certification processes and
requirements established in categorical pretreatment standards, except as
otherwise specified in the categorical pretreatment standard.
      3.   The control authority may reduce the requirement in subsection E1 of
this section to a requirement to report no less frequently than once a year,
unless required more frequently in the pretreatment standard or by the approval
authority, where the industrial user meets all of the following conditions:
         a.   The industrial user's total categorical wastewater flow does not
exceed any of the following:
            (1)   0.01 percent of the design dry weather hydraulic capacity of
the POTW, or five thousand (5,000) gallons per day, whichever is smaller, as
measured by a continuous effluent flow monitoring device unless the industrial
user discharges in batches;
            (2)   0.01 percent of the design dry weather organic treatment
capacity of the POTW; and
            (3)   0.01 percent of the maximum allowable headworks loading for
any pollutant regulated by the applicable categorical pretreatment standard for
which approved local limits were developed by a POTW in accordance with section
403.5(c) and subsection D of this section;
         b.   The industrial user has not been in significant noncompliance, as
defined in section 403.8(0)(2)(viii), for any time in the past two (2) years;
         c.   The industrial user does not have daily flow rates, production
levels, or pollutant levels that vary so significantly that decreasing the
reporting requirement for this industrial user would result in data that are
not representative of conditions occurring during the reporting period pursuant
to subsection G3 of this section;
         d.   The industrial user must notify the control authority immediately
of any changes at its facility causing it to no longer meet conditions of
subsection E3a or E3b of this section. Upon notification, the industrial user
must immediately begin complying with the minimum reporting in subsection E1 of
this section; and
         e.   The control authority must retain documentation to support the
control authority's determination that a specific industrial user qualifies for
reduced reporting requirements under subsection E3 of this section for a period
of three (3) years after the expiration of the term of the control mechanism.
      4.   For industrial users subject to equivalent mass or concentration
limits established by the control authority in accordance with the procedures
in section 403.6(c), the report required by subsection E1 of this section shall
contain a reasonable measure of the user's long term production rate. For all
other industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed
only in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other
measure of operation), the report required by subsection E1 of this section
shall include the user's actual average production rate for the reporting
period.
   F.   Notice Of Potential Problems, Including Slug Loading: All categorical
and noncategorical industrial users shall notify the POTW immediately of all
discharges that could cause problems to the POTW, including any slug loadings,
as defined by section 403.5(b), by the industrial user.
   G.   Monitoring And Analysis To Demonstrate Continued Compliance:
      1.   Except in the case of nonsignificant categorical users, the reports
required in subsections B, D, E, and H of this section shall contain the
results of sampling and analysis of the discharge, including the flow and the
nature and concentration, or production and mass where requested by the control
authority, of pollutants contained therein which are limited by the applicable
pretreatment standards. This sampling and analysis may be performed by the
control authority in lieu of the industrial user. Where the POTW performs the
required sampling and analysis in lieu of the industrial user, the user will
not be required to submit the compliance certification required under
subsections B6 and D of this section. In addition, where the POTW itself
collects all the information required for the report, including flow data, the
industrial user will not be required to submit the report.
      2.   If sampling performed by an industrial user indicates a violation,
the user shall notify the control authority within twenty four (24) hours of
becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and
analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the control authority
within thirty (30) days after becoming aware of the violation. Where the
control authority has performed the sampling and analysis in lieu of the
industrial user, the control authority must perform the repeat sampling and
analysis unless it notifies the user of the violation and requires the user to
perform the repeat analysis. Resampling is not required if:
         a.   The control authority performs sampling at the industrial user at
a frequency of at least once per month; or
         b.   The control authority performs sampling at the user between the
time when the initial sampling was conducted and the time when the user or the
control authority receives the results of this sampling.
      3.   The reports required in subsections B, D, E and H of this section
must be based upon data obtained through appropriate sampling and analysis
performed during the period covered by the report, which data are
representative of conditions occurring during the reporting period. The control
authority shall require that frequency of monitoring necessary to assess and
assure compliance by industrial users with applicable pretreatment standards
and requirements. Grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil
and grease, sulfide, and volatile organic compounds. For all other pollutants,
twenty four (24) hour composite samples must be obtained through flow
proportional composite sampling techniques, unless time proportional composite
sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the control authority. Where time
proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the control
authority, the samples must be representative of the discharge and the decision
to allow the alternative sampling must be documented in the industrial user
file for that facility or facilities. Using protocols (including appropriate
preservation) specified in 40 CFR part 136 and appropriate EPA guidance,
multiple grab samples collected during a twenty four (24) hour period may be
composited prior to the analysis as follows: For cyanide, total phenols, and
sulfides the samples may be composited in the laboratory or in the field; for
volatile organics and oil and grease the samples may be composited in the
laboratory. Composite samples for other parameters unaffected by the
compositing procedures as documented in approved EPA methodologies may be
authorized by the control authority, as appropriate.
      4.   For sampling required in support of baseline monitoring and ninety
(90) day compliance reports required in subsections B and D of this section, a
minimum of four (4) grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols,
oil and grease, sulfide and volatile organic compounds for facilities for which
historical sampling data do not exist; for facilities for which historical
sampling data are available, the control authority may authorize a lower
minimum. For the reports required by subsections E and H of this section, the
control authority shall require the number of grab samples necessary to assess
and assure compliance by industrial users with applicable pretreatment
standards and requirements.
      5.   All analyses shall be performed in accordance with procedures
established by the administrator pursuant to section 304(h) of the act and
contained in 40 CFR part 136 and amendments thereto or with any other test
procedures approved by the administrator. (See sections 136.4 and 136.5.)
Sampling shall be performed in accordance with the techniques approved by the
administrator. Where 40 CFR part 136 does not include sampling or analytical
techniques for the pollutants in question, or where the administrator
determines that the part 136 sampling and analytical techniques are
inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses shall be
performed using validated analytical methods or any other sampling and
analytical procedures, including procedures suggested by the POTW or other
parties, approved by the administrator.
      6.   If an industrial user subject to the reporting requirement in
subsection E or H of this section monitors any regulated pollutant at the
appropriate sampling location more frequently than required by the control
authority, using the procedures prescribed in subsection G5 of this section,
the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report.
         a.   Reporting Requirements For Industrial Users Not Subject To
Categorical Pretreatment Standards: The control authority must require
appropriate reporting from those industrial users with discharges that are not
subject to categorical pretreatment standards. Significant noncategorical
industrial users must submit to the control authority at least once every six
(6) months (on dates specified by the control authority) a description of the
nature, concentration, and flow of the pollutants required to be reported by
the control authority. In cases where a local limit requires compliance with a
best management practice or pollution prevention alternative, the user must
submit documentation required by the control authority to determine the
compliance status of the user. These reports must be based on sampling and
analysis performed in the period covered by the report, and in accordance with
the techniques described in part 136 and amendments thereto. This sampling and
analysis may be performed by the control authority in lieu of the significant
noncategorical industrial user.
   H.   Annual POTW Reports:   POTWs with approved pretreatment programs shall
provide the approval authority with a report that briefly describes the POTW's
program activities, including activities of all participating agencies, if more
than one jurisdiction is involved in the local program. The report required by
this subsection shall be submitted no later than one year after approval of the
POTW's pretreatment program and at least annually thereafter, and shall
include, at a minimum, the following:
      1.   An updated list of the POTW's industrial users, including their
names and addresses, or a list of deletions and additions keyed to a previously
submitted list. The POTW shall provide a brief explanation of each deletion.
This list shall identify which industrial users are subject to categorical
pretreatment standards and specify which standards are applicable to each
industrial user. The list shall indicate which industrial users are subject to
local standards that are more stringent than the categorical pretreatment
standards. The POTW shall also list the industrial users that are subject only
to local requirements. The list must also identify industrial users subject to
categorical pretreatment standards that are subject to reduced reporting
requirements under subsection E3 of this section, and identify which industrial
users are nonsignificant categorical industrial users;
      2.   A summary of the status of industrial user compliance over the
reporting period;
      3.   A summary of compliance and enforcement activities (including
inspections) conducted by the POTW during the reporting period;
      4.   A summary of changes to the POTW's pretreatment program that have
not been previously reported to the approval authority; and
      5.   Any other relevant information requested by the approval authority.
   I.   Notification Of Changed Discharge: All industrial users shall promptly
notify the control authority (and the POTW if the POTW is not the control
authority) in advance of any substantial change in the volume or character of
pollutants in their discharge, including the listed or characteristic hazardous
wastes for which the industrial user has submitted initial notification under
subsection O of this section.
   J.   Compliance Schedule For POTWs: The following conditions and reporting
requirements shall apply to the compliance schedule for development of an
approvable POTW pretreatment program required by section 403.8.
      1.   The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of
dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the
development and implementation of a POTW pretreatment program (e.g., acquiring
required authorities, developing funding mechanisms, acquiring equipment);
      2.   No increment referred to in subsection J1 of this section shall
exceed nine (9) months;
      3.   Not later than fourteen (14) days following each date in the
schedule and the final date for compliance, the POTW shall submit a progress
report to the approval authority including, as a minimum, whether or not it
complied with the increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the
date on which it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason
for delay, and the steps taken by the POTW to return to the schedule
established. In no event shall more than nine (9) months elapse between such
progress reports to the approval authority.
   K.   Signatory Requirements For Industrial User Reports: The reports
required by subsections B, D, and E of this section shall include the
certification statement as set forth in section 403.6(a)(2)(ii), and shall be
signed as follows:
      1.   By a responsible corporate officer, if the industrial user
submitting the reports required by subsections B, D, and E of this section is a
corporation. For the purpose of this subsection, a "responsible corporate
officer" means:
         a.   A president, secretary, treasurer, or vice president of the
corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who
performs similar policy or decision making functions for the corporation, or
         b.   The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or
operating facilities, provided, the manager is authorized to make management
decisions which govern the operation of the regulated facility including having
the explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment
recommendations, and initiate and direct other comprehensive measures to assure
long term environmental compliance with environmental laws and regulations; can
ensure that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to gather
complete and accurate information for control mechanism requirements; and where
authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in
accordance with corporate procedures.
      2.   By a general partner or proprietor if the industrial user submitting
the reports required by subsections B, D and E of this section is a
partnership, or sole proprietorship respectively.
      3.   By a duly authorized representative of the individual designated in
subsection K1 or K2 of this section if:
         a.   The authorization is made in writing by the individual described
in subsection K1 or K2 of this section;
         b.   The authorization specifies either an individual or a position
having responsibility for the overall operation of the facility from which the
industrial discharge originates, such as the position of plant manager,
operator of a well or well field superintendent, or a position of equivalent
responsibility, or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for
the company; and
         c.   The written authorization is submitted to the control authority.
      4.   If an authorization under subsection K3 of this section is no longer
accurate because a different individual or position has responsibility for the
overall operation of the facility, or overall responsibility for environmental
matters for the company, a new authorization satisfying the requirements of
subsection K3 of this section must be submitted to the control authority prior
to or together with any reports to be signed by an authorized representative.
   L.   Signatory Requirements For POTW Reports: Reports submitted to the
approval authority by the POTW in accordance with subsection H of this section
must be signed by a principal executive officer, ranking elected official or
other duly authorized employee. The duly authorized employee must be an
individual or position having responsibility for the overall operation of the
facility or the pretreatment program. This authorization must be made in
writing by the principal executive officer or ranking elected official, and
submitted to the approval authority prior to or together with the report being
submitted.
   M.   Provisions Governing Fraud And False Statements: The reports and other
documents required to be submitted or maintained under this section shall be
subject to:
      1.   The provisions of 18 USC section 1001 relating to fraud and false
statements;
      2.   The provisions of sections 309(c)(4) of the act, as amended,
governing false statements, representation or certification; and
      3.   The provisions of section 309(c)(6) regarding responsible corporate
officers.
   N.   Record Keeping Requirements:
      1.   Any industrial user and POTW subject to the reporting requirements
established in this section shall maintain records of all information resulting
from any monitoring activities required by this section, including
documentation associated with best management practices. Such records shall
include for all samples:
         a.   The date, exact place, method, and time of sampling and the names
of the person or persons taking the samples;
         b.   The dates analyses were performed;
         c.   Who performed the analyses;
         d.   The analytical techniques/methods used; and
         e.   The results of such analyses.
      2.   Any industrial user or POTW subject to the reporting requirements
established in this section (including documentation associated with best
management practices) shall be required to retain for a minimum of three (3)
years any records of monitoring activities and results (whether or not such
monitoring activities are required by this section) and shall make such records
available for inspection and copying by the director and the regional
administrator (and POTW in the case of an industrial user). This period of
retention shall be extended during the course of any unresolved litigation
regarding the industrial user or POTW or when requested by the director or the
regional administrator.
      3.   Any POTW to which reports are submitted by an industrial user
pursuant to subsections B, D, E, and H of this section shall retain such
reports for a minimum of three (3) years and shall make such reports available
for inspection and copying by the director and the regional administrator. This
period of retention shall be extended during the course of any unresolved
litigation regarding the discharge of pollutants by the industrial user or the
operation of the POTW pretreatment program or when requested by the director or
the regional administrator.
   O.   Notification Of Proper Authorities:
      1.   The industrial user shall notify the POTW, the EPA regional waste
management division director, and state hazardous waste authorities in writing
of any discharge into the POTW of a substance, which, if otherwise disposed of,
would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR part 261. Such notification must
include the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR part 261, the
EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge (continuous, batch or
other). If the industrial user discharges more than one hundred kilograms (100
kg) of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification shall also
contain the following information to the extent such information is known and
readily available to the industrial user: an identification of the hazardous
constituents contained in the wastes, an estimation of the mass and
concentration of such constituents in the waste stream discharged during that
calendar month, and an estimation of the mass of constituents in the waste
stream expected to be discharged during the following twelve (12) months. All
notifications must take place within one hundred eighty (180) days of the
effective date of this rule. Industrial users who commence discharging after
the effective date of this rule shall provide the notification no later than
one hundred eighty (180) days after the discharge of the listed or
characteristic hazardous waste. Any notification under this subsection need be
submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged. However, notifications
of changed discharges must be submitted under 40 CFR 403.12(j). The
notification requirement in this section does not apply to pollutants already
reported under the self-monitoring requirements of 40 CFR 403.12 (b), (d), and
(e).
      2.   Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of subsection O1 of
this section during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than
fifteen kilograms (15 kg) of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute
hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.301(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of
more than fifteen kilograms (15 kg) of nonacute hazardous wastes in a calendar
month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR
261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a onetime notification.
Subsequent months during which the industrial user discharges more than such
quantities of any hazardous waste do not require additional notification.
      3.   In the case of any new regulations under section 3001 of RCRA
identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any
additional substance as a hazardous waste, the industrial user must notify the
POTW, the EPA regional waste management waste division director, and state
hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within ninety
(90) days of the effective date of such regulations.
      4.   In the case of any notification made under this subsection O, the
industrial user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the
volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has
determined to be economically practical.
   P.   Annual Certification By Nonsignificant Categorical Industrial Users: A
facility determined to be a nonsignificant categorical industrial user pursuant
to section 403.3(v)(2) must annually submit the following certification
statement, signed in accordance with the signatory requirements in subsection L
of this section. This certification must accompany any alternative report
required by the control authority:
Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible for managing
compliance with the categorical Pretreatment Standards under 40 CFR
               , I certify that, to the best of my knowledge and belief that
during the period from                  , to                   [month, days,
year]:
   (a)    The facility described as                 [facility name] met the
definition of a non- significant categorical Industrial User as described in
section 403.3(v)(2); (b) the facility complied with all applicable Pretreatment
Standards and requirements during this reporting period; and (c) the facility
never discharged more than 100 gallons of total categorical wastewater on any
given day during this reporting period. This compliance certification is based
upon the following information:
   Q.   Electronic Reporting: The control authority that chooses to receive
electronic documents must satisfy the requirements of 40 CFR part 3 (electronic
reporting). (Ord. 2662 § 1, 2007: Ord. 2268 § 1, 1995)
13.52.080: COMPLIANCE MONITORING:
   A.   Right Of Entry; Inspection And Sampling: The director shall have the
right to enter the premises of any user to determine whether the user is
complying with all requirements of this chapter and any wastewater discharge
permit or order issued hereunder. Users shall allow the director ready access
to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records
examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties.
      1.   Where a user has security measures in force which require proper
identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall
make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation
of suitable identification, the director will be permitted to enter without
delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities.
      2.   The director shall have the right to set up on the user's property,
or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling
and/or metering of the user's operations.
      3.   The director may require the user to install monitoring equipment as
necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained
at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the user at its own
expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be
calibrated per the manufacturer of the device's guidelines to ensure their
accuracy.
      4.   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to
the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the
user at the written or verbal request of the director and shall not be
replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the user.
      5.   Unreasonable delays in allowing the director access to the user's
premises shall be a violation of this chapter.
   B.   Search Warrants: If the director has been refused access to a building,
structure, or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate
probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this chapter, or
that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection
and sampling program of the city designed to verify compliance with this
chapter or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall
public health, safety and welfare of the community, then the director may seek
issuance of a search warrant from the appropriate court. (Ord. 2268 § 1, 1995)
13.52.090: CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION:
   A.   Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys,
wastewater discharge permit applications, wastewater discharge permits, and
monitoring programs, and from the director's inspection and sampling
activities, shall be available to the public without restriction, unless the
user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of
the director, that the release of such information would divulge information,
processes, or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets
under applicable state law. Any such request must be asserted at the time of
submission of the information or data. When requested and demonstrated by the
user furnishing a report that such information should be held confidential, the
portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes
shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made
available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to
the permit program or pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings
involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and
characteristics and other "effluent data" as defined by 40 CFR 2.302 will not
be recognized as confidential information and will be available to the public
without restriction. (Ord. 2268 § 1, 1995)
13.52.100: PUBLICATION OF USERS IN SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE:
   A.   The director shall publish at least annually, in a newspaper of general
circulation that provides meaningful public notice within the jurisdictions
served by the POTW, a list of the users which, at any time, during the previous
twelve (12) months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable
pretreatment standards and requirements. For the purposes of this section, a
user is in significant noncompliance if its violation meets one or more of the
following criteria:
      1.   "Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits", defined here as
those in which sixty six percent (66%) or more of wastewater measurements taken
for the same pollutant parameter during a six (6) month period exceed (by any
magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including
instantaneous limits, as defined;
      2.   "Technical review criteria (TRC) violations", defined here as those
in which thirty three percent (33%) or more of wastewater measurements taken
for each pollutant parameter during a six (6) month period equals or exceeds
the product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement including
instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(1) multiplied by the
applicable TRC (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other
pollutants except pH);
      3.   Any other discharge violation of a pretreatment standard or
requirement as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(1) that the POTW determines has caused,
alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass-through,
including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public;
      4.   Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to
human health, welfare or to the environment, or has resulted in the POTW's
exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge;
      5.   Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days of the scheduled date, a
compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or
enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or
attaining final compliance;
      6.   Failure to provide within forty five (45) days after the due date,
any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, ninety (90) day
reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with
compliance schedules;
      7.   Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
      8.   Any other violation or group of violations, which may include a
violation of best management practices, which the POTW determines will
adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment
program. (Ord. 2662 § 2, 2007: Ord. 2268 § 1, 1995)
13.52.110: ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES:
   A.   Notification Of Violation: When the director finds that a user has
violated any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or order
issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the
director may serve upon that user a written notice of violation. Within ten
(10) calendar days of the receipt of this notice, an explanation of the
violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to
include specific required actions, shall be submitted by the user to the
director. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for
any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation.
Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the director to take any
action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without
first issuing a notice of violation.
   B.   Compliance Orders: When the director finds that a user has violated any
provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the director may
issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that the
user come into compliance within a specified time. If the user does not come
into compliance within the time provided, sewer service may be discontinued
unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances
are installed and properly operated. Compliance orders also may contain other
requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring
and management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants
discharged to the sewer. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for
compliance established for a pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a
compliance order relieve the user of liability for any violation, including any
continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar
against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
   C.   Emergency Suspensions: The director may immediately suspend a user's
discharge, after informal notice to the user, whenever such suspension is
necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to
present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or
welfare of persons. The director may also immediately suspend a user's
discharge, after notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens to interfere
with the operation of the POTW, or which presents, or may present, an
endangerment to the environment.
      1.   Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately
stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's failure to
immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the director may take
such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer
connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream, or
endangerment to any individuals. The director may allow the user to recommence
its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the
director that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination
proceedings of this chapter are initiated against the user.
      2.   A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge
presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement,
describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to
prevent any future occurrence, to the director prior to the date of any show
cause or termination hearing under this chapter.
Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to
any emergency suspension under this section.
   D.   Termination Of Discharge: In addition to the provisions of this
chapter, any user who violates the following conditions is subject to discharge
termination:
      1.   Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions;
      2.   Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of its discharge;
      3.   Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater
volume, constituents, and characteristics prior to discharge;
      4.   Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose
of inspection, monitoring, or sampling; or
      5.   Violation of the pretreatment standards of this chapter.
Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge and be
offered an opportunity to show cause under this chapter why the proposed action
should not be taken. Exercise of this option by the director shall not be a bar
to, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. (Ord. 2268
§ 1, 1995)
13.52.120: JUDICIAL ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES:
   A.   Injunctive Relief: When the director finds that a user has violated, or
continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge
permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement, the director may petition the appropriate court through the city
attorney's office for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as
appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of the
wastewater discharge permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this
chapter on activities of the user. The director may also seek such other action
as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief, including a requirement
for the user to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive
relief shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other
action against a user.
   B.   Civil Penalties:
      1.   Any user who has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of
this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit, an order issued hereunder, or any
other pretreatment standard or requirement shall be liable to the city for a
maximum civil penalty of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation, per
day for as long as the violation continues, plus actual damages incurred by the
city. In the case of a monthly or other long term average discharge limit,
penalties shall accrue for each day during the period of the violation.
      2.   The director may recover reasonable attorney fees, court costs, and
other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and
monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the city.
      3.   In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall take
into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the
extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the
violation, any economic benefit gained through the user's violation, corrective
actions by the user, the compliance history of the user and any other factor as
justice requires.
      4.   Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user.
   C.   Criminal Prosecution:
      1.   Any user who violates any provision of this chapter, a wastewater
discharge permit, an order issued hereunder or any other pretreatment standard
or requirement shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by
a fine of not more than the maximum fine and/or imprisonment allowed under
state law per violation, per day.
      2.   Any user who introduces any substance into the POTW which causes
personal injury or property damage shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a
misdemeanor punishable by a fine not more than the maximum fine and/or
imprisonment allowed under state law per violation, per day. This penalty shall
be in addition to any other cause of action for personal injury or property
damage available under state law.
      3.   Any user who knowingly makes any false statements, representations,
or certifications in any application, record, report, plan, or other
documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this chapter,
wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or who falsifies,
tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method
required under this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of
not more than the maximum fine and/or imprisonment allowable under state law
per violation, per day.
   D.   Remedies Nonexclusive: The remedies provided for in this chapter are
not exclusive. The director may take any, all, or any combination of these
actions against a noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations
will generally be in accordance with the city's enforcement response plan.
However, the director may take other action against any user when the
circumstances warrant. Further, the director is empowered to take more than one
enforcement action against any noncompliant user. (Ord. 2268 § 1, 1995)
13.52.130: SUPPLEMENTAL ENFORCEMENT ACTION:
   A.   Performance Bonds: The director may decline to issue or reissue a
wastewater discharge permit to any user who has failed to comply with any
provision of this chapter, a previous wastewater discharge permit, or order
issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless
such user first files a satisfactory bond, payable to the city, in a sum not to
exceed a value determined by the director to be necessary to achieve consistent
compliance.
   B.   Liability Insurance: The director may decline to issue or reissue a
wastewater discharge permit to any user who has failed to comply with any
provision of this chapter, a previous wastewater discharge permit, or order
issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless the
user first submits proof that it has obtained financial assurances sufficient
to restore or repair damage to the POTW caused by its discharge.
   C.   Water Supply Severance: Whenever a user has violated or continues to
violate any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit, or order
issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, water
service to the user may be severed. Service shall only recommence, at the
user's expense, after it has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply.
   D.   Public Nuisance: A violation of any provision of this chapter, a
wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement is hereby declared a public nuisance and
shall be corrected or abated as directed by the director. Any person creating a
public nuisance shall be subject to the provisions of this code governing such
nuisances, including reimbursing the city for any costs incurred in removing,
abating or remedying such nuisance. (Ord. 2268 § 1, 1995)
13.52.140: MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS:
   A.   Pretreatment Charges And Fees: The city may adopt by resolution
reasonable fees for the reimbursement of its costs of establishing,
implementing and operating the city's pretreatment program which may include,
but are not limited to, the cost of processing wastewater discharge permit
applications for monitoring, inspection and surveillance procedures, the review
of monitoring reports submitted by users, for reviewing and responding to
accidental discharge procedures and construction for filing appeals and other
fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the requirements of this
chapter. (Ord. 2268 § 1, 1995)
CHAPTER 13.54
STORM DRAINS
SECTION:
13.54.010: Purpose
13.54.020: Definitions
13.54.030: Administration
13.54.040: Notice
13.54.050: Connections
13.54.060: Protection Of The Storm Drain System
13.54.070: Prohibited Discharges
13.54.080: Exceptions To The Prohibited Discharges
13.54.090: Notification Of Intent And Compliance With General Permits
13.54.100: Compliance With Best Management Practices (BMPs)
13.54.110: Spill Containment
13.54.120: Prevention Of Accidental Discharges
13.54.130: Notification Of Accidental Discharge
13.54.140: Authority To Inspect
13.54.150: Residential And Commercial Requirements
13.54.160: Industrial Requirements; Specific Prohibitions
13.54.170: Nonstormwater Discharges
13.54.180: Best Management Practices
13.54.190: Permits Required
13.54.192: Report Required
13.54.200: Notice Of Violation
13.54.210: Violations Deemed A Public Nuisance
13.54.220: Falsifying Information
13.54.230: Administrative Hearing
13.54.240: Administrative Orders
13.54.250: Legal Action
13.54.260: Civil Penalties
13.54.270: Criminal Penalties
13.54.280: Compensation For Damages
13.54.290: Notice To Remediate
13.54.300: NPDES Program Regulatory Fees
13.54.310: Recovery Of Additional Inspection Costs
13.54.320: Liens
13.54.010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the future health, safety and general
welfare of inhabitants of the city by controlling discharges into the Redlands
storm drain system. This will be accomplished by eliminating all nonpermitted
discharges to Redlands separate storm sewers, controlling the discharge to
Redlands separate storm sewers from spills, dumping or disposal of materials
other than stormwater and reducing pollutants in stormwater discharges to the
maximum extent practicable. (Ord. 2274 § 1, 1995)
13.54.020: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
   BMP: Any best management practice, best management guideline, or best
management requirement as adopted by any federal, state, regional, or local
agency and applicable to storm drain system.
   CITY PERMIT: Any permit issued by the city.
   CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY: Any activity as defined by the state water resources
board or the regional water quality control board, Santa Ana region, whichever
is more restrictive, that necessitates securing an NPDES permit or NOI.
   ILLEGAL DISCHARGE: Any discharge to the stormwater drainage system that is
not composed entirely of stormwater or contains constituents not provided for
under section
13.54.070, "Prohibited Discharges", of this chapter.
   ILLICIT CONNECTION: Any connection to the stormwater drainage system that is
directly or indirectly associated with an illegal discharge except for
connections permitted pursuant to a valid NPDES permit authorized by written
approval of the city.
   NOI: A notice of intent to comply with an NPDES general stormwater permit.
   NPDES: The national pollutant discharge elimination system.
   NPDES PERMIT: Any permit issued pursuant to the NPDES program under the
federal clean water act.
   NONSTORMWATER: Any water not associated with storm runoff that originates on
or traverses any property.
   RECEIVING WATER: All waters of the United States and tributaries of waters
of the United States that are used for recreational or other purposes; from
which fish or shellfish are taken; or which are used for industrial purposes by
industries in interstate commerce.
   STORM DRAIN SYSTEM: All of the property owned or leased by the city and used
directly or indirectly in the collection, conveyance, storage or disposal of
storm water including, but not limited to, conduits, channels, basins and
watercourses, together with appurtenances, pumping stations and equipment.
   STORM WATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN: The plan as described in the general
construction activity storm water permit as issued by the state water resources
control board on August 20, 1992, and as amended.
   SWIMMING POOL: Any body of water created by artificial means designed or
used for swimming, immersion or therapeutic purposes. (Ord. 2274 § 1, 1995)
13.54.030: ADMINISTRATION:
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the public works director for the
city or his or her designee, shall administer, implement and enforce the
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2274 § 1, 1995)
13.54.040: NOTICE:
Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, any notice required to be given
under this chapter shall be in writing and served in person or by first class
or by registered or certified mail. Notice shall be deemed to have been given
at the time of deposit, postage prepaid, in a facility regularly serviced by
the United States postal service. (Ord. 2274 § 1, 1995)
13.54.050: CONNECTIONS:
   A.   The discharge or diversion of nonstorm water is permissible only when
connection to the storm drain system is made in accordance with a valid city
permit, approved construction plan, or an NPDES permit and/or an NOI, and the
discharge conforms to the standards of this chapter.
   B.   It is prohibited to establish, use, maintain and/or continue any
illicit connections. This prohibition is retroactive and applies to connections
made in the past, regardless of whether made under a permit or other
authorization or whether permissible under the law or practices applicable or
prevailing at the time of the connection.
   C.   Permits are required for the construction or modification of any storm
drain or conveyor of drainage waters and appurtenant items within:
      1.   Dedicated easements, rights of way, or public place and/or facility;
      2.   Private property so as it may directly or indirectly discharge into
the storm drain system. Indirect discharges include, but are not necessarily
limited to, under sidewalk drains, driveway approaches, and unrestricted sheet
flow. (Ord. 2274 § 1, 1995)
13.54.060: PROTECTION OF THE STORM DRAIN SYSTEM:
No person shall, without prior written approval by the city, construct, modify
or cause to be constructed or modified any structure, facility, or appurtenant
items which may alter the normal functioning of the storm drain system,
including actions which may alter the capacity, fall or structural integrity of
a storm drain, channel or related structures. (Ord. 2274 § 1, 1995)
13.54.070: PROHIBITED DISCHARGES:
It is prohibited to:
   A.   Discharge directly or indirectly into the storm drain system any storm
water or other solid, liquid or gaseous matter in violation of any law, rule,
regulation, permit, order or other requirement of any federal, state, county,
municipal or other governmental entity or agency;
   B.   Discharge nonstorm water directly or indirectly to the storm drain
system or any street, or lined or unlined drainage ditch which leads to a
public storm drain, unless such discharge is permitted by an NPDES permit or a
city permit. If such discharge is permitted by an NPDES permit, but causes the
city to violate any portion of its NPDES permit for storm water discharges,
such discharge is also prohibited;
   C.   Throw, deposit, leave, maintain, keep or permit to be thrown,
deposited, placed, left or maintained, any refuse, rubbish, garbage, or other
discarded or abandoned objects, articles, and accumulations, in or upon any
street, alley, sidewalk, storm drain, inlet, catch basin, conduit or other
drainage structures, business place, or upon any public or private lot of land
in the city, so that the same might be or become a pollutant;
   D.   Throw or deposit litter in any fountain, pond, lake, stream or any
other body of water in any park, or elsewhere within the city. (Ord. 2274 § 1,
1995)
13.54.080: EXCEPTIONS TO THE PROHIBITED DISCHARGES:
The following discharges are exempt from the prohibited discharges listed in
section
13.54.070 of this chapter:
   A.   Water line flushing and other discharges from potable water sources,
provided that the chlorine residual in any heavily chlorinated water used to
disinfect water storage facilities or water mains is thoroughly dechlorinated
prior to contacting receiving waters;
   B.   Landscape irrigation, lawn watering, and irrigation water;
   C.   Diverted stream flows, rising ground water, infiltration of separate
storm drains, springs, flows from riparian habitats and wetlands;
   D.   Uncontaminated pumped ground water, foundation and footing drains,
water from crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation;
   E.   Individual residential car washing, dechlorinated swimming pool
discharges; and
   F.   Flows from firefighting. (Ord. 2274 § 1, 1995)
13.54.090: NOTIFICATION OF INTENT AND COMPLIANCE WITH GENERAL PERMITS:
   A.   Each industrial discharger, discharger associated with construction
activity, or other discharger, described in any general storm water permit
addressing such discharges, as may be adopted by the United States
environmental protection agency, the state water resources control board, or
the California regional water quality control board, Santa Ana region, shall
provide NOI, comply with, and undertake all other activities required by any
general NPDES storm water permit applicable to such discharges.
   B.   Each discharger identified in an individual NPDES permit or discharge
order relating to storm water discharges shall comply with and undertake all
activities required by such permit or order. (Ord. 2274 § 1, 1995)
13.54.100: COMPLIANCE WITH BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs):
Any person undertaking any activity or operation that causes or contributes to
illegal discharges or storm water pollution shall comply with all applicable
BMPs. (Ord. 2274 § 1, 1995)
13.54.110: SPILL CONTAINMENT:
   A.   Spill containment systems, as may be required, shall conform to
requirements established by the public works director. No person shall operate
a spill containment system that allows incompatible liquid to mix thereby
creating hazardous or toxic substances in the event of failure of one or more
containers.
   B.   Spill containment systems shall consist of a system of dikes, walls,
barriers, berms, or other devices designed to contain spillage of the liquid
contents of containers. Spill containment systems shall be constructed of
impermeable and nonreactive materials to the liquids being contained.
   C.   Spilled or leaked waste and accumulated precipitation shall be removed
from the spill containment system in as timely a manner as is necessary to
prevent overflow of the collection system. Unless otherwise approved in writing
by the city, all chemicals or wastes discharged within the collection area
shall be disposed of in accordance with all applicable federal, state and local
laws and regulations and not discharged to the public sewer or the ground.
(Ord. 2274 § 1, 1995)
13.54.120: PREVENTION OF ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGES:
Protection of the storm drain system from accidental discharge of prohibited
material is the responsibility of the person or persons in charge of such
material. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide
this protection shall be submitted to the city for review, and shall be
approved by the public works director prior to any construction. All existing
users shall complete such a plan. Review and approval of such plans and
operating procedures shall not relieve the user from the responsibility to
modify the user's facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this
chapter. (Ord. 2274 § 1, 1995)
13.54.130: NOTIFICATION OF ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE:
   A.   A notice shall be permanently posted in a prominent place advising
employees whom to contact in the event of an accidental discharge. Employers
shall ensure that all employees are advised of the emergency notification
procedures.
   B.   In the event of an accidental discharge, it is the responsibility of
the user to immediately telephone and notify the city and applicable federal
and state offices.
Within five (5) working days following an accidental discharge to the storm
drain system, the person or persons in charge of the material accidentally
discharged shall submit a written report to the public works director. The
report shall describe in detail the type, volume and cause of the discharge,
corrective actions taken, and measures to be taken to prevent future
occurrence. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any fines or civil
penalties incurred as a result of such event, or any other liability which may
be imposed by this chapter or other applicable laws. (Ord. 2274 § 1, 1995)
13.54.140: AUTHORITY TO INSPECT:
   A.   Representatives of the city shall be authorized at all reasonable times
to enter the premises of any user of the storm drain system to determine
compliance with the provisions of this chapter, and to:
      1.   Conduct inspection, sampling, monitoring, and/or other authorized
duties to enforce the provisions of this chapter;
      2.   Review any records, reports, test results or other information
required to enforce the provisions of this chapter. Such review may include the
necessity to photograph, videotape, take measurements or copy any applicable
information, and to require reports from industrial, commercial, and
construction sites discharging into the municipal separate storm sewer system
(MS4);
      3.   Inspect any wastes, chemicals, storage areas, storage containers,
waste generating processes, treatment facilities, and discharge locations. Such
inspection may include the necessity to photograph or videotape any applicable
wastes, chemicals, storage areas, storage containers, waste generating
processes, treatment facilities, and discharge locations.
   B.   Adequate identification shall be provided by the representative of the
city when entering the premises of any user. If such entry is refused or cannot
be obtained, the city shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to
secure lawful entry and inspection of the premises.
   C.   If the city has reasonable cause to believe that nonstormwater
discharge conditions on or emanating from the premises are so hazardous, unsafe
or dangerous as to require immediate inspection to safeguard the public health
or safety, the city shall have the right to immediately enter and inspect the
property, and may use any reasonable means required to effect such entry and
make such inspection, whether the property is occupied or unoccupied and
whether or not formal permission to inspect has been obtained.
   D.   Where a user has instituted security measures requiring proper
identification and clearance before entry onto the premises, the user shall
make all necessary arrangements with its security guards in order that, upon
presentation of such identification, duly designated city personnel shall be
permitted to enter the premises without delay for the purpose of performing
their authorized duties. For facilities which require special clearances to
conduct inspections, it shall be the responsibility of the user to obtain all
necessary clearances on behalf of the city so that city inspections are not
impaired. (Ord. 2742, 2010)
13.54.150: RESIDENTIAL AND COMMERCIAL REQUIREMENTS:
Persons owning or operating a parking lot, gas station pavement or similar
structure shall clean those structures as frequently and thoroughly as
practicable in a manner that does not result in discharge of pollutants to the
city storm drain system. (Ord. 2274 § 1, 1995)
13.54.160: INDUSTRIAL REQUIREMENTS; SPECIFIC PROHIBITIONS:
By adoption of industrial activity stormwater regulations or by the issuance of
industrial activity stormwater permits, or both, the public works director may
impose reasonable limitations as to the quality of stormwater (including,
without limitations, the designation of maximum levels of pollutants)
discharged directly or indirectly into the storm drain system from sites of
industrial activity. (Ord. 2274 § 1, 1995)
13.54.170: NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGES:
The following nonstormwater discharges are allowed under the general
construction permit so long as they comply with BMPs as described in the
stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) and they do not cause or
contribute to violation of any water quality standard or federal, state or
local law or regulation:
   A.   Landscape irrigation of erosion control measures;
   B.   Waterline flushing and testing as provided for in section
13.54.080 of this chapter;
   C.   Street washing;
   D.   Dewatering;
   E.   Dust control;
   F.   Soil compaction; and
   G.   Discharges of nonstormwater as may be necessary for performance and
completion of certain construction projects. (Ord. 2274 § 1, 1995)
13.54.180: BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES:
   A.   Any new construction activity shall use best management practices
(BMPs) to prevent the discharge of pollutants to the maximum extent
practicable. Any new industrial or commercial or other development activity, or
development, must use BMPs or other steps to prevent discharge of pollutants to
the MS4. For other premises exposed to stormwater, the responsible person must
use BMPs, if they exist, or other steps to reduce the discharge of pollutants
to the maximum extent practicable, including the removal and lawful disposal of
any solid waste or any other substance which, if it were to be discharged to
the MS4, would be a pollutant, including fuels, waste fuels, chemicals,
chemical wastes and animal wastes, from all parts of the premises exposed to
stormwater. Examples of suitable BMPs may be found in the California Stormwater
Quality Association (CASQA) "Stormwater Best Management Practice Handbook", and
the city of Redlands' "Storm Water Guidance Handbook". Other BMPs may be
utilized with the prior written approval of the city engineer.
   B.   Best management practices as defined in section
13.54.020 of this chapter shall be those practices which are standard practices
in the city or those practices which are adopted by resolution of the city
council to reduce or eliminate pollution in the storm drainage system. Best
management practices which are standard practices of the city are:
      1.   Street sweeping all public curbed streets as required by the city's
NPDES permit, and as otherwise established by the city;
      2.   Storm drain and catch basin cleaning and maintenance as needed;
      3.   Regular pavement repair and maintenance;
      4.   Spill prevention as practiced by all field divisions and as handled
on an emergency basis by the fire department hazardous materials response team;
      5.   Household hazardous waste collection as administered by the fire
department;
      6.   Storm drain facility inspection for illicit connections and/or
illegal discharges. (Ord. 2742, 2010)
13.54.190: PERMITS REQUIRED:
Any individual or entity wishing to engage in construction activity shall
comply with provisions of this chapter and provide evidence of compliance prior
to obtaining any city issued grading or construction permits. (Ord. 2274 § 1,
1995)
13.54.192: REPORT REQUIRED:
All commercial, industrial and construction sites that employ BMPs to prevent
or reduce pollution shall submit a yearly report to the city's municipal
utilities and engineering department detailing inspection dates, any
maintenance performed, and any repairs that were made to the BMPs used. The
report shall also include a summary of the effectiveness of the BMPs used. This
effectiveness shall be based on actual, not estimated, measurements. The report
shall be filed by July 1 of each year, in hardcopy and electronic (PDF) format.
The report must be prepared and signed by a California registered engineer, a
professional hydrologist as certified by the American Institute Of Hydrology, a
certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC), a certified
professional in stormwater quality (CPSWQ), or a certified erosion, sediment
and stormwater inspector (CESSWI). (Ord. 2742, 2010)
13.54.200: NOTICE OF VIOLATION:
   A.   Whenever the authorized representative finds that any user has violated
or is violating any provision of this chapter, an NPDES permit or city permit
the city may serve upon such person a written notice stating the nature of the
violation and stating the penalties for continued noncompliance.
   B.   If required in the notice, the user shall submit to the city, within a
prescribed period specified in the notice, which period shall not be less than
ten (10) working days unless an emergency situation dictates a shorter period,
a plan indicating the cause of the violation, corrective actions which will be
taken to prevent recurrence, and, if required, a proposed compliance schedule
indicating the dates those corrective actions will be completed. (Ord. 2274 §
1, 1995)
13.54.210: VIOLATIONS DEEMED A PUBLIC NUISANCE:
   A.   In addition to the penalties established by this chapter, any threat to
the public health, safety, and welfare shall be declared and deemed a public
nuisance. Such public nuisance may be summarily abated and/or remediated or
restored by the city, and/or the city may commence a civil action to abate,
enjoin, or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance.
   B.   The cost of such abatement, remediation, or restoration shall be borne
by the owner of the property causing the violation. This cost may be recovered
by forfeiture of permit deposits, through the use of security such as trust
funds, bonds or other short term funding source, or by imposition of a lien
upon and against the property, and such lien shall continue in existence until
the same shall be paid. If the lien is not satisfied by the owner of the
property within a prescribed amount of time after the completion by the city of
the removal of the public nuisance and restoration and remediation of the
property to its original condition, the lien may be recorded and entered in the
same manner as a judgment. (Ord. 2742, 2010)
13.54.220: FALSIFYING INFORMATION:
Any person who knowingly makes any false statement, representation, record,
report, plan or other document filed with the city, or who falsifies, tampers
with, or knowingly renders inaccurate monitoring devices or methods required
under this chapter, shall have violated this chapter. (Ord. 2274 § 1, 1995)
13.54.230: ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING:
   A.   Any user may request in writing or the authorized representative may
order, an administrative hearing, at which a user who causes or allows or who
has caused or allowed a violation of this chapter to occur shall show cause why
a proposed enforcement action should not be taken. An administrative hearing
officer who is a city officer not directly involved in enforcement of this
chapter shall preside over the administrative hearing, at which each party,
including the user and the city, shall have the right to present evidence.
   B.   A notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place of
the hearing regarding the violation, the reasons why the action is to be taken
and proposed enforcement action, directing the user to show cause before the
hearing officer why proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice
of hearing shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail,
return receipt requested, at least ten (10) working days before the hearing.
Service may be made on any agent or officer of the user. (Ord. 2274 § 1, 1995)
13.54.240: ADMINISTRATIVE ORDERS:
   A.   The authorized representative may require compliance with this chapter,
NPDES permit or city permit by issuing written administrative orders that are
enforceable in a court of law or by directly seeking court action.
Administrative orders may include stop work orders, cease and desist orders,
termination of service orders and immediate termination of service orders.
      1.   Stop Work Order: The city may serve a written stop work order on any
person engaged in doing or causing to be done new construction, tenant
improvements, alterations or additions, if:
         a.   A city permit is required and no permit has been granted by the
city;
         b.   Work has begun without necessary prior written approval by the
city;
         c.   Violations of this chapter are found at the site of the new
construction, tenant improvements, alterations or additions.
Any person served a stop work order shall stop such work forthwith until
written authorization to continue is received from the public works director.
      2.   Cease And Desist Order: When the city finds that any industrial/
commercial user has violated or threatens to violate any provisions of this
chapter, NPDES stormwater permit or city permit the city may issue a cease and
desist order directing the user to:
         a.   Comply immediately; or
         b.   Comply in accordance with a time schedule specified in the cease
and desist order.
A cease and desist order may include modifications in the frequency of
monitoring, testing and submission of self- monitoring reports.
      3.   Termination Of Service: When the city finds any industrial/
commercial user has violated an administrative order, the public works director
may terminate storm drain service to the user. The user shall be liable for all
costs for termination of storm drain service incurred by the user and the city.
This provision is in addition to other statutes, rules or regulations
authorizing termination of service for delinquency payment, or for any other
reasons. Storm drain service shall be reinstituted by the city after the user
has complied with all the provisions of the administrative order. The user
shall also be liable for all costs for reinstituting storm drain service.
      4.   Immediate Termination Of Service: The city may immediately suspend
storm drain service and the city permit when such suspension is necessary, in
the opinion of the public works director to stop an actual or threatened
discharge which presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment
to the health or welfare of persons or the environment, or which significantly
causes pollution to the receiving groundwaters and watercourse of the city. Any
industrial/commercial user notified that storm drain service NPDES permit or
city permit has been suspended shall immediately stop and eliminate the
applicable contributions to the storm drain system.
   B.   In the event of failure to comply voluntarily with the suspension
order, the city shall take steps as deemed necessary including immediate
severance of storm drain connections. The industrial/commercial user shall be
liable for all costs incurred by the city in terminating storm drain service.
Storm drain service may be reinstituted by the city after the actual or
threatened discharge has been eliminated. A detailed written statement,
submitted by the industrial/commercial user, describing the cause of the
harmful contribution and the measure to prevent any future occurrence shall be
submitted to the public works director within fifteen (15) working days of the
date of storm drain service termination.
   C.   The authorized representative may adopt a proposed compliance schedule
submitted by the user, or may adopt a revised compliance schedule if, in the
judgment of the authorized representative, the compliance schedule would allow
the user to cause harm to the receiving waters and/or city storm drain
facilities.
   D.   The authorized representative will notify the user of the adopted
compliance schedule in a timely manner. The authorized representative shall not
adopt a compliance schedule which extends beyond applicable federal guidelines.
(Ord. 2274 § 1, 1995)
13.54.250: LEGAL ACTION:
   A.   If any person violates the provisions of this chapter, federal or state
NPDES permit, city permit requirement or any order of the city, the city
attorney may commence an action for appropriate legal, equitable or injunctive
relief in the municipal or superior court of the county.
   B.   In addition to the penalties provided in this chapter, the city may
recover all reasonable attorney fees, court costs, court reporter fees and
other expenses of litigation by appropriate suit of law against the person(s)
found to have violated any of the provisions of this chapter, NPDES permit,
city permit or the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued thereunder.
(Ord. 2274 § 1, 1995)
13.54.260: CIVIL PENALTIES:
   A.   The business license of any industrial/commercial user who is found to
have violated an administrative order to comply with any provisions of this
chapter, NPDES permit or city permit and the orders, rules, regulations and
permits under this chapter may be revoked. The industrial/commercial user may
also be fined a sum not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) per day for
each offense.
   B.   Each violation shall be considered a separate and distinct offense, and
each day on which a violation shall occur or continue shall be deemed a
separate and distinct offense. In addition to the penalties provided in this
chapter, the city may recover all reasonable attorney fees, court costs, court
reporters' fees and other expenses of litigation by appropriate suit at law
against the person found to have violated this chapter, NPDES permit, city
permit, or the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued under this
chapter. (Ord. 2274 § 1, 1995)
13.54.270: CRIMINAL PENALTIES:
   A.   Any person who wilfully violates any provision of this chapter or any
permit condition; who knowingly violates any stop work order, cease and desist
order, termination or immediate termination order, prohibition or effluent
limitation; who knowingly makes false statements, representation or
certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed
or required to be maintained pursuant to this chapter or NPDES permit; or who
falsifies, tampers with or knowingly causes inaccuracy in any monitoring device
or method required or authorized under this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor
which, upon conviction, is punishable in accordance with state law.
   B.   Each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for every
day during any portion of which any violation of any provisions of this chapter
is committed, continued or permitted by such person, and shall be punishable
for that violation as provided by this chapter. (Ord. 2274 § 1, 1995)
13.54.280: COMPENSATION FOR DAMAGES:
Any person who damages monitoring equipment, detrimentally affects the water
quality of the United States, significantly increases maintenance of, requires
nonroutine inspection or sampling of, causes blockages of, damage to, or
interference with storm drain facilities, or causes any other damages,
including the imposition of fines or penalties on the city by federal, state or
local regulatory agencies, shall be liable to the city for all damages and
additional costs, including fines and penalties, occasioned thereby. An
administrative fee, which shall be based on the city's current overhead cost
allocation percentage, shall be added to these charges and shall be payable to
the city within thirty (30) calendar days of invoicing. (Ord. 2274 § 1, 1995)
13.54.290: NOTICE TO REMEDIATE:
Whenever the authorized representative finds any nonpermitted, prohibited
substance discharge or any other material of any kind, in or upon the sidewalk
abutting or adjoining any parcel of land, or upon any parcel of land or
grounds, which may result in an increase in pollutants entering the city storm
drain system, the authorized representative may give notice to remove any
nonpermitted, prohibited substance discharge that the city may provide. The
industrial/commercial user who receives such a notice shall undertake the
remediation activities as described in the notice. (Ord. 2274 § 1, 1995)
13.54.300: NPDES PROGRAM REGULATORY FEES:
   NPDES program regulatory fees shall be collected on an annual basis along
with, and as a condition of issuance of, the city's business license tax for
those businesses requiring regular compliance inspections pursuant to this
chapter. Affected businesses shall include industrial businesses subject to the
California statewide general NPDES permit for stormwater discharges associated
with industrial activities, commercial businesses listed in the area wide urban
stormwater runoff permit, and other industrial and commercial sites/sources
that the city determines may contribute a significant pollutant load to the
municipal separate storm sewer system. The NPDES program regulatory fee shall
be established in an amount to pay for the city's costs of inspection time, and
for preparation of inspection reports, review of written stormwater pollution
prevention plans, stormwater sampling activities, general program compliance,
education and enforcement response and follow up as needed. The NPDES program
regulatory fee shall be established by resolution of the city council and shall
be subject to periodic review and revision by resolution of the city council.
(Ord. 2742, 2010)
13.54.310: RECOVERY OF ADDITIONAL INSPECTION COSTS:
If any person fails to meet the requirements of the stormwater pollution
prevention plan (SWPPP) and additional site inspections are therefore required,
such persons shall be liable for the costs for such additional inspections
incurred by the city. These costs may be recovered through the forfeiture of
permit deposits, or through the requirement for additional inspection deposits
to cover permit inspection and administration expenses. The city may also
pursue any civil action deemed necessary against the owner contractor to
recover excess SWPPP inspection and compliance costs. (Ord. 2742, 2010)
13.54.320: LIENS:
Costs of enforcement of this chapter, including, but not limited to, costs of
investigation, sampling and monitoring costs, and unpaid administrative fines
and civil penalties, shall constitute a lien against the real property on which
the violation occurs and on the real property of any person who violates this
chapter until such lien is satisfied. The lien may be recorded and enforced in
the same manner as a judgment lien. (Ord. 2742, 2010)
CHAPTER 13.56
SEWER SERVICE OUTSIDE CITY
SECTION:
13.56.010: Septage Loads
13.56.010: SEPTAGE LOADS:
Septic tank loads originating outside the city's corporate boundaries may be
discharged into the city's wastewater treatment plant or sewage collection
system subject to regulations promulgated by the city's municipal utilities
director, including a limit on the number of loads per day, to protect the
health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Redlands. (Ord. 2284 § 1, 1995)
CHAPTER 13.58
RECYCLED WATER
SECTION:
13.58.010: Purpose
13.58.020: Definitions
13.58.030: Policy
13.58.040: Priority
13.58.050: Director
13.58.060: Application
13.58.070: Recycled Water Master Plan; Service And Use
13.58.080: Authorized Uses
13.58.090: Conditions Of Service
13.58.100: Other Applicable Laws
13.58.110: Recycled Water Service Application
13.58.120: Recycled Water Use Agreement
13.58.130: Size, Location And Installation Of Service Lines
13.58.140: Service Connection Limitations
13.58.150: Service Pressure
13.58.160: Relocation Of Recycled Water Service Lines
13.58.170: Protective Measures
13.58.180: Types Of Protection
13.58.190: Testing And Maintenance Of Backflow Prevention Devices
13.58.200: Facilities Design
13.58.210: Construction
13.58.220: Emergency Connection To Recycled Water System From Potable Water
System
13.58.230: Off Site Facilities
13.58.240: On Site Facilities
13.58.250: Monitoring And Inspection
13.58.260: Maintenance Responsibility
13.58.010: PURPOSE:
   A.   The purpose of this chapter is to establish procedures, specifications
and limitations for the safe and orderly development and operation of recycled
water facilities and systems, and to establish rules and regulations governing
such use.
   B.   Recycled water use is regulated by the California regional water
quality control board (RWQCB), Santa Ana region. In accordance with waste
discharge requirements for water reclamation projects, the RWQCB requires
control mechanisms to regulate facilities distributing recycled water.
Permission to use recycled water is based on city's ability to adequately treat
domestic wastewater to the point that the recycled water meets the requirements
of title 22 of the California Code of Regulations, which were adopted to ensure
proper health protection and specify the treatment to meet the needs of the
intended applications. (Ord. 2615 § 1, 2005)
13.58.020: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following terms and
phrases, as used in this chapter, in addition to the definitions set forth in
title 22 of the California Code of Regulations, shall have the meanings
hereinafter designated:
   AWWA: The American Water Works Association.
   AGRICULTURAL USE: Water used for the production of crops and/or livestock.
   AIR GAP SEPARATION: A physical break between a supply pipe and a receiving
vessel. The air gap shall be at least double the diameter of the supply pipe,
measured vertically from the flood rim of the receiving vessel to the supply
pipe; however, in no case shall this separation be less than one inch (1").
   APPLICANT: Any person, group, firm, partnership, corporation, association or
agency that applies for recycled water service.
   APPROVED SITE: A site with well defined boundaries designated in a recycled
water use agreement for the use of recycled water.
   APPROVED USE: An application of recycled water in a manner, and for a
purpose, designated in a recycled water use agreement in compliance with
applicable state and local laws and regulations.
AS BUILT DRAWINGS: The record drawings that show the completed facilities as
constructed or modified.
   AUXILIARY WATER SUPPLY: Any water supply on or available to the property
other than the city's potable water.
   CITY COUNCIL: The city council of the city.
   COMMERCIAL/INDUSTRIAL USE: The water used for toilets, urinals, decorative
fountains, decorative indoor and outdoor landscape, industrial processes such
as rinsing, washing, cooling, flushing, circulation or construction; and other
uses approved by the city.
   CROSS CONNECTION: Any unapproved and/or unprotected, actual or potential,
connection between any part of a potable water system and any equipment, source
or system containing water or other substances not approved as safe and potable
for human consumption, as defined by title 17 of the California Code of
Regulations.
   DHS: The California department of health services.
   DIRECT BENEFICIAL USE: The use of recycled water which has been transported
from the point of production to the point of use, without an intervening
discharge to waters of the state.
   DIRECTOR: The municipal utilities director of the city or his or her
authorized representative.
   DISCHARGE: Any release or distribution of recycled water to a use area or
disposal site/mechanism. Such discharges are subject to approval by the city.
   DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY: A double check (DC) valve that, at a minimum,
conforms to the AWWA standard C506-78 (R83) for double check valve type
backflow prevention devices.
   INFILTRATION RATE: The rate at which water penetrates the soil surface and
enters the soil profile.
   LANDSCAPE IMPOUNDMENT: A body of water containing recycled water, which is
used for aesthetic or irrigation purposes and which is not intended for public
contact or ingestion.
   LANDSCAPE IRRIGATION/USE: Recycled water used for the propagation and
maintenance of trees, shrubs, ground cover and turf used for erosion control
and aesthetic value, not for resale/profit purposes.
   NONPOTABLE WATER: Water that has not been treated for, or is not acceptable
for, human consumption in conformance with federal, state and local water
standards. Nonpotable water includes recycled water.
   OFF SITE FACILITIES: All existing or proposed facilities under the control
of the city, from the sources of supply to the point of connection with the
customer's on site facilities, up to and including the city's recycled water
meter and meter box.
ON SITE FACILITIES: All existing or proposed facilities within property under
the control of the customer, normally downstream of the city's recycled water
meter and meter box.
ON SITE RECYCLED WATER SUPERVISOR: A qualified person designated by a recycled
water user and approved by the city to be responsible for the safe and
efficient operation of the user's recycled water system. This person shall be
knowledgeable in the operation of the recycled water system and in the
application of federal, state and local laws and regulations governing the use
of recycled water.
   POC: The point of connection at the recycled water service meter.
   PONDING: The retention of recycled water on the ground surface or humanmade
surface for a period of time following the cessation of an approved recycled
water use activity, such that potential hazard to the public health may result,
as determined by regulatory agencies.
   POTABLE WATER: Water which conforms to federal, state and local drinking
water standards.
   RWQCB: The California regional water quality control board, Santa Ana
region.
   RECREATIONAL IMPOUNDMENT: A body of recycled water used for recreational
activities including, but not limited to, fishing, boating and/or swimming.
Allowable uses will depend on treatment level of the recycled water.
   RECYCLED WATER: Water which, as a result of treatment of wastewater, is
suitable for direct beneficial use or a controlled use that otherwise would not
occur. The treatment of wastewater is accomplished in accordance with the
criteria set forth in title 22 of the California Code of Regulations.
   RECYCLED WATER FACILITIES: The system, structures and appurtenant
facilities, used in the treatment, storage, pumping, transmission and
distribution of recycled water.
   RECYCLED WATER USE AGREEMENT: An agreement between the user and the city to
use recycled water in compliance with all applicable laws and regulations.
   REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE: A reduced pressure
principle backflow prevention device that, as a minimum, conforms to the AWWA
standard C506-78 (R83) for reduced pressure principle type backflow prevention
devices which is herein incorporated by reference.
   REGULATORY AGENCY: Any public entity legally constituted by federal, state
or local law to protect health and water quality.
   RUNOFF: The flow of water along natural or manmade surfaces away from the
designated use area.
   SECONDARY EFFLUENT: Any oxidized wastewater that has been treated by gravity
sedimentation to remove settled solids remaining after the primary biological
treatment process.
   SERVICE: The delivery of recycled water to a user.
   SERVICE CONNECTION: City facilities between the city recycled water
distribution system and the customer's meter including, but not limited to, the
meter, meter box, valves and piping equipment.
   STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS: The specifications approved by the city for
construction of recycled water facilities.
   TERTIARY EFFLUENT: Any secondary effluent which has been filtered and
disinfected and meets all applicable requirements under title 22 of the
California Code of Regulations. Allowable uses for tertiary effluent shall
include body contact and irrigation of human food crops.
   UNAUTHORIZED DISCHARGE: Any release of recycled water that violates any
applicable federal, state, or local law or regulations.
   USE AREA: The specific area designated to be served with recycled water
through on site recycled water facilities.
   USER: Any person, group, firm, partnership, corporation, association or
agency accepting recycled water from the city's recycled water facilities for
use in accordance with this chapter, and the owners of the property when such
use is provided.
   WINDBLOWN SPRAY: Any dispersed, airborne particles of recycled water capable
of being transmitted through the air to a location other than that for which
the direct application of recycled water is approved. (Ord. 2615 § 1, 2005)
13.58.030: POLICY:
It is the policy of the city that recycled water be used for any purposes
approved for recycled water use, when it is economically, technically, and
institutionally feasible. Recycled water shall be the primary source of supply
for commercial and industrial uses, whenever available and/or feasible. Use of
potable water for commercial and industrial uses shall be contrary to city
policy; shall not be considered the most beneficial use of a natural resource;
and shall be avoided to the maximum extent feasible. (Ord. 2615 § 1, 2005)
13.58.040: PRIORITY:
Connection to the recycled water system shall be provided on a first come,
first served basis, as long as infrastructure and recycled water supplies are
available. (Ord. 2615 § 1, 2005)
13.58.050: DIRECTOR:
Except as otherwise provided herein, the director shall administer, implement
and enforce the provisions of this chapter. The director may, at his or her
discretion, delegate any or all of these powers and duties. (Ord. 2615 § 1,
2005)
13.58.060: APPLICATION:
The provisions of this chapter apply to the use of recycled water by customers
of the city. Recycled water service shall be provided to a specific property
when related distribution facilities are completed and service becomes
available. (Ord. 2615 § 1, 2005)
13.58.070: RECYCLED WATER MASTER PLAN; SERVICE AND USE:
   A.   General:
      1.   The city shall prepare and adopt a water recycling master plan to
encourage and develop the use of recycled water. The master plan shall be
reviewed and updated not less than every five (5) years and shall designate
current and potential areas for recycled water use. The master plan shall be
prepared in accordance with all requirements of the DHS and RWQCB and shall
include an evaluation of the location and size of present and future
reclamation treatment plants, distribution pipelines, pump stations, reservoirs
and other related facilities, including cost estimates and potential financing
methods.
      2.   The city council shall review the master plan and recommend where
water service should be made with recycled water in place of potable water.
Where it is determined recycled water is, or will be, available within five (5)
years, the city may request modifications to existing on site water facilities
and require construction of recycled water systems in new developments.
      3.   The city council may enter into agreements with other cities and/or
agencies to facilitate recycled water use service areas within the
jurisdictions of those entities.
   B.   Existing Potable Water Service:
      1.   The city council may make determinations of areas where existing
potable water use should be replaced with recycled water use.
      2.   A notice of the determination to use recycled water shall be mailed
to the current owner, explaining the reasons for use and resultant procedures
needed to facilitate recycled water use.
   C.   New Recycled Water Service:
      1.   Upon submittal by an applicant for a subdivision map, conditional
use permit or commission review and approval, or upon a request for recycled
water service, the director shall make preliminary determinations if recycled
water service can be provided to the property which is the subject of the
application.
      2.   The director may require the use of recycled water for approved
uses, and refuse or otherwise restrict potable water service when recycled
water is available and approved for use. (Ord. 2615 § 1, 2005)
13.58.080: AUTHORIZED USES:
Uses of recycled water include only those uses approved by DHS and for which
title 22 of the California Code of Regulations provides treatment requirements.
Each such use will be considered for approval on a case by case basis. Prior to
approval, the user must comply with the requirements of this chapter and any
other requirements imposed by the city, DHS and any other regulatory agency
having jurisdiction over such use. (Ord. 2615 § 1, 2005)
13.58.090: CONDITIONS OF SERVICE:
   A.   Prior to obtaining recycled water service, the user shall enter into a
recycled water use agreement with the city. Recycled water use shall be subject
to terms and conditions established in the agreement, and in accordance with
this chapter, and other applicable laws and regulations. If any of the
conditions of service are not satisfied at all times, the recycled water use
agreement may be terminated by the city council after which all recycled water
service shall cease.
   B.   The city shall not be liable for any damage caused by recycled water or
resulting from:
      1.   Defective plumbing.
      2.   Broken or faulty services or recycled water mains.
      3.   On site facilities failures.
      4.   High or low pressure conditions.
      5.   Interruptions of service.
      6.   Any inappropriate or illegal use or management practices.
   C.   All recycled water will be provided to the user in the conditions and
quantity specified in the recycled water use agreement.
   D.   Recycled water use will not be subject to the same restrictions as
potable water during drought conditions and will be supplied as available.
   E.   Recycled water service may be terminated whenever the quality of the
recycled water does not comply with the requirements of regulatory agencies, or
at any time the provisions of this chapter, or the conditions specified in the
recycled water use agreement, are violated. (Ord. 2615 § 1, 2005)
13.58.100: OTHER APPLICABLE LAWS:
Other laws, regulations and guidelines that may be applied by the director to
govern the use of recycled water, unless excepted by the recycled water use
agreement, within the city include:
   A.   Regulations that deal with backflow prevention, billing, deposits,
penalties, delinquencies and metering for potable water as established in
chapters 13.12, 13.16 and 13.20 of this title.
   B.   Water reclamation (title 22 of the California Code of Regulations).
   C.   Regulations relating to cross connections.
   D.   Guidelines for distribution of nonpotable water (California- Nevada
section AWWA). (Ord. 2615 § 1, 2005)
13.58.110: RECYCLED WATER SERVICE APPLICATION:
The steps for obtaining recycled water service are as follows:
   A.   The user shall complete and submit a recycled water service
application, including existing facility "as built" drawings or proposed
facility plans as appropriate, description of where and how recycled water use
is proposed, and any other information pertinent to the use of recycled water
as requested by the director.
   B.   The user prepares an engineering report describing proposed/requested
recycled water use(s). The engineering report shall be consistent with DHS
guidelines.
   C.   The completed engineering report shall be forwarded to DHS for review
and approval.
   D.   The user and the city will address any concerns that the DHS may have
regarding the engineering report and revise the report accordingly.
   E.   After DHS approves the engineering report, the user shall enter into a
recycled water use agreement with the city, and pay all applicable fees.
   F.   The director will schedule a start up test of on site recycled water
system to ensure that cross connections do not exist.
   G.   Upon the successful completion of the test, the director may authorize
recycled water service to begin. (Ord. 2615 § 1, 2005)
13.58.120: RECYCLED WATER USE AGREEMENT:
Recycled water use agreements shall be subject to the following conditions:
   A.   The applicant shall pay any specified connection fees, service line and
other charges and comply with the requirements prescribed by this chapter and
any additional requirements required by other agencies governing recycled water
use.
   B.   To maintain acceptable operating conditions throughout the recycled
water system, the director may schedule recycled water use for specific
applications. Such scheduling may involve programming deliveries to different
users and/or to various portions of a single user's on site system. Any
scheduling shall consider the operating constraints of the affected users.
   C.   The director may temporarily terminate recycled water service at any
time recycled water produced by the city reclamation plant does not meet the
requirements of regulatory agencies. Recycled water service would, in such
case, be restored when the recycled water meets such requirements.
   D.   At a minimum, a recycled water use agreement shall include the
following:
      1.   Names and addresses of owner of the approved site and the user of
the recycled water.
      2.   A statement that no changes in the proposed system will be
undertaken without amending the agreement.
      3.   A statement that the user recognizes potential penalties for
violation of this chapter and any regulatory agencies.
      4.   A copy of the DHS approved engineering report.
      5.   Specific quantity of recycled water to be used, including estimated
average annual use in acre-feet, and the maximum gallons per minute (gpm)
needed at the point of connection (POC) as shown on the plans.
      6.   Approved uses.
      7.   A statement that the agreement may be unilaterally canceled or
amended by the city if:
         a.   A change of recycled water use occurs.
         b.   A change in the piping system has been implemented without prior
approval.
         c.   A violation of this chapter occurs and results in a system
turnoff.
      8.   Rates, fees, charges and deposits. The rates for use of recycled
water service shall be recommended by the director and established by the city
council, and shall include consideration of cost of service, capital recovery
and return on investment. (Ord. 2615 § 1, 2005)
13.58.130: SIZE, LOCATION AND INSTALLATION OF SERVICE LINES:
Recycled water service lines shall be extended by the property owner/developer
to a curb line or property line of the user's property, abutting on a public
street, highway, road or city easement in which recycled water mains are
installed. The size and location and/or type of recycled water service lines,
service connections, meters, backflow protection devices and any/all other
appurtenances are subject to approval by the city. (Ord. 2615 § 1, 2005)
13.58.140: SERVICE CONNECTION LIMITATIONS:
Recycled water service shall be subject to the following conditions:
   A.   A recycled water service connection and its corresponding meter shall
not be used to supply property of a different owner, or to supply property of
the same owner across a road, street or other public right of way. When a
property provided with a recycled water connection and corresponding meter is
subdivided, such connection and meter shall be considered as serving the lot or
parcel of land on which the meter is located. Additional recycled water mains
and/or recycled water service lines shall be required for all subdivided lots
in accordance with this chapter.
   B.   Private irrigation systems for homeowners' associations and other
developments where landscaping around homes and in common areas are served with
one meter, shall not cross public roads, easements or other public rights of
way without prior city approval.
   C.   All recycled water used on any property where a meter is installed
shall pass through the meter. Users shall be responsible and charged for all
recycled water passing through their meters. (Ord. 2615 § 1, 2005)
13.58.150: SERVICE PRESSURE:
Whenever possible, the city will operate the recycled water system at a
slightly lower pressure than the potable water system. This will cause potable
water to flow in the recycled water system in the event of a cross connection.
(Ord. 2615 § 1, 2005)
13.58.160: RELOCATION OF RECYCLED WATER SERVICE LINES:
Should a recycled water service line installed according to the directions of
user be of the wrong size, or installed in the wrong location or depth, the
cost of relocation or removal shall be paid for by the user. (Ord. 2615 § 1,
2005)
13.58.170: PROTECTIVE MEASURES:
The following provisions are intended to protect the city's potable water
supplies against actual, undiscovered, unauthorized or potential cross
connections to the user's recycled water system. These provisions are in
addition to, not in lieu of, the controls and requirements of other regulatory
agencies. These provisions are in accordance with title 17 of the California
Code of Regulations.
   A.   Installation; Maintenance: Approved backflow prevention devices on the
city's potable water services to the property as required in these provisions,
shall be provided, installed, tested and maintained according to chapter 13.20
of this title. These devices shall be located on the property served
immediately downstream of the meter. All devices shall be readily accessible
for testing and maintenance and no device shall be submerged at any time.
   B.   User To Provide Information: When a request for recycled water service
is initiated, the user shall provide sufficient information, including plumbing
and building plans, to enable the director and other regulatory agencies to
determine the level of backflow protection required. The proper backflow
protection, as determined by the director and such regulatory agencies, shall
then be installed and tested according to chapter 13.20 of this title before
recycled water service is provided.
   C.   Change Of Tenant: Each time there is a change of tenant on any
commercial or industrial property, the user shall notify the director
immediately. The director will then reassess the level of protection required.
In addition, any alterations to existing on site facilities that may affect
required protection level shall be reported immediately to the director.
   D.   Inspection Of Property: At their discretion, representatives of any
health agency having jurisdiction, and the director, may inspect any property
provided recycled water service by the city. The inspection shall serve to
determine if any actual or potential cross connections exist. The user shall
provide full cooperation in facilitating the inspection.
   E.   Portable Water Supplies: Where protection is required, an approved
backflow protection device for potable water supplies shall be provided as
follows:
      1.   Each city water service connection that supplies potable water to a
property having an auxiliary water supply (including recycled water) that is
not accepted as a potable source by the director, and/or is not approved for
potable use by the DHS, shall be protected against backflow from the property
into the city potable water system.
      2.   Each city water service connection supplying potable or recycled
water to a property on which any substance is handled in such a fashion as to
permit entry into the city water systems (potable or recycled) from the
property shall be protected against backflow. This shall include, but not
limited to, the handling of fertilizers, process waters, waters originating
from any of the city water systems that have been subject to deterioration in
quality, and agricultural use.
      3.   Approved backflow devices shall be installed where property has
intricate plumbing and piping arrangements or where not all portions of the
property are readily accessible for inspection.
      4.   Appropriate backflow protection may be required at property where
there has been a history of cross connections being reestablished.
   F.   Other Measures:
      1.   Water meters used for recycled water service shall be tagged or
color coded purple, color pantone 512 or 522, or otherwise distinguished as
such per AWWA standards. These meters shall not be interchanged or used for
potable water service after repairs and/or meter testing has been performed.
      2.   Periodic inspection by the city of the recycled water facilities
will determine if all identifying items are still clearly discernable. If not,
they shall be replaced, repaired or refurbished, as needed, by the user. These
items include:
         a.   Warning tags.
         b.   Painted surfaces.
         c.   Warning tape.
         d.   Identification tape.
         e.   Covers, caps, signs.
         f.   Other items that indicate recycled water is being used.
      3.   To determine the existence of any cross connections or backflow
conditions into the potable water system, periodic testing by DHS approved
methods will be performed by the director and/or other regulatory agencies.
      4.   In the event of contamination or pollution of a city potable water
system due to a cross connection or other failure, DHS and the director shall
be promptly notified by telephone so that appropriate and immediate measures
may be taken to correct the problem.
      5.   The state and county health departments and the director shall be
kept informed by written document of the identity of the person responsible for
the user's recycled water system on all property governed by these rules and
regulations. At each authorized use area, an "on site" recycled water
supervisor shall be designated. This supervisor shall be responsible for:
         a.   The installation and use of all components of the on site
recycled water system(s).
         b.   Prevention of cross connections.
         c.   Change in use of recycled water.
   G.   When the recycled water uses or conditions, as determined by the
director or other regulatory agency, represent a clear and immediate hazard to
the city potable and/or recycled water supply that cannot be immediately
removed or corrected, the director shall terminate recycled water use.
Conditions or uses that create a basis for termination include, but are not
limited to, refusal to install, test or repair a required backflow prevention
device. (Ord. 2615 § 1, 2005)
13.58.180: TYPES OF PROTECTION:
The level of protection required shall be related to the degree of potential
hazard that exists on the property served, and will be determined by the
director. (Ord. 2615 § 1, 2005)
13.58.190: TESTING AND MAINTENANCE OF BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES:
The user is responsible for testing all backflow prevention devices and
maintaining the devices in a satisfactory operating condition. Testing shall be
done at least once a year by a San Bernardino County certified backflow
prevention tester. More frequent testing may be required if successive
inspections indicate repeated failures. The backflow prevention devices shall
be repaired, overhauled and/or replaced whenever they are found to be
defective. These devices shall also be tested immediately after they are
installed, relocated or repaired. All inspections, tests and repairs shall be
performed at the user's expense. The user shall maintain records of all such
tests, repairs and overhauls. These records shall be submitted to the director,
annually, and made available to DHS, on request. (Ord. 2615 § 1, 2005)
13.58.200: FACILITIES DESIGN:
   A.   Plans And Specifications: The design of off site facilities, including
the preparation of plans and construction specifications shall be under the
responsibility of an engineer registered in the state of California. The design
of user (on site) facilities that will use recycled water, and preparation of
plans and construction specifications, shall be stamped and signed by a state
of California registered landscape architect or civil engineer, unless
otherwise approved by the director.
   B.   As Built Drawings; Testing: Before the director grants final acceptance
of any system using recycled water, as built drawings of the system shall be
provided. The installed system shall be tested in accordance with the city
standard specifications to ensure that the system is in full compliance with
theses rules and regulations.
   C.   Recycled Water Systems: All off site and on site recycled water
facilities shall be designed and constructed according to the requirements,
conditions and standards as adopted in the city standard specifications to
ensure that the system is in full compliance with this chapter. Recycled water
systems, both on site and off site, shall be separate and independent of any
potable water system.
   D.   Dual Or Multiple Water Systems: Where the property contains dual or
multiple water systems, the exposed portions of pipelines shall be identified
at sufficient intervals.
   E.   Irrigated Areas: Areas irrigated with recycled water must be kept
completely separated from domestic water wells and reservoirs. Recycled water
shall not be applied or allowed to migrate to within fifty feet (50') of any
well used for domestic supply. No impoundment of recycled water shall be
located within one hundred feet (100') of any domestic water well, unless it
can be demonstrated that special circumstances justify lesser distances to be
acceptable.
   F.   On Site Facilities:
      1.   The user for the property shall be responsible for all costs
associated with on site recycled water facilities.
      2.   When city standards and specifications require a higher quality
material, equipment, design or construction method than that required by other
governing laws or regulations, the city standards and specifications shall take
precedence.
   G.   Future Availability: In areas where recycled water is not immediately
available when the property is ready for construction, and if the city has
determined that recycled water will be supplied in the future, on site
facilities shall be designed to use recycled water. Provisions shall be made to
allow for connection to the city off site recycled water facilities, when
available. In the interim, potable or other suitable water may be supplied to
the on site facilities through an "interim service connection".
   H.   Conditions Of Interim Service:
      1.   The city anticipates recycled water will be available to the
property within five (5) years of the time interim service is initiated.
      2.   The user for the property must sign a recycled water use agreement.
      3.   The user for the property must agree to perform or pay for all work
necessary to remove the interim connection and make connections to the
permanent recycled water system at the time the recycled water system is
installed.
      4.   An approved backflow prevention device is required on the interim
service. The backflow prevention device shall be at the point of connection
with the interim supply system and a part of the on site recycled water
facilities.
      5.   Future recycled water users will pay for the following:
         a.   Cost of constructing and abandoning the interim service and cost
of constructing the recycled water service.
         b.   Applicable recycled water fees at the time service becomes
available.
         c.   Applicable interim water rates for the type of water delivered
through the interim service.
      6.   When recycled water is available to the property, an inspection of
the on site facilities will be conducted by the director to verify that the
facilities are still in compliance with the recycled water use agreement.
Recycled water service shall be provided on verification of compliance. If the
facilities are not in compliance, the director shall notify the user to make
any necessary corrections. (Ord. 2615 § 1, 2005)
13.58.210: CONSTRUCTION:
   A.   Construction of all new recycled water facilities shall comply with
city standards and specifications and the AWWA construction guidelines for
recycled water facilities.
   B.   Where it is planned that an existing nonrecycled water system shall be
converted to a recycled water facility, the facilities to be converted to
recycled water shall be investigated in detail at the user's expense to
determine the measures required to bring the system into full compliance with
this chapter. No existing potable water facilities shall be connected to or
incorporated into the recycled water system without city and DHS approval.
   C.   If, due to on site failure of the recycled water system, the director
determines that it is necessary to convert on site facilities from a recycled
water supply to a potable water supply, it shall be the responsibility of the
user to pay all costs for such conversion. Conversion costs may include, but
not be limited to, the following:
      1.   Isolation of the recycled water supply service shall be removed and
plugged at the city main or abandoned in a manner approved by the director.
      2.   Installation of approved backflow prevention devices, as determined
by the director, on all potable and/or other water meter connections.
      3.   Removal of any/all special recycled water quick couplers. The user
shall be responsible for replacement with quick couplers approved for potable
water systems.
      4.   Notification to all on site personnel involved.
      5.   Removal of all warning labels/signs.
      6.   Installation of any/all potable water facilities and payment of any
associated capital improvement fees, as established in chapters 3.44 and 3.48
of this code and chapter 13.44 of this title.
      7.   System flushing, disinfecting, decontamination, and water quality
analyses, as required by the city and/or other regulatory agencies. (Ord. 2615
§ 1, 2005)
13.58.220: EMERGENCY CONNECTION TO RECYCLED WATER SYSTEM FROM POTABLE WATER
SYSTEM:
If the director determines an emergency exists where all or parts of the
recycled water system are unable to provide recycled water, the director may
approve an emergency temporary connection to the potable water system. Before
such emergency temporary connection is made, the portion without recycled water
shall be isolated by an air gap separation from the remainder of the recycled
water system. This isolation shall occur at either individual services or on
the off site system, as determined by the director. An approved backflow
prevention device shall be installed on the potable lines in accordance with
chapter 13.20 of this title. The emergency temporary connection shall be
removed before connection to the recycled water system is reestablished.
Reestablishment of recycled water service must be inspected and approved by the
director prior to resuming delivery of recycled water. (Ord. 2615 § 1, 2005)
13.58.230: OFF SITE FACILITIES:
The city shall be responsible for the operation, maintenance and surveillance
of all off site recycled water systems. This includes, but is not limited to,
recycled water pipelines, valves, connections, storage facilities, and other
related equipment and property up to and including the meter. Only city
personnel and their representatives shall operate, adjust, change, alter, move
or relocate any portion of their respective off site recycled water facilities.
(Ord. 2615 § 1, 2005)
13.58.240: ON SITE FACILITIES:
   A.   General:
      1.   The operation, surveillance, repair and maintenance of all user
recycled water facilities are the responsibility of the user and his designated
"on site" recycled water supervisor.
      2.   The director shall have the right to enter the user's property to
monitor and inspect all on site recycled water facilities. Where necessary,
keys and/or lock combinations shall be issued to the director to provide such
access during hours of recycled water system operation.
   B.   Responsibilities: The user shall have the following responsibilities
pertaining to operation of on site facilities:
      1.   Ensure that all operations personnel are trained and familiarized
with the use of recycled water.
      2.   Furnish their operations personnel with maintenance instructions,
irrigation schedules, controller charts and as built drawings to ensure proper
operation in accordance with the on site facilities design and this chapter.
      3.   Prepare and submit to the director one reproducible set of as built
drawings.
      4.   Notify the director of all updates or proposed changes,
modifications, or additions to the on site facilities and operations for review
and approval prior to construction or implementation. All updates and proposed
changes shall comply with this chapter, the recycled water use agreement and
any other applicable laws and regulations.
      5.   Ensure that the operation and maintenance of all recycled water
facilities remain in accordance with this chapter, the recycled water use
agreement and any other applicable laws and regulations.
      6.   Operate and control the system in order to prevent direct human
consumption of recycled water and to control and limit runoff. The user for the
property shall be responsible for any and all subsequent uses of the recycled
water. Operation and control measures to be utilized in this regard shall
include, where appropriate, but not be limited to:
         a.   Minimizing discharge onto areas not under control of the user so
as to minimize public contact. Full circle sprinklers shall not be used
adjacent to sidewalks, roadways and property lines in order to confine the
discharge to the use area.
         b.   Operating the on site recycled water facilities during periods of
minimal human use of the service area, and allowing a maximum dry out time
before the irrigated area will be used by the public.
         c.   Providing adequate first aid kits on the property, and promptly
treating all cuts and abrasions to prevent infection. If infection is likely, a
physician should be consulted.
         d.   Taking any other precautionary measures to minimize direct
contact with recycled water. User's employees, residents, and the public should
not be subjected to recycled water sprays.
         e.   Applying recycled water at a rate that does not exceed the
infiltration rate of the soil. Where varying soil types are present, the design
and operation of the recycled water facilities shall be compatible with the
lowest infiltration rate of the soils present.
         f.   Reporting to the director any/all failures in the recycled water
system that cause unauthorized discharge of recycled water.
         g.   Protecting all drinking fountains located within the approved use
area, by location and/or structure from contact with recycled water to the
maximum extent possible. Windblown spray, direct contact by irrigation
application or other approved uses are considered sources of recycled water.
Protection shall be by design, construction practice or system operation.
   C.   Prohibitions: The user shall enforce the following prohibitions:
      1.   Cross connections resulting from the use of recycled water or from
the physical presence of a recycled water service, whether by design,
construction practice or system operation, are prohibited.
      2.   Discharge of recycled water for any purposes, in areas other than
those specifically approved in the recycled water use agreement, and without
the prior approval of the director, is prohibited.
      3.   Use or installation of permanent hose bibs on any user water system
that presently operates or is designed to operate with recycled water is
prohibited.
      4.   Conditions that directly or indirectly cause recycled water to pond
either within or outside of the approved use area, whether by design,
construction practice, or system operation, are prohibited, unless designed
specifically for ponding, and approved by the director.
      5.   Conditions that directly or indirectly cause runoff of recycled
water onto areas outside of approved use areas, whether by design, construction
practice, or system operation, are prohibited.
      6.   Use of recycled water for any purposes other than those specifically
approved in the recycled water use agreement, and without the prior approval of
the director, is prohibited.
      7.   Conditions that directly or indirectly permit windblown spray to
pass outside of the approved area, whether by design, construction practice or
system operation, are prohibited. (Ord. 2615 § 1, 2005)
13.58.250: MONITORING AND INSPECTION:
The director will monitor and inspect the entire recycled distribution
facility, including both off site and on site facilities. The director will
conduct monitoring programs, maintain records as deemed necessary, inspect on
site facilities for compliance with these rules and regulations, and provide
reports as requested by DHS. For these purposes, the director will have the
right to enter the user's property during hours of recycled water system
operation to inspect on site recycled water facilities and approved use areas,
to verify that the user's irrigation practices conform with this chapter and
the recycled water use agreement. (Ord. 2615 § 1, 2005)
13.58.260: MAINTENANCE RESPONSIBILITY:
   A.   The user is responsible for maintaining all on site facilities that are
under the ownership of parties other than the city.
   B.   No person shall place, dispose, deposit or permit the placement,
disposal, deposit of oil, toxic, hazardous or contaminated liquid or waste,
trash, soil, building materials or any other substances, objects or
obstructions in, on, or around meter boxes or other city facilities. No person
shall allow or permit meter boxes or other city facilities to become obstructed
or obscured by trees, shrubs, plants or in any other manner so as to impede use
or access to such facilities; the city may accomplish the cleaning and removal
at the user's expense. The director will provide reasonable notice to the user
before assessing the charge. (Ord. 2615 § 1, 2005)
DIVISION III. OUTSIDE CITY UTILITIES
CHAPTER 13.60
UTILITY CONNECTIONS FOR RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT OUTSIDE CITY BOUNDARIES
SECTION:
13.60.010: Purpose And Intent
13.60.020: Definitions
13.60.030: Contiguous Projects
13.60.040: Processing Dates
13.60.050: General Requirements
13.60.060: Availability Of Water And/Or Sewer Connections
13.60.070: Priority
13.60.010: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The extension of utility services outside the city's boundaries is solely a
discretionary decision of the city council taking into account the city's goals
and policies relating to land planning, utility infrastructure, and the public
health, safety and welfare of its citizens. The purpose of this chapter is to
establish a procedure for the application and approval of connections to the
city's water system and/or sewerage system for residential development projects
within the city's sphere of influence and planning area. (Ord. 2302 § 1, 1996)
13.60.020: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
   APPLICANT: The owner of the property for which a water and/or sewer
connection is requested.
   AVAILABILITY: The reservation of water and/or sewer connections for the
calendar year for which an application is made for a water and/or sewer
connection to Redlands' water and/or sewerage system for a residential dwelling
unit.
   CEQA: The California environmental quality act (Public Resources Code
section 21000 et seq.) as amended.
   CONNECTION: The approval of an application for a water and/or sewer
connection and the physical setting of a water meter and/or the physical
connection of a residential dwelling unit to the city's sewerage system.
   LAFCO: The local agency formation commission for the county of San
Bernardino, California.
   MAJOR PROJECT: A project consisting of five (5) or more residential dwelling
units.
   MINOR PROJECT: A project consisting of four (4) or less residential dwelling
units.
   PROJECT: Any residential development project, existing or proposed.
   RESIDENTIAL DWELLING UNIT: Any single-family residence, apartment, unit of a
duplex, triplex, multi-family structure or mobilehome. (Ord. 2302 § 1, 1996)
13.60.030: CONTIGUOUS PROJECTS:
The procedure established by this chapter shall apply only to projects located
on property which is not contiguous to the city's boundaries. Unless specific
findings are made by the city council that the provision of water and/or sewer
service without annexation is in the best interests of the public health,
safety and welfare, all projects located on property contiguous to the city's
boundaries shall annex to the city of Redlands as a condition of receiving
water and/or sewer connections to the city's water and/or sewerage system.
(Ord. 2302 § 1, 1996)
13.60.040: PROCESSING DATES:
   A.   For each calendar year, the initial deadline for submitting
applications to the city's municipal utilities department for availability of
water and/or sewer connections shall be January 4 of such year. Applications
may be submitted any time prior to January 4.
   B.   For each calendar year, the second deadline for submitting applications
to the city's municipal utilities department for availability of water and/or
sewer connections shall be June 1 of such year.
   C.   The express intent of the city council for establishing two (2) filing
dates for applications for availability of water and/or sewer connections is:
      1.   To implement the provisions of the voter approved initiative zoning
ordinance proposition "R", as amended by measure "N", and ensure that no more
than one hundred fifty (150) water and/or sewer connections are made to
residential dwelling units constructed outside the city's corporate boundaries;
      2.   To ensure that applications for water and/or sewer connections
outside the city's boundaries are made in good faith and at the times when both
the applicants for projects and the city reasonably believe that the proposed
projects will effect connections to the city's water and/or sewerage system;
and
      3.   To ensure that no project unreasonably impedes the efforts of
another project which, in good faith, is attempting to obtain a water and/or
sewer connection to the city's water and/or sewerage system. (Ord. 2302 § 1,
1996)
13.60.050: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
Water and/or sewer connections shall be made in accordance with the following
provisions:
   A.   Applications for availability of water and/or sewer connections shall
be filed with the municipal utilities department. The applicant shall be the
owner of the property for which the connection is requested, or the authorized
agent of the owner who has the written consent of the owner to file an
application. Submittal of an application shall be accompanied by the payment of
the applicable processing fee in the amount established by the city council.
The processing fee shall not be refundable.
   B.   An application for availability of a water and/or sewer connection
shall expire at the end of the calendar year for which it is filed. A new
application shall be filed, and the applicable fees for reapplication shall be
paid, for each subsequent calendar year during which a water and/or sewer
connection that was the subject of an expired application is sought.
   C.   As a condition of receiving a water and/or sewer connection, the
property upon which the project is located and the proposed use shall be
consistent with the goals and implementing policies of the Redlands general
plan.
   D.   Pursuant to the requirements of CEQA, application shall be made to the
city for environmental review by the city as part of the application for a
water and/or sewer connection and the preannexation agreement required by this
chapter. Submittal of the application for environmental review shall be
accompanied by the payment of the applicable processing fee in the amount
established by the city council. The processing fee shall not be refundable.
   E.   Concurrent with the filing of an application for availability of a
water and/or sewer connection, the applicant shall also make application to the
city community development department for a preannexation agreement. Submittal
of the application for a preannexation agreement shall be accompanied by
payment of the applicable processing fee in the amount as established by the
city council. The processing fee shall not be refundable.
   F.   Water and/or connections shall be distributed to minor projects on a
first come, first served basis. The number of available connections for minor
projects for each year shall be set by resolution of the city council.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, if no such resolution is adopted for any given
calendar year, the number of available connections for minor projects for such
year shall be equal to the number of available connections for minor projects
established for the previous year.
   G.   Availability for water and/or sewer connections for major projects for
each year shall be set by resolution of the city council. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, if no such resolution is adopted for any given calendar year, the
number of available connections for major projects shall be equal to the number
of available connections for major projects established for the previous year.
The availability of water and/or sewer connections shall be issued on a
priority basis for the calendar year. The determination of a major project's
priority for issuance of water and/or sewer availability shall be made by the
municipal utilities director based upon the date of receipt of a completed
application and the applicant's compliance with the requirements of this
chapter.
   H.   Upon the city's receipt of completed applications for a water and/or
sewer connection, environmental review and the preannexation agreement, the
municipal utilities director and community development director shall present
the applications to the city council for its determination on whether the
public health, safety and welfare, and the best interests of the citizens of
Redlands, are served by the city's continued processing of the applications.
Applications for a sewer connection shall be approved only for those projects
receiving domestic water from the city's water system, unless specific findings
are made by the city council that the provision of city sewer service to a
project not receiving city domestic water is in the best interests of the
public health, safety and welfare. In making its determination, the city
council may consider, among other factors:
      1.   The relationship of the property and its proposed use to the city's
general plan and zoning ordinances;
      2.   The relationship of the property and its proposed use to the city's
water and sewer master plans, and the city's water and sewer capital
improvement programs;
      3.   The proximity of the property to the city's boundaries and existing
utility infrastructure;
      4.   The proposed potential for new revenue sources for the city to pay
for city services provided to the project as a result of annexation and
development of the property; and
      5.   The proposed standards for development of the property.
If the determination is made that the project is consistent with the city's
general plan, the municipal utilities director shall continue processing the
application for a water and/or sewer connection. If the project is determined
to be inconsistent with the city's general plan, the municipal utilities
director shall deny the application for a water and/or sewer connection.
   I.   Unless exempt, pursuant to Government Code section 56133 all projects
making application for availability for a water and/or sewer connection shall
also make application to the city for approval of the extension of city utility
services outside city boundaries from LAFCO.
   J.   All projects shall have received final approval from the public agency
having planning approval authority for the project prior to the approval of a
water and/or sewer connection by the city. For purposes of this subsection,
"final approval" shall mean the last discretionary approval required by the
applicant from such public agency to proceed with construction of the
applicant's project.
   K.   In the event a connection to the city's water and/or sewerage system is
not made in the calendar year for which the availability application was
approved, the project shall lose its availability and the applicant shall
resubmit an application for availability in compliance with this chapter,
including making payment of any applicable resubmittal fees, before any water
or sewer connection may be made. (Ord. 2302 § 1, 1996)
13.60.060: AVAILABILITY OF WATER AND/OR SEWER CONNECTIONS:
   A.   All projects applying for availability of water and/or sewer service
connections shall be subject to the following conditions:
      1.   The municipal utilities director shall determine the development
requirements, including the infrastructure improvements which must be
constructed and the fees which must be paid for the project, to provide water
service and/or sewer service to the project.
      2.   To ensure that operation of the city's water and/or sewerage system
conforms with all requirements of the state department of health services, the
local regional water quality control board and the sound operational policies
of the city, the municipal utilities director may, at his or her discretion,
condition or reject any application that is determined to be contrary to
applicable regulatory requirements and detrimental to the city's water and/or
sewer system. Any decision by the municipal utilities director to condition or
reject an application pursuant to this subsection shall be made in writing to
the applicant. In the event an applicant disagrees with the municipal utilities
director's decision, the applicant may appeal the decision to the city council
by filing a written request therefor with the city clerk of the city within
fourteen (14) days of the date of the written decision of the municipal
utilities director. Upon receipt of the appeal, the city council shall consider
the appeal and either approve, modify or disapprove the decision of the
municipal utilities director.
   B.   The applicant for a water and/or sewer connection shall comply with the
following conditions before a physical connection to the city's water and/or
sewerage system will be permitted, and meters set:
      1.   The applicant shall submit for review and approval plans which
comply with the infrastructure improvement requirements of the municipal
utilities director, make application for and comply with the required
conditions of a construction permit, install the required infrastructure
improvements in accordance with city requirements and specifications, receive
approval of a water and/or sewer service connection and pay all applicable city
fees established by the city council. Such fees shall be those in effect when
the city determines that the applicant is physically ready to connect and the
city has received a written request from the applicant to physically connect to
a city water and/or sewer main. Prepayment of fees is prohibited.
      2.   The owner of the property to be served shall enter into a
preannexation agreement with the city, which shall be subject to recordation in
the official records of the county of San Bernardino and shall constitute a
covenant running with the land, which requires the owner to irrevocably consent
to annexation proceedings and/or commence proceedings to annex the property to
the city at the request of the city, and which requires the payment to the city
of an amount equivalent to all capital improvement and other development fees
which would be applicable to the property if it were within city limits. The
preannexation agreement shall provide, among other things, that in the event
the property is not annexed to the city in accordance with the terms of the
agreement, the owner of the property shall pay each year to the city, as
liquidated damages, a sum equal to the property taxes and any sales taxes the
city would have received had the property been annexed. The preannexation
agreement shall further provide that the failure to make such liquidated
damages payments shall be cause for the city to cease water and/or sewer
service to the project.
      3.   Applicants for water and/or sewer connections made under the
provisions of this chapter shall comply with all rules and regulations
established by the city. (Ord. 2820, 2015: Ord. 2302 § 1, 1996)
13.60.070: PRIORITY:
   A.   The priority of an application for availability for water and/or sewer
connections shall be based upon the date of receipt by the city of a completed
application that satisfies the requirements of this chapter.
   B.   Applications for availability of water and/or sewer connections which
are subject to the January 4 deadline shall be approved on a priority basis
subject to the following criteria:
      1.   If only one application has been made for availability, that
applicant shall be entitled, subject to compliance with the requirements of
this chapter, to receive all availability applied for up to and including the
annual amount of availability set by resolution of the city council.
      2.   In the event more than one application for availability is received
for the January 4 deadline, the application having the highest priority shall
be entitled, subject to compliance with requirements of this chapter, to
receive all availability applied for up to and including fifty percent (50%) of
the annual amount of availability set by resolution of the city council. All
other applications shall be entitled, in order of their priority and subject to
compliance with the requirements of this chapter, to receive all availability
applied for up to and including the amount of annual availability remaining as
set by resolution of the city council.
      3.   In the event there remains unallocated availability after compliance
with subsection A of this section and this subsection, any remaining
availability shall be distributed to the applicants in accordance with their
respective priority basis until all the amount of annual availability set by
resolution of the city council has been allocated.
   C.   Any application for availability which was subject to the January 4
deadline shall lose its priority in the event the following has not occurred by
June 1 of the calendar year during which such applications were approved:
      1.   The project for which the application was approved is a subdivision,
and a final map has not been approved and recorded for such project.
      2.   The project for which the application was approved is not a
subdivision and construction has not commenced on the project pursuant to the
issuance of a building permit.
   D.   Applications for availability of water and/or sewer connections which
are subject to the June 1 deadline shall be approved on a priority basis
subject to the following criteria:
      1.   Applications for availability shall be approved only to the extent
that unallocated availability is extant from the amount of availability set by
resolution of the city council.
      2.   Applications shall be approved in accordance with the procedures
established by subsection B of this section.
      3.   In the event no applications for availability are made, any
applications for availability which were subject to the January 4 deadline and
which lost priority subject to subsection C of this section, shall have their
previous priorities restored for the remainder of the calendar year. (Ord. 2302
§ 1, 1996)
CHAPTER 13.62
UTILITY CONNECTIONS FOR NONRESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT OUTSIDE CITY BOUNDARIES
SECTION:
13.62.010: Purpose And Intent
13.62.020: Definitions
13.62.030: Contiguous Projects
13.62.040: General Requirements
13.62.050: Requirements For Water And/Or Sewer Connections
13.62.010: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The extension of utility services outside the city's boundaries is solely a
discretionary decision of the city council taking into account the city's goals
and policies relating to land planning, utility infrastructure, and the public
health, safety and welfare of its citizens. The purpose of this chapter is to
establish a procedure for the application and approval of connections to the
city's water system and/or sewerage system for nonresidential development
projects located within the city's sphere of influence and planning area. (Ord.
2301 § 1, 1996)
13.62.020: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
   APPLICANT: The owner of the property for which a water and/or sewer
connection is requested.
   CEQA: The California environmental quality act (Public Resources Code
sections 21000 et seq.) as amended.
   CONNECTION: The approval of an application for a water and/or sewer
connection and the physical setting of a water meter and/or the physical
connection of a building to the city's sewerage system.
   LAFCO: The local agency formation commission for the county of San
Bernardino, California.
   PROJECT: Any nonresidential development, existing or proposed. (Ord. 2301 §
1, 1996)
13.62.030: CONTIGUOUS PROJECTS:
The procedure established by this chapter shall apply only to projects located
on property which is not contiguous to the city's boundaries. Unless specific
findings are made by the city council that the provision of water and/or sewer
service without annexation is in the best interests of the public health,
safety and welfare, all projects located on property contiguous to the city's
boundaries shall annex to the city prior to, and as a condition of, receiving a
water and/or sewer connection to the city's water and/or sewerage system. (Ord.
2301 § 1, 1996)
13.62.040: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
Water and/or sewer connections shall be made in accordance with the following
provisions:
   A.   Applications for water and/or sewer connections shall be filed with the
municipal utilities department. The applicant shall be the owner of the
property for which the water and/or sewer connection is requested or the
authorized agent of the owner who has the written consent of the owner to file
an application. Submittal of an application shall be accompanied by the payment
of the applicable processing fee in the amount established by the city council.
The processing fee shall not be refundable.
   B.   An application for a water and/or sewer connection shall expire at the
end of the calendar year during which it is filed. A new application shall be
filed, and the applicable fees for reapplication shall be paid, for each
subsequent calendar year during which a water and/or sewer connection that was
the subject of an expired application is sought.
   C.   As a condition of receiving a water and/or sewer connection, the
property upon which the project is located and the proposed use shall be
consistent with the goals and implementing policies of the Redlands general
plan.
   D.   Pursuant to the requirements of CEQA, application shall be made for
environmental review by the city as part of the application process for a water
and/or sewer connection and the preannexation agreement required by this
chapter. Submittal of an application shall be accompanied by the payment of the
applicable processing fee in the amount established by the city council. The
processing fee shall not be refundable.
   E.   Concurrent with the filing of an application for a water and/or sewer
connection, the applicant shall also make application to the city's community
development department for a preannexation agreement. Submittal of an
application shall be accompanied by payment of the applicable processing fee in
the amount established by the city council. The processing fee shall not be
refundable.
   F.   Upon the city's receipt of completed applications for a water and/or
sewer connection, environmental review in accordance with CEQA, and the
preannexation agreement, the municipal utilities director and community
development director shall present the applications to the city council for its
determination of whether the public health, safety and welfare, and the best
interests of the citizens of Redlands, are served by the city's continued
processing of the applications. Applications for a sewer connection shall be
approved only for those projects receiving domestic water from the city's water
system, unless specific findings are made by the city council that the
provision of city sewerage service to a project not receiving city domestic
water is in the best interests of the public health, safety and welfare. In
making its determination of a project's consistency with the Redlands general
plan, the city council may consider, among other factors:
      1.   The relationship of the property and its proposed use to the city's
general plan and zoning ordinances;
      2.   The relationship of the property and its proposed use to the city's
water and sewer master plans, and the city's water and sewer capital
improvement programs;
      3.   The proximity of the property to the city's boundaries and existing
utility infrastructure;
      4.   The proposed potential for new revenue sources for the city as a
result of annexation and development of the property; and
      5.   The proposed standards for development of the property.
If the determination is made that the project is consistent with the city's
general plan, the municipal utilities director shall continue processing the
application for a water and/or sewer connection. If the project is determined
to be inconsistent with the city's general plan, the municipal utilities
director shall deny the application for a water and/or sewer connection.
   G.   Unless exempt, pursuant to Government Code section 56133 all projects
making application for a water and/or sewer connection shall also make
application to the city for approval of the extension of city utility services
outside city boundaries from LAFCO.
   H.   All projects shall have received final approval from the public agency
having planning approval authority for the project prior to the approval of a
water and/or sewer connection by the city. For purposes of this subsection,
"final approval" shall mean the last discretionary approval required by the
applicant from such public agency to proceed with construction of the
applicant's project. (Ord. 2301 § 1, 1996)
13.62.050: REQUIREMENTS FOR WATER AND/OR SEWER CONNECTIONS:
   A.   All projects applying for water and/or sewer connections shall be
subject to the following conditions:
      1.   The municipal utilities director shall determine the development
requirements, including the infrastructure improvements which must be
constructed and the fees which must be paid for the project, to provide city
potable and nonpotable water and/or sewer connections to the project.
      2.   To ensure that operation of the city's water and/or sewerage system
conforms with all requirements of the state department of health services, the
local regional water quality control board and the operational policies of the
city, the municipal utilities director may, at his or her discretion, condition
or reject any application for a water and/or sewer connection that is
determined to be contrary to applicable regulatory requirements and detrimental
to the city's water or sewerage system. Any decision by the municipal utilities
director to condition or reject an application pursuant to this subsection
shall be made in writing to the applicant. In the event an applicant disagrees
with the municipal utilities director's decision, the applicant may appeal the
decision to the city council by filing a written request therefor with the city
clerk of the city within fourteen (14) days from the date of the written
decision of the municipal utilities director. An appeal of the municipal
utilities director's decision shall be made on the city's form for appeal and
shall be accompanied by payment of the applicable appeal fee. Upon receipt of
the appeal, the city council shall consider the appeal and either approve,
modify or disapprove the decision of the municipal utilities director.
   B.   The applicant for a water and/or sewer connection shall comply with the
following conditions before a physical connection to the city's water and/or
sewerage system will be permitted, and meters set:
      1.   The applicant shall submit for review and approval improvement plans
which comply with the infrastructure improvement requirements of the municipal
utilities director, make application for and comply with the required
conditions of a construction permit for such infrastructure improvements,
install the required infrastructure improvements to provide potable and/or
nonpotable water to the project in accordance with city requirements and
specifications and receive approval for a water and/or sewer connection. The
applicable fees shall be those in effect when the city determines that the
applicant is physically ready to connect the project to the city's water and/or
sewerage system and, the city has received a written request from the applicant
to physically connect to a city water and/or sewer main. Prepayment of fees is
prohibited.
      2.   Prior to, and as a condition of the approval of a physical
connection to the city's water and/or sewerage system, the owner of the
property for which a water and/or sewer connection is sought shall enter into a
preannexation agreement with the city, which shall be subject to recordation,
in the official records of the county of San Bernardino and shall constitute a
covenant running with the land, requiring the owner and the owner's successors
in interest to irrevocably consent to annexation proceedings and/or commence
proceedings to annex the property to the city at the request of the city. The
preannexation agreement shall provide, among other things, that in the event
the property is not annexed to the city in accordance with its terms, the owner
of the property shall pay each year to the city, as liquidated damages, a sum
equal to the property taxes and any sales taxes the city would have received
had the property been annexed. The preannexation agreement shall further
provide that the failure to make such liquidated damages payments shall be
cause for the city to cease water and/or sewer service to the project.
      3.   Applicants for water and/or sewer connections made under the
provisions of this chapter shall comply with all rules and regulations
established by the city. (Ord. 2301 § 1, 1996)
DIVISION IV. GARBAGE COLLECTION
CHAPTER 13.64
INTEGRATED SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT
SECTION:
13.64.010: Purpose
13.64.020: Definitions
13.64.030: Exclusive Jurisdiction Of City
13.64.040: Authority To Establish Rates And Charges
13.64.050: Billing And Deposit For Solid Waste Services
13.64.060: Failure To Pay Charges
13.64.070: Required
13.64.080: Unlawful Placement Of Solid Waste
13.64.090: Dumping And Burying
13.64.100: Burning
13.64.110: Unlawful To Interfere With Collection
13.64.120: Unauthorized Collection Prohibited
13.64.130: Frequency Of Collection
13.64.140: Hours Of Collection
13.64.150: Containers; Type
13.64.160: Sanitation
13.64.170: Service Levels Changes
13.64.180: Manner Of Container Placement
13.64.190: Shared Containers; Commercial Collection
13.64.200: Enclosure Requirement; Commercial
13.64.210: Special Collections (Roll-Off/Compactor Service)
13.64.220: Removal Of Containers After Collection
13.64.230: Placement Of Solid Waste In Containers
13.64.240: Placement Of Green Waste In Containers
13.64.250: Prohibited Substances In Solid Waste, Green Waste Or Recyclable
Material Containers
13.64.260: Additional Prohibited Substances In Green Waste Containers
13.64.270: Placement Of Recyclable Materials
13.64.280: Bulky Waste
13.64.290: Physically Challenged/Elderly Service
13.64.300: Exemption From Service
13.64.310: Director; Authorization To Enforce
13.64.320: Violation; Penalty
13.64.010: PURPOSE:
   A.   Pursuant to Public Resources Code sections 40000-49620 et seq. (the
"state law") the city is mandated to conduct an integrated solid waste
management program to reduce, reuse and recycle solid waste to extend the life
of its sanitary landfill, and implement mandatory residential and commercial
recycling of comingled recyclables and organic waste with the purpose of
reducing greenhouse gas emissions by diverting residential and commercial solid
waste to recycling facility. The purpose of this chapter is to establish
procedures for the regular collection, transfer, processing and disposal of
solid waste from property in the city. To protect the health, safety and
welfare of owners and occupants of property in the city, all persons shall
participate in the city's solid waste collection program and be responsible for
the payment of the solid waste and recycling charges established pursuant to
this chapter.
   B.   Solid waste services may be furnished by city personnel, independent
contractors authorized or franchised by the city, or a combination thereof. For
the purpose of regulating the collection of solid waste, including green waste
and recyclable materials, the rules and regulations of this chapter shall be
observed by all persons owning or occupying property within the city. (Ord.
2929 § 1, 2021: Ord. 2382 § 1, 1998)
13.64.020: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them. Words not ascribed a meaning shall have the
meaning ascribed by state law.
AUTOMATED    The collection of solid waste or green waste, using a specially designed vehicle
COLLECTION:  with mechanical apparatus which empties a container directly into a vehicle
             without requiring manual labor to empty the container.
AUTOMATED    A solid waste or green waste container specially designed for automated
COLLECTION   collection.
CONTAINER:
             Means and includes, but is not limited to, objects of furniture, household or
             industrial metallic discards, auto parts, construction and demolition materials,
BULKY WASTE: trees and/or tree trunks larger than six inches (6") in diameter, shipping
             crates, containers and other large, bulky or heavy objects which cannot be placed
             in a covered container and discarded by a customer.
             An employee of the city or an independent contractor or franchisee of the city
COLLECTOR:   authorized to collect and transport solid waste, and/or green waste or recyclable
             materials.
COMMERCIAL   A city approved bin, usually one (1) cubic yard to four (4) cubic yards'
BIN:         capacity, designed for the deposit of solid waste, including green waste and
             recyclable materials, which is charged at commercial rates.
COMPOST:     The product resulting from the controlled biological decomposition of organic
             wastes.
CONSTRUCTION All nonhazardous waste material and rubble resulting from the construction,
AND          alteration, remodeling, repair, removal or demolition of housing, commercial
DEMOLITION   buildings and other structures, including, but not limited to, inert wastes,
WASTE:       lumber, brick, soil, concrete, and plaster, which is customarily handled and
             transported by means of a roll-off drop box.
             A city approved bin, can or receptacle used for collecting solid waste, including
CONTAINER:   green waste and recyclable materials, whether owned by the city, collector,
             property owner or a tenant.
             The owner and/or occupant of any property within the city that is required to
CUSTOMER:    participate in the city's solid waste, including green waste and recyclables,
             collection program.
DIRECTOR:    The city's municipal utilities director or his or her designee.
             Tree and shrubbery trimmings, tree roots less than six inches (6") in diameter,
             vegetation matter resulting from land clearing, grass, weeds, straw, or leaves,
             wood chips, sawdust and other household garden organic materials which have been
GREEN WASTE: segregated from other solid waste materials for the purpose of deposit at a
             designated collection location, including curbside location, for collection and
             transportation to a compost facility. Green waste does not include palm fronds,
             cactus or tree limbs, roots or stumps larger than six inches (6") in diameter.
             Waste which, because of its quantity, concentration, physical, chemical or
             infectious characteristics causes any of the following:
             A.   An increase in mortality or serious irreversible or incapacitating
             reversible illness;
HAZARDOUS    B.   A substantial present or potential hazard to human health or environment
WASTE:       when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of or otherwise managed;
             C.   Damage to property and/or contaminate the water table by reason of being
             explosive, flammable, poisonous, corrosive, radioactive or otherwise harmful to
             the environment;
             D.   "Hazardous waste" means hazardous waste, extremely hazardous and acutely
             hazardous waste as these terms are defined by state law.
HOUSEHOLD    Any hazardous waste, including heavy metals, generated incidental to owning and/
HAZARDOUS    or maintaining a property, but does not include any waste generated in the course
WASTE:       of operating a business at a residence.
             Solid waste resulting from industrial processes and manufacturing operations,
             including, but not limited to, wholesale and volume food processing waste, boiler
INDUSTRIAL   house cinders, lumber scraps and shavings, metal scraps and shavings and chemical
WASTE:       wastes, or that originates from any organization, private or civic, or any number
             of persons or objects that manufactures, assembles, combines, converts, or
             refines any substance, liquid, element, material, or energy source of any type.
MAY:         Permissive.
             Waste which meets both of the following requirements:
             A.   Is composed of waste which is generated or produced as a result of any of
             the following:
                1.   Research, diagnosis, treatment or immunization of human beings or
             animals;
MEDICAL         2.   The production or testing of biologicals.
WASTE:       B.   The waste is any of the following:
                1.   Biohazardous waste as defined in California Health and Safety Code,
             division 20, chapter 6.1, article 2, section 25020.5;
                2.   Sharps waste, including, but not limited to, hypodermic needles,
             syringes, blades, tubing, acupuncture needles, root canal files, broken glass
             such as Pasteur pipettes and blood vials.
             Any large metal article or product, or any part thereof, including, but not
METALLIC     limited to, metal furniture, machinery, appliances, electronic products, vehicles
DISCARD:     and wood burning stoves. Metallic discards are banned by the state of California
             from all municipal sanitary landfills.
MUNICIPAL    A billing invoice sent to a customer by the city for use of city provided utility
SERVICES     services.
STATEMENT:
             Waste containing material originated from living organisms and their metabolic
ORGANIC      waste products including, but not limited to, food, green material, landscape and
WASTE:       pruning waste, organic textiles and carpets, lumber, wood, paper products,
             printing and writing paper, manure, biosolids, digestate, and sludges.
PERSON:      Any person, firm, business, sole proprietorship, joint venture, trust,
             association or corporation whether for profit or nonprofit.
             Any lot, vacant or under construction, building, residence, single-family or
PROPERTY:    multiple-family residential, commercial or industrial property, occupied or
             unoccupied.
RECYCLABLE   A container, bag, bin, roll-off drop box or other container used to hold
COLLECTION   recyclable materials placed for collection.
CONTAINER:
             Those waste materials generated on or emanating from residential, commercial or
             industrial property that are placed for collection in a city approved container
RECYCLABLE   for recycling. Such materials include, but are not limited to, aluminum cans,
MATERIALS:   bimetal cans, cardboard, glass containers, plastic containers, newspaper, paper,
             and other materials designated as recyclable by the city which, due to their
             nature, are discarded by the producer.
             The process of collecting, sorting, cleansing, treating and reconstituting
RECYCLE OR   material that would otherwise become solid waste, and returning them to the
RECYCLING:   economic mainstream in the form of raw material for new, reused or reconstituted
             products.
RECYCLING    A place where recyclable materials may be dropped off either for payment for
DROP OFF     goods received or as a donation.
LOCATION:
SANITARY     A site for solid waste disposal approved by the California integrated waste
LANDFILL:    management board.
SHALL:       Mandatory.
             The designated all inclusive term for all putrescible and nonputrescible solid
             and semisolid waste including garbage, wet garbage, trash, refuse, ashes,
SOLID WASTE: industrial wastes, construction and demolition wastes, bulky waste, manure,
             vegetable or animal solid and semisolid wastes. Solid waste does not include
             hazardous or household hazardous waste, medical waste or low level radioactive
             waste. (Ord. 2929 § 2, 2021: Ord. 2382 § 1, 1998)
 
13.64.030: EXCLUSIVE JURISDICTION OF CITY:
   A.   The collection of all solid waste, including green waste and recyclable
materials, within the city shall be performed by the city or under the
direction of the city. For such purposes, the city may use city personnel, an
authorized collector, or any combination thereof.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person to collect or transport solid waste,
including green waste and recyclable materials, except for a customer
transporting solid waste to a sanitary landfill, or green waste to a compost
facility or sanitary landfill, or recyclable materials to a recycling facility,
unless such person is a "collector" as defined in this chapter. (Ord. 2382 § 1,
1998)
13.64.040: AUTHORITY TO ESTABLISH RATES AND CHARGES:
Rates and charges, which include processing fees and service charges for all
solid waste services, may be established from time to time by the city. (Ord.
2382 § 1, 1998)
13.64.050: BILLING AND DEPOSIT FOR SOLID WASTE SERVICES:
   A.   Solid waste charges, including green waste and recyclable materials
charges established by the city shall be a civil debt owing to the city by all
customers for property receiving solid waste collection services.
   B.   A prepayment deposit may be collected by the city for all "solid waste
only" accounts for which solid waste charges are billed separately from other
utility accounts when a customer fails to pay the collection charge when due,
provided that the deposit shall not constitute liquidated damages and the
customers shall remain liable to the city for any unpaid charges. For
geographical areas annexed to the city and previously served by solid waste
collectors other than the city, the city may consider the past payment records
of such "solid waste only" accounts when determining, in its discretion,
whether to require a prepayment deposit.
   C.   The city may notice a property owner that an application for utility
account has been received by the city from a person requesting utility services
in a name other than the owner of the property to be serviced, and that in the
event of nonpayment of any portion of the municipal services statement, any
charges for service shall be deemed the responsibility of the property owner
and may result in a lien against the property. (Ord. 2431 § 1, 2000: Ord. 2382
§ 1, 1998)
13.64.060: FAILURE TO PAY CHARGES:
   A.   Solid waste charges may be included in the city's municipal services
statement. Failure to pay any part of the municipal services statement,
including the solid waste charge, shall result in the delinquency of such
statement, actionable as a civil debt to the city.
   B.   In addition to any other remedies it may have for the collection of
delinquent accounts, the city may cause notice of a hearing on delinquent
accounts in accordance with Government Code sections 25830.1 and 38790.1. Such
notice shall be mailed to property owners listed as delinquent accounts not
less than ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing. At the hearing, the
city council shall hear any objections or protests of such property owners. The
city council may make such revisions, corrections or deletions to the report of
delinquent accounts as it deems just, after which, by resolution, the report
shall be confirmed. The delinquent charges set forth in the delinquent account
report may be placed as a lien on such properties for the amount of such
delinquent charges plus legal fees and administration costs. A certified copy
of the confirmed report shall be filed with the city clerk, for the current tax
roll. The lien created attaches upon recordation, in the office of the county
recorder, of a certified copy of the resolution of confirmation. All laws
applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of city ad valorem property
taxes shall be applicable to such liens.
   C.   In the case of a discovered solid waste undercharge, the undercharge
shall be adjusted back for a period of up to four (4) years for services
rendered. Proper billing shall begin with the first cycle billing after the
discovered error and the customer shall be notified in writing of the
undercharge and the reason for the adjustment.
(Ord. 2903 § 7, 2019: Ord. 2382 § 1, 1998)
13.64.070: REQUIRED:
The fact that any property is occupied shall be prima facie evidence that solid
waste is being generated and accumulated upon such property and that service
charges for the collection and disposal thereof are due the city. Every person
owning or occupying any property in the city shall keep such property in a
clean and sanitary condition and shall not cause or permit solid waste to
collect or accumulate upon; provided, however, that this provision shall not be
construed to interfere with any customer keeping building materials upon
property during the construction, reconstruction, or repair of a building or
structure thereon under a valid building permit, nor with the keeping of wood
neatly piled upon such property for household use.
   A.   Residential:
      1.   Every property shall subscribe to automated or nonautomated solid
waste, organic, and recycling services. It is unlawful for any property to
keep, accumulate, or permit to be kept or accumulated, any solid waste in or
upon any private place unless the same shall be in a container for such as
specified in this chapter. It is unlawful for any property to fail or neglect
to provide for the removal of solid waste from such property in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter.
      2.   In the event of the accumulation of solid waste matter upon any
property, the city may remove the waste matter and charge a service fee, in an
amount equal to the cost of such removal, to the customer.
      3.   Residential customers with automated service shall be responsible
for the separation of organic and green waste from all other solid waste
generated by the property.
   B.   Commercial:
      1.   Every property shall subscribe to commercial bin, roll-off bin,
commercial can, or commercial automated solid waste services. Every commercial
property generating two (2) cubic yards or more of solid waste must subscribe
to organic and recycling collection services. It is unlawful for any customer
to keep, accumulate, or permit to be kept or accumulated, any solid waste in or
upon any property unless the same shall be in a container such as specified in
this chapter. It is unlawful for any customer to fail or neglect to provide for
the removal of solid waste from such property in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter.
      2.   In the event of the accumulation of solid waste matter upon any
property, the city may remove the waste matter and charge a service fee, in an
amount equal to the cost of such removal, to the customer. (Ord. 2929 § 3,
2021: Ord. 2382 § 1, 1998)
13.64.080: UNLAWFUL PLACEMENT OF SOLID WASTE:
   A.   No person shall deposit, keep, accumulate, permit, or cause any solid
waste, including green waste and recyclable materials, to be deposited, kept or
accumulated in a condition which is offensive, unsightly, detrimental to public
health or hazardous from fire upon any property or on any public street, land,
alley, or driveway, except as provided in this chapter. No person shall place
or deposit, or cause to be placed or deposited, or to allow to remain in the
street, alley or right of way area adjacent to the property occupied by such
person any solid waste, including green waste and recyclable materials, in,
into or upon any public street, avenue, alley, right of way, or other public
place in the city, or in, into, or upon any property, or in or into any river
or wash or in the bed thereof, except in the manner and for the purposes
permitted by this chapter.
   B.   No person shall deposit any solid waste, including green waste and
recyclable materials accumulating and generated on any premises within the
city, and place it in the solid waste, green waste, or recyclable container on
any other premises within the city; or to place any such container for
collection of solid waste, including green waste and recyclable materials,
therefrom in, upon, or in front, or in the rear of any other premises. (Ord.
2382 § 1, 1998)
13.64.090: DUMPING AND BURYING:
No person shall dump, place, or deposit upon, or bury in any lot, land, street,
alley, water or waterway within the city any solid waste, including green waste
and recyclable materials or substance condemned by the county department of
environmental health services, or any other deleterious or offensive substance;
provided, however, that this section shall not apply to any land used by the
county of San Bernardino or its agents as a public sanitary landfill. (Ord.
2382 § 1, 1998)
13.64.100: BURNING:
No solid waste, including green waste and recyclable materials, shall be burned
in the open air within the city. (Ord. 2382 § 1, 1998)
13.64.110: UNLAWFUL TO INTERFERE WITH COLLECTION:
No person shall interfere with or obstruct the collection or disposal of solid
waste, including green waste and recyclable materials. (Ord. 2382 § 1, 1998)
13.64.120: UNAUTHORIZED COLLECTION PROHIBITED:
   A.   When solid waste, including green waste and recyclable materials, is
placed for the purpose of collection, it shall become the property of the city
or its authorized collector, and it is unlawful for any person other than an
owner thereof, its agents and employees, to remove or cause to be removed,
tamper or meddle with any solid waste, including green waste and recyclable
materials, regardless of whether or not such container conforms to the
requirements set forth by this chapter.
   B.   Each collection in violation of this chapter shall constitute a
separate and distinct violation punishable as provided in this chapter.
   C.   Nothing in this chapter shall limit the right of any person,
organization or other entity to donate, sell or otherwise dispose of recyclable
materials, provided that any such disposal is in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter. (Ord. 2382 § 1, 1998)
13.64.130: FREQUENCY OF COLLECTION:
Solid waste, including green waste and recyclable materials, shall be collected
a minimum of once a week, and all solid waste, including green waste and
recyclable materials, shall be removed from the property and disposed of in
such a manner as not to become a nuisance or danger to public health. Solid
waste shall be collected a minimum of once each week, excepting those
properties which generate food waste, such as restaurants, schools with a food
service cafeteria, and hotels, which shall be collected a minimum of twice each
week. The city may require a greater number of collections per week for
establishments with commercial collection as deemed necessary to comply with
the provisions of this chapter and for the protection of the public health,
safety and welfare. (Ord. 2382 § 1, 1998)
13.64.140: HOURS OF COLLECTION:
All containers placed for collection shall be in their designated collection
location no later than six o'clock (6:00) A.M. for collection of the container
between the hours of six o'clock (6:00) A.M. and two thirty o'clock (2:30)
P.M., or later, Monday through Saturday. Collection times are subject to change
and may vary from week to week. An additional service charge may be assessed
for any container placed for collection after six o'clock (6:00) A.M., upon
which the customer reports to the solid waste division as being missed for
collection and is subsequently collected after the route has already been
completed. (Ord. 2382 § 1, 1998)
13.64.150: CONTAINERS; TYPE:
The director shall prescribe suitable kinds of new or replacement solid waste
containers and covers in which solid waste, including green waste and
recyclable materials, shall be placed and kept for collection. All customer
owned containers placed in service shall have prior approval of the director
for compatibility with collection equipment. All customer owned containers
shall be clearly marked with the customer's name and address.
   A.   Automated Containers:
      1.   The city shall provide automated solid waste, including green waste,
containers.
      2.   Automated containers are the property of the city and are assigned
to the property. Customers shall not remove containers from the assigned
property.
      3.   No customer shall mark, deface or alter any city owned and assigned
container.
      4.   If an assigned container is stolen or damaged, through no fault of a
customer, the city will provide a free replacement.
      5.   Containers shall not exceed two hundred (200) pounds' gross weight
when filled.
   B.   Nonautomated Containers: Residential or commercial property that cannot
be serviced by the automated collection method or commercial property that
cannot be serviced by commercial bin collection, as determined by the director,
shall comply with the following specifications:
      1.   Each solid waste container shall be sufficiently durable material
(metal, PVC, hard rubber) to withstand repeated handling in all type of weather
and conditions. Handles shall be sturdy enough to endure repeated lifting
without detachment. A tightfitting cover must be used. The use of plastic bags,
boxes, fifty (50) gallon oil drums or portions of such drums and cardboard
barrels is prohibited. All containers shall be free of sharp edges, splinters,
protruding nails, or other conditions dangerous to collection personnel.
      2.   Containers shall not exceed thirty two (32) gallons in capacity nor
sixty five (65) pounds' gross weight or twenty (20) pounds empty.
   C.   Bin Containers: For commercial bins that are rented from the city, the
city shall provide all mechanical maintenance and repair including container
replacement at such time the container is deemed unserviceable by the director.
      1.   Front loader bins shall be no smaller than one cubic yard and no
larger than four (4) cubic yards, with side channel pick up, and must be
compatible with collection equipment.
      2.   Rear loader bins shall be no larger than three (3) cubic yards and
must be compatible with collection equipment.
      3.   Commercial bins may be secured through the installation of a locking
bar device to prevent unauthorized collection, tampering and unauthorized
placement of solid waste, yet shall be accessible for disposal and collection
of solid waste, green waste, and recyclable materials by authorized persons.
The customer shall either provide a combination lock, and provide the
combination to the solid waste division, or provide a key lock, retain the key,
and ensure that the bin remains accessible for collection during collection
hours. Additional charges may be assessed, as determined by the city, for
additional trips to service a locking bin, which was locked when service was
attempted on the regular schedule.
   D.   Roll-Off Or Compactor Containers: Roll-off or compactor drop boxes
shall be no larger than forty (40) cubic yards and shall be compatible with
city collection equipment.
   E.   Noncity Owned Containers: If this section is not fully complied with,
the city may deem the container as unfit for service or a potential safety
hazard to collection personnel and may require the customer to provide
alternative containers satisfactory to the city or to subscribe to an
alternative method of collection. (Ord. 2382 § 1, 1998)
13.64.160: SANITATION:
   A.   All containers shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition at all
times by the customer. Containers shall be kept covered at all times, except
when solid waste, including green waste and recyclable materials, is being
deposited therein or removed therefrom, and shall at all times be secure and
free from leaks.
   B.   Periodic cleaning of customer owned commercial binds, commercial bins
rented from the city, and automated containers or recycling containers provided
by the city, shall be the sole responsibility of the customer. A fee shall be
assessed for this service to the customer, whether requested by the customer,
the county health officer or as deemed necessary by the director. (Ord. 2382 §
1, 1998)
13.64.170: SERVICE LEVELS CHANGES:
Any customer establishing a new solid waste account with the city shall have
the option at that time to change the existing automated container
configuration established by the previous customer or select an adequate
commercial service level based upon the individual needs of the customer.
Subsequent service level changes requested are subject to a service charge, as
determined by the city. For residential customers with automated collection,
service level changes are permissible during the month of June each year at no
charge. A service charge does not apply to repairs on automated containers, the
replacement of stolen automated containers or repairs or replacements of city
owned commercial bins, through no fault of the customer. (Ord. 2382 § 1, 1998)
13.64.180: MANNER OF CONTAINER PLACEMENT:
   A.   Residential Collection: Solid waste, green waste and recyclable
material containers for residential property shall be placed for collection at
the city designated collection location.
      1.   In portions of the city where an alley abuts the property, all
containers for collection shall be placed adjacent to the alley as close as
possible to the property line; provided, however, that where such placement is
impractical, such containers shall be placed for collection as directed by the
director.
      2.   Where there is no alley, all automated containers shall be placed
for collection at the most logical street frontage location; however, where
such placement is impractical, such container shall be placed for collection as
directed by the director.
      3.   Containers shall be placed in the street at the curb, or such place
as if a curb did exist, or on the parkway, as close to the curb as possible. No
container shall be placed on any sidewalk.
      4.   Containers shall not be placed within three feet (3') from any
obstacle, such as a parked vehicle, fence, lamp post, mailbox and at least one
foot (1') from any other container.
      5.   Containers must be placed with the handle facing the property.
      6.   It shall be the customer's responsibility to provide means of
ingress and egress, adequate collection vehicle turning radius, vertical and
horizontal clearance for collection personnel and equipment.
      7.   In all cases of disputes or complaints arising from, or concerning
the placement of automated or nonautomated containers while awaiting the
removal of their contents, the director shall designate the placement of such
containers which decision shall be final.
   B.   Commercial Collection: All commercial containers shall be placed for
collection in a location approved by the director which shall be easily
accessible to collection personnel and equipment.
      1.   It shall be the customer's responsibility to provide means of
ingress and egress, adequate collection vehicle turning radius, vertical and
horizontal clearance for collection personnel and equipment.
      2.   No container shall be placed for collection inside a closed
building.
   C.   Disputes: In all cases of disputes or complaints arising from, or
concerning the placement of commercial bins or roll-off bins, written notice
shall be given to the city. In all cases of disputes or complaints, the
director shall forthwith designate the place and the decision shall be final.
(Ord. 2382 § 1, 1998)
13.64.190: SHARED CONTAINERS; COMMERCIAL COLLECTION:
   A.   Commercial properties that share containers will have rates established
by the city.
   B.   When physical limitations make it impractical to locate a commercial
container on the property of the business utilizing the container and for the
purposes of public health, safety and welfare it may become necessary to
either:
      1.   Locate the container on adjacent property; or
      2.   Subscribe to individual means of solid waste collection. (Ord. 2382
§ 1, 1998)
13.64.200: ENCLOSURE REQUIREMENT; COMMERCIAL:
   A.   Bin enclosure specifications shall be required to be resubmitted for
approval to the solid waste division prior to construction as part of the
development and planning process.
   B.   The enclosure(s) may be secured to prevent unauthorized collection,
tampering, and unlawful placement of solid waste, green waste, or recyclable
materials, but must be accessible to collection personnel during hereinbefore
stated collection hours. Additional charges may be assessed, as determined by
the city, for additional trips to service a previously locked enclosure.
   C.   Each development project, as that term is defined in Public Resources
Code section 42905, for which an application for a building permit has been
submitted after the effective date of this chapter, shall conform to the
requirements of the model ordinance adopted by the California integrated waste
management board and required by the California solid waste reuse and recycling
access act of 1991 1  relating to the provision of adequate areas for
collecting and loading recyclable materials. (Ord. 2382 § 1, 1998)
 
Notes
1 1. Pub.Res.C. § 42900 et seq.
13.64.210: SPECIAL COLLECTIONS (ROLL-OFF/COMPACTOR SERVICE):
Roll-off service is made available by application with the solid waste
division, including payment arrangements, for use by customers requiring
special disposal services, including building contractors for regular solid
waste disposal. A copy of the roll- off service policies and procedures will be
provided upon application. (Ord. 2382 § 1, 1998)
13.64.220: REMOVAL OF CONTAINERS AFTER COLLECTION:
It shall be the responsibility of every customer placing a solid waste, green
waste or recyclable material container in, or upon any street, sidewalk, curb
or alley for collection to remove such container from the designated collection
location as soon as possible after the containers have been collected, and in
any event no later than ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. on the designated collection
day. It is unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to perform such duty.
(Ord. 2382 § 1, 1998)
13.64.230: PLACEMENT OF SOLID WASTE IN CONTAINERS:
   A.   All solid waste, green waste, or recyclable materials placed in
automated or nonautomated containers shall be placed loosely in such container
so as to ensure ease of disposal. No overloaded containers, either by volume or
weight, shall be collected.
   B.   Customers shall flatten or dismantle boxes or cartons of cardboard,
which cannot be set aside for recycling, or other materials to provide the
maximum volume of waste matter in containers.
   C.   Ashes shall be thoroughly moistened to prevent scattering and shall be
bagged, wrapped or boxed prior to being placed in the container.
   D.   Animal feces, other than manure, and personal care products which are
unsanitary and offensive shall be securely wrapped.
   E.   All solid waste created, produced, or accumulated at hotels,
restaurants and other business establishments containing food waste shall be
drained and placed in plastic, watertight, heavy duty bags prior to being
placed in solid waste containers for collection.
   F.   Until removed by the collector, the customer shall be responsible for
the cleanup of any and all discards which the customer has generated, dumped,
spilled or otherwise lost or littered, notwithstanding human or animal
interference, wind or other natural forces and weather during storage,
collection, removal, or transfer. The collector shall be responsible for any
discards spilled during collection, removal or transfer by the collector. (Ord.
2382 § 1, 1998)
13.64.240: PLACEMENT OF GREEN WASTE IN CONTAINERS:
   A.   All property required to participate in the city's green waste
collection program shall place all "green waste", as defined in this chapter,
within the designated green waste container. Property not subject to the green
waste collection program may place "green waste", as defined in this chapter,
in the household waste container, until otherwise notified of requirement to
participate.
   B.   Any customer may make application for exemption from participation in
the city's green waste collection program, provided that the application shall
be made in affidavit form, fully sworn to by the customer making the
application, and filed with the director, along with payment of the processing
fee, and the following criteria is met:
      1.   A licensed landscaper removes all green waste from the premises; or
      2.   The customer removes all green waste from the premises; or
      3.   The customer practices backyard composting and grass cycling,
thereby not generating green waste requiring collection; or
      4.   The property is under construction, and no green waste is generated.
Any property exempted from the program is subject to periodic, random
inspections of containers placed for collection by the city, and evidence of
green waste contained therein shall result in immediate termination of the
exemption and the customer thereafter shall comply with the provisions of this
chapter. (Ord. 2382 § 1, 1998)
13.64.250: PROHIBITED SUBSTANCES IN SOLID WASTE, GREEN WASTE OR RECYCLABLE
MATERIAL CONTAINERS:
   A.   No person shall dispose of dangerous and infectious substances, such as
medical and "hazardous waste" as defined in this chapter, in any solid waste,
including green waste or recyclable materials, container for collection by the
city.
   B.   No person shall place or deposit in any solid waste, including green
waste or recyclable materials, container for collection by the city, wearing
apparel, bedding or other articles from any home or place where any infectious
or contagious disease has prevailed. The owner or occupant of any property
where an infectious or contagious disease has prevailed shall forthwith notify
the county health officer and shall dispose of such articles as directed.
   C.   No person shall place or deposit tires, asphalt or metallic discards in
any solid waste container, including green waste or recyclable materials
containers, for collection by the city.
   D.   If the provisions of this chapter are not fully complied with, the
collector shall place a tag on the container so stating. No collection shall be
made until the provisions of this section are complied with, or when a
collection has been made of a container without knowledge of its prohibited
contents, or a collection must be made to provide for the public health and
safety, a service charge may be assessed to offset the costs of removal and
disposal.
   E.   No person shall place or deposit any animal carcass in any solid waste,
including green waste or recyclable materials, container for collection by the
city. (Ord. 2382 § 1, 1998)
13.64.260: ADDITIONAL PROHIBITED SUBSTANCES IN GREEN WASTE CONTAINERS:
No person shall place or deposit any animal waste, inert noncompostable
products such as dirt, rocks, concrete, painted or treated wood, wood
containing nails or screws, plastic bags, glass, paper, razor blades, metal,
chemicals, food scraps, or other substances rendering such green waste unfit
for production of soil amendments or compost, for collection by the city. (Ord.
2382 § 1, 1998)
13.64.270: PLACEMENT OF RECYCLABLE MATERIALS:
Properties located in areas of the city that are included in the residential
recycling program shall place the recyclable materials in the container
provided by the city in the designated collection location directed by the
city, prior to six o'clock (6:00) A.M., on the regular solid waste collection
day, for automated customers. Recyclable material collection for nonautomated
customers shall occur on the automated collection day for their specific area.
(Ord. 2382 § 1, 1998)
13.64.280: BULKY WASTE:
Bulky waste items shall not be placed within residential or commercial solid
waste, green waste or recycling material containers. Upon request, and for an
additional charge, the director may arrange special collection of these items.
(Ord. 2382 § 1, 1998)
13.64.290: PHYSICALLY CHALLENGED/ELDERLY SERVICE:
   A.   Physically challenged and/or elderly customers with infirmities, who do
not have an able bodied person assisting with their household or business
activities, may receive set out/set back service for automated containers upon
written request to the city. The request shall describe the infirmity and/or
other factors, and the care they are receiving from a family member, a service
provider or other assistant, for their infirmity, which require the applicant
to receive such service. For those persons who are approved for the service,
there shall be no extra charge. A special designation shall be made to alert
the collector to provide the service which shall continue until terminated by
the director. If the director deems it necessary, he shall have the authority
to require that the customer provide proof of the physical challenge or
infirmity from a physician.
   B.   For automated customers involving special on premises collection, as
with those state above, containers shall be freely accessible and not be placed
for collection inside closed buildings or a gated area. (Ord. 2382 § 1, 1998)
13.64.300: EXEMPTION FROM SERVICE:
   A.   Unoccupied Property: Any customer may make application for exemption
from solid waste collection services on the basis that a developed property is
unoccupied, and that no solid waste, including green waste and recyclable
materials shall be placed or offered for collection by the city or its
authorized collector, from such property. The director may temporarily exempt
such property from participation in the city's solid waste collection program
for the limited period while the property is unoccupied; provided, that any
such statement or representation shall be made in affidavit form, fully sworn
to by the person making such statement or representation and filed with the
director along with payment of the application fee. An exemption shall be valid
only for the time that the statements made in the affidavit continue to be
true. Any violation of provisions of the exemption shall result in termination
of the exemption and shall require the customer to subscribe to solid waste
collection services in accordance with this chapter.
   B.   Fee: The fee for an application for an exemption shall be established
by the city council and shall be no less than the cost to the solid waste
division or authorized agent to validate the claim and shall include the cost
to process and maintain records of the exemption, and costs incurred to remove
container(s) from the property.
   C.   Expiration Of Exemption: From and after the date of adoption of the
ordinance establishing this chapter, all exemptions granted to customers for
solid waste services which do not relate to unoccupied property shall expire,
and all such persons shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter and
shall subscribe to the city's solid waste collection service. (Ord. 2382 § 1,
1998)
13.64.310: DIRECTOR; AUTHORIZATION TO ENFORCE:
The director is authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter, and
shall, in accordance with the law, have the right to inspect the exterior of
all property for the purpose of determining sanitary conditions and whether the
provisions of this chapter are being observed. Any person denying or
obstructing such inspections shall be subject to the penalties provided in this
chapter. (Ord. 2382 § 1, 1998)
13.64.320: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor. (Ord. 2382 § 1, 1998)
CHAPTER 13.65
RECYCLING REQUIREMENTS FOR LARGE VENUES AND EVENTS
SECTION:
13.65.010: Purpose Of Chapter
13.65.020: Applicability
13.65.030: Large Venue Recycling Requirements
13.65.040: Large Event Recycling Requirements
13.65.010: PURPOSE OF CHAPTER:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish requirements for recycling by large
venues and events to facilitate the city's compliance with state recycling
mandates, specifically those laws commonly referred to as "AB 2176" and "AB
939". (Ord. 2626 § 1, 2006)
13.65.020: APPLICABILITY:
This chapter shall apply to large venues and events in conformance with the
definitions below:
   INDIVIDUAL: A person who works at, or attends, a large venue or large event,
or a customer who is seated or served at the large venue or large event.
   LARGE EVENT: An event that charges an admission price, or is operated by a
local agency, and serves an average of more than two thousand (2,000)
individuals per day of operation of the event, including, but not limited to, a
public, nonprofit, or privately owned park, parking lot, golf course, street
system, or other open space when being used for an event, including, but not
limited to, a sporting event or a flea market.
   LARGE VENUE: A permanent venue facility that annually seats or serves an
average of more than two thousand (2,000) individuals within the grounds of the
facility per day of operation of the venue facility. For purposes of this
chapter, a venue facility includes, but is not limited to, a public, nonprofit,
or privately owned or operated stadium, amphitheater, arena, hall, amusement
park, conference or civic center, zoo, aquarium, airport, racetrack, horse
track, performing arts center, fairground, museum, theater or other public
attraction facility. A site under common ownership or control that includes
more than one large venue that is contiguous with other large venues in the
site is considered a single large venue.
   LOCAL AGENCY: A city or county. (Ord. 2626 § 1, 2006)
13.65.030: LARGE VENUE RECYCLING REQUIREMENTS:
The operator of a "large venue", as defined in this chapter, shall submit for
review and approval a completed recycling plan to the municipal utilities
director. The recycling plan shall be based upon the application form of the
municipal utilities. The recycling plan shall include the following:
   A.   Recycling Plan Requirements:
      1.   Location Of Containers And Compliance With Other Requirements: The
location of all interior and exterior containers used for the collection of
refuse, green waste and recyclables shall be identified. If a trash compactor
is proposed for use, the design and manufacturer's detail drawings shall be
submitted with the site plan submittal. The plans shall comply with the solid
waste recycling access act of 1991,
chapter 13.66 of this title, and the solid waste development requirements for
the activity and the requirements of this code.
      2.   Interior Recycling Containers: The recycling plan shall include a
provision for interior recycling containers in all work areas to provide
convenient access for recyclables at the point of generation.
      3.   Employee And Public Participant Education: The recycling plan shall
provide an explanation of actions taken to educate the public and employees
regarding the proper separation of recyclables including, but not limited to,
signage, employee meetings, and supervisory monitoring.
      4.   Adequate Capacity: Adequate capacity shall be provided for refuse
and recycling collection. Such requirements shall be based on the volume and
tonnage generated by the venue, as estimated by the city.
      5.   Equal Access To Recycling: Recycling and refuse containers, both
interior and exterior, shall be collocated to provide employees and members of
the public with access to recycling that is equivalent to refuse disposal
alternatives.
      6.   Materials To Be Recycled: The recycling plan shall identify
materials targeted for recycling. At a minimum, all materials included in the
city's residential curbside recycling program shall be included. Additional
materials may be required (e.g., wood waste, pallets and inerts).
      7.   Meeting With The City: Operators of large venues are required to
meet with the municipal utilities director or their designee on an annual basis
to review recycling requirements and to determine the solid waste and recycling
requirements appropriate for large venues. The city may revise recycling plans
for large venues to reflect changing conditions and markets for recyclables.
      8.   Fee Collected By The City: The city shall charge a fee established
by resolution of the city council, for processing and reviewing the initial
recycling plan.
   B.   Reporting Requirements:
      1.   Annual Reporting: On or before July 1 and annually thereafter, each
operator of a large venue shall submit to the city, upon request, written
documentation of waste reduction, reuse, recycling and diversion programs, if
any, implemented at the large venue. If the operator of a large venue did not
implement any part of the approved recycling plan, the operator shall include a
brief explanation for the delay as part of its report to the city.
      2.   Report Required Within One Month Of Notification: The operator of
the large venue shall submit the requested information to the city no later
than one month from the date the operator receives the request. (Ord. 2626 § 1,
2006)
13.65.040: LARGE EVENT RECYCLING REQUIREMENTS:
The operator of a large event shall submit for review and approval a completed
recycling plan to the municipal utilities director or their designee as a
condition of issuing the event permit. The recycling plan shall be based upon
the application form of the municipal utilities. The recycling plan shall
include the following:
   A.   Recycling Plan Requirements:
      1.   Meeting With The City: Operators of large venues are required to
meet with the municipal utilities director or their designee on an annual basis
to review recycling requirements and to determine the solid waste and recycling
requirements appropriate for the large venues.
      2.   Recycling Area Identified: The recycling plan shall identify the
area for collecting refuse and recyclables.
      3.   Number And Placement Of Refuse And Recycling Containers: The
recycling plan shall provide details related to the number and placement of
recycling and refuse containers serving the event.
      4.   Flow Of Recyclables And Refuse: The recycling plan shall identify
how refuse and recyclables shall be collected and transferred to the
centralized area pursuant to this subsection. The recycling plan shall identify
the number of persons and persons (e.g., volunteers, organization employees and
vendors) responsible for collecting and transferring refuse and recyclables
during the event.
      5.   Materials Targeted For Recycling: The recycling plan shall identify
materials targeted for recycling. At a minimum, all materials included in the
city's residential curbside recycling program shall be included. Additional
materials may be required (e.g., wood waste, pallets, and inerts).
      6.   Education Component: The recycling plan shall provide information
regarding signage, printed materials, employee/volunteer meetings or any other
means utilized to educate the public and workers on the proper separation of
recyclables at the event.
      7.   Approved Recycling Plan As Condition For Issuing Event Permit: No
event permit shall be issued for any large event subject to this chapter unless
the recycling plan has been approved by the municipal utilities director.
   B.   Reporting Requirements:
      1.   Upon request, the operator of a large event shall provide the city
with a report on the volume or weight of materials recycled at the event. If
the operator of a large event did not implement any part of the approved
recycling plan, the operator shall include a brief explanation for not
implementing that portion of the recycling plan in its report to the city.
      2.   The operator of the large event shall submit the requested
information to the city no later than one month from the date the operator
receives the request. (Ord. 2626 § 1, 2006)
CHAPTER 13.66
RECYCLING REQUIREMENTS FOR SPECIFIED DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY
SECTION:
13.66.010: Purpose
13.66.020: Applicability
13.66.030: Site And Building Recycling Plan Requirements
13.66.040: Construction And Demolition Recycling Requirements
13.66.050: Exceptions For Existing Development
13.66.010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish requirements for recycling by
specified development activities to facilitate the city's compliance with state
recycling mandates, remove architectural barriers to recycling and ensure the
recycling of construction and demolition debris. (Ord. 2544 § 1, 2003)
13.66.020: APPLICABILITY:
This chapter shall apply to applicants for the following types of development
activities:
   A.   The demolition of any structure.
   B.   The construction of, and additions or tenant improvements to, any
building other than a single-family residential building.
   C.   All reroofing activities. (Ord. 2544 § 1, 2003)
13.66.030: SITE AND BUILDING RECYCLING PLAN REQUIREMENTS:
The applicant for any development activity subject to this chapter shall, as a
condition of approval of that application, submit for review and approval a
completed site and building recycling plan to the city's municipal utilities
department. The site and building recycling plan shall be based upon the
application form of the municipal utilities department and consists of two (2)
components (site plan and building recycling plan). The plan shall include the
location and design of all existing and proposed recycling and trash
enclosures, design of site access points for solid waste and recycling
collection vehicles and a design of the grading of the site, operational
criteria for the proposed use of the property and capacity requirements for the
waste generation of the building. The municipal utilities director may waive
the requirement for a site plan upon its finding that: a) the development
activity is a reroofing project or a demolition; or b) the development activity
is a tenant improvement not requiring significant site improvements; or c) the
existing trash and recycling enclosure is adequate to provide the required
level of service, including capacity and access, for trash collection for
recycling, for the facility.
   A.   Site Plan Requirements:
      1.   Development Activity Other Than Duplexes, Triplexes, Fourplexes: For
development activity other than duplexes, triplexes and fourplexes, the site
plan shall provide for one or more double enclosures. If a trash compactor is
proposed for use, the design and manufacturer's detail drawings shall be
submitted with the site plan submittal. The plans shall comply with the solid
waste recycling access act of 1991, the solid waste development requirements
for the activity and the requirements of this code.
      2.   Trash And Recycling Containers: Trash and recycling containers shall
be shown on the site plan at grade.
      3.   Trash And Recycling Enclosures Accessibility: Trash and recycling
enclosures shall be accessible to solid waste collection vehicles. Location and
access shall be designed to minimize potential injury to employees or the
public and damage to property from collection vehicles. The plan shall include
design for solid waste truck turnaround movements, showing access and
turnaround areas, and "keep clear" areas, for solid waste collection vehicles.
      4.   Adequate Capacity: Adequate capacity shall be provided for the trash
and recycling enclosure design as shown on the site. Such requirements shall be
based on the volume and tonnage generated by the development activity, as
estimated by the city.
      5.   Recycling And Trash Enclosures Required: Recycling and trash
enclosures shall be required where trash receptacles are not stored wholly
within a building and in any industrial project where trash receptacles are
being used and the trash receptacles are not stored wholly within the building
or screened by landscaping, fencing or a structure.
         a.   Size: Recycling and trash bin enclosures shall be sized to
provide for both recycling and trash receptacles without one blocking the other
for proper access.
         b.   Design Specifications: The design of the recycling and trash bin
enclosures shall conform to the city's adopted standard specifications and
plans. Alternative designs are subject to the approval of the municipal
utilities director. The storage of grease or oils in the trash and recycling
enclosure is prohibited.
      6.   Issuance Of Building Permit: No building permit shall be issued for
any development activity subject to this chapter unless the site plan has been
approved by the municipal utilities director.
   B.   Building Recycling Plan Requirements:
      1.   The storage of trash and recyclables shall be contained in dumpsters
or other receptacles approved by the city.
      2.   The storage of nontrash or nonrecyclables in the trash and recycling
enclosure is prohibited.
      3.   The flow of materials through the facility shall be indicated.
Interior space shall be identified in centralized areas for the consolidation
of trash and recyclables (e.g., lounges, copy machine areas, etc.).
      4.   An education/public outreach program shall be implemented to
instruct occupants of the development about the benefits of recycling and how
to recycle.
         a.   Promotional Literature: The owners/property managers of the
development shall provide tenants with information on the proper separation of
recyclables from trash. Such information will be provided upon move in and at
least once each year thereafter. Employees of commercial businesses shall
receive periodic training to reinforce the proper separation of materials,
including the distribution of a flier that lists the materials for recycling.
         b.   Signage: Signage shall be permanently posted on recycling
containers to distinguish them from refuse or trash containers. General
instructions about how to recycle shall be posted within the recycling and
trash enclosure at or near the receptacle area and shall be visible to the
enclosure/receptacle users. The name and phone number of the person responsible
for maintenance of the enclosure or receptacle shall be posted. Any sign
visible from outside of the enclosure shall be no larger than two (2) square
feet.
      5.   Recycling receptacles shall be collocated next to trash containers
in the centralized areas of office work spaces. Signage shall be employed to
instruct users as to the proper separation of recyclables from trash. Signage
may be posted on the wall above or adjacent to the containers or affixed to the
containers. Signage shall be large enough to read from five foot (5') distance
by a person with average eyesight.
      6.   No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any development
activity subject to this chapter structure until the adequacy of the building
recycling plan has been approved by the municipal utilities director. (Ord.
2544 § 1, 2003)
13.66.040: CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION RECYCLING REQUIREMENTS:
The construction and demolition requirements specify recycling or
deconstruction for reuse in the removal, remodeling or new construction of any
structure on the site. The construction and demolition recycling plan shall
include the following:
   A.   Loading And Collection Area Drawing: The construction and demolition
recycling plan shall include a drawing that identifies an area for the loading
and collection of recyclable materials with appropriate access for collection
vehicles.
   B.   Targeted Materials For Recycling: Targeted materials for recycling
shall include concrete, asphalt, clean wood (unpainted or untreated), brick,
metal, cardboard and sheetrock. The municipal utilities director may modify the
targeted materials based on available markets.
   C.   Separation Of Materials: The demolition and construction plan shall
specify how the materials will be separated at the source and/or recycled by
utilizing the services of a processor.
   D.   Plan Compliance: The demolition and construction plan shall demonstrate
compliance with the following construction site requirements:
      1.   Construction waste and demolition debris shall be removed from the
construction site on a regular basis and shall not be stored on site and in the
open for a period in excess of four (4) weeks, provided that such waste is not
hazardous or noxious and does not constitute a nuisance, in which case it must
be appropriately secured and regularly removed from the construction site.
      2.   Reasonable efforts shall be demonstrated to provide for segregation
of recyclable construction materials and demolition debris for diversion from
landfills.
      3.   Construction waste and demolition debris that may become windblown
shall be containerized to prevent litter.
   E.   Recycled Materials: Recycled materials to be used in construction or
remodeling of the facility shall be identified.
   F.   Approved Demolition Permit And Building Permit: No demolition permit or
building permit shall be issued for any development activity subject to this
chapter unless the construction and demolition recycling plan has been approved
by the municipal utilities director.
   G.   Certificate Of Occupancy And Reporting Requirements/Documentation Of
Compliance With Construction And Demolition Plan:
      1.   Recycling Report A Condition Of Certificate Of Occupancy: The
applicant shall submit a report to the municipal utilities director that
documents the construction and demolition debris recycled as a condition of
issuing a certificate of occupancy.
      2.   Requirement To Report Quantities Of Waste Recycled As A Condition Of
The Certificate Of Occupancy: The construction and demolition report shall
report the estimated quantities of all construction waste and demolition debris
listed in the recycling plan.
      3.   Documentation Of Reported Quantities: The applicant shall attach
recycling receipts or provide other pertinent documentation that demonstrates
waste diversion and recycling in conformance with the approved construction and
demolition recycling plan. (Ord. 2544 § 1, 2003)
13.66.050: EXCEPTIONS FOR EXISTING DEVELOPMENT:
   A.   Existing Recycling And Trash Bin Enclosure: If the development activity
is a tenant improvement for a site, not requiring significant site
improvements, that has an existing trash enclosure, then the required recycling
containers for the facility shall be located inside the trash enclosure. If it
is not possible to locate the required recycling receptacles in the trash
enclosure, based on the municipal utilities director's estimate of required
volume, then recycling receptacles shall be located adjacent to the existing
trash enclosure. Any proposed modifications to the existing trash enclosure
shall comply with the requirements listed in section
13.66.030 of this chapter.
   B.   No Existing Recycling And Trash Bin Enclosure: If the development
activity does not have an existing trash enclosure, the development may be
required to install a trash enclosure that will meet the requirements of
section
13.66.030 of this chapter. If it is determined by the municipal utilities
director that there is insufficient space to construct a trash and recycling
enclosure, the required recycling receptacle shall be located adjacent to the
existing trash receptacles. Any proposed recycling and trash enclosure shall
comply with the requirements listed in section
13.66.030 of this chapter. The municipal utilities director shall have the
authority to grant exceptions to the requirements under section
13.66.030 of this chapter based on space and access considerations.
   C.   Waiver Of Parking Requirement: In order to meet the required recycling
volume requirement for the size of the facility, the planning commission and/or
city council may grant a waiver to reduce required parking through approval of
a variance. The municipal utilities director and the community development
director shall have the authority to grant the use of parking spaces for the
location of recycling receptacles, provided the enclosure or receptacles meet
the design specifications in section
13.66.030 of this chapter and the reduction in parking spaces does not violate
the minimum requirement for the development. (Ord. 2544 § 1, 2003)
CHAPTER 13.67
MANDATORY ORGANIC WASTE DISPOSAL REDUCTION
SECTION:
13.67.010: Purpose
13.67.020: Definitions
13.67.030: Requirements For Single-Family Generators
13.67.040: Requirements For Commercial Organic Waste Generators And Commercial
Business Generators
13.67.050: Waivers For Generators
13.67.060: Requirements For Commercial Edible Food Generators
13.67.070: Requirements For Food Recovery Organizations And Services
13.67.080: Requirements For Haulers And Facility Operators
13.67.090: Self-Hauler Requirements
13.67.100: Model Water Efficient Landscaping Ordinance Requirements
13.67.110: Procurement Requirements For City Departments, Direct Service
Providers And Vendors
13.67.120: Inspections And Investigations By The City
13.67.130: Enforcement
13.67.010: PURPOSE:
This Chapter is intended to comply with SB 1383, the, Short-lived Climate
Reduction Act of 2016, and its implementing regulations. SB 1383 Regulations
place requirements on cities, single-family residential dwellings, commercial
businesses including multi-family residential dwellings, commercial edible food
generators, self-haulers, food recovery organizations and food recovery
services to achieve statewide organic waste disposal reduction targets to
reduce organics in landfills as a source of methane. SB 1383 requires the City
to adopt and enforce an enforceable mechanism, such as the ordinance codified
in this Chapter to implement SB 1383 Regulations. (Ord. 2945 § 1, 2022)
13.67.020: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words, terms, phrases and their
derivations have the meanings given herein. Terms not defined in this section
and defined elsewhere in this Code shall have the same meanings herein unless
the context otherwise requires. When consistent with the context, words used in
the present tense include the future tense, and words in the singular number
include the plural number. In the event of a conflict between a definition in
this Code and a definition in CalRecycle's SB 1383 Regulations (14 CCR Section
18982), the definitions in 14 CCR Section 18982 shall control for the purposes
of this chapter. Additionally, for the purposes of this chapter, the
definitions in 14 CCR 18982 shall control for terms used in this chapter and
not defined in this Code. Unless otherwise specified herein, references to the
statute or regulation means the statute or regulation, as amended,
supplemented, superseded and replaced from time to time.
              Has the same meaning as in 14 CCR Section 18982 (a)(28) and shall be used for the
              purpose of storage and collection of black container waste. Black container waste
BLACK         means solid waste that is collected in a black container that is part of the
CONTAINER:    City's three (3) organic waste collection service as specified in 14 CCR Section
              18984.1. Designated recyclable materials, designated organic waste, and/or
              designated food scraps do not constitute black container waste.
BLUE          Has the same meaning as in 14 CCR Section 18982.2(a)(5) and shall be used only
CONTAINER:    for the purpose of storage and collection of source separated recyclable
              materials or source separated blue container organic waste.
CALIFORNIA    The State of California Code of Regulations. CCR references in this chapter are
CODE OF       preceded with a number that refers to the relevant Title of the CCR (e.g., "14
REGULATIONS   CCR" refers to Title 14 of CCR).
OR CCR:
              California's Department of Resources Recycling and Recovery, which is the
CALRECYCLE:   Department designated with responsibility for developing, implementing, and
              enforcing SB 1383 Regulations on Jurisdictions (and others).
CITY:         City of Redlands.
CITY          The City Manager of the City, and/or his/her designee(s), including such City
ENFORCEMENT   employees who are partially or wholly responsible for enforcing City ordinances,
OFFICIAL:     provision of the Redlands Municipal Code (the "Code" or "this Code"), and rules
              and regulations promulgated thereunder.
CITY MANAGER: The City Manager or his/her designee.
              A firm, partnership, proprietorship, joint-stock company, corporation, or
COMMERCIAL    association, whether for-profit or nonprofit, strip mall, industrial facility, or
BUSINESS OR   a multifamily residential dwelling, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR Section
COMMERCIAL:   18982(a)(6). A multi-family residential dwelling that consists of fewer than five
              (5) units is not a commercial business for purposes of implementing this chapter.
              Includes a Tier One or a Tier Two Commercial Edible Food Generator as defined in
COMMERCIAL    Section 13.67.020 of this ordinance or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR Section
EDIBLE FOOD   18982(a)(73) and (a)(74). For the purposes of this definition, food recovery
GENERATOR:    organizations and food recovery services are not commercial edible food
              generators pursuant to 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(7).
COMPLIANCE    A review of records by a jurisdiction to determine compliance with this chapter.
REVIEW:
              Has the same meaning as in 14 CCR Section 17896.2(a)(4), which stated, as of the
              effective date of this chapter, that "compost" means the product resulting from
COMPOST:      the controlled biological decomposition of organic solid wastes that are source
              separated from the municipal solid waste stream, or which are separated at a
              centralized facility.
CONTAINER
CONTAMINATION A container, regardless of color, that contains prohibited container
OR            contaminants, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(55).
CONTAMINATED
CONTAINER:
              Discarded or used materials removed from construction, remodeling, repair,
              renovation and/or demolition debris on any pavement, house, commercial building
C&D:          or other structure, or from landscaping; or, as otherwise defined in Title 15,
              Chapter 15.16 (Buildings & Construction - California Green Buildings Standards
              Code).
              Items designated by the City for placement in the green container that is
              specifically intended for the separate collection of food scraps and other
              organic waste materials which may be designated from time to time by the City
DESIGNATED    Manager or his/her designee. Designated food scraps includes all food such as,
FOOD SCRAPS:  but not limited to fruits, vegetables, meat, poultry, seafood, shellfish, bones,
              rice, beans, past, bread, cheese and eggshells. Food scraps excludes fats, oil
              and grease (FOG), meat and/or bones when such materials have been source
              separated from other food scraps for the purposes of sending to a rendering
              company.
DESIGNATED    Non-putrescible and non-hazardous recyclable waste including but not limited to
NON-ORGANIC   bottles, can, metals, plastics and glass, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR
RECYCLABLES:  Section 18982(a)(43) and other materials which may be designate from time to time
              by the City Manager or his/her designee.
              Organic waste designated by the City for placement in a green container that is
DESIGNATED    specifically intended for the separate collection of organic waste excluding
ORGANIC       designated blue container waste, carpets, non-compostable paper and textiles.
WASTE:        Designated organic waste includes garden trimmings, leaves, grass clippings,
              weeds, shrub clippings and other materials which may be designated from time to
              time by the City Manager or his/her designee.
DESIGNATED    Items designated for placement in the blue container specifically intended for
RECYCLABLE    the separate collection of designated non-organic recyclables and designated blue
MATERIALS:    container organic waste.
              An entity that a City contracts with or otherwise arranges to carry out any of
DESIGNEE:     the City's responsibilities of this chapter as authorized in 14 CCR Section
              18981.2. A designee may be a government entity, a hauler, a private entity, or a
              combination of those entities.
              Food intended for human consumption, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR Section
              18982(a)(18). For the purposes of this chapter or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR
EDIBLE FOOD:  Section 18982(a)(18), "edible food" is not solid waste if it is recovered and not
              discarded. Nothing in this chapter or in 14 CCR, Division 7, Chapter 12 requires
              or authorizes the recovery of edible food that does not meet the food safety
              requirements of the California Retail Food Code.
ENFORCEMENT   An action of the City to address non-compliance with this ordinance including,
ACTION:       but not limited to, issuing administrative citations, fines, penalties, or using
              other remedies; or, as otherwise defined in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(19).
ENFORCEMENT   The City Manager or the City's authorized designee(s) who is/are partially or
OFFICIAL:     wholly responsible for enforcing this chapter.
              Hazardous substance, hazardous waste, infectious waste, designated waste,
              volatile, corrosive, medical waste, infectious, regulated radioactive waste, and
              toxic substances or material that facility operator(s), which receive materials
              from the City and its generators, reasonably believe(s) would, as a result of or
              upon acceptance, transfer, processing, or disposal, be a violation of local,
              State, or Federal law, regulation, or ordinance, including: land use restrictions
              or conditions, waste that cannot be disposed of in Class III landfills or
              accepted at the facility by permit conditions, waste that in the City's
EXCLUDED      enforcement official's, or its designee's reasonable opinion would present a
WASTE:        significant risk to human health or the environment, cause a nuisance or
              otherwise create or expose the City, or its designee, to potential liability; but
              not including de minimis volumes or concentrations of waste of a type and amount
              normally found in single-family or multi-family solid waste after implementation
              of programs for the safe collection, processing, recycling, treatment, and
              disposal of batteries and paint in compliance with Sections 41500 and 41802 of
              the California Public Resources Code. Excluded waste also includes materials
              which require separate handling and cannot be collected from standard solid
              waste, recycling or organic containers, including but not limited to appliances,
              scrap metal, electronics, tires and oversized furniture items.
FOOD          A company that distributes food to entities including, but not limited to,
DISTRIBUTOR:  supermarkets and grocery stores, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR Section 18982
              (a)(22).
FOOD          Has the same meaning as in Section 113789 of the Health and Safety Code.
FACILITY:
FOOD          Actions to collect and distribute food for human consumption that otherwise would
RECOVERY:     be disposed, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(24).
              An entity that engages in the collection or receipt of edible food from
              commercial edible food generators and distributes that edible food to the public
              for food recovery either directly or through other entities or as otherwise
              defined in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(25), including, but not limited to:
              A.   A food bank as defined in Section 113783 of the Health and Safety Code;
              B.   A nonprofit charitable organization as defined in Section 113841 of the
FOOD RECOVERY Health and Safety code; and,
ORGANIZATION: C.   A nonprofit charitable temporary food facility as defined in Section 113842
              of the Health and Safety Code.
              A food recovery organization is not a commercial edible food generator for the
              purposes of this chapter and implementation of 14 CCR, Division 7, Chapter 12
              pursuant to 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(7).
              If the definition in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(25) for Food Recovery Organization
              differs from this definition, the definition in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(25) shall
              apply to this chapter.
              A person or entity that collects and transports edible food from a commercial
              edible food generator to a food recovery organization or other entities for food
FOOD RECOVERY recovery, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(26). A food recovery
SERVICE:      service is not a commercial edible food generator for the purposes of this
              chapter and implementation of 14 CCR, Division 7, Chapter 12 pursuant to 14 CCR
              Section 18982(a)(7).
              All food such as, but not limited to, fruits, vegetables, meat, poultry, seafood,
FOOD SCRAPS:  shellfish, bones, rice, beans, pasta, bread, cheese, and eggshells. Food scraps
              excludes fats, oils, and grease when such materials are source separated from
              other food scraps.
              An entity primarily engaged in providing food services to institutional,
FOOD SERVICE  governmental, commercial, or industrial locations of others based on contractual
PROVIDER:     arrangements with these types of organizations, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR
              Section 18982(a)(27).
FOOD-SOILED   Compostable paper material that has come into contact with food or liquid, such
PAPER:        as, but not limited to, compostable paper plates, paper coffee cups, napkins,
              pizza boxes, and milk cartons.
FOOD WASTE:   Food scraps but does not include food soiled paper or compostable plastics unless
              otherwise specified by the City.
              A person or entity that is responsible for the initial creation of solid waste,
GENERATOR:    and with respect to organic waste; or, as otherwise defined in 14 CCR Section
              18982(a)(48).
              Has the same meaning as in 14 CCR Section 18982.2(a)(29) and shall be used for
GREEN         the purpose of storage and collection of source separated green container organic
CONTAINER:    waste.
              Or "…shall be used for the purpose of storage and collection of designated
              organic waste."   
              A store primarily engaged in the retail sale of canned food; dry goods; fresh
GROCERY       fruits and vegetables; fresh meats, fish, and poultry; and any area that is not
STORE:        separately owned within the store where the food is prepared and served,
              including a bakery, deli, and meat and seafood departments, or as otherwise
              defined in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(30).
              The designated itinerary or sequence of stops for each segment of the City's
HAULER ROUTE: collection service area, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)
              (31.5).
              A facility that is in compliance with the reporting requirements of 14 CCR
HIGH          Section 18815.5(d) and meets or exceeds an annual average mixed waste organic
DIVERSION     content recovery rate of fifty percent (50%) between January 1, 2022 and December
ORGANIC WASTE 31, 2024, and seventy- five percent (75%) after January 1, 2025, as calculated
PROCESSING    pursuant to 14 CCR Section 18815.5(e) for organic waste received from the "mixed
FACILITY:     waste organic collection stream" as defined in 14 CCR Section 17402(a)(11.5); or,
              as otherwise defined in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(33).
              A site visit where the City reviews records, containers, and an entity's
              collection, handling, recycling, or landfill disposal of organic waste or edible
INSPECTION:   food handling to determine if the entity is complying with requirements set forth
              in this ordinance or chapter, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)
              (35).
LANDSCAPE     Tree and shrubbery trimmings, vegetation from land clearing, grass cuttings,
WASTE:        leaves, garden organic materials, sawdust, straw, wood chips and other discarded
              plant or vegetation material.
              An event, including, but not limited to, a sporting event or a flea market, that
              charges an admission price, or is operated by a local agency, and serves an
              average of more than two thousand (2,000) individuals per day of operation of the
LARGE EVENT:  event, at a location that includes, but is not limited to, a public, nonprofit,
              or privately owned park, parking lot, golf course, street system, or other open
              space when being used for an event. If the definition in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)
              (38) differs from this definition, the definition in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(38)
              shall apply to this chapter.
              A permanent venue facility that annually seats or serves an average of more than
              two thousand (2,000) individuals within the grounds of the facility per day of
              operation of the venue facility. For purposes of this chapter and implementation
              of 14 CCR, Division 7, Chapter 12, a venue facility includes, but is not limited
              to, a public, nonprofit, or privately owned or operated stadium, amphitheater,
              arena, hall, amusement park, conference or civic center, zoo, aquarium, airport,
LARGE VENUE:  racetrack, horse track, performing arts center, fairground, museum, theater, or
              other public attraction facility. For purposes of this chapter and implementation
              of 14 CCR, Division 7, Chapter 12, a site under common ownership or control that
              includes more than one large venue that is contiguous with other large venues in
              the site, is a single large venue. If the definition in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)
              (39) differs from this definition, the definition in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(39)
              shall apply to this chapter.
LOCAL         A school district, charter school, or county office of education that is not
EDUCATION     subject to the control of city or county regulations related to solid waste, or
AGENCY:       as otherwise defined in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(40).
MULTI-FAMILY  Of, from, or pertaining to residential premises with five (5) or more dwelling
RESIDENTIAL   units. Multi-family premises do not include hotels, motels, or other transient
DWELLING OR   occupancy facilities, which are considered commercial businesses.
MULTI-FAMILY:
MWELO:        Refers to the Model Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance MWELO), 23 CCR, Division
              2, Chapter 2.7.
NON-          Includes but is not limited to paper that is coated in a plastic material that
COMPOSTABLE   will not breakdown in the composting process or is not accepted for composting at
PAPER:        the local composting facility, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)
              (41).
NON-ORGANIC   Non-putrescible and non-hazardous recyclable wastes including but not limited to
RECYCLABLES:  bottles, cans, metals, plastics and glass, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR
              Section 18982(a)(43).
NOTICE OF     A notice that a violation has occurred that includes a compliance date to avoid
VIOLATION     an action to seek penalties, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)
(NOV):        (45) or further explained in 14 CCR Section 18995.4.
              Solid wastes containing material originated from living organisms and their
              metabolic waste products, including but not limited to food, green material,
ORGANIC       landscape and pruning waste, organic textiles and carpets, lumber, wood, paper
WASTE:        products, printing and writing paper, manure, biosolids, digestate, and sludges
              or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(46). Biosolids and digestate
              are as defined by 14 CCR Section 18982(a).
ORGANIC WASTE A person or entity that is responsible for the initial creation of organic waste,
GENERATOR:    or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(48).
PAPER         Include, but are not limited to, paper janitorial supplies, cartons, wrapping,
PRODUCTS:     packaging, file folders, hanging files, corrugated boxes, tissue, and toweling,
              or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(51).
              Include, but are not limited to, copy, xerographic, watermark, cotton fiber,
PRINTING AND  offset, forms, computer printout paper, white wove envelopes, manila envelopes,
WRITING       book paper, note pads, writing tablets, newsprint, and other uncoated writing
PAPERS:       papers, posters, index cards, calendars, brochures, reports, magazines, and
              publications, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(54).
              Unless otherwise defined in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(55), means the following:
              A.   Discarded materials placed in the blue container that are not identified by
              the City as acceptable source separated recyclable materials for the blue
              container;
PROHIBITED    B.   Discarded materials placed in the green container that are not identified as
CONTAINER     acceptable source separated green container organic waste for the green
CONTAMINANTS: container;
              C.   Discarded materials placed in the black container that are acceptable source
              separated recyclable materials and/or source separated green container organic
              wastes to be placed in the green container and/or blue container; and,
              D.   Excluded waste placed in any container.
RECOVERED     Products made from California, landfill-diverted recovered organic waste
ORGANIC WASTE processed in a permitted or otherwise authorized facility, or as otherwise
PRODUCTS:     defined in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(60).
RECOVERY:     Any activity or process described in 14 CCR Section 18983.1(b), or as otherwise
              defined in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(49).
RECYCLED-     Paper products and printing and writing paper that consists of at least thirty
CONTE NT      percent (30%), by fiber weight, postconsumer fiber, or as otherwise defined in 14
PAPER:        CCR Section 18982(a)(61).
              Gas derived from organic waste that has been diverted from a California landfill
RENEWABLE     and processed at an in-vessel digestion facility that is permitted or otherwise
GAS:          authorized by 14 CCR to recycle organic waste, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR
              Section 18982(a)(62).
              An establishment primarily engaged in the retail sale of food and drinks for on-
RESTAURANT:   premises or immediate consumption, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR Section
              18982(a)(64).
              A visual inspection of containers along a hauler route for the purpose of
ROUTE REVIEW: determining container contamination and may include mechanical Inspection methods
              such as the use of cameras, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)
              (65).
              Senate Bill 1383 of 2016 approved by the Governor on September 19, 2016, which
              added Sections 39730.5, 39730.6, 39730.7, and 39730.8 to the Health and Safety
              Code, and added Chapter 13.1 (commencing with Section 42652) to Part 3 of
SB 1383:      Division 30 of the Public Resources Code, establishing methane emissions
              reduction targets in a Statewide effort to reduce emissions of short-lived
              climate pollutants as amended, supplemented, superseded, and replaced from time
              to time.
SB 1383       Means or refers to, for the purposes of this chapter, the Short-Lived Climate
REGULATIONS   Pollutants: Organic Waste Reduction regulations developed by CalRecycle and
OR SB 1383    adopted in 2020 that created 14 CCR, Division 7, Chapter 12 and amended portions
REGULATORY:   of regulations of 14 CCR and 27 CCR.
SINGLE-       Of, from, or pertaining to any residential premises with fewer than five (5)
FAMILY:       units.
              Has the same meaning as defined in State Public Resources Code Section 40191,
              which defines solid waste as all putrescible and non-putrescible solid,
              semisolid, and liquid wastes, including garbage, trash, refuse, paper, rubbish,
              ashes, industrial wastes, demolition and construction wastes, abandoned vehicles
              and parts thereof, discarded home and industrial appliances, dewatered, treated,
              or chemically fixed sewage sludge which is not hazardous waste, manure, vegetable
              or animal solid and semi-solid wastes, and other discarded solid and semisolid
              wastes, with the exception that Solid Waste does not include any of the following
              wastes:
SOLID WASTE:  A.   Hazardous waste, as defined in the State Public Resources Code Section
              40141.
              B.   Radioactive waste regulated pursuant to the State Radiation Control Law
              (Chapter 8 (commencing with Section 114960) of Part 9 of Division 104 of the
              State Health and Safety Code).
              C.   Medical waste regulated pursuant to the State Medical Waste Management Act
              (Part 14 (commencing with Section 117600) of Division 104 of the State Health and
              Safety Code). Untreated medical waste shall not be disposed of in a solid waste
              landfill, as defined in State Public Resources Code Section 40195.1. Medical
              waste that has been treated and deemed to be solid waste shall be regulated
              pursuant to Division 30 of the State Public Resources Code.
              Materials, including commingled recyclable materials, that have been separated or
              kept separate from the Solid Waste stream, at the point of generation, for the
              purpose of additional sorting or processing those materials for recycling or
              reuse in order to return them to the economic mainstream in the form of raw
              material for new, reused, or reconstituted products, which meet the quality
SOURCE        standards necessary to be used in the marketplace, or as otherwise defined in 14
SEPARATED:    CCR Section 17402.5(b)(4). For the purposes of the ordinance, source separated
              shall include separation of materials by the generator, property owner, property
              owner's employee, property manager, or property manager's employee into different
              containers for the purpose of collection such that source separated materials are
              separated from black container waste/mixed waste or other solid waste for the
              purposes of collection and processing.
STATE:        The State of California.
              A full-line, self-service retail store with gross annual sales of two million
SUPERMARKET:  dollars ($2,000,000), or more, and which sells a line of dry grocery, canned
              goods, or nonfood items and some perishable items, or as otherwise defined in 14
              CCR Section 18982(a)(71).
              A commercial edible food generator that is one of the following:
              A.   Supermarket.
              B.   Grocery store with a total facility size equal to or greater than ten
TIER ONE      thousand (10,000) square feet.
COMMERCIAL    C.   Food service provider.
EDIBLE FOOD   D.   Food distributor.
GENERATOR:    E.   Wholesale food vendor.
              If the definition in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(73) of Tier One Commercial Edible
              Food Generator differs from this definition, the definition in 14 CCR Section
              18982(a)(73) shall apply to this chapter.
              A commercial edible food generator that is one of the following:
              A.   Restaurant with two hundred fifty (250) or more seats, or a total facility
              size equal to or greater than five thousand (5,000) square feet.
              B.   Hotel with an on-site food facility and two hundred (200) or more rooms.
              C.   Health facility with an on-site food facility and one hundred (100) or more
TIER TWO      beds.
COMMERCIAL    D.   Large venue.
EDIBLE FOOD   E.   Large event.
GENERATOR:    F.   A State agency with a cafeteria with two hundred fifty (250) or more seats
              or total cafeteria facility size equal to or greater than five thousand (5,000)
              square feet.
              G.   A local education agency facility with an on-site food facility.
              If the definition in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(74) of Tier Two Commercial Edible
              Food Generator differs from this definition, the definition in 14 CCR Section
              18982(a)(74) shall apply to this chapter.
              A business or establishment engaged in the merchant wholesale distribution of
WHOLESALE     food, where food (including fruits and vegetables) is received, shipped, stored,
FOOD VENDOR:  prepared for distribution to a retailer, warehouse, distributor, or other
              destination, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR Section 189852(a)(76). (Ord. 2945
              § 1, 2022)
 
13.67.030: REQUIREMENTS FOR SINGLE-FAMILY GENERATORS:
Single-family organic waste generators shall comply with the following
requirements:
   A.   Shall subscribe to the City's three-container organic waste collection
services for all organic waste generated as described below in Section
13.67.030(b). The City shall have the right to review the number and size of a
generator's containers to evaluate adequacy of capacity provided for each type
of collection service for proper separation of materials and containment of
materials; and single-family generators shall adjust its service level for its
collection services as requested by the City. Generators may additionally
manage their organic waste by preventing or reducing their organic waste,
managing organic waste on site, and/or using a community composting site
pursuant to 14 CCR Section 18984.9(c).
   B.   Shall participate in the City's organic waste collection service(s) by
source separating designated recyclable materials and designated organic waste
(including designated food scraps which shall first be prepared/bagged in the
manner described in notice provided by the City) from other waste and placing
designated materials in designated containers as described below:
      1.   Shall place only designated recyclable materials in the blue
container.
      2.   Shall place only Designated organic waste materials in the green
container.
      3.   Shall prepare all materials designated for collection as per written
instructions provided by the City or its designee.
      4.   Shall NOT place designated recyclable materials in black or green
containers and shall NOT place designated organic waste materials in blue or
black containers.
      5.   Shall not place prohibited container contaminants in collection
containers. (Ord. 2945 § 1, 2022)
13.67.040: REQUIREMENTS FOR COMMERCIAL ORGANIC WASTE GENERATORS AND COMMERCIAL
BUSINESS GENERATORS:
Commercial organic waste generators and commercial businesses shall comply with
the following requirements:
   A.   Shall subscribe to the City's organic waste collection service(s) and
comply with requirements of those services as described below in Section
13.67.040(b). The City shall have the right to review the number and size of a
generator's containers and frequency of collection to evaluate adequacy of
capacity provided for each type of collection service for proper separation of
materials and containment of materials; and commercial businesses shall adjust
their service level for their collection services as requested by the City.
   B.   Except for commercial businesses that meet the self-hauler requirements
in Section
13.67.090 of this Chapter, generators that are commercial businesses, including
multi-family residential dwellings, shall participate in the City's organic
waste collection service(s) by source separating designated recyclable
materials and designated organic waste (including designated food scraps) from
other waste and placing designated materials in designated containers as
described below:
      1.   Shall place only designated organic waste in the green container;
designated food scraps in the green container; designated recyclable materials
in the blue container; and black container waste in the black container.
      2.   Shall NOT place materials designated for the black container into
the green container or blue container.
      3.   Shall NOT place designated recyclable materials, designated food
scraps or designated organic waste into any container other than the container
designated for each of the corresponding materials.
      4.   Shall NOT place prohibited container contaminants in any container.
   C.   Commercial businesses, including multi-family residential dwellings,
shall supply and allow access to adequate number, size and location of
collection containers with sufficient labels or colors (conforming with
Sections 13.67.040(d)(1) and 13.67.040(d)(2) below for employees, contractors,
tenants, and customers, consistent with the City's collection services or, if
self-hauling, per the commercial businesses' instructions to support its
compliance with its self-haul program, in accordance with Section
13.67.090.
   D.   Commercial businesses, not including multi-family residential
dwellings, shall provide containers for the collection of designated organic
waste, designated food scraps and designated recyclable materials in all indoor
and outdoor areas where disposal containers are provided for customers, for
materials generated by that business. Such containers do not need to be
provided in restrooms. If a commercial business does not generate any of the
materials that would be collected in one type of container, then the business
does not have to provide that container in all areas where disposal containers
are provided for customers. Pursuant to 14 CCR Section 18984.9(b), the
containers provided by the business shall have either:
      1.   A body or lid that conforms with the container colors provided
through the collection service provided by the City, with either lids
conforming to the color requirements or bodies conforming to the color
requirements or both lids and bodies conforming to color requirements. A
commercial business is not required to replace functional containers.
      2.   Container labels that include language or graphic images, or both,
indicating the primary material accepted and the primary materials prohibited
in that container, or containers with imprinted text or graphic images that
indicate the primary materials accepted and primary materials prohibited in the
container. Pursuant 14 CCR Section 18984.8, the container labeling requirements
are required on new containers commencing January 1, 2022.
   E.   Multi-family residential dwellings are not required to comply with
container placement requirements or labeling requirements pursuant to 14 CCR
Section 18984.9(b).
   F.   Commercial businesses shall implement policies and procedures to
educate and train employees on proper separation of materials and prohibit
employees from placing materials in a container not designated for those
materials per City's solid waste collection services.
   G.   Commercial businesses, excluding multi-family residential dwellings,
shall inspect blue, green and/or black containers provided pursuant to Section
13.67.040(d) at least weekly for contamination and inform employees and
tenants/occupants if containers are contaminated and of the requirements to
keep contaminants out of those containers pursuant to 14 CCR Section 18984.9(b)
(3).
   H.   Commercial businesses, including multi-family dwellings, shall at least
annually provide written information on training to employees, contractors,
tenants and customers bout organic waste recovery requirements and about proper
sorting of designated organic waste, designated food scraps and designated
recyclable materials.
   I.   Commercial businesses, including multi-family residential dwellings,
shall provide education information described in subsection (g) of this Section
to new employees and/or tenants within fourteen (14) days of hiring new
employees or of occupation of the premises by tenants. Education information
shall describe requirements to keep designated organic waste, designated food
scraps and designated recyclable materials separate from black container waste
and the location of containers and the rules governing their use at each
property.
   J.   Commercial businesses, including multi-family residential dwellings,
shall provide or arrange access for the City or its agent(s) to their
properties during all Inspections conducted in accordance with Section
13.67.120 of this Chapter to confirm compliance with the requirements of this
Chapter.
   K.   Commercial businesses, including multi-family residential dwellings, if
generating two (2) cubic yards or more per week of total solid waste (or other
threshold defined by the State), shall requires that any contract or work
agreements between the owner, occupant, or operator of the commercial business
and a gardening or landscaping service specify that the organic waste generated
by those services be managed in compliance with Chapter 12, Part 3, Division 30
of the State Public Resources Code.
   L.   Commercial businesses, including multi-family residential dwellings,
that wish to self-haul organic waste or recyclables, shall meet the self-hauler
requirements in Section
13.67.090 of this Chapter.
   M.   Nothing in this section prohibits a generator from preventing or
reducing waste generation, managing organic waste on site, or using a community
composting site pursuant to 14 CCR Section 18984.9(c).
   N.   Commercial businesses that are Tier One or Tier Two Commercial Edible
Food Generators shall comply with food recovery requirements, pursuant to
Section 13.67.060. (Ord. 2945 § 1, 2022)
13.67.050: WAIVERS FOR GENERATORS:
   A.   De Minimis Waivers: The City may waive a commercial business'
(including multi-family residential dwellings) obligation to comply with some
or all the organic waste requirements of this Chapter if the commercial
business provides documentation that the business generates below a certain
amount of organic waste material as described in Section 13.67.050(a)(2) below.
Commercial businesses requesting a de minimis waiver shall:
      1.   Apply specifying the services that they are requesting a waiver from
and provide documentation as noted in Section 13.67.050(a)(2) below.
      2.   Provide documentation that either:
         a.   The commercial business' total solid waste collection service is
two cubic yards or more per week and organic waste subject to collection in a
blue container or green container comprises less than twenty (20) gallons per
week per applicable container of the business' total waste; or,
         b.   The commercial business' total solid waste collection service is
less than two cubic yards per week and organic waste subject to collection in a
blue container or green container comprises less than ten (10) gallons per week
per applicable container of the business' total waste.
      3.   Notify the City within fifteen (15) days if circumstances change
such that commercial business's organic waste exceeds threshold required for
waiver, in which case waiver will be rescinded.
      4.   De minimis waivers are to be valid for up to a period not to exceed
every five (5) years and are subject to a reverification audit conducted by the
City or its designee at any time.
   B.   Physical Space Waivers: The City may waive a commercial business' or
property owner's obligations (including multi-family residential dwellings) to
comply with some or all of the recyclable materials and/or organic waste
collection service requirements if the City has evidence from its own staff, a
hauler, licensed architect, or licensed engineer demonstrating that the
premises lacks adequate space for the collection containers required for
compliance with the organic waste collection requirements of Section
13.67.040.
A commercial business or property owner may request a physical space waiver
through the following process:
      1.   Submit an application to the City Manager or his/her designee
specifying the type(s) of collection services for which they are requesting a
compliance waiver.
      2.   Provide documentation that the premises lacks adequate space for
blue containers and/or green containers including documentation from its
hauler, licensed architect, or licensed engineer.
      3.   Notify the City if circumstances change such that commercial
business has adequate space for the collection containers required for
compliance with the organic waste collection requirements of Section
13.67.040, in which case the waiver will be rescinded. In addition, if the City
determines at any time that a commercial business that has adequate space for
the collection containers required for compliance with organic waste collection
requirements of Section
13.67.040, the City shall rescind the waiver.
      4.   Provide written verification to the City that it is still eligible
for physical space waiver every five (5) years, if the City has approved
application for a physical space waiver.
   C.   The City Manager and/or his/her designee will be responsible for review
and approval of waivers. (Ord. 2945 § 1, 2022)
13.67.060: REQUIREMENTS FOR COMMERCIAL EDIBLE FOOD GENERATORS:
   A.   Tier One Commercial Edible Food Generators must comply with the
requirements of this Section commencing January 1, 2022, and Tier Two
Commercial Edible Food Generators must comply commencing January 1, 2024,
pursuant to 14 CCR Section 18991.3.
   B.   Large venue or large event operators not providing food services, but
allowing for food to be provided by others, shall require food facilities
operating at the large venue or large event to comply with the requirements of
this Section, commencing January 1, 2024.
   C.   Commercial edible food generators shall comply with the following
requirements:
      1.   Arrange to recover the maximum amount of edible food that would
otherwise be disposed.
      2.   Contract with or enter into a written agreement with food recovery
organizations or food recovery services for: (i) the collection of edible food
for food recovery; or (ii) acceptance of the edible food that the commercial
edible food generator self-hauls to the food recovery organization for food
recovery.
      3.   Shall not intentionally spoil edible food that is capable of being
recovered by a food recovery organization or a food recovery service.
      4.   Allow the City's designated enforcement entity or designated third
party enforcement entity to access the premises and review records pursuant to
14 CCR Section 18991.4.
      5.   Keep records that include the following information, or as otherwise
specified in 14 CCR Section 18991.4:
         a.   A list of each food recovery service or organization that
collects or receives its edible food pursuant to a contract or written
agreement established under 14 CCR Section 18991.3(b).
         b.   A copy of all contracts or written agreements established under
14 CCR Section 18991.3(b).
         c.   A record of the following information for each of those food
recovery services or food recovery organizations:
            (1)   The name, address and contact information of the food
recovery service or food recovery organization.
            (2)   The types of food that will be collected by or self-hauled to
the food recovery service or food recovery organization.
            (3)   The established frequency that food will be collected or
self-hauled.
            (4)   The quantity of food, measured in pounds recovered per month,
collected or self-hauled to a food recovery service or food recovery
organization for food recovery.
      6.   Provide the City upon request, an annual food recovery report that
includes information on the food recovery efforts of the business for the year,
including information on amount recovered and outlets recovered food.
   D.   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to limit or conflict with
the protections provided by the California Good Samaritan Food Donation Act of
2017, the Federal Good Samaritan Act, or share table and school food donation
guidance pursuant to Senate Bill 557 of 2017 (approved by the Governor of the
State of California on September 25, 2017, which added Article 13 [commencing
with Section 49580] to Chapter 9 of Part 27 of Division 4 of Title 2 of the
Education Code, and to amend Section 114079 of the Health and Safety Code,
relating to food safety, as amended, supplemented, superseded and replaced from
time to time). (Ord. 2945 § 1, 2022)
13.67.070: REQUIREMENTS FOR FOOD RECOVERY ORGANIZATIONS AND SERVICES:
   A.   Food recovery services collecting or receiving edible food directly
from commercial edible food generators, via a contract or written agreement
established under 14 CCR Section 18991.3(b), shall maintain the following
records, or as otherwise specified by 14 CCR Section 18991.5(a)(1):
      1.   The name, address, and contact information for each commercial
edible food generator from which the service collects edible food.
      2.   The quantity in pounds of edible food collected from each commercial
edible food generator per month.
      3.   The quantity in pounds of edible food transported to each food
recovery organization per month.
      4.   The name, address, and contact information for each food recovery
organization that the food recovery service transports edible food to for food
recovery.
   B.   Food recovery organizations collecting or receiving edible food
directly from commercial edible food generators, via a contract or written
agreement established under 14 CCR Section 18991.3(b), shall maintain the
following records, or as otherwise specified by 14 CCR Section 18991.5(a)(2):
      1.   The name, address, and contact information for each commercial
edible food generator from which the organization receives edible food.
      2.   The quantity in pounds of edible food received from each commercial
edible food generator per month.
      3.   The name, address, and contact information for each food recovery
service that the organization receives edible food from for food recovery.
   C.   Food recovery organizations and food recovery services that have their
primary address physically located in the City and contract with or have
written agreements with one or more commercial edible food generators pursuant
to 14 CCR Section 18991.3(b) shall report to the City the total pounds of
edible food recovered in the previous calendar year from the Tier One and Tier
Two Commercial Edible Food Generators they have established a contract or
written agreement with pursuant to 14 CCR Section 18991.3(b) no later than
April 1st of each year. (Ord. 2945 § 1, 2022)
13.67.080: REQUIREMENTS FOR HAULERS AND FACILITY OPERATORS:
   A.   Requirements For Haulers: Permitted and licensed haulers providing
residential, commercial, or industrial organic waste collection services to
generators within the City's boundaries shall meet the following requirements
and standards as a condition of approval of a contract, agreement, or other
authorization with the City to collect organic waste:
      1.   Through written notice to the City, identify the facilities to which
they will transport organic waste.
      2.   Transport organic waste to a facility, operation, activity, or
property that recovers organic waste as defined in 14 CCR, Division 7, Chapter
12, Article 2.
      3.   Obtain applicable approval of the City pursuant to 14 CCR Section
18988.1 and keep a record of the documentation of its approval by the City.
      4.   Comply with the applicable requirements of 14 CCR, Division 7,
Chapter 12, Article 3. (Ord. 2945 § 1, 2022)
13.67.090: SELF-HAULER REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Self-haulers shall source separate all designated recyclable materials
and designated organic waste (materials that the City otherwise requires
generators to separate for collection in the City's organics and recycling
collection program) generated on-site from solid waste in a manner consistent
with 14 CCR Sections 18984.1 and 18984.2 or shall haul organic waste to a high
diversion organic waste processing facility as specified in 14 CCR Section
18984.3.
   B.   Self-haulers shall haul their source separated designated recyclable
materials to a facility that recovers those materials; and haul their source
separated green container organic waste to a solid waste facility, operation,
activity, or property that processes or recovers source separated organic
waste. Alternatively, self-haulers may haul organic waste to a high diversion
organic waste processing facility.
   C.   Self-haulers that are commercial businesses (including multi-family
residential dwellings) shall keep a record of the amount of organic waste
delivered to each solid waste facility, operation, activity, or property that
processes or recovers organic waste; this record shall be subject to Inspection
by the City. The records shall include the following information:
      1.   Delivery receipts and weight tickets from the entity accepting the
waste.
      2.   The amount of material in cubic yards or tons transported by the
generator to each entity.
      3.   If the material is transported to an entity that does not have
scales on-site or employs scales incapable of weighing the self-hauler's
vehicle in a manner that allows it to determine the weight of materials
received, the self-hauler is not required to record the weight of material but
shall keep a record of the entities that received the organic waste.
   D.   Self-haulers that are commercial businesses (including multi-family
self-haulers) shall provide information collected in Section 13.67.090(c) to
the City upon request.
   E.   A single-family residential organic waste generator that self-hauls
organic waste is not required to record or report information in Sections
13.67.090(c) and (d). (Ord. 2945 § 1, 2022)
13.67.100: MODEL WATER EFFICIENT LANDSCAPING ORDINANCE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   In addition to any requirements of this code, property owners or their
building or landscape designers, including anyone requiring a building or
planning permit, plan check, or landscape design review from the City, who are
constructing a new (single-family, multi-family, public, institutional, or
commercial) project with a landscape area greater than five hundred (500)
square feet, or rehabilitating an existing landscape with a total landscape
area greater than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet, shall comply
with Sections 492.6(a)(3)(B) (C), (D), and (G) of the MWELO, including sections
related to use of compost and mulch as delineated in this Section 14.
   B.   If, after the adoption of this chapter, the California Department of
Water Resources, or its successor agency, amends 23 CCR, Division 2, Chapter
2.7, Sections 492.6(a)(3)(B) (C), (D), and (G) of the MWWELO September 15, 2015
requirements in a manner that requires Cities to incorporate the requirements
of an updated MWELO in a local ordinance, and the amended requirements include
provisions more stringent than those required in this Section, the revised
requirements of 23 CCR, Division 2, Chapter 2.7 shall be enforced. (Ord. 2945 §
1, 2022)
13.67.110: PROCUREMENT REQUIREMENTS FOR CITY DEPARTMENTS, DIRECT SERVICE
PROVIDERS AND VENDORS:
City departments, direct service providers to the City and all vendors as
applicable, must comply with the City's recovered organic waste product
procurement policy and recycled-content paper procurement policy. (Ord. 2945 §
1, 2022)
13.67.120: INSPECTIONS AND INVESTIGATIONS BY THE CITY:
   A.   City representatives and/or its designee are authorized to conduct
inspections and investigations, at random or otherwise, of any collection
container, collection vehicle loads, or transfer, processing, or disposal
facility for materials collected from generators, or source separated materials
to confirm compliance with this ordinance by organic waste generators,
commercial businesses (including multi-family residential dwellings), property
owners, commercial edible food generators, haulers, self-haulers, food recovery
services, and food recovery organizations, subject to applicable laws. This
Section does not allow the City to enter the interior of a private residential
property for Inspection.
   B.   Regulated entity shall provide or arrange for access during all
Inspections (except for residential property interiors) and shall cooperate
with the City's employee or its designee during such Inspections and
investigations. Such Inspections and investigations may include confirmation of
proper placement of materials in containers, edible food recovery activities,
records, or any other requirement of this chapter described herein. Failure to
provide or arrange for: (i) access to an entity's premises; or (ii) access to
records for any inspection or investigation is a violation of this chapter and
may result in penalties described.
   C.   Any records obtained by the City during its Inspections, and other
reviews shall be subject to the requirements and applicable disclosure
exemptions of the Public Records Act as set forth in Government Code Section
6250 et seq.
   D.   City representatives, and/or designee are authorized to conduct any
Inspections, or other investigations as reasonably necessary to further the
goals of this ordinance, subject to applicable laws.
   E.   The City shall receive written complaints from persons regarding an
entity that may be potentially non-compliant with SB 1383 Regulations,
including receipt of anonymous complaints in accordance with SB 1383
Regulations (14 CCR Section 18995.3. (Ord. 2945 § 1, 2022)
13.67.130: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute grounds for
issuance of a Notice of Violation and assessment of a fine by a City
Enforcement Official or representative. Enforcement actions under this chapter
are issuance of an administrative citation and assessment of a fine. The City's
procedures on imposition of administrative fines are hereby incorporated in
their entirety, as modified from time to time, and shall govern the imposition,
enforcement, collection, and review of administrative citations issued to
enforce this ordinance and any rule or regulation adopted pursuant to this
chapter, except as otherwise indicated in this chapter.
   B.   Other remedies allowed by law may be used, including civil action or
prosecution as misdemeanor or infraction. The City may pursue civil actions in
the California courts to seek recovery of unpaid administrative citations. The
City may choose to delay court action until such time as a sufficiently large
number of violations, or cumulative size of violations exist such that court
action is a reasonable use of City staff and resources.
   C.   Responsible Entity For Enforcement: Enforcement pursuant to this
chapter may be undertaken by the City Enforcement Official, which may be the
City Manager or their designated entity, legal counsel, or combination thereof.
      1.   City Enforcement Official(s) will interpret this Chapter; determine
the applicability of waivers, if violation(s) have occurred; implement
enforcement actions; and, determine if compliance standards are met.
      2.   City Enforcement Official(s) may issue Notices of Violation(s).
   D.   Process For Enforcement:
      1.   City Enforcement Official(s) and/or their designee will monitor
compliance with the ordinance randomly and through compliance reviews, route
reviews, investigation of complaints, and an inspection program. Section
13.67.120 establishes the City's right to conduct inspections and
investigations.
      2.   The City may issue an official notification to notify regulated
entities of its obligations under the ordinance.
      3.   For incidences of prohibited container contaminants found in
containers, the City or its designee will issue an informational Notice of
Contamination to any generator found to have prohibited container contaminants
in a container. Such notice will be provided via a cart tag or other
communication immediately upon identification of the prohibited container
contaminants or within ten (10) days after determining that a violation has
occurred. If the City or its designee observes prohibited container
contaminants in a generator's containers on more than two (2) occasions, the
City or its designee may arrange for pick up and disposal of contaminated
containers and assess contamination processing fees (such as return trip fees
and extra pick-up fees) on the generator.
      4.   To address violations of this Chapter, the City shall issue a Notice
of Violation requiring compliance within thirty (30) calendar days after
issuance of the notice, or such shorter reasonable specific time period as the
City Enforcement Official shall assign within which the generator must correct
or otherwise remedy each violation, but in no event less than twenty-four (24)
hours from the date and time the Notice of Violation is issued.
      5.   Absent compliance by the respondent within the deadline set forth in
the Notice of Violation, the City shall commence an action to impose penalties,
via an administrative citation and fine, pursuant to the Chapter/Section
addressing fines and penalties of our MC, unless the City determines compliance
deadline extensions as set forth in Section 13.67.130(f) are found to be
warranted by extenuating circumstances.
   E.   Penalty Amounts For Types Of Violations: The penalty amounts for
violation of this Chapter shall be consistent with the City's Administrative
Remedies Ordinance or fee schedule (Resolution 8045 of the City of Redlands)
and assessed as the rates referenced.
   F.   Compliance Deadline Extension Considerations: The City may extend the
compliance deadlines set forth in a Notice of Violation issued if it finds that
there are extenuating circumstances beyond the control of the respondent that
make compliance within the deadlines impracticable, including the following:
      1.   Acts of God such as earthquakes, wildfires, flooding, and other
emergencies or natural disasters;
      2.   Delays in obtaining discretionary permits or other government agency
approvals; or,
      3.   Deficiencies in organic waste recycling infrastructure or edible
food recovery capacity and the City is under a corrective action plan with
CalRecycle pursuant to 14 CCR Section 18996.2 due to those deficiencies.
   G.   Appeals Process: Persons receiving an administrative citation
containing a penalty for an uncorrected violation may request a hearing to
appeal the citation. A hearing will be held only if it is requested within the
time prescribed and consistent with the City's procedures in the City's codes
for appeals of administrative citations. Evidence may be presented at the
hearing. The City will appoint a hearing officer who shall conduct the hearing
and issue a final written order.
   H.   Education Period For Non-Compliance: Beginning January 1, 2022 and
through December 31, 2023, the City will conduct inspections, route reviews
and/or waste evaluations, and compliance reviews, depending upon the type of
regulated entity, to determine compliance, and if the City determines that
organic waste generator, self-hauler, hauler, tier one commercial edible food
generator, food recovery organization, food recovery service, or other entity
is not in compliance, it shall provide educational materials to the entity
describing its obligations under this chapter and a notice that compliance is
required by January 1, 2022, and that violations may be subject to
administrative civil penalties starting on January 1, 2024.
   I.   Civil Penalties For Non-Compliance: Beginning January 1, 2024, if the
City determines that an organic waste generator, self-hauler, hauler, Tier One
or Tier Two Commercial Edible Food Generator, food recovery organization, food
recovery service, or other entity is not in compliance with this chapter, it
shall document the noncompliance or violation, issue a Notice of Violation, and
take enforcement action as needed. (Ord. 2945 § 1, 2022)
TITLE 14
RESERVED
TITLE 15
BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION
CHAPTER 15.04
CALIFORNIA BUILDING CODE (CBC)
SECTION:
15.04.010: Documents Adopted By Reference; Copies On File
15.04.020: Scope And Administration
15.04.030: Fire Protection Systems
15.04.040: Minimum Roof Covering Classifications
15.04.050: Awnings
15.04.060: Temporary Use Of Streets And Alleys
15.04.070: Grading
15.04.080: Violation; Penalty
15.04.010: DOCUMENTS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE; COPIES ON FILE:
That certain document on file in the office of the City Clerk of the City
marked and designated as the 2022 California Building Code, Volumes 1 and 2,
including Chapters 1, as amended, and Appendices G, H, I and J, as amended, is
adopted as the building code of the City and all of the regulations,
provisions, conditions and terms of such code and amendments are referred to
and are adopted and made part of this chapter. (Ord. 2950, 2022: Ord. 2901,
2019: Ord. 2816, 2015)
15.04.020: SCOPE AND ADMINISTRATION:
The following sections and subsections of the California Building Code, Chapter
1, Division II, Sections 105 through 113.4 are added and/or amended as follows:
   A.   CBC Chapter 1, Division II, Section [A]105.2, of the California
Building Code entitled "Work exempt from permit" is hereby amended by amending
items 2 and 4, and adding a new item 14, to read as follows:
      2.   Wood, chain-link, plastic, vinyl, metal, or similar fences not over
6 feet in height or masonry, concrete fence not over 3 feet in height measured
from the lowest adjacent grade to top of the wall and does not serve as a
swimming pool enclosure as required by section 15.06.080 of the Redlands
Municipal Code.
      4.   Retaining walls that are not over 3 feet in height measured from the
top of footing unless supporting a surcharge or impounding class I, II or III-
A liquids.
      14.   Flagpole not more than 30 feet in height measured from the lowest
adjacent grade the top of the pole on a residential zoned lot.
   B.   CBC Chapter 1, Division II, Section 105.3.1 entitled "Action on
Application", is hereby amended by the addition of two (2) exceptions to read
as follows:
      Exception 1: A permit shall not be issued for work on property within an
area which may be unsafe or for which no public access for such work is
provided, or, because of the hazards, there is no way in which the work can be
done so that it will be safe;
      Exception 2: A permit shall be withheld or denied if the chief building
official finds there are existing violations of the provisions of RMC Title 15
or any other provisions found in the Redlands municipal code, on site.
   C.   CBC Chapter 1, Division II, Section 105.6, entitled "Suspension or
Revocation", is hereby amended by the addition of the following two (2)
paragraphs to read as follows:
      The chief building official may, in writing, suspend or revoke a permit
issued under the provisions of this code if dust is generated in excess of
local, state, or federal standards, or conditions of project approvals.
      Failure to keep the site clear of debris or properly contain asbestos
containing materials may cause the permit to be suspended or revoked and the
site to be declared a public nuisance and abated as provided for by law.
   D.   CBC Chapter 1, Division II, Section 107.6, entitled "Demolition and/or
Remodeling Permits", is hereby added to read as follows:
      The chief building official may require that a detailed schedule be
provided to ensure demolition or remodeling work progresses expeditiously and
debris is hauled from the site as generated.
   E.   CBC Chapter 1, Division II Section [A] 109.4 of the California Building
Code is amended by the addition of the following sentence:
      Prior to the issuance of a permit for the performed work an investigation
permit shall be issued, and an inspection performed.
   F.   CBC Chapter 1, Division II Section [A] 109.4 of the California Building
Code amended by adding the following paragraph to the end of the section.
      Investigation fee. An investigation fee, in addition to the permit fee,
shall be collected whether or not a permit is then or subsequently issued. The
minimum investigation fee shall be equal to the minimum fee as defined in
Section 109.2. The payment of such investigation fee shall not exempt any
person from compliance with all other provisions of this code nor from any
penalty prescribed by law.
   G.   CBC Chapter 1, Division II Section [A] 109.6 of the California Building
Code is deleted in this entirety and hereby amended by adding the following
section:
      Fee Refunds. The Chief Building Official may authorize refunding of any
fee paid hereunder which was erroneously paid or collected.
      The Chief Building Official may authorize refunding of not more than 80
percent of the permit fee paid when no inspections have been performed under a
permit issued in accordance with this code.
      The Chief Building Official may authorize refunding of not more than 80
percent of the plan review fee when an application for a permit for which a
plan review fee has been paid is withdrawn or canceled before any plan review
is performed.
      The Chief Building Official shall not authorize refunding of any fee paid
except on written application filed by the original permittee not later than
180 calendar days after the date of fee payment.
   H.   CBC Chapter 1, Division II Section [A] 109.7 entitled "Re-Inspections"
is hereby added to read as follows:
      A fee may be assessed in the following scenarios at the fully burdened
hourly inspection rate as adopted by fee resolution and shall be paid prior to
the re-inspection of the work being scheduled.
      1.   Re-inspection performed for work that previously received
corrections and those corrections were not addressed.
      2.   Building permit is not posted or otherwise available on the work
site.
      3.   City approved plans are not available for scheduled inspection.
      4.   Failure to provide inspector access to the work performed on the
date for which the inspection was scheduled.
      5.   Deviation from the City approved plans.
      In instances where re-inspection fees have been assessed, no additional
inspection of the work will be performed until the required fees have been
paid.
   I.   CBC Chapter 1, Division II, Section [A] 111.3 entitled "Temporary
Occupancy", is hereby deleted in its entirety and rewritten to read as follows:
      If the chief building official finds that no substantial hazard will
result from occupancy of any building or portions thereof before the same is
completed, the chief building official may issue a Temporary Certificate of
Occupancy (TCO) for the use of a portion or portions of a building or
structure, provided an administrative fee, as established by resolution of the
city council, is paid for that temporary certificate of occupancy. Prior to the
expiration of the TCO, an inspection shall be performed, and Permanent
Certificate of Occupancy issued or the building vacated until all outstanding
conditions of approval are completed.
   J.   CBC Chapter 1, Division II, Section [A] 111.5, entitled "Certificate of
occupancy a requirement for issuing a city business license", is hereby added
to read as follows:
      No license to conduct a business, occupation or profession in a
particular building or structure in the city of Redlands shall be issued by the
finance director of said city until the building official has certified an
appropriate certificate of occupancy for the business occupancy classification
has been issued as required by this code.
   K.   CBC Chapter 1, Division II Section [A] 113.1, entitled "General", is
hereby amended to read as follows:
      General. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or
determination made by the Chief Building Official relative to the application
and interpretation of this code, the Planning Commission shall serve as the
board of appeals. The Chief Building Official, Director of Development Services
and the Fire Marshal of the City shall serve in an advisory capacity when
requested to do so. Commission members shall disqualify themselves and shall
not participate in any decision in which they have a conflict of interest.
   L.   CBC Chapter 1, Division II Section [A] 113.4 of Chapter 1, Division II
entitled "Procedures", is hereby added to read as follows:
      Procedures. An application for an appeal shall be based on a claim that
the true intent of this code or other rules legally adopted thereunder have
been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions do not fully apply or an equally
good or better form of construction is proposed. After notice to such parties
as the board may direct, a hearing shall be held and the board may affirm or
deny the decision of the chief building official. The board's determination
shall be in writing to the chief building official with a copy to the
appellant. If the appellant disagrees with the decision of the board, he may
appeal the decision to the city council. Such appeal shall be filed with the
city clerk within fifteen (15) days of the decision by the board.
(Ord. 2950, 2022: Ord. 2901, 2019: Ord. 2816, 2015)
15.04.030: FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS:
CBC Chapter 9, Division II, Section 901.2 of the California Building Code is
hereby amended by the addition of a sentence to read as follows:
   See Redlands Municipal Code, Title 15, and Chapter 15.20: Fire Code, for
additions and amendments to this chapter.
(Ord. 2950, 2022: Ord. 2901, 2019: Ord. 2816, 2015)
15.04.040: MINIMUM ROOF COVERING CLASSIFICATIONS:
CBC Chapter 15, Division II, Table 1505.1 of the California Building Code is
hereby amended to read as follows:
   Table 1505.1
Minimum Roof Covering Classification for different types
of construction for new buildings, re-roofs or additions.
 
IA IB IIA IIB IIIA IIIB IV VA VB
A  A  A   A   A    A    B* B* B*
 
      *See Section 1505.1.1 for Class A Roof Coverings in Very-High Fire Hazard
Severity.
(Ord. 2950, 2022: Ord. 2901, 2019: Ord. 2816, 2015)
15.04.050: AWNINGS:
CBC Chapter 31, division II, sections 3105.4, 3105.4.1, 3105.4.2, 3105.4.3, and
3105.4.4 are hereby added to read as follows:
   3105.4 General. This section shall apply to awnings projecting over public
and/or private property.
   3105.4.1 Definitions. For the purpose of the section:
      Ladder access area is the air space required for a ladder to rest upon
the ground, street, or sidewalk and be supported by a building windowsill,
permanent appendage, and parapet or roof eave at an angle of 75 degrees from
the horizontal.
      Collapsible is the property of an awning which will enable it to be
readily collapsible, retractable or capable of being folded against the face of
the supporting building without the use of a tool, special effort or special
knowledge.
   3105.4.2 Construction. Awnings shall have non-combustible frames but may
have fabric coverings that meet fire resistance criteria as outlined in CBC
§3105.3. Every awning with non-combustible coverings and every fabric covered
awning which projects into the ladder access area, as defined above, shall be
collapsible.
      Exception: A fixed awning not more than ten (10) feet in length may be
erected over a doorway to the building.
   3105.4.3 Projection. Awnings may extend over public or private property not
more than seven (7) feet from the face of the supporting building, but no
portion shall extend nearer than two (2) feet to the face of the nearest curb
or edge of the traffic way measured horizontally. In no case shall the awning
extend over public property greater than two-thirds of the distance from the
property line to the nearest curb in front of the building nor shall any
portion of the awning be closer to the side or rear property lines than would
be permitted by the current edition of the California building code for
projections.
   3105.4.4 All portions of an awning shall be at least eight (8) feet above
any public or private walkway.
      Exception: Any valance attached to an awning shall not project above the
roof of the awning at the point of attachment and shall not extend more than
twelve (12) inches below the roof of the awning at the point of attachment, but
in no case shall any portion of a valance be less than seven (7) feet in height
above a public or private way.
(Ord. 2950, 2022: Ord. 2901, 2019: Ord. 2816, 2015)
15.04.060: TEMPORARY USE OF STREETS AND ALLEYS:
CBC Chapter 33, Division II, Section 3308.3 of the California Building Code is
hereby added to read as follows:
   Public streets and alleys shall not be utilized by persons doing
construction or demolition work until proper clearance has been obtained from
the City Engineer. Whenever requested, plot plans and construction details
shall be submitted to the City Engineer for review. The City Engineer may
approve, modify or deny a request to utilize public streets by persons during
construction and/or demolition and his decision shall be based on findings
relative to hazards to life and limb, traffic safety and/or to excessive
traffic or pedestrian congestion. Where damage to public property could result,
proper bonds and insurance as specified by the City Engineer may be required.
Failure to obtain proper clearance for use of public property may result in a
finding that the materials constitute a public nuisance and a hazard to persons
or property and are subject to abatement and/or removal as provided by law.
(Ord. 2950, 2022: Ord. 2901, 2019: Ord. 2816, 2015)
15.04.070: GRADING:
The following sections and subsections of the California Building Code Appendix
J Sections J101 through J114 are hereby added and/or amended to read as
follows:
   A.   CBC Appendix J, Section J101.1 entitled "Scope" is hereby amended to
read as follows:
      The provisions of this chapter apply to grading, excavation and earthwork
construction, including fills and embankments. Where conflicts occur between
the technical requirements of this chapter and the geotechnical report, the
geotechnical report shall govern. In addition, the designs of the work as
described above need to meet the recognized and accepted civil and geotechnical
engineering practices and principles.
   B.   CBC Appendix J, Section J101.3 entitled "Enforcement Authority" is
hereby added to read as follows:
      The City Engineer shall have the authority for the enforcement of CBC
Appendix J and any amendments thereto. The words "Chief Building Official" as
hereinafter used shall mean City Engineer.
   C.   CBC Appendix J, Section J101.4 entitled "Hazardous Conditions" is
hereby added as follows:
      Whenever the Chief Building Official determines that any existing
excavation or embankment or fill on private property has become a hazard to
life and limb, or endangers property, or adversely affects the safety, use or
stability of a public way or drainage channel, the owner of the property upon
which the excavation or fill is located, or other person or agent in control of
said property, upon receipt of notice in writing from the Chief Building
Official, shall within the period specified therein repair or eliminate such
excavation or embankment to eliminate the hazard and to be in conformance with
the requirements of this code.
   D.   CBC Appendix J, Section J103.2 of the California Building Code is
hereby amended to read as follows:
      J103.2 Exemptions:
      A grading permit shall not be required for the following:
      1.   Grading in an isolated, self-contained area provided there is no
danger to the public and that such grading will not adversely affect adjoining
property. A determination of exemption per this section shall be made by the
City Engineer.
      2.   An excavation below finished grade for basements and footings of a
building, retaining wall or other structure authorized by a valid building
permit. This shall not exempt any fill made with the material from such
excavation or exempt any excavation having an unsupported height greater than 5
feet (1524mm) after the completion of such structure.
      3.   Cemetery graves.
      4.   Refuse disposal sites controlled by other regulations.
      5.   Excavations for wells or trenches for utilities.
      6.   Mining, quarrying, excavating, processing or stockpiling rock, sand,
gravel, aggregate or clay controlled by other regulations, provided such
operations do not affect the lateral support or increase the stresses in or
pressure upon any adjacent or contiguous property.
      7.   Exploratory excavations performed under the direction of soil
engineers or engineering geologists.
      8.   A fill less than 1 foot (305mm) in depth and placed on natural
terrain with a slope flatter than 1 unit vertical in 5 units horizontal (20%
slope), or a cut less than 3 feet (914mm) in depth, not intended to support
structures, or does not exceed 50 cubic yards (38.3m) on any one lot and does
not obstruct a drainage course.
      9.   Grading by public agencies or their agents, in connection with
construction or maintenance of roads or facilities for the generation, storage,
or transmission of water including flood waters or water for the purpose of
producing electrical energy.
      10.   Grading performed by disking or plowing for agricultural purposes
in connection with the preparation of soil for crop or animal use.
      Exemption from the permit requirements of this Appendix shall not be
deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in
violation of the provisions of this chapter or any other laws or ordinances of
the City.
   E.   CBC Appendix J, Section J104.5 entitled "As Built Plans" is hereby
added to read as follows:
      The permittee shall provide a copy of as-built plans to the City for a
permanent record at the end of the approved grading work.
   F.   CBC Appendix J, Section J105.1 of the California Building Code is
hereby amended to read as follows:
      Inspections shall be governed by Section 110, Chapter 1, Division II of
this code and requirements established, by approved policies and procedures of
the Engineering Division. An engineer shall provide grading inspections and
certifications for the work.
   G.   CBC Appendix J, Section J109.4 of the California Building Code is
hereby amended to have the following sentences added at the end of the section:
      For Single Family Lot Drainage
      1.   Whenever possible, drainage from single family lots shall flow
directly to a street.
      2.   If it should be determined necessary to allow offside drainage to
flow through a single-family lot (to preserve down lot views, aesthetics,
accept flow from offsite property, etc.), the following shall apply:
         a.   Drainage from only one lot shall flow through only one other lot.
         b.   A drainage easement shall be provided/obtained over the lot
accepting the drainage.
         c.   The drainage shall be contained within either a concrete/rock
lined swale or a reinforced concrete pipe.
         d.   The drainage facility shall be designed with excess capacity to
account for the probable lack of necessary maintenance. Therefore, it shall be
designed to convey two times the runoff from a 100-year storm with the minimum
diameter for a pipe being 12 inches.
   H.   CBC Appendix J Section J110.3 entitled "Temporary erosion control
during construction", is hereby added to read as follows:
      The permittee shall put into effect and maintain all precautionary
measures necessary to protect adjacent watercourses and public or private
property from damage by erosion, flooding, and deposition of mud or debris
origination from the site during the grading operation regardless of lot size.
   I.   CBC Appendix J Section J112 entitled "Protection of adjacent property"
is hereby added to read as follows:
      During grading operations, the permittee shall be responsible for the
prevention of damage to adjacent property and no person shall excavate on land
sufficiently close to the property line to endanger any adjoining public
street, sidewalk, alley, or other public or private property without supporting
and protecting such property from settling, cracking, or other damage which
might result.
   J.   CBC Appendix J Section J113 entitled "Dust control" is hereby added to
read as follows:
      The owner of the site or the project contractor shall put into effect and
maintain all precautionary measures necessary to prevent dust blowing from the
site to adjacent properties. Prior to the permit issuance, dust control sign
and required contact information as required by the department's policy shall
be installed at the site.
(Ord. 2950, 2022: Ord. 2901, 2019)
15.04.080: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
It is unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, partnership, or entity to do
or permit the following: erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move,
improve, remove, convert, demolish, equip, use or maintain any residential
building in violation of this chapter. Such person who violates any of the
provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. Such person shall be
deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof
during which any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is
committed, continued or permitted. Upon conviction, such person may be
punishable by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by
imprisonment in the county jail for a period not exceeding six (6) months, or
by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 2950, 2022: Ord. 2901, 2019: Ord.
2816, 2015)
CHAPTER 15.06
RESIDENTIAL BUILDING CODE
SECTION:
15.06.010: Document Adopted By Reference; Copies On File
15.06.020: Work Exempt From Permit
15.06.030: Temporary Occupancy
15.06.040: Board Of Appeals
15.06.050: Geotechnical Evaluation
15.06.060: Minimum Roof Classification
15.06.070: Swimming Pool Safety
15.06.080: Violation; Penalty
15.06.010: DOCUMENT ADOPTED BY REFERENCE; COPIES ON FILE:
That certain document on file in the office of the City Clerk of the City
marked and designated as the 2022 California Residential Code including
chapters 1, 4, and 9 (as amended), and appendices AH, AJ, AS, and AX (as
amended) are adopted as the residential code of the City and all of the
regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of such code and amendments are
referred to and are adopted and made part of this chapter. (Ord. 2950, 2022:
Ord. 2901, 2019: Ord. 2816, 2015)
15.06.020: WORK EXEMPT FROM PERMIT:
CRC chapter 1, division II, section R105.2 (2) and (3) is hereby deleted and
rewritten to read as follows:
   See Redlands Municipal Code, Title 15, Chapter 15.06.20(A).
(Ord. 2950, 2022: Ord. 2901, 2019: Ord. 2816, 2015)
15.06.030: TEMPORARY OCCUPANCY:
CRC chapter 1, division II, section R110.4 is hereby deleted in its entirety
and rewritten to read as follows:
   See Redlands Municipal Code, Title 15, Chapter
15.04.020(H) for additions and amendments to this section.
(Ord. 2950, 2022: Ord. 2901, 2019: Ord. 2816, 2015)
15.06.040: BOARD OF APPEALS:
CRC chapter 1, division II, section R112 is hereby deleted in its entirety and
rewritten to read as follows:
   See Redlands Municipal Code, Title 15, Chapter
15.04.020(L)(M) for additions and amendments to this section.
(Ord. 2950, 2022: Ord. 2901, 2019: Ord. 2816, 2015)
15.06.050: GEOTECHNICAL EVALUATION:
CRC Chapter 4 Division II Section R401.4.1 of the California Residential Code
is hereby amended by adding a sentence at the end of the section to read as
follows:
   A geotechnical or soil report is required for the new construction or when
the aggregate size of additions to the original structure exceed 50%.
(Ord. 2950, 2022)
15.06.060: MINIMUM ROOF CLASSIFICATION:
   A.   CRC chapter 9, subsection 902.1.1 shall be amended in part in terms of
being retitled as follows:
      Roof Coverings within the fire hazard areas as designated by the City of
Redlands Fire Chief on the Fire Hazard Map.
   B.   CRC chapter 9, division II, section R902.1.3 of the California
residential code is hereby amended to read as follows:
      The entire roof covering of every existing structure where more than 50
percent of the total roof area is replaced within any one-year period, the
entire roof covering of every new structure, and any roof covering applied in
the alteration, repair or replacement of the roof of every existing structure,
shall be fire-retardant roof covering that is at least Class B.
   C.   The remainder of the subsection shall remain unchanged. (Ord. 2950,
2022: Ord. 2901, 2019: Ord. 2816, 2015)
15.06.070: SWIMMING POOL SAFETY:
   A.   CRC appendix AX, section 115922 is hereby amended to read as follows:
      Except as provided in Section 115925, when a building permit is issued
for the construction of a new pool and/or spa or the remodeling of an existing
pool and/or spa at a private single-family home, the respective swimming pool
and/or spa shall be equipped with item #1 and at least one addition of the
following seven drowning prevention features:
   B.   CRC appendix AX, section 115923 is hereby amended to read as follows:
      An enclosure that meets the requirements of Section 115923 and isolates
the swimming pool or spa from the private single-family home. Any walls of the
residential structure or accessory structures used to complete the isolation
enclosure must have its door openings equipped with protection as required in
115922 (a) #4 or #5. Any such door protection device provided for this purpose
may not be used to comply with the second drowning prevention feature
requirement.
(Ord. 2950, 2022: Ord. 2901, 2019)
15.06.080: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
It is unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, partnership, or entity to do
or permit the following: erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move,
improve, remove, convert, demolish, equip, use or maintain any plumbing in
violation of this chapter. Every person who violates any of the provisions of
this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. Such person shall be deemed guilty of
a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is committed, continued or
permitted. Upon conviction such person may be punishable by a fine not
exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by imprisonment in the county
jail for a period not exceeding six (6) months, or by both such fine and
imprisonment. (Ord. 2950, 2022: Ord. 2901, 2019: Ord. 2816, 2015)
CHAPTER 15.08
CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE (CPC)
SECTION:
15.08.010: Document Adopted By Reference; Copies On File
15.08.020: Board Of Appeals
15.08.030: Building Sewers
15.08.040: Private Sewage Disposal Systems
15.08.050: Violation; Penalty
15.08.010: DOCUMENT ADOPTED BY REFERENCE; COPIES ON FILE:
That certain document on file in the office of the City Clerk of the City
marked and designated as the California Plumbing Code, 2022 Edition, including
Chapter 1, Division II (as amended) with Appendices, is adopted as the Plumbing
Code of the City and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms
of the California Plumbing Code are referred to and are adopted and made part
of this chapter. (Ord. 2950, 2022: Ord. 2901, 2019: Ord. 2816, 2015)
15.08.020: BOARD OF APPEALS:
CPC Chapter 1, Division II, Section 107, is hereby deleted in its entirety and
rewritten to read as follows:
   The Board of Appeals and the procedures concerning its operation as
described in Title 15,
Chapter 15.04 of the Redlands Municipal Code, shall also apply to all appeals
resulting from the administration of the California Plumbing Code.
(Ord. 2950, 2022: Ord. 2901, 2019: Ord. 2816, 2015)
15.08.030: BUILDING SEWERS:
CPC Chapter 7, Division II, Section 713.4 is deleted in its entirety and
rewritten as follows:
   713.4 Public Sewer Availability.
   The public sewer shall be considered as not being available where such
public sewer is more than two hundred (200) feet for the first dwelling unit
and an additional one hundred (100) feet for each subsequent dwelling unit from
the nearest point of the property that is served by such public sewer. A
property owner, or his authorized representative, may request in writing a
waiver based upon technical infeasibility due to site constraints. This request
shall be reviewed by the Chief Building Official and a determination given in
writing.
(Ord. 2950, 2022: Ord. 2901, 2019: Ord. 2816, 2015)
15.08.040: PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS:
CPC chapter 1, division II, chapter 7 section 721.2.1 are hereby added to read
as follows:
   721.2.1 Location of private sewage disposal systems.
      All components of an onsite wastewater treatment system shall be located
in the front yard area as defined in Redlands Municipal Code.
      Exception: If site constraints exist that prevent the placement of the
onsite wastewater treatment system in the front yard an alternate location
providing vehicle access for the future replacement and servicing shall be
provided. If vehicle access is not provided as a result of structures or
topography, then both the primary and 100% expansion effluent dispersal fields
shall be installed.
(Ord. 2950, 2022: Ord. 2901, 2019: Ord. 2816, 2015)
15.08.050: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
It is unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, partnership, or entity to do
or permit the following: erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move,
improve, remove, convert, demolish, equip, use or maintain any plumbing in
violation of this chapter. Every person who violates any of the provisions of
this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. Such person shall be deemed guilty of
a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is committed, continued or
permitted. Upon conviction such person may be punishable by a fine not
exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by imprisonment in the county
jail for a period not exceeding six (6) months, or by both such fine and
imprisonment. (Ord. 2950, 2022: Ord. 2901, 2019: Ord. 2816, 2015)
CHAPTER 15.10
CALIFORNIA ELECTRICAL CODE (CEC)
SECTION:
15.10.010: Document Adopted By Reference; Copies On File
15.10.020: Board Of Appeals
15.10.030: Electric Fences
15.10.040: Used Material
15.10.050: Trailers, Mobilehomes, Commercial Coaches And House Cars
15.10.060: Violation; Penalty
15.10.010: DOCUMENT ADOPTED BY REFERENCE; COPIES ON FILE:
That certain document on file in the office of the City Clerk of the City
marked and designated as the California Electrical Code, 2022 Edition and
Annexes thereto, is adopted as the Electrical Code of the City and all
regulations, provisions, conditions, and terms of such electrical code and
amendments are referred to and adopted and made a part of this chapter. (Ord.
2950, 2022: Ord. 2901, 2019: Ord. 2816, 2015)
15.10.020: BOARD OF APPEALS
CEC Article 89, Section 89.108.8 shall be deleted in its entirety and shall be
rewritten to read as follows:
   Appeals and the procedures concerning its operation as described in Title
15,
Chapter 15.04 of the Redlands Municipal Code, shall also apply to all appeals
resulting from the administration of the California Electric Code.
(Ord. 2950, 2022: Ord. 2901, 2019: Ord. 2816, 2015)
15.10.030: ELECTRIC FENCES:
CEC article 90, section 90.10 is hereby added to read as follows:
   It is unlawful to install any type of electric fence within the city of
Redlands. Prohibited electric fences include, but are not limited to, those
energized by battery, generator or electrical utility.
(Ord. 2950, 2022: Ord. 2901, 2019: Ord. 2816, 2015)
15.10.040: USED MATERIAL:
CEC Article 90, Section 90.11 is hereby added to read as follows:
   Previously used electrical material shall not be reused without prior
written approval of the Chief Building Official.
(Ord. 2950, 2022: Ord. 2901, 2019: Ord. 2816, 2015)
15.10.050: TRAILERS, MOBILEHOMES, COMMERCIAL COACHES AND HOUSE CARS:
CEC Article 90, Section 90.12 is hereby added to read as follows:
   Trailers, mobile homes, and commercial coaches being utilized for
construction projects as defined in title 8,
chapter 8.20 of the Redlands Municipal Code which connect to temporary power
shall comply with the city's adopted electrical code. Trailers, mobile homes,
commercial coaches, and house cars connected to an electrical source shall
obtain an electrical permit prior to the placement and inspections.
(Ord. 2950, 2022: Ord. 2901, 2019: Ord. 2816, 2015)
15.10.060: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
It is unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, partnership, or entity to do
or permit the following: erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move,
improve, remove, convert, demolish, equip, use or maintain any electrical
system in violation of this chapter. Every person who violates any of the
provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. Such person shall be
deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof
during which any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is
committed, continued or permitted. Upon conviction such person may be
punishable by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by
imprisonment in the county jail for a period not exceeding six (6) months, or
by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 2950, 2022: Ord. 2901, 2019: Ord.
2816, 2015)
CHAPTER 15.12
CALIFORNIA MECHANICAL CODE (CMC)
SECTION:
15.12.010: Document Adopted By Reference; Copies On File
15.12.020: Board Of Appeals
15.12.030: Violation; Penalty
15.12.010: DOCUMENT ADOPTED BY REFERENCE; COPIES ON FILE:
That certain document on file in the office of the City Clerk of the City
marked and designated as the California Mechanical Code, 2022 Edition,
including chapter 1, division II (as amended) with appendices, is adopted as
the mechanical code of the City and all of the regulations, provisions,
conditions and terms of the California Mechanical Code are referred to and are
adopted and made part of this chapter. (Ord. 2950, 2022: Ord. 2901, 2019: Ord.
2816, 2015)
15.12.020: BOARD OF APPEALS:
CMC Chapter 1, Division II, Section 107.1 of the California Mechanical Code is
hereby deleted in its entirety and rewritten to read as follows:
   The Board of Appeals and the procedures concerning its operation as
described in Title 15,
Chapter 15.04 of the Redlands Municipal Code, shall also apply to all appeals
resulting from the administration of the California Mechanical Code.
(Ord. 2950, 2022: Ord. 2901, 2019: Ord. 2816, 2015)
15.12.030: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
It is unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, partnership, or entity to do
or permit the following: erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move,
improve, remove, convert, demolish, equip, use or maintain any plumbing in
violation of this chapter. Every person who violates any of the provisions of
this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. Such person shall be deemed guilty of
a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is committed, continued or
permitted. Upon conviction such person may be punishable by a fine not
exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by imprisonment in the county
jail for a period not exceeding six (6) months, or by both such fine and
imprisonment. (Ord. 2950, 2022: Ord. 2901, 2019: Ord. 2816, 2015)
CHAPTER 15.14
DANGEROUS BUILDINGS CODE
SECTION:
15.14.010: Reference To Dangerous Buildings Code
15.14.020: Uniform Code For The Abatement Of Dangerous Buildings Adopted
15.14.030: Section 205 Deleted
15.14.040: Section 201.4 Added - Deputies Section
15.14.050: Section 302 Amended
15.14.060: Section 401.2 Amended - Notice And Order
15.14.070: Section 501 Amended
15.14.080: Section 601 Amended
15.14.090: Section 602 Amended
15.14.100: Section 603 Deleted - Subpoenas
15.14.110: Section 604 Amended - Conduct Of Hearing
15.14.120: Section 605 Amended - Decision Of Administrative Hearing Officer
15.14.130: Section 701 Amended - Compliance
15.14.140: Chapter 9 Deleted - Recovery Of Cost Of Repair Or Demolition
15.14.150: Violation; Penalty
15.14.010: REFERENCE TO DANGEROUS BUILDINGS CODE:
This chapter shall be known as the City's DANGEROUS BUILDINGS CODE and may be
cited as such. Whenever in this Code, or any ordinance of the City, the phrases
"Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings" or "Dangerous Buildings
Code" appear, such phrases shall be deemed and construed to refer or apply to
this chapter in conjunction with all other chapters of this title. (Ord. 2878,
2018)
15.14.020: UNIFORM CODE FOR THE ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS ADOPTED:
The Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, 1997 edition, and
any related errata, promulgated by the International Conference of Building
Officials, 5360 Workman Mill Road, Whittier, California, and which regulates
the enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, conversion, demolition,
occupancy, equipment, use and maintenance of buildings and other structures, is
adopted and by this reference is made a part of this Code with the force and
effect as though set out herein in full with the exception of those parts
expressly deleted or amended by this chapter. One copy of the Uniform Code for
the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, which has been certified as a true copy,
is on file and open for inspection by the public in the Office of the City
Clerk. (Ord. 2878, 2018)
15.14.030: SECTION 205 DELETED:
Section 205 and Chapter 5 of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous
Buildings is deleted and not adopted.
(Ord. 2878, 2018)
15.14.040: SECTION 201.4 ADDED - DEPUTIES SECTION:
Section 201 of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings is
amended by adding thereto a new subsection 201.4 to read as follows:
201.4 Deputies. In accordance with prescribed procedures and with the approval
of the appointing authority, the Building Official may appoint such number of
technical officers and inspectors and other employees as shall be authorized
from time to time. The Building Official may deputize such inspectors or
employees as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of the Uniform Code
for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings.
(Ord. 2878, 2018)
15.14.050: SECTION 302 AMENDED:
Whenever a building or structure, used or intended to be used for dwelling
purposes, because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, decay, damage,
faulty construction or arrangement, inadequate light, air or sanitation
facilities, or otherwise, is determined by the Community Development Director,
the Building Official or the Code Enforcement Manager, or their designees, to
be unsanitary, unfit for human habitation or in such a condition that is likely
to cause sickness or disease.
(Ord. 2878, 2018)
15.14.060: SECTION 401.2 AMENDED - NOTICE AND ORDER:
Paragraph 5 of section 401.2 of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous
Buildings is amended to read as follows:
      5.   Statements advising (i) that any person having any record, title or
legal interest in the building may appeal from the notice and order in
accordance with Redlands Municipal Code Section.
1.06.050, and (ii) that failure to appeal will constitute a waiver of all
rights to an administrative hearing and determination of the matter.
(Ord. 2878, 2018)
15.14.070: SECTION 501 AMENDED:
Wherever the board of appeals may be mentioned in Sections 501.1, 501.2, and
501.3, such term shall mean an Administrative Hearing Officer as established in
Chapter 1.22 of this Code.
(Ord. 2878, 2018)
15.14.080: SECTION 601 AMENDED:
Wherever the board of appeals or hearing examiner may be mentioned in Section
601, such terms shall mean an Administrative Hearing Officer as established in
Chapter 1.22 of this Code.
(Ord. 2878, 2018)
15.14.090: SECTION 602 AMENDED:
Wherever the board of appeals may be mentioned in Sections 501.1, 501.2, and
501.3, such term shall mean an Administrative Hearing Officer as established in
Chapter 1.22 of this Code.
(Ord. 2878, 2018)
15.14.100: SECTION 603 DELETED - SUBPOENAS:
Section 603 is deleted and not adopted. (Ord. 2878, 2018)
15.14.110: SECTION 604 AMENDED - CONDUCT OF HEARING:
Wherever the board of appeals may be mentioned in Section 604, such term shall
mean an Administrative Hearing Officer as established in Chapter 1.22 of this
Code.
(Ord. 2878, 2018)
15.14.120: SECTION 605 AMENDED - DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING OFFICER:
Section 605 is deleted and rewritten to read as follows. The Administrative
Hearing Officer shall render his/her decision pursuant to the provisions of
Chapter 1.22 of this Code.
(Ord. 2878, 2018)
15.14.130: SECTION 701 AMENDED - COMPLIANCE:
Wherever the board of appeals may be mentioned in Section 701, such term shall
mean an Administrative Hearing Officer as established in
Chapter 1.22 of this Code.
(Ord. 2878, 2018)
15.14.140: CHAPTER 9 DELETED - RECOVERY OF COST OF REPAIR OR DEMOLITION:
Chapter 9 is deleted and not adopted. The recovery of the cost of repair or
demolition of any substandard or dangerous building shall be subject to the
same procedures for recovery of costs incurred for abatement of public
nuisances as set forth in
Chapter 8.04 of this Code.
(Ord. 2878, 2018)
15.14.150: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
It is unlawful for any person, firm, entity, organization, or corporation
(collectively, "person") to violate, or permit a violation of, any provision of
this chapter. Every person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter
is guilty of a misdemeanor. Such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate
offense for each and every day, or portion thereof, during which any violation
of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted. Upon conviction, such
person may by punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00)
or by imprisonment in the County Jail for a period not to exceed six (6)
months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 2878, 2018)
CHAPTER 15.16
CALIFORNIA GREEN BUILDING STANDARDS CODE
SECTION:
15.16.010: Document Adopted By Reference; Copies On File
15.16.020: Violation; Penalty
15.16.010: DOCUMENT ADOPTED BY REFERENCE; COPIES ON FILE:
That certain document on file in the office of the City Clerk of the City
marked and designated as the California Green Building Standards, 2022 Edition,
is adopted as the Green Building Code of the City and all of the mandatory
regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of such code and amendments are
referred to and are adopted and made part of this Chapter. (Ord. 2950, 2022:
Ord. 2901, 2019: Ord. 2816, 2015)
15.16.020: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to violate or allow
violations of any mandatory requirement of this chapter. Every person who
violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. Such
person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or
portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter is committed, continued or permitted. Upon conviction, such person may
be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by
imprisonment in the county jail for a period not exceeding six (6) months, or
by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 2950, 2022: Ord. 2901, 2019: Ord.
2816, 2015)
CHAPTER 15.18
CALIFORNIA ENERGY CODE (CENC)
SECTION:
15.18.010: Document Adopted By Reference; Copies On File
15.18.020: Violation; Penalty
15.18.010: DOCUMENT ADOPTED BY REFERENCE; COPIES ON FILE:
That certain document on file in the office of the city clerk of the city
marked and designated as the California Energy Code, 2022 edition, is adopted
as the Energy Code of the City and all of the mandatory regulations,
provisions, conditions and terms of such code and amendments are referred to
and are adopted and made part of this chapter. (Ord. 2950, 2022: Ord. 2901,
2019: Ord. 2816, 2015)
15.18.020: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to violate or allow
violations of any mandatory requirement of this chapter. Every person who
violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. Such
person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or
portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter is committed, continued or permitted. Upon conviction, such person may
be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by
imprisonment in the county jail for a period not exceeding six (6) months, or
by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 2950, 2022: Ord. 2901, 2019: Ord.
2816, 2015)
CHAPTER 15.20
FIRE CODE
SECTION:
15.20.010: Findings And Adoption Of The California Fire Code
15.20.020: Definitions
15.20.030: Establishment Of Limits Required By The California Fire Code
15.20.040: Title
15.20.050: Department Of Fire Prevention
15.20.060: Liability
15.20.070: Fire Investigations
15.20.080: Annual Permit
15.20.090: Permit Fees
15.20.100: Fees Nonrefundable
15.20.110: Required Operational Permits
15.20.120: Inspection Fees
15.20.130: Electronic Record Keeping
15.20.140: Board Of Appeals
15.20.150: Violation Penalties
15.20.160: Abatement Of Violation
15.20.170: Failure To Comply
15.20.180: Religious Ceremonies
15.20.190: Surface And Turning Radius
15.20.200: Grade
15.20.210: Obstruction Of Fire Apparatus Access Roads
15.20.220: Premises Identification
15.20.230: Rooftop Addresses
15.20.240: Fire Hydrants And Mains
15.20.250: Private Fire Hydrant Identification
15.20.260: Private Fire Hydrant Markers
15.20.270: Access To Equipment
15.20.280: Smoke Or Fog Emitting Systems
15.20.290: Group A-1
15.20.300: Group A-2
15.20.310: Group A-3
15.20.320: Group A-4
15.20.330: Group A-5
15.20.340: Group B
15.20.350: Group E
15.20.360: Group F
15.20.370: Group M
15.20.380: Group R
15.20.390: Group S
15.20.400: Repair Garages
15.20.410: Bulk Storage Of Tires
15.20.420: Section 903.2.9 Amended
15.20.430: Stories Without Openings
15.20.440: Section 903.2.11.3 Amended
15.20.450: Group U Occupancy
15.20.460: NFPA 13D Sprinkler Systems
15.20.470: Water Supply For Areas Without City Water Service
15.20.480: Area Increase And Reconstruction
15.20.490: Change In Use
15.20.500: Adaptive Reuse
15.20.510: Section 905.4 Amended
15.20.520: Smoke And Heat Vents, Mechanical Smoke Exhaust Systems And Draft
Curtains
15.20.530: Sprinklered Buildings
15.20.540: Section 914.12 Added
15.20.550: Emergency Responder Radio Coverage In Existing Buildings
15.20.560: Fireworks
15.20.570: Minor Charge
15.20.580: Property
15.20.590: Response Costs
15.20.600: Responsible Guardian
15.20.610: Prohibition
15.20.620: Application Of State Law
15.20.630: Liability For Response Costs
15.20.640: Wildland-Urban Interface Fire Area
15.20.650: Vegetation Management
15.20.660: Defensible Space
15.20.670: Fire Protection Plan
15.20.680: Appendix B
15.20.690: Appendix BB
15.20.700: Appendix C
15.20.710: Appendix CC
15.20.720: Appendix D
15.20.730: Appendix O
15.20.740: Violation; Penalty
15.20.750: Fire Hazard Severity Zone Map
15.20.010: FINDINGS AND ADOPTION OF THE CALIFORNIA FIRE CODE:
   A.   Findings: The City Council of the City of Redlands hereby finds and
determines:
   1.   That the International Code Council is a private organization which has
been in existence for a period of at least three (3) years.
   2.   That the International Fire Code, 2021 edition, published by said
organization, is a nationally recognized compilation of proposed rules,
regulations, and standards of said organization.
   3.   That the International Fire Code has been printed and published as a
code in book form within the meaning of section 50022.2 et seq., of the
California Government Code.
   4.   That the California Fire Code, also known as the California Code of
Regulations, title 24, part 9, a portion of the "California Building Standards
Code" as defined in the "California Building Standards Law" commencing with
section 18901 of the Health And Safety Code, is assigned to the California
Building Standards Commission, which by law is responsible for approving all
building standards within the State of California. The 2022 edition of the
California Fire Code incorporates by reference the 2021 edition of the
International Fire Code, with necessary California amendments.
   5.   That a copy of the 2022 California Fire Code, certified by the city
clerk of the city of Redlands to be a true copy, has been filed for use and
examination by the public in the fire prevention office of the Redlands fire
department and the office of the city clerk.
   6.   The sections of said California Fire Code may be referred to by the
number used in said published compilation, preceded by the words "California
Fire Code section" or "Fire Code section", and may also be referred to by
additional reference to this Municipal Code and sections therein pertaining to
said California Fire Code.
   7.   That the additional requirements and standards established herein are
needed to properly protect the health, safety, and welfare of the existing and
future residents and workers within the city of Redlands. Said requirements and
standards are reasonably necessary because of local climatic, geological, and
topographical conditions, and comply with existing state laws and regulations.
   8.   The City Council finds and determines that the local variances from the
California Fire Code - building standards, California Code of Regulations,
title 24, part 9, contained in the City Fire Code, are reasonably necessary
because of local climatic, topographic and geographical considerations.
   B.   Adoption Of The California Fire Code: The city council of the city of
Redlands hereby adopts by reference, the 2022 California Fire Code, and
appendices B, BB, C, CC, and D, including fees and penalties, as compiled and
adopted by the California building standards commission; along with certain
amendments, additions, deletions and exceptions based upon the city council's
findings that the same are necessary based upon local climatic, geologic and
topographical conditions. The provisions of the California Fire Code,
California Fire Code appendix chapters, and the California Fire Code appendices
shall be applicable in all areas within the City of Redlands. The City Council
of the City of Redlands hereby adopts and amends the 2022 edition of the
California Fire Code, as compiled and published by the California Building
Standards Commission. (Ord. 2948, 2022: Ord. 2900, 2019: Ord. 2840, 2016)
15.20.020: DEFINITIONS:
   A.   Wherever the word "jurisdiction" is used in the fire code, it shall
mean the city of Redlands.
   B.   Wherever the term "corporation counsel" is used in the fire code, it
shall mean the city attorney for the city of Redlands.
   C.   Wherever the term "fire chief" is used in the fire code, it shall mean
the fire chief of the city of Redlands, or his or her authorized
representative.
   D.   Wherever the term "fire department" is used in the fire code, it shall
mean the fire department of the city of Redlands.
   E.   An employee of the city of Redlands fire department, when enforcing the
California fire code, this municipal code and other laws, rules and regulations
relating to fire and life safety, fire prevention and fire investigation, shall
be deemed a "peace officer" as those words are used in section 830.31 of the
California Penal Code.
   F.   Whenever the term "fire marshal" is used in the fire code, it shall
mean the supervisor of the fire prevention bureau and shall serve as the fire
code official under the direction of the fire chief, or the fire chief's
authorized representative. The community risk reduction division of the fire
department shall be responsible for fire prevention department duties within
the city of Redlands. (Ord. 2948, 2022: Ord. 2900, 2019: Ord. 2840, 2016)
15.20.030: ESTABLISHMENT OF LIMITS REQUIRED BY THE CALIFORNIA FIRE CODE:
   A.   Storage Of Flammable Cryogenic Fluids: Pursuant to section 5504.1 of
the California fire code, flammable cryogenic fluids shall not be permitted to
be stored, dispensed, or used unless, in the opinion of the fire code official,
such storage will not create an unacceptable threat to the occupants and
property owners.
   B.   Storage Of Explosives And Blasting Agents: Pursuant to section 5601.1
of the California fire code, the storage of explosives and blasting agents is
prohibited in all areas unless authorized by the fire code official.
   C.   Storage Of Class I And II Liquids: Pursuant to sections 5704.1 and
5706.1 of the California fire code, the storage of class I and class II liquids
in outside aboveground unprotected tanks is prohibited in all areas of the city
unless the fire code official determines, with specific documented findings,
that such an installation will not create a hazard to life or property in the
area.
   D.   Storage Of Liquefied Petroleum Gases: Pursuant to section 6101.3 of the
California fire code, the aggregate capacity of any one installation for the
bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gases shall not exceed two thousand (2,000)
water gallons (7571 liters) in commercial, residential and other areas where,
in the opinion of the fire code official, the location of bulk storage of
liquefied petroleum gases would create a threat to life and property. (Ord.
2948, 2022: Ord. 2900, 2019: Ord. 2840, 2016)
15.20.040: TITLE:
Section 101.1 of chapter 1, division II of the California fire code is hereby
amended to read as follows:
   101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the fire code of the city
of Redlands, hereinafter referred to for purposes of this chapter 15.20 as
"this code."
(Ord. 2948, 2022: Ord. 2900, 2019: Ord. 2840, 2016)
15.20.050: DEPARTMENT OF FIRE PREVENTION:
Section 103.2 of chapter 1, division II of the California fire code is hereby
deleted. (Ord. 2948, 2022: Ord. 2900, 2019: Ord. 2840, 2016)
15.20.060: LIABILITY:
Section 104.13 of chapter 1, division II of the California fire code is hereby
added to read as follows:
   104.13.1 Cost Recovery. Fire suppression, investigation and rescue or
emergency medical costs are recoverable in accordance with Health and Safety
Code sections 13009 and 13009.1. Any person who negligently or intentionally,
or in violation of law, causes an emergency response, including but not limited
to, a traffic accident or spill of toxic or flammable fluids or chemicals, is
liable for the costs of securing such emergency, including those costs set out
in Health And Safety Code section 13009 et seq. and Government Code section
53150 et seq. Any expense incurred by the city for securing such an emergency
situation shall constitute a debt of such person and shall be collectible by
the city in the same manner as in the case of an obligation under contract,
expressed or implied.
   A false fire alarm response fee may be imposed and paid after two (2) false
fire alarms have been received from any one residential or commercial source,
or from any one alarm system, within any consecutive three hundred sixty five
(365) day period. The false alarm response fee shall be established by
resolution of the city council.
   104.13.2 Expense for Securing an Emergency. The expense of securing any
emergency or hazard which is the result of a violation of this code or any
other code, ordinance or state law, or any damages caused by malicious mischief
requiring any corrective or preventive actions conducted by the city may be a
charge against the persons or entity whose such emergency or action may
constitute a debt of such persons or entity as provided below.
      1.   The fire chief, or duly authorized representative, may impose the
reasonable cost of fire prevention, fire suppression, and protection of the
public from other safety hazards when a fire or hazardous condition results
from any of the following activities or conditions:
         A.   Manufacture, transportation, storage, handling, or spilling of
hazardous chemicals, flammable or combustible liquids, explosives, or blasting
agents;
         B.   Failure to correct a hazardous condition for which a "notice of
violation," or equivalent notice, has been previously given by the chief, or
duly authorized representative;
         C.   Use of welding equipment, cutting torch, tar pot, or other open
flame device;
         D.   Permitting or causing the accumulation of hazardous or flammable
materials;
         E.   Setting of a fire or allowing a fire to be set in violation of
any code, ordinance, law or regulation;
         F.   Creating, allowing, or maintaining a fire hazard.
(Ord. 2948, 2022: Ord. 2900, 2019: Ord. 2840, 2016)
15.20.070: FIRE INVESTIGATIONS:
Section 104.11 of chapter 1, division II of the California fire code is hereby
amended to read as follows:
   104.11 Fire Investigations. The fire code official and the fire department
shall investigate the cause, origin and circumstances of any fire, explosion
and other hazardous condition. Information that could be related to trade
secrets or processes shall not be made part of the public record except as
required by law.
   The fire chief or duly authorized representative, is authorized to
investigate the cause, origin and circumstances of unauthorized releases of
hazardous materials. The Redlands police department and allied law enforcement
agencies are authorized to assist the fire department in its investigations
when requested to do so.
(Ord. 2948, 2022: Ord. 2900, 2019: Ord. 2840, 2016)
15.20.080: ANNUAL PERMIT:
Section 105.1.6 of chapter 1, division II of the California fire code is hereby
deleted. (Ord. 2948, 2022)
15.20.090: PERMIT FEES:
Section 105.2.5 of chapter 1, division II of the California fire code is hereby
added to read as follows:
   105.2.5 Permit Fees. Permit fees as established by city council resolution
shall be collected by the finance department. Proof of receipt shall accompany
all applications for permit prior to any inspection and approval by the city.
(Ord. 2948, 2022: Ord. 2900, 2019: Ord. 2840, 2016)
15.20.100: FEES NONREFUNDABLE:
Section 105.2.6 of chapter 1, division II of the California fire code is hereby
added to read as follows:
   105.2.6 Fees Not Refundable. Permit fees shall not be refundable for any
reason after initiation of plan review or inspection procedures.
(Ord. 2948, 2022: Ord. 2900, 2019: Ord. 2840, 2016)
15.20.110: REQUIRED OPERATIONAL PERMITS:
Section 105.5.50 of chapter 1, division II of the California fire code is
hereby added to read as follows:
   105.5.55 Fixed Kitchen Hood and Duct Extinguishing System. An operational
permit is required to utilize commercial cooking appliances, as defined in
Section 602, with a fixed hood and duct fire extinguishing system.
   105.5.56 - Temporary Haunted Houses, Ghost Walks, and Similar Amusement
uses. An operational permit is required in accordance with Appendix O for
temporary haunted houses, ghost walks, and similar amusement uses.
(Ord. 2948, 2022: Ord. 2900, 2019)
15.20.120: INSPECTION FEES:
Section 107.7 of chapter 1, division II of the California fire code is hereby
added to read as follows:
   107.7 Inspection Fees. The fire code official is authorized to impose and
collect appropriate fees for inspections established by resolution of the city
council.
(Ord. 2948, 2022: Ord. 2900, 2019: Ord. 2840, 2016)
15.20.130: ELECTRONIC RECORD KEEPING:
Section 109.3.1 of chapter 1, division II of California Fire Code is hereby
added to read as follows:
   109.3.1. Electronic Record Keeping. The Fire Code Official is authorized to
require electronic format submittals for fire protection systems maintenance
records.
(Ord. 2948, 2022)
15.20.140: BOARD OF APPEALS:
Section 111 of chapter 1, division II of the California fire code is hereby
amended to read as follows:
   111.1 Board of Appeals. The city planning commission shall serve as the
board of appeals. The chief building official, director of development services
and the fire chief of the city, or their respective designees, shall serve in
an advisory capacity when requested to do so. Board members shall disqualify
themselves and shall not participate in any decision in which they have a
conflict of interest.
(Ord. 2948, 2022: Ord. 2900, 2019: Ord. 2840, 2016)
15.20.150: VIOLATION PENALTIES:
Section 112.4 of chapter 1, division II of the California fire code is hereby
amended to read as follows:
   112.4.1 Administrative Citation Process Violation Penalties. Persons who
shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the
requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter, repair or do work in
violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the fire code
official, or of a permit or certificate used under provisions of this code,
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) a day or by imprisonment not exceeding six months, or both such
fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has
been served shall be deemed a separate offense. The city may also prosecute or
enforce violations of this chapter as a criminal offense in accordance with
this section.
(Ord. 2948, 2022: Ord. 2900, 2019: Ord. 2840, 2016)
15.20.160: ABATEMENT OF VIOLATION:
Section 112.4 of chapter 1, division II of the California fire code is hereby
amended to read as follows:
   112.4.1 Abatement of Violation. In addition to the imposition of the
penalties herein described, the fire code official is authorized to institute
an appropriate action to prevent unlawful construction or to restrain, correct
or abate a violation; or to prevent illegal occupancy of a structure or
premises; or to stop an illegal act, conduct of business or occupancy of a
structure on or about any premises. The expense of such action may be made a
lien upon the property upon which such condition exists.
(Ord. 2948, 2022: Ord. 2900, 2019: Ord. 2840, 2016)
15.20.170: FAILURE TO COMPLY:
Section 113.4 of chapter 1, division II of the California fire code is hereby
amended to read as follows:
   113.4 Failure To Comply. Any person who shall continue any work after having
been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed
to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to
violation penalties pursuant to section 112.4.
(Ord. 2948, 2022: Ord. 2900, 2019: Ord. 2840, 2016)
15.20.180: RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES:
Section 308.1.7 of the California fire code is hereby amended to read as
follows:
   308.1.7 Religious or Other Assembly Ceremonies. Candles held in persons'
hands (or on a non-stable device) are especially dangerous and shall not be
permitted. Battery operated simulated candles are available and may be used. No
permit is required for battery-operated candles or other electric candles.
(Ord. 2948, 2022: Ord. 2900, 2019: Ord. 2840, 2016)
15.20.190: SURFACE AND TURNING RADIUS:
   A.   Section 503.2.3 of the California fire code is hereby amended to read
as follows:
      503.2.3 Surface §503.2.3 Fire apparatus access roads for purposes of
rapid and reliable fire apparatus access shall be designed and maintained to
support the imposed load of fire apparatus weighing at least 75,000 pounds.
Fire apparatus access roads shall be surfaced with an approved concrete or
asphalt covering so as to provide all-weather driving capabilities. Turf block,
Ritter Rings, Turf Paver and other similar products shall not be used for fire
department access surfacing. Where rural road grades do not exceed 8%, the fire
code official may approve access roads of approved native materials or gravel
when compacted to ninety-five percent (95%).
   B.   Section 503.2.4 of the California fire code is hereby amended to read
as follows:
      503.2.4 Turning radius. The required turning radius of a fire apparatus
access road shall be an inner radius of twenty (20) feet and outer radius of
forty (40) feet.
(Ord. 2948, 2022: Ord. 2900, 2019: Ord. 2840, 2016)
15.20.200: GRADE:
Section 503.2.7 of the California fire code is hereby amended to read as
follows:
   503.2.7 Grade. The grade of the fire apparatus access road shall be a
maximum of twelve percent (12%), unless otherwise approved by the fire code
official for short distances when appropriate mitigation measures are utilized.
(Ord. 2948, 2022: Ord. 2900, 2019: Ord. 2840, 2016)
15.20.210: OBSTRUCTION OF FIRE APPARATUS ACCESS ROADS:
Section 503.4 of the California fire code is hereby amended to read as follows:
   503.4 Obstruction of Fire Apparatus Access Roads. Fire apparatus access
roads shall not be obstructed in any manner, including the parking of vehicles.
The minimum widths and clearances established in section 503.2.1 shall be
maintained at all times. Any obstruction or impedance to reasonable access may
be removed at the order of the fire code official or the fire department, with
the expense of such removal to be borne by the owner of the roadway, or in the
case of an obstructing vehicle or object, by the owner of said vehicle or
object.
(Ord. 2948, 2022: Ord. 2900, 2019: Ord. 2840, 2016)
15.20.220: PREMISES IDENTIFICATION:
Section 505.1 of the California fire code is hereby amended to read as follows:
   505.1 Premises Identification. New and existing buildings shall have
approved address numbers, building numbers or approved building identification
that is plainly legible and visible from the street or road fronting the
property. These numbers shall contrast with their background. Address numbers
shall be Arabic numerals or alphabet letters. Numbers shall be affixed on a
structure in a location with a clear, unobstructed view from the street. All
numbers shall be electrically illuminated during the hours of darkness.
   Numbers shall be a minimum of 4 inches high with a minimum stroke width of
0.5 inch for single-family residences.
   All multi-family, multi-retail and multi-commercial occupancies shall:
   Have a minimum of 6 inch high numbers, with a minimum one inch (1") stroke.
   Identify individual units with numbers a minimum of four (4) inches, affixed
to the unit's front door entrance or frame. All buildings with a rear door
access shall identify that unit with the proper numbers affixed to the door or
frame.
   All light and heavy industrial occupancies shall have a minimum of ten (10)
inch high numbers, with a minimum one-and-one-half inch (1½") stroke. All
complexes that are three (3) stories or greater in height and/or have two (2)
or more building units shall have a minimum of ten (10) inch high numbers, with
a one-and-one-half inch (1½") stroke.
   Buildings with a total floor area of 100,000 square feet (9290 m2) or
greater shall have minimum 12 inch (305 mm) high numbers, with a minimum stroke
width of 1½ inches (38 mm).
   All buildings with two (2) or more units shall identify utility meters
according to the unit being serviced.
   Buildings set-back from the street by 200' or more, shall have additional
address number of a minimum of 4" located at the property entrance.
(Ord. 2948, 2022: Ord. 2900, 2019: Ord. 2840, 2016)
15.20.230: ROOFTOP ADDRESSES:
Section 505.1.1 of the California fire code is hereby added to read as follows:
   505.1.1 Rooftop Addressing. Buildings exceeding a total square footage of
50,000 square feet shall have rooftop numbers placed parallel to the addressed
street for purposes of being visible from the air. The numbers shall be block
lettered and shall be a minimum of four (4) feet in height and eighteen (18)
inches in width. When more than one street address is assigned to a building,
the beginning and ending address numbers are to be placed at opposite ends of
the building, indicating the approximate location of the addressed portion of
the building.
(Ord. 2948, 12-6-2022)
15.20.240: FIRE HYDRANTS AND MAINS:
Section 507.5.1 of the California fire code is hereby amended to read as
follows:
   507.5.1 Where Required. Where a portion of the facility or building
hereafter constructed or moved into or within the jurisdiction is more than 300
feet (91 m) from a hydrant on a fire apparatus access road, as measured by an
approved route around the exterior of the facility or building, on-site fire
hydrants and mains shall be provided where required by the fire code official.
      Exceptions:
      1.   For group R-3 and group U occupancies, the distance requirement
shall be 600 feet (183 m). This distance may be further modified by the fire
code official for such occupancies when buildings are equipped throughout with
an approved fire sprinkler system installed in accordance with section
903.3.1.3.
      2.   Deleted.
(Ord. 2948, 2022: Ord. 2900, 2019: Ord. 2840, 2016)
15.20.250: PRIVATE FIRE HYDRANT IDENTIFICATION:
Section 507.5.7: California fire code is hereby added to read as follows:
   507.5.7 Private fire hydrants shall be painted OSHA Safety red or
equivalent.
(Ord. 2948, 2022)
15.20.260: PRIVATE FIRE HYDRANT MARKERS:
Section 507.5.8: of the California Fire Code is hereby added to read as
follows:
   507.5.8 Blue reflective pavement markers shall be placed within six (6)
inches of the edge of the center lane line on the side of the nearest hydrant.
(Ord. 2948, 2022)
15.20.270: ACCESS TO EQUIPMENT:
Section 507.5.7:
Section 509.3 of the California fire code is hereby added to read as follows:
   509.3 Access to Equipment in Multi-Unit Buildings. When automatic fire
sprinkler systems or fire alarm systems are installed in buildings constructed
for multiple tenants and these systems protect multiple tenant spaces, the main
controls and control appurtenances, such as risers, fire alarm control panels,
and valves for such systems, shall be located in an attached or included room
or an approved weather-resistant enclosure with at least one exterior access
door of not less than 3'-0" by 6'-8".
(Ord. 2948, 2022: Ord. 2900, 2019: Ord. 2840, 2016)
15.20.280: SMOKE OR FOG EMITTING SYSTEMS:
Section 511 of the California fire code is hereby added to read as follows:
   511 Smoke Or Fog Emitting Systems. No alarm system shall be installed in a
building or portion of a building which as a part of its operation discharges
any gas, vapor, liquid, or other product when the primary intent of the system
discharge is to obscure the vision of any person, cause disorientation, or
incapacitate any person within the building or portion thereof. Nothing in this
section is intended to preclude the connection of an alarm system to any fire
suppression system.
(Ord. 2948, 2022)
15.20.290: GROUP A-1:
Section 903.2.1.1 of the California fire code is hereby amended to read as
follows:
   903.2.1.1 Group A-1. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for
group A-1 occupancies.
(Ord. 2948, 2022: Ord. 2900, 2019: Ord. 2840, 2016)
15.20.300: GROUP A-2:
Section 903.2.1.2 of the California fire code is hereby amended to read as
follows:
   903.2.1.2 Group A-2. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for
group A-2 occupancies.
(Ord. 2948, 2022: Ord. 2900, 2019: Ord. 2840, 2016)
15.20.310: GROUP A-3:
Section 903.2.1.3 of the California fire code is hereby amended to read as
follows:
   903.2.1.3 Group A-3. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for
group A-3 occupancies.
(Ord. 2948, 2022: Ord. 2900, 2019: Ord. 2840, 2016)
15.20.320: GROUP A-4:
Section 903.2.1.4 of the California fire code is hereby amended to read as
follows:
   903.2.1.4 Group A-4. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for
group A-4 occupancies.
(Ord. 2948, 2022: Ord. 2900, 2019: Ord. 2840, 2016)
15.20.330: GROUP A-5:
Section 903.2.1.5 of the California fire code is hereby amended to read as
follows:
   903.2.1.5 Group A-5. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for
group A-5 occupancies in the following areas: concession stands, retail areas,
press boxes, and other accessory use areas in excess of 200 square feet (19
m2).
(Ord. 2948, 2022: Ord. 2900, 2019: Ord. 2840, 2016)
15.20.340: GROUP B:
Section 903.2.1.8 of the California fire code is hereby added to read as
follows:
   903.2.1.8 Group B. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided
throughout all buildings containing group B occupancies where the fire area
exceeds 200 square feet (19 m2).
(Ord. 2948, 2022: Ord. 2900, 2019: Ord. 2840, 2016)
15.20.350: GROUP E:
Section 903.2.3 of the California fire code is hereby amended to read as
follows:
   903.2.3 Group E. Except as provided for in sections 903.2.19 for a new
public school campus and 903.2.20 (modernization project), an automatic
sprinkler system shall be provided for group E occupancies as follows:
      1.   Throughout all group E fire areas greater than 200 square feet (19
m2) in area.
      2.   Throughout every portion of educational buildings below the level of
exit discharge.
      3.   In rooms or areas with special hazards such as laboratories,
vocational shops and other such areas where hazardous materials in exempt
amounts are used or stored.
(Ord. 2948, 2022: Ord. 2900, 2019: Ord. 2840, 2016)
15.20.360: GROUP F:
Section 903.2.4 of the California fire code is hereby amended to read as
follows:
   903.2.4 Group F. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout
all buildings containing group F occupancy where the fire area exceeds 200
square feet (19 m2).
(Ord. 2948, 2022: Ord. 2900, 2019: Ord. 2840, 2016)
15.20.370: GROUP M:
Section 903.2.7 of the California fire code is hereby amended to read as
follows:
   903.2.7 Group M. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout
buildings containing a group M occupancy where the fire area exceeds 200 square
feet (19 m2).
(Ord. 2948, 2022: Ord. 2900, 2019: Ord. 2840, 2016)
15.20.380: GROUP R:
Section 903.2.8 of the California fire code is hereby amended to read as
follows:
   903.2.8 Group R. An automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with
section 903.3 shall be provided throughout all buildings with a group R fire
area.
      Exceptions:
      1.   Existing Group R-3 occupancies converted to Group R-3.1 occupancies
not housing bedridden clients, not housing non-ambulatory clients above the
first floor, and not housing clients above the second floor.
      2.   Existing Group R-3 occupancies converted to Group R-3.1 occupancies
housing only one bedridden client and complying with Section 435.8.3.3 of the
California Building Code.
      3.   Pursuant to Health and Safety Code, Section 13113, occupancies
housing ambulatory children only, none of whom are mentally ill children or
children with intellectual disabilities, and the buildings or portions thereof
in which such children are housed are not more than two stories in height, and
buildings or portions thereof housing such children have an automatic fire
alarm system activated by approved smoke detectors.
      4.   Pursuant to Health and Safety Code, Section 13143.6, occupancies
licensed for protective social care which house ambulatory clients only, none
of whom is a child (under the age of 18 years), or who is elderly (65 years of
age or over).
      5.   When approved by the fire code official, detached group U private
garages or carports accessory to a group R-3 occupancy, not located in the high
or very high fire hazard areas of the jurisdiction as identified by California
Department of Forestry and Fire Protection.
      6.   When approved by the fire code official, detached group U private
garages or carports accessory to a group R-3 occupancy not located within fifty
(50) feet from an adjacent building, structure, and/or property line.
(Ord. 2948, 2022: Ord. 2900, 2019: Ord. 2840, 2016)
15.20.390: GROUP S:
Section 903.2.9 of the California fire code is hereby amended to read as
follows:
   903.2.9 Group S. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout
all buildings containing a group S occupancy where the fire area exceeds 200
square feet (19 m2).
(Ord. 2948, 2022: Ord. 2900, 2019: Ord. 2840, 2016)
15.20.400: REPAIR GARAGES:
Section 903.2.9.1 of the California fire code is hereby amended to read as
follows:
   903.2.9.1 Repair Garages. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided
throughout all buildings used as repair garages in accordance with the
California building code.
(Ord. 2948, 2022: Ord. 2900, 2019: Ord. 2840, 2016)
15.20.410: BULK STORAGE OF TIRES:
Section 903.2.9.2 of the California fire code is hereby amended to read as
follows:
   903.2.9.2 Bulk Storage of Tires. Buildings and structures where the area for
the storage of tires exceeds 200 square feet (19 m2) shall be equipped
throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with section
903.3.1.1.
(Ord. 2948, 2022: Ord. 2900, 2019: Ord. 2840, 2016)
15.20.420: SECTION 903.2.9 AMENDED:
Section 903.2.9 of the California fire code is hereby amended by the deletion
of the exception. (Ord. 2948, 2022: Ord. 2900, 2019: Ord. 2840, 2016)
15.20.430: STORIES WITHOUT OPENINGS:
Section 903.2.11.1 of the California fire code is hereby amended to read as
follows:
   903.2.11.1 Stories without Openings. An automatic sprinkler system shall be
installed throughout all stories, including basements, of all buildings where
the floor area exceeds 200 square feet (19 m2) and where there is not provided
at least one of the following types of exterior wall openings:
      1.   Openings below grade that lead directly to ground level by an
exterior stairway complying with section 1011 or an outside ramp complying with
section 1012. Openings shall be located in each 50 linear feet (15 240 mm), or
fraction thereof, of exterior wall in the story on at least one side.
      2.   Openings entirely above the adjoining ground level totaling at least
20 square feet (1.86 m2) in each 50 linear feet (15 240 mm), or fraction
thereof, of exterior wall in the story on at least one side.
(Ord. 2948, 2022: Ord. 2900, 2019: Ord. 2840, 2016)
15.20.440: SECTION 903.2.11.3 AMENDED:
Section 903.2.11.3 of the California fire code is hereby amended by the
deletion of the exception. (Ord. 2948, 2022: Ord. 2900, 2019: Ord. 2840, 2016)
15.20.450: GROUP U OCCUPANCY:
Section 903.2.18 of the California fire code is hereby amended to read as
follows:
   903.2.18 Group U Occupancy. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided
throughout buildings containing a group U occupancy where the fire area exceeds
200 square feet (19 m2).
      Exceptions:
         1.   When approved by the fire code official, group U occupancies, not
located in the high or very high fire hazard areas of the jurisdiction as
identified by California Department of Forestry and Fire Protection.
         2.   When a group U occupancy is not located within fifty (50) feet
from an adjacent building, structure, and/or property line.
(Ord. 2948, 2022: Ord. 2900, 2019: Ord. 2840, 2016)
15.20.460: NFPA 13D SPRINKLER SYSTEMS:
Section 903.3.1.3 of the California fire code is hereby amended to read as
follows:
   903.3.1.3 NFPA 13D Sprinkler Systems. Automatic sprinkler systems installed
in one- and two-family dwellings shall be installed throughout in accordance
with NFPA 13D, including attached garages.
(Ord. 2948, 2022: Ord. 2900, 2019: Ord. 2840, 2016)
15.20.470: WATER SUPPLY FOR AREAS WITHOUT CITY WATER SERVICE:
Section 903.3.5.3 of the California fire code is hereby added to read as
follows:
   903.3.5.3 Water Supply For Areas Without City Water Service. In areas
without city water service, buildings where the fire area exceeds 200 square
feet (19 m2) shall be provided with an approved automatic sprinkler system.
Group R-3 occupancies shall be provided with on-site water storage for a
minimum 10-minute sprinkler demand. When approved by the fire code official,
on-site water storage for other than group R occupancies may be reduced to that
required for an approved 30-minute sprinkler demand. These flows and duration
do not consider the needs required to provide domestic service. All sprinkler
systems shall be suitably freeze-protected for climatic conditions when
necessary.
      Exception: When approved by the fire code official, group U occupancy,
not located in the high or very high fire hazard areas of the jurisdiction as
identified by California Department of Forestry and Fire Protection.
(Ord. 2948, 2022: Ord. 2900, 2019: Ord. 2840, 2016)
15.20.480: AREA INCREASE AND RECONSTRUCTION:
Section 903.6.1 of the California fire code is hereby amended by adding the
following:
   903.6.1 Area Increase and Reconstruction. Every existing building or
structure relocated or moved onto a property, every building or structure which
as a result of fire, earthquake, or other disaster requires demolition and
reconstruction, or every existing building or structure that is receiving or
has received an addition(s) in which fifty percent (50%) of the original area
is exceeded, shall have an approved automatic sprinkler system installed
throughout therein.
(Ord. 2948, 2022: Ord. 2900, 2019: Ord. 2840, 2016)
15.20.490: CHANGE IN USE:
Section 903.6.2 of the California fire code is hereby amended by adding the
following:
   903.6.2 Change in Use. Changes made in the character or use of an occupancy
shall be approved by the building official and the chief. When there is a
change of use or occupancy of a building which exceeds 5,000 square feet in
floor area which would place the building in a different division of the same
group of occupancy or in a different group of occupancies, the occupancy shall
be provided with an approved automatic sprinkler system throughout, unless the
proposed use is less hazardous based on fire or life safety risk, than the
existing use.
(Ord. 2948, 2022: Ord. 2900, 2019: Ord. 2840, 2016)
15.20.500: ADAPTIVE REUSE:
Section 903.6.3 of the California fire code is hereby amended by adding the
following:
   903.6.3 Adaptive Reuse. Every existing group R occupancy that is changed to
a commercial use shall have an approved automatic sprinkler system installed
throughout.
(Ord. 2948, 2022: Ord. 2900, 2019: Ord. 2840, 2016)
15.20.510: SECTION 905.4 AMENDED:
Section 905.4 of the California fire code is hereby amended by adding location
number 7 to read as follows:
   7.   When required by other provisions of this code, 2½ inch hose
connections, meeting the requirements of this section and fire department
standards, shall be located at every other exterior fire department access door
as defined by section 2306.6.1, and arranged so that every portion of the
building and its contents can be reached with 150 feet of hose and stream.
(Ord. 2948, 2022: Ord. 2900, 2019: Ord. 2840, 2016)
15.20.520: SMOKE AND HEAT VENTS, MECHANICAL SMOKE EXHAUST SYSTEMS AND DRAFT
CURTAINS:
Section 910.2 of the California fire code is hereby amended to read as follows:
   910.2 Where Required. Where required by this code or otherwise installed,
smoke and heat vents or mechanical smoke exhaust systems and draft curtains
shall conform to the requirements of this section.
      Exceptions:
      1.   Frozen food warehouses used solely for storage of class I and II
commodities where protected by an approved automatic sprinkler system.
      2.   Deleted.
      3.   Deleted.
(Ord. 2948, 2022: Ord. 2900, 2019: Ord. 2840, 2016)
15.20.530: SPRINKLERED BUILDINGS:
Section 910.3.5 of the California fire code is hereby amended to read as
follows:
   910.3.5 Sprinklered Buildings. Where installed in buildings equipped with an
approved automatic sprinkler system, smoke and heat vents shall be designed to
operate automatically by the actuation of a heat responsive device rated at
least 100 degrees F above the operating temperature of the sprinkler heads, or
manually with independent controls for the fire department pursuant to section
914.12.
(Ord. 2948, 2022: Ord. 2900, 2019: Ord. 2840, 2016)
15.20.540: SECTION 914.12 ADDED:
Section 914.12 of the California fire code is hereby added to read as follows:
   914.12 Special Requirements For Group F, M, S-1 Or S-2 Distribution
Warehouses Greater Than 50,000 Square Feet in Floor Area. Buildings classified
primarily as group M, group S-1 or S-2, with no more than 10% of the building
square footage occupied with accessory uses, in which the primary use is
wholesale or retail sales of bulk products or packaged materials, or for the
storage of commodities for distribution, shall be in accordance with this
section.
   914.12.1 Fire Command Center. A fire command center for fire department
operations shall be provided. The location and accessibility of the fire
control room shall be approved by the fire code official. The fire control room
shall be separated from the remainder of the building by walls and ceilings not
less than one-hour fire partitions. The room shall be a minimum of 200 square
feet (19 m2) in area, with a minimum dimension of 10 feet (3048 mm). The room
shall contain the following as a minimum:
      1.   The fire alarm control unit and associated equipment.
      2.   Annunciator panel displaying status of sprinkler control valves and
waterflow detectors.
      3.   Main controls and indicators for mechanical smoke exhaust systems.
      4.   Graphic with schematic indicating building floor plans, means of
egress, fire protection systems, firefighting equipment and access.
      5.   Other firefighting equipment and system controls as required by the
fire code official.
      6.   Emergency lighting powered by the standby electrical system.
   914.12.2 Mechanical Smoke Exhaust. A mechanical smoke exhaust system
conforming to the requirements of section 910.4 shall be provided. The system
may be combined with environmental or other ventilation air systems when
approved by the fire code official.
   914.12.3 Standpipe Systems. A class I standpipe system shall be provided,
with hose connections located at fire department access doors as required by
section 905.4. The system may be interconnected with the building automatic
sprinkler systems, and may be supplied by adjacent systems or by a separate
riser. Standpipe systems shall conform to the requirements of NFPA 14.
   914.12.4 Fire Department Graphic. A printed graphic with schematic diagrams
of the building automatic sprinkler systems, fire alarm systems, means of
egress, standpipe systems, smoke exhaust systems, access doors, and any other
equipment as required by the fire code official shall be superimposed over a
building floor plan or site plan and mounted on the wall in a highly visible
location in the fire control room. The graphic shall be durable and
waterproofed.
   914.12.5 Standby Power. A standby power generator conforming to the
California electrical code shall be provided on the premises, in a protected
location. The generator shall have a rated capacity necessary to supply the
load of all fire protection features listed below at the same time:
      1.   Emergency lighting and exit signs necessary for egress.
      2.   Lighting for the fire control room.
      3.   Signal and communication systems as applicable.
      4.   Electrically powered fire pumps required to maintain pressure.
      5.   Mechanical smoke exhaust systems as required by section 914.12.2.
      In addition, a fuel supply sufficient for not less than two hours of
operation shall be required on the premises. All electrically connected systems
shall be transferred within 60 seconds after losing primary power.
   914.12.6 Enhanced Communications. When required by the fire code official,
enhanced communication equipment, such as bi-directional amplifiers, shall be
provided in the building for dedicated use by the fire department. When such
equipment is required to be installed, it shall be provided with a standby
power supply.
   914.12.7 Other Requirements. All fire protection systems shall comply with
fire department standards regarding installation, signage and labeling,
maintenance, and other requirements as specified by the fire code official.
(Ord. 2948, 2022: Ord. 2900, 2019: Ord. 2840, 2016)
15.20.550: EMERGENCY RESPONDER RADIO COVERAGE IN EXISTING BUILDINGS:
Section 1103.2 of the California Fire Code is hereby amended to read as
follows:
   1103.2 Criteria 2: Within one (1) year of completion date. All plans and
permits shall be submitted for review within six (6) months of completion date.
(Ord. 2948, 2022)
15.20.560: FIREWORKS:
Section 5608 of the California Fire Code is hereby added to read as follows:
   "Fireworks" means any device containing chemical elements and chemical
compounds capable of burning independently of the oxygen of the atmosphere and
producing audible, visual, mechanical, or thermal effect which are useful as
pyrotechnic devices or for entertainment. The term "Fireworks" includes, but is
not limited to, devices designated by the manufacturer as Fireworks,
firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, roman candles, rockets, sparklers,
chasers, fountains, smoke sparks, aerial bombs, and Fireworks kits. "Fireworks"
includes both "dangerous Fireworks" and "safe and sane" Fireworks as defined in
the California Health and Safety Code.
(Ord. 2948, 2022: Ord. 2900, 2019: Ord. 2847, 2017)
15.20.570: MINOR CHARGE:
"Minor charge" is a person under the age of eighteen (18) years for whom a
responsible guardian has the legal care, custody or control. (Ord. 2948, 2022:
Ord. 2900, 2019: Ord. 2847, 2017)
15.20.580: PROPERTY:
"Property" shall mean any private property; including but not limited to, a
residence, yard, or field, whether or not occupied as a dwelling, and whether
owned, leased, rented or used with or without compensation. (Ord. 2948, 2022:
Ord. 2900, 2019: Ord. 2847, 2017)
15.20.590: RESPONSE COSTS:
"Response costs" means those reasonable and necessary costs directly incurred
by City public safety or other personnel for a response to an unpermitted
discharge or illegal storage of fireworks, and include the cost of providing
law enforcement, firefighting, or other services arising from the unpermitted
discharge or illegal storage, maintaining or handling of fireworks, including
but not limited to:
   A.   Salaries and benefits of public safety or other personnel for the
amount of time spent responding to, remaining at, or otherwise dealing with the
unpermitted discharge or illegal storage of fireworks, and the administrative
costs attributable to any response;
   B.   The cost of any medical treatment to or for any public safety personnel
injured responding to, remaining at, or leaving the scene of the unpermitted
discharge or illegal storage of fireworks;
   C.   The cost of repairing or replacing any public safety equipment or
property damage, and the cost of use of any such equipment, in responding to,
remaining at, or leaving the scene of any unpermitted discharge or illegal
storage of fireworks; and
   D.   The disposal cost of confiscated fireworks. (Ord. 2948, 2022: Ord.
2900, 2019: Ord. 2847, 2017)
15.20.600: RESPONSIBLE GUARDIAN:
"Responsible guardian" means a parent, guardian or other person having the
legal care, custody, or control of his or her minor charge. (Ord. 2948, 2022:
Ord. 2900, 2019: Ord. 2847, 2017)
15.20.610: PROHIBITION:
Except as otherwise provided in this Code, no person shall have in his or her
possession, or keep, store, use, shoot, discharge, set off, ignite, explode,
manufacture, sell, offer to sell, give, transport, or improperly dispose of any
fireworks or dangerous or safe and sane fireworks.
   A.   Except where otherwise expressly provided in this Code or under a
permit issued by the California State Fire Marshal or the Fire Chief, it shall
be unlawful for any person to possess, offer for sale, or store any fireworks.
   B.   Except where otherwise expressly provided in this Code, it shall be
unlawful for any property owner or tenant to allow or permit the possession,
sale, use or discharge of fireworks at or on their property when the property
owner or tenant knows or should know of the possession, sale, use or discharge
of fireworks at or on such property.
   C.   The Fire Chief and his or her authorized representatives shall have the
authority to seize, take, and remove any fireworks, dangerous fireworks, and
safe and sane fireworks. The Fire Chief and his authorized representatives may
charge any person whose fireworks are seized pursuant to this section.
   D.   Every person who causes, aids, abets or conceals a violation of the
California Fire Code is guilty of violating the California Fire Code. Each such
person, corporation or firm shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor of a
separate offense for each day or portion thereof during which any violation of
any provision of the California Fire Code is committed, continued, permitted or
maintained by such person, firm or corporation. (Ord. 2948, 2022: Ord. 2900,
2019: Ord. 2847, 2017)
15.20.620: APPLICATION OF STATE LAW:
Nothing in sections
15.20.550 through
15.20.630 shall limit any of the penalties provided in the California Health
and Safety Code or the California Penal Code with regard to the offer for sale,
exposing for sale, sale at retail, use or discharge of any fireworks. (Ord.
2948, 2022: Ord. 2900, 2019: Ord. 2847, 2017)
15.20.630: LIABILITY FOR RESPONSE COSTS:
   A.   Any person who violates sections
15.20.550 through 15.20.630 shall be liable for response costs incurred in
responding to the unpermitted use, discharge or storage of fireworks.
   B.   If a person who violated sections
15.20.550 through 15.20.630 is a minor charge, the responsible guardian of the
minor charge and the minor charge shall be jointly and severally liable for the
response costs incurred pursuant to sections
15.20.550 through 15.20.630.
   C.   To incur liability for response costs imposed by sections
15.20.550 through 15.20.630, a person who violates sections
15.20.550 through 15.20.630 need not be present at the event that causes the
response giving rise to the imposition of response costs.
   D.   Response costs imposed by sections
15.20.550 through 15.20.630 are in addition to any other costs that may be
recovered under this Code or State law. (Ord. 2948, 2022: Ord. 2900, 2019: Ord.
2847, 2017)
15.20.640: WILDLAND-URBAN INTERFACE FIRE AREA:
Section 4902.1 the definition of the Local Responsibility Area (LRA) is hereby
added to read as follows:
   Local Responsibility Area (LRA) is defined as lands within the geographical
boundaries found in the map within the city of Redlands general plan figure
8.1.
(Ord. 2948, 2022: Ord. 2900, 2019: Ord. 2840, 2016)
15.20.650: VEGETATION MANAGEMENT:
Section 4906.1.1 of the California fire code is hereby added to read as
follows:
   4906.1.1 Maintenance. Persons owning, leasing, controlling, operating or
maintaining buildings or structures in, upon or adjoining hazardous fire areas,
and persons owning, leasing or controlling land adjacent to such buildings or
structures, shall at all times:
   Maintain an effective fuel modification zone by removing, clearing, or
modifying away combustible vegetation and other flammable materials from areas
within 100 feet from such buildings or structures. (See exception 3 for fire-
resistive construction and other features for approval and/or a reduction of
the fuel modification zone.) The fuel modification zone may be replanted with
either approved irrigated, fire-resistant planting material or approved non-
irrigated, drought-tolerant, fire-resistant plant material. Use of plants,
trees, and/or shrubs on the Redlands fire department wildland urban interface
high fire severity area undesirable list, must be specifically approved by the
fire code official. Use of any of the plantings on the list is subject to
periodic, ongoing inspections by the fire department to ensure proper
maintenance. Inspections may incur fees payable by the property owner. Failure
to maintain the plants and trees on this list in accordance with plan approval
could result in the plants, trees, and/or shrubs being ordered to be removed at
the expense of the property owner. Replanting of the fuel modification zone may
be required for erosion control.
      Exceptions:
      1.   Single specimens of trees, ornamental shrubbery or similar plants
used as ground covers, provided that they do not form a means of rapidly
transmitting fire from the native growth to any structure.
      2.   Grass and other vegetation located more than 30 feet from buildings
or structures and less than 18 inches (457 mm) in height above the ground need
not be removed where necessary to stabilize the soil and prevent erosion.
      3.   With the approval of the fire code official, the width of the fuel
modification zone may be reduced where fire-resistive structures or other
features are constructed. However, in no case shall the fuel modification zone
be reduced to less than 30 feet. See California building code chapter 7A and
international wildland-urban interface code for the minimum requirements of a
fire-resistive structure.
   Remove portions of trees, which extend within 10 feet of the outlet of a
chimney,
   Maintain trees adjacent to or overhanging a building free of deadwood, and
   Maintain the roof of a structure free of leaves, needles or other dead
vegetative growth.
   If the owner fails to correct such conditions, the fire code official is
authorized to cause the same to be done and make the expense of such correction
a lien upon the property where such condition exists.
(Ord. 2948, 2022: Ord. 2900, 2019: Ord. 2840, 2016)
15.20.660: DEFENSIBLE SPACE:
Section 4907.4 of the California fire code is hereby added to read as follows:
   4907.4 Defensible space zones. All existing habitable buildings and
structures withing the Very High Fire Hazard Severity Zone (VHFHSZ) shall
maintain defensible space in accordance with sections 4907.4.1, 4907.4.2, and
4907.4.3. The fire code official may require additional fuel modification
measures to be taken by the property owner when extreme hazardous vegetation
conditions are present.
   4907.4.1 Zone Zero (0-5 feet) - Ember Resistant. Zone zero zones shall be
maintained in accordance with sections 4907.4.1.1 through 4907.4.1.8.
   4907.4.1.1 Vegetation. Vegetation shall be in accordance with the following:
      1.   Ornamental and native shrubs shall be thinned, relocated, or removed
to provide no more than fifty (50) percent density and/or coverage and shall be
positioned to limit plan continuity and inhibit fire progression.
      2.   Remove all dead, dying, or diseased vegetation, including where
applicable on portions of live vegetation and dead, dying, or diseased grass,
plants, shrubs, branches, leaves, and weeds.
      3.   Maintain grasses to a maximum height of four (4) inches.
      4.   Maintain large shrubs and hedges exceeding six (6) feet in height
such that limbs are not within 4 feet of the ground or one-third of its height,
whichever is less.
      5.   Vines are to be limited on the structure.
      6.   Vegetation under windows shall be kept to below eighteen (18)
inches.
      7.   Consideration shall be given to properties with more fire-resistive
construction, lower flammability plant species, and frequent irrigation.
   4907.4.1.2 Tree Maintenance. Tree maintenance shall be in accordance with
the following:
      1.   Trees shall be maintained (i.e., cleaned, thinned, raised) to reduce
the spread of fire.
      2.   Tree branches shall have six (6) feet of clearance above roofs,
combustible fences, combustible structures, and the ground. Additional
clearance equal to three (3) times the height of the shrub is needed if shrubs
are located under tree branches.
      3.   Dead, dying, or diseased trees shall be removed. An evaluation by a
licensed arborist with recommendations on removal of dying or diseased trees
may be required by the fire code official.
   4907.4.1.3 Balconies, Overhangs, and Porches. The underside of balconies,
overhangs, and porches shall be kept clear of combustible vegetation.
   4907.4.1.4 Organic Wood Chips and Mulch. Organic mulch and wood chip
application is prohibited. Non-combustible materials such as concrete, gravel,
decomposed granite, or other approved materials shall be used within this zone.
   4907.4.1.5 Firewood. Firewood shall not be stored within this zone.
   4907.4.1.6 Chimneys. All chimneys shall have a spark arrestor and all
branches shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet from chimneys, stovepipe outlet,
and heater outlets.
   4907.4.1.7 Propane Tanks. Dead, dying, or diseased vegetation shall be
removed from within ten (10) feet of propane tanks.
   4907.4.1.8 Roofs and Gutters. Maintain the roof and gutters to be free of
leaves, needles, or other vegetation.
   4907.4.1.9 Firefighter Access. Remove hazardous items that would hinder
existing firefighter access to all sides of the structure.
   4907.4.2 Zone One (5-30 feet) - Lean, Clean, and Green Zone. Zone one zones
shall be maintained in accordance with sections 4907.4.2.1 through 4907.4.2.5.
   4907.4.2.1 Vegetation. Vegetation shall be in accordance with the following:
      1.   Ornamental and native shrubs shall be thinned, relocated, or removed
to provide no more than fifty (50) percent density and/or coverage and shall be
positioned to limit plan continuity and inhibit fire progression.
      2.   Remove all dead, dying, or diseased vegetation, including where
applicable on portions of live vegetation and dead, dying, or diseased grass,
plants, shrubs, branches, leaves, and weeds.
      3.   Maintain grasses to a maximum height of four (4) inches.
      4.   Maintain large shrubs and hedges exceeding six (6) feet in height
such that limbs are not within 4 feet of the ground or one-third of its height,
whichever is less.
      5.   Consideration shall be given to properties with more fire-resistive
construction, lower flammability plant species, and frequent irrigation.
   4907.4.2.2 Tree Maintenance. Tree maintenance shall be in accordance with
the following:
      1.   Trees shall be maintained (i.e., cleaned, thinned, raised) to reduce
the spread of fire.
      2.   Tree branches shall have six (6) feet of clearance above roofs,
combustible fences, combustible structures, and the ground. Additional
clearance equal to three (3) times the height of the shrub is needed if shrubs
are located under tree branches.
      3.   Dead, dying, or diseased trees shall be removed. An evaluation by a
licensed arborist with recommendations on removal of dying or diseased trees
may be required by the fire code official.
   4907.4.2.3 Organic Wood Chips and Mulch. Organic mulch and wood chips shall
be kept at a depth of three (3) inches.
   4907.4.2.4 Propane Tanks. Dead, dying, or diseased vegetation shall be
removed from within ten (10) feet of propane tanks.
   4907.4.2.5 Firefighter Access. Remove hazardous items that would hinder
existing firefighter access to all sides of the structure.
   4907.4.3 Zone Two (30-100 feet) - Fuel Reduction Zone. Zone one zones shall
be maintained in accordance with sections 4907.4.3.1 through 4907.4.3.5.
   4907.4.3.1 Vegetation. Vegetation shall be in accordance with the following:
      1.   Ornamental and native shrubs shall be thinned, relocated, or removed
to provide no more than sixty (60) percent density and/or coverage and shall be
positioned to limit plan continuity and inhibit fire progression.
      2.   Remove all dead, dying, or diseased vegetation, including where
applicable on portions of live vegetation and dead, dying, or diseased grass,
plants, shrubs, branches, leaves, and weeds.
      3.   Maintain grasses to a maximum height of eighteen (18) inches.
      4.   Maintain large shrubs and hedges exceeding six (6) feet in height
such that limbs are not within four (4) feet of the ground or one-third of its
height, whichever is less.
      5.   Consideration shall be given to properties with more fire-resistive
construction, lower flammability plant species, and frequent irrigation.
   4907.4.3.2 Tree Maintenance. Tree maintenance shall be in accordance with
the following:
      1.   Trees shall be maintained (i.e., cleaned, thinned, raised) to reduce
the spread of fire.
      2.   Tree branches shall have six (6) feet of clearance above roofs,
combustible fences, combustible structures, and the ground. Additional
clearance equal to three (3) times the height of the shrub is needed if shrubs
are located under tree branches.
      3.   Dead, dying, or diseased trees shall be removed. An evaluation by a
licensed arborist with recommendations on removal of dying or diseased trees
may be required by the fire code official.
      4.   All exposed wood piles shall have a minimum of ten (10) feet of
clearance down to bare mineral soil in all direction.
   4907.4.3.3 Organic Wood Chips and Mulch. Organic mulch and wood chips shall
be kept at a depth of three (3) inches.
   4907.4.3.4 Propane Tanks. Dead, dying, or diseased vegetation shall be
removed from within ten (10) feet of propane tanks.
   4907.4.3.5 Firefighter Access. Remove hazardous items that would hinder
existing firefighter access to all sides of the structure.
(Ord. 2948, 2022: Ord. 2900, 2019: Ord. 2840, 2016)
15.20.670: FIRE PROTECTION PLAN:
Section 4903 of the California fire code is hereby amended to read as follows:
   Section 4903 Fire Protection Plan
      4903.1 General. A fire protection plan (FPP), approved by the fire code
official, shall be required for all new development within the wildland-urban
interface area.
      The FPP shall include mitigation measures consistent with the unique
problems resulting from the location, topography, geology, flammable
vegetation, and climate of the proposed site.
      The FPP shall address water supply, access, building ignition and fire
resistance, fire protection systems and equipment, defensible space and
vegetation management.
      The FPP shall be consistent with the requirements of California building
code chapter 7A, and the international wildland-urban interface code, and the
Redlands municipal code.
(Ord. 2948, 2022: Ord. 2900, 2019: Ord. 2840, 2016)
15.20.680: APPENDIX B:
Section B105.2 of appendix B of the California fire code is hereby amended by
amending the exception to read as follows:
   Exception: A reduction in required fire-flow of up to 50 percent (50%), as
approved, is allowed when the building is provided with an approved automatic
sprinkler system installed in accordance with section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2.
The resulting fire-flow shall not be less than 1,500 gallons per minute (5678
l/min) for the prescribed duration as specified in table B105.1(2).
(Ord. 2948, 2022: Ord. 2900, 2019: Ord. 2840, 2016)
15.20.690: APPENDIX BB:
Section BB105.1 of appendix BB of the California fire code is hereby amended by
amending the exception to read as follows:
   Exception: A reduction in required fire-flow of up to 50 percent (50%), is
allowed when the building is provided with an approved automatic sprinkler
system. When a reduction in fire flow is used, fire flow shall not be less than
1500 gpm.
(Ord. 2948, 2022: Ord. 2900, 2019:Ord. 2840, 2016)
15.20.700: APPENDIX C:
Appendix C is hereby adopted in its entirety without amendments or deletions.
(Ord. 2948, 2022: Ord. 2900, 2019: Ord. 2840, 2016)
15.20.710: APPENDIX CC:
Appendix CC is hereby adopted in its entirety without amendments or deletions.
(Ord. 2948, 2022: Ord. 2900, 2019: Ord. 2840, 2016)
15.20.720: APPENDIX D:
Appendix D is hereby adopted in its entirety with the following additions and
amendments:
   Section D101.2 of appendix D of the California fire code is hereby added to
read as follows:
      D101.2 Construction Documents. Construction documents for proposed fire
apparatus access location of fire lanes, security gates across fire apparatus
access and construction documents and hydraulic calculations for fire hydrant
systems shall be submitted to the fire department for review and approval prior
to construction.
   Section D101.3 of appendix D of the California fire code is hereby added to
read as follows:
      D101.3 Timing of Installation. When fire apparatus access roads or a
water supply for fire protection is required to be installed, such protection
shall be installed and made serviceable prior to and during the time of
construction except when approved alternative methods of protection are
provided. Temporary street signs shall be installed at each street intersection
when construction of new roadways allows passage by vehicles.
   Section D102.1 of appendix D of the California fire code is hereby amended
to read as follows:
      D102.1 Access and Loading. Approved fire apparatus access roads shall be
provided for every facility, building or portion of a building thereafter
constructed or moved into or within the jurisdiction. The fire apparatus access
road shall comply with the requirements of this section and shall extend to
within 150 feet of all portions of the facility and all portions of the
exterior wall for the first story of the building as measured by an approved
route around the exterior of the building or facility.
   Section D103.3 of appendix D of the California fire code is hereby amended
to read as follows:
      D103.3 Turning Radius. 503.2.4 Turning radius. The required turning
radius of a fire apparatus access road shall be an inner radius of nineteen
(20) feet and outer radius of forty (40) feet.
   Section D103.4 of appendix D of the California fire code is hereby amended
to read as follows:
      D103.4 Dead Ends. Dead-end fire apparatus access roads in excess of 150
feet in length shall be provided with an approved area for turning around fire
apparatus.
   Section D103.7 of appendix D of the California fire code is hereby added to
read as follows:
      D103.7 Surface. Fire apparatus access roads shall be designed and
maintained to support the imposed loads of fire apparatus weighing at least
75,000 pounds. The roadway shall be surfaced so as to provide all weather
driving capabilities.
   Section D103.8 of appendix D of the California fire code is hereby added to
read as follows:
      D103.8 Authority. The fire code official shall have the authority to
require an increase in the minimum access width where they are inadequate for
fire or rescue operations.
   Section D103.9 of appendix D of the California fire code is hereby added to
read as follows:
      D103.9 Bygone Roadways. Where fire department access is unduly difficult
utilizing bygone roadways, and where modifications would significantly impact
the historical significance of the area, the fire chief may authorize
alternative means and methods in order to maintain fire department access.
Methods may include but are not limited to the posting of signs and notices of
parking requirements in order to maintain access.
(Ord. 2948, 2022: Ord. 2900, 2019: Ord. 2840, 2016)
15.20.730: APPENDIX O:
Section O101.2 of the California fire code is hereby amended to read as
follows:
   O101.2 Permits. An operational permit shall be required for haunted houses,
ghost walks or similar uses in accordance with Appendix O101.2. Permit
applications and documents shall be submitted within three (3) weeks of
occupancy date. Additional permits shall be obtained from local building
department as required for any structural, electrical, or other modifications.
Section O103.2 of the California fire code is hereby amended to read as
follows:
   O103.2 Tents or membrane structures. Tents and membrane structures may be
used when in compliance with all applicable requirements of this regulation,
chapter 31 of this code, and when the total floor area of the tent is less than
1,000 square feet and the travel distance to an exit from any location is less
than fifty (50) feet.
Section O103.7 of the California fire code is hereby amended to read as follows
   O103.7 Exception 2: Existing unsprinklered assembly spaces, such as
gymnasiums, when used for assembly purposes such as grad night.
Section O103.7.1.1 of the California fire code is hereby amended to read as
follows:
   O103.7.1.1 Obstructions. Fire sprinkler systems and piping, when provided,
shall not be obstructed, altered, or used to support any decorations.
Section O103.7.2.1 of the California fire code is hereby amended to read as
follows:
   O103.7.2.1 Obstructions. Automatic smoke detection systems or devices, when
present, shall not be obstructed, altered, or turned off.
Section O103.7.4 of the California fire code is hereby added to read as
follows:
   O103.7.4 Add Exception. When the total floor area of the tent is less than
1,000 square feet and the travel distance to an exit from any location is less
than fifty (50) feet, manually activated devices suitable for sounding an alarm
or another approved method of alerting staff shall be provided as approved by
the fire code official.
Section O103.9.1 of the California fire code is hereby amended to read as
follows:
   O103.9.1 Flame retardant. All decorative materials shall be both inherently
flame retardant, labeled as such, or be treated with a listed flame-retardant
material registered with the California State Fire Marshal. If the material is
treated by the user, a container and receipt will serve as proof.
Section O103.12 of the California fire code is hereby amended to read as
follows:
   O103.12 Inspections. A fire and life safety inspection shall be conducted by
the fire department prior to the start of the event. Final building department
inspection and sign-off shall be made in conjunction with the fire department.
(Ord. 2948, 2022)
15.20.740: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
   A.   It is unlawful to violate or fail to comply with any of the provisions
of the California fire code, or to fail to comply with any order made pursuant
thereto. It is also unlawful to build in violation of any detailed statement of
plans or specifications submitted and approved under the California fire code,
or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has
been taken.
   B.   Except as otherwise specified in this chapter, all violations of the
California fire code or its appendices, or the amendments thereto contained in
this chapter, are misdemeanors and are punishable as provided in title 1,
chapter 1.20 of this code.
   C.   Every person who causes, aids, abets or conceals a violation of the
California fire code is guilty of violating the California fire code. Each such
person, corporation or firm shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for
each day or portion thereof during which any violation of any provisions of the
California fire code is committed, continued, permitted or maintained by such
person, firm or corporation. (Ord. 2948, 2022: Ord. 2900, 2019: Ord. 2840,
2016)
15.20.750: FIRE HAZARD SEVERITY ZONE MAP:
   A.   The City of Redlands hereby designates the Fire Hazard Severity Zones
as recommended by the California Department of Forestry and Fire Protection
pursuant to Government Code Section 51178.
      1.   The map, adopted by the City of Redlands, is hereby incorporated by
reference, and entitled "Local Responsibility Area Fire Hazard Severity Zones -
City of Redlands - San Bernardino County." Dated March 24, 2025.
      2.   A copy of the official map included may also be viewed the City
Clerk's Office and electronically at:
https://www.cityofredlands.org/pod/community-wildfire-safety-statewide-fire-haz
ard-zone-map-updates
(Ord. 2986, 2025)
CHAPTER 15.22
CALIFORNIA HISTORICAL BUILDING CODE (CHBC)
SECTION:
15.22.010: Document Adopted By Reference; Copies On File
15.22.020: Violation; Penalty
15.22.010: DOCUMENT ADOPTED BY REFERENCE; COPIES ON FILE:
That certain document on file in the office of the City Clerk of the City
marked and designated as the California Historical Building Code, 2022 Edition,
is adopted as the Historical Building Code of the City and all of the mandatory
regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of such code and amendments are
referred to and are adopted and made part of this Chapter. (Ord. 2950, 2022:
Ord. 2901, 2019: Ord. 2816, 2015)
15.22.020: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to violate or allow
violations of any mandatory requirement of this chapter. Every person who
violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. Such
person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or
portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter is committed, continued or permitted. Upon conviction, such person may
be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by
imprisonment in the county jail for a period not exceeding six (6) months, or
by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 2950, 2022: Ord. 2901, 2019: Ord.
2816, 2015)
CHAPTER 15.23
CALIFORNIA EXISTING BUILDING CODE
SECTION:
15.23.010: Document Adopted By Reference; Copies On File
15.23.020: Violation; Penalty
15.23.010: DOCUMENT ADOPTED BY REFERENCE; COPIES ON FILE:
That certain document on file in the office of the City Clerk of the City
marked and designated as the California Existing Building Code, 2022 Edition,
is adopted as the Existing Building Code of the City and all of the mandatory
regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of such code and amendments are
referred to and are adopted and made part of this Chapter. (Ord. 2950, 2022)
15.23.020: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to violate or allow
violations of any mandatory requirement of this chapter. Every person who
violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. Such
person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or
portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter is committed, continued or permitted. Upon conviction, such person may
be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by
imprisonment in the county jail for a period not exceeding six (6) months, or
by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 2950, 2022)
CHAPTER 15.24
UNIFORM HOUSING CODE
SECTION:
15.24.010: Document Adopted By Reference; Copies On File
15.24.020: Enforcement
15.24.030: Health Officer
15.24.040: Performance Of Work, Repair Or Demolition
15.24.050: Repayment Of Repair And Demolition Fund
15.24.070: Conflicts With Zoning Provisions Or Other Ordinances
15.24.080: Violation; Penalty
15.24.010: DOCUMENT ADOPTED BY REFERENCE; COPIES ON FILE:
That certain document on file in the office of the city clerk of the city,
which is marked and designated as the uniform housing code, 1997 edition, and
each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of the
uniform housing code as amended in this chapter, are referred to, adopted and
made a part of this chapter. (Ord. 2405 § 1, 1999)
15.24.020: ENFORCEMENT:
Uniform housing code chapter 2, "Enforcement", is amended by rewording section
203.1 as follows:
Section 203.1.
In order to provide for final interpretation of the provisions of this code and
to hear appeals provided for hereunder, the city of Redlands planning
commission is designated as the board of appeals. The board may adopt
reasonable rules and regulations for conducting its business and shall render
all decisions and findings in writing to the appellant with a copy to the chief
building official. Appeals to the board shall be processed in accordance with
the provisions contained in section H-1201 of this code. If the appellant
disagrees with the findings of the board, he or she may appeal the decision to
the city council within fifteen (15) days from the date of decision of the
board.
(Ord. 2816, 2015)
15.24.030: HEALTH OFFICER:
Uniform housing code chapter 4, "Definitions", is amended by rewording section
401 as follows:
Section 401. Health Officer.
Health officer shall be the legally designated head of the San Bernardino
County environmental health services department.
(Ord. 2405 § 1, 1999)
15.24.040: PERFORMANCE OF WORK, REPAIR OR DEMOLITION:
Uniform housing code chapter 15, "Performance Of Work Or Repair Or Demolition",
is amended by rewording section 1501.1 and deleting section 1502 as follows:
Section 1501.1. Procedure.
When any work, repair or demolition is performed pursuant to section 1401.3
item 3, of this code, the chief building official shall obtain at least three
bids from contractors licensed to do business in the city of Redlands. The
chief building official may employ such architectural and engineering
assistance on a contract basis as he may deem reasonably necessary.
Section 1501.2. Costs.
The cost of such work shall be paid from the general fund of the city of
Redlands and may be made a special assessment against the property involved, or
may be made a personal obligation of the property owner, whichever the city
council shall determine is appropriate. All funds collected under the
proceedings hereinafter provided for shall be paid to the city's finance
director who shall credit the same to the general fund.
(Ord. 2718 § 35, 2009)
15.24.050: REPAYMENT OF REPAIR AND DEMOLITION FUND:
Uniform housing code chapter 16, entitled "Recovery Of Cost Of Repair Or
Demolition", is amended by rewording section 1612, Repayment Of Repair And
Demolition Fund, as follows:
Section 1612.
All monies recovered by payment of the charge or assessment or from the sale of
the property at foreclosure sale shall be paid to the city's finance director
who shall credit the same to the general fund. Only that amount owed to the
city shall be collected at the time of foreclosure.
(Ord. 2718 § 36, 2009)
15.24.070: CONFLICTS WITH ZONING PROVISIONS OR OTHER ORDINANCES:
In any case where the requirements of title 18 of this code, or other
ordinances adopted by the city or laws of the state, are more restrictive than
the standards set forth herein, the provisions of title 18 of this code and
such other ordinances and laws shall apply to all new construction and
additions or extensions to any building or structure. (Ord. 2405 § 1, 1999)
15.24.080: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
It is unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, partnership, or entity to do
or permit the following: erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move,
improve, remove, convert, demolish, equip, use or maintain any residential
building in violation of this chapter. Such person who violates any of the
provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. Such person shall be
deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof
during which any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is
committed, continued or permitted. Upon conviction, such person may be
punishable by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by
imprisonment in the county jail for a period not exceeding six (6) months, or
by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 2816, 2015)
CHAPTER 15.30
INTERNATIONAL WILDLAND-URBAN INTERFACE CODE
SECTION:
15.30.010: Findings And Adoption
15.30.020: Definitions
15.30.030: Title
15.30.040: Alternative Materials Or Methods
15.30.050: Work Exempt From Permit
15.30.060: Permit Fees
15.30.070: Fees Not Refundable
15.30.080: Site Plan
15.30.090: Inspection Fees
15.30.100: Terms Defined In Other Codes
15.30.110: Building Official Definition
15.30.120: Heavy Fuel Definition
15.30.130: Light Fuel Definition
15.30.140: Medium Fuel Definition
15.30.150: Fuel Modification Zone Definition
15.30.160: Heavy Timber Construction Definition
15.30.170: Exception
15.30.180: Standby Power
15.30.190: Scope
15.30.200: Protection Of Eaves
15.30.210: Section 504.7 Appendages And Projections
15.30.220: Section 505.7 Appendages And Projections
15.30.230: Penalties
15.30.010: FINDINGS AND ADOPTION:
   A.   Findings: The city council of the city of Redlands hereby finds and
determines:
      1.   That the International Code Council (ICC) is a private organization
which has been in existence for a period of at least three (3) years.
      2.   That the international wildland-urban interface code (IWUIC), 2006
edition, published by said organization, is a nationally recognized compilation
of proposed rules, regulations, and standards of said organization.
      3.   That said international wildland-urban interface code has been
printed and published as a code in book form within the meaning of section
50022.2 et seq., of the California Government Code.
      4.   That one copy of the 2006 international wildland-urban interface
code, certified by the city clerk of the city of Redlands to be a true copy,
has been filed for use and examination by the public in the fire prevention
office of the fire department of the city.
      5.   The sections of said international wildland-urban interface code may
be referred to by the number used in said published compilation, preceded by
the words "international wildland-urban interface code section" or "wildland-
urban interface code section" or "WUI code section," and may also be referred
to by additional reference to this municipal code and sections therein
pertaining to said international wildland-urban interface code.
   B.   Adoption: The city council of the city hereby adopts and amends the
2006 edition of the international wildland-urban interface code, and
international wildland-urban interface code appendices A, B and D, as compiled
and published by the International Code Council. (Ord. 2696 § 1, 2008)
15.30.020: DEFINITIONS:
   A.   Wherever the word "jurisdiction" is used in said wildland- urban
interface code, it shall mean the city of Redlands.
   B.   Wherever the term "code official" is used in said wildland- urban
interface code, it shall mean the fire marshal for the city.
   C.   Wherever the term "corporation counsel" is used in said wildland-urban
interface code, it shall mean the city attorney for the city.
   D.   Wherever the term "fire department" is used in said wildland- urban
interface code, it shall mean the fire department of the city.
   E.   An employee of the fire department of the city, when enforcing the
international wildland-urban interface code, this municipal code and other
laws, rules and regulations relating to fire and life safety, fire prevention
and fire investigation, shall be deemed a "peace officer" as those words are
used in section 830.31 of the California Penal Code. (Ord. 2696 § 1, 2008)
15.30.030: TITLE:
Section 101.1 of the international wildland-urban interface code is hereby
amended to read as follows:
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the wildland-urban interface
code of the city of Redlands, hereinafter referred to as "this code."
(Ord. 2696 § 1, 2008)
15.30.040: ALTERNATIVE MATERIALS OR METHODS:
Section 103.3 of the international wildland-urban interface code is hereby
amended to read as follows:
103.3 Alternative Materials Or Methods. The code official, in concurrence with
approval from the building official and fire chief, is authorized to approve
alternative materials or methods, provided that the code official finds that
the proposed design, use or operation satisfactorily complies with the intent
of this code and that the alternative is, for the purpose intended, at least
equivalent to the level of quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance,
durability and safety prescribed by this code. Approvals under the authority
herein contained shall be subject to the approval of the building official
whenever the alternate material or method involves matters regulated by the
California building code.
(Ord. 2696 § 1, 2008)
15.30.050: WORK EXEMPT FROM PERMIT:
Section 105.3 of the international wildland-urban interface code is hereby
amended to read as follows:
105.3 Work Exempt From Permit. Unless otherwise provided in the requirements of
the California building code, a permit shall not be required for the following:
(Remainder of section remains the same.)
(Ord. 2696 § 1, 2008)
15.30.060: PERMIT FEES:
Section 105.11 of the international wildland-urban interface code is hereby
added to read as follows:
105.11 Permit Fees. Permit fees as established by resolution of the city
council shall be collected by the finance department. Proof of receipt shall
accompany all applications for permit applications prior to inspection and
approval by the code official.
(Ord. 2696 § 1, 2008)
15.30.070: FEES NOT REFUNDABLE:
Section 105.12 of the international wildland-urban interface code is hereby
added to read as follows:
105.12 Fees Not Refundable. Permit fees shall not be refundable for any reason
after initiation of inspection procedures.
(Ord. 2696 § 1, 2008)
15.30.080: SITE PLAN:
Section 106.3 of the international wildland-urban interface code is hereby
amended to read as follows:
106.3 Site Plan. In addition to the requirements for plans in the California
building code, site plans shall include topography, width and percent of grade
of access roads, landscape and vegetation details, locations of structures or
building envelopes, existing or proposed overhead utilities, occupancy
classification of buildings, types of ignition- resistant construction of
buildings, structures and their appendages, roof classification of buildings,
and site water supply systems.
(Ord. 2696 § 1, 2008)
15.30.090: INSPECTION FEES:
Section 107.1.2.1 of the international wildland-urban interface code is hereby
added to read as follows:
107.1.2.1 Inspection Fees. The code official is authorized to collect
appropriate fees for inspections as established by resolution of the city
council of the city.
(Ord. 2696 § 1, 2008)
15.30.100: TERMS DEFINED IN OTHER CODES:
Section 201.3 of the international wildland-urban interface code is hereby
amended to read as follows:
201.3 Terms Defined In Other Codes. Where terms are not defined in this code
and are defined in other California or international codes, such terms shall
have the meanings ascribed to them as in those codes.
(Ord. 2696 § 1, 2008)
15.30.110: BUILDING OFFICIAL DEFINITION:
Section 202, definition of "building official", of the international wildland-
urban interface code is hereby amended to read as follows:
   BUILDING OFFICIAL. The officer or other designated authority charged with
the administration and enforcement of the California building code, or the
building official's duly authorized representative.
(Ord. 2696 § 1, 2008)
15.30.120: HEAVY FUEL DEFINITION:
Section 202, definition of "fuel, heavy", of the international wildland-urban
interface code is hereby amended to read as follows:
   FUEL, HEAVY. Vegetation consisting of round wood 3 to 8 inches (76 to 203
mm) in diameter. Heavy fuels represent dense conifer stands where there is a
heavy accumulation of litter and downed woody material. See applicable national
fire danger rating system (NFDR), fuel models G & U as described in appendix D.
(Ord. 2696 § 1, 2008)
15.30.130: LIGHT FUEL DEFINITION:
Section 202, definition of "fuel, light", of the international wildland-urban
interface code is hereby amended to read as follows:
   FUEL, LIGHT. Vegetation consisting of herbaceous plants and round wood less
than 1/4 inch (6.4 mm) in diameter. Light fuels represent western grasslands
vegetated by annual or perennial grasses and forbs. Grasses and forbs are the
primary ground fuel, but there can be enough needle litter and branch wood
present from an open pine stand to contribute to the fuel loading. See
applicable national fire danger rating system (NFDR), fuel models A, C & L as
described in appendix D.
(Ord. 2696 § 1, 2008)
15.30.140: MEDIUM FUEL DEFINITION:
Section 202, definition of "fuel, medium", of the international wildland-urban
interface code is hereby amended to read as follows:
   FUEL, MEDIUM. Vegetation consisting of round wood 1/4 to 3 inches (6.4 mm to
76 mm) in diameter. Medium fuels represent mature, dense fields of California
mixed chaparral. See applicable national fire danger rating system (NFDR), fuel
models B & F as described in appendix D.
(Ord. 2696 § 1, 2008)
15.30.150: FUEL MODIFICATION ZONE DEFINITION:
Section 202, definition of "fuel modification zone", of the international
wildland-urban interface code is hereby added to read as follows:
   FUEL MODIFICATION ZONE. A strip of land where combustible vegetation has
been thinned, modified, or both, and partially or totally replaced with
approved drought- tolerant, fire-resistant, and/or irrigated plants to provide
an acceptable level of risk from vegetation fires. Fuel modification reduces
radiant and convective heat, thereby reducing the amount of heat exposure on
the roadway or structure and providing fire suppression forces a safer area in
which to take action.
(Ord. 2696 § 1, 2008)
15.30.160: HEAVY TIMBER CONSTRUCTION DEFINITION:
Section 202, definition of "heavy timber construction", of the international
wildland-urban interface code is hereby amended to read as follows:
   HEAVY TIMBER CONSTRUCTION. As described in the California building code.
(Ord. 2696 § 1, 2008)
15.30.170: EXCEPTION:
Section 404.5, subsection 2, "Exception", of the international wildland-urban
interface code is hereby amended to read as follows:
Exception: A reduction in required flow rate of up to 50 percent, as approved
by the code official, is allowed when the building is provided with an approved
automatic sprinkler system. The resulting water supply shall not be less that
1,500 gallons per minute (94.6 l/s).
(Ord. 2696 § 1, 2008)
15.30.180: STANDBY POWER:
Section 404.10.3 of the international wildland-urban interface code is hereby
amended to read as follows:
404.10.3 Standby Power. Stationary water supply facilities within the wildland-
urban interface area dependent on electrical power to meet adequate water
supply demands shall provide standby power systems in accordance with the
California electrical code to ensure that an uninterrupted water supply is
maintained. The standby power source shall be capable of providing power for a
minimum of two hours. (Remainder of section remains the same.)
(Ord. 2696 § 1, 2008)
15.30.190: SCOPE:
Section 501.1 of the international wildland-urban interface code is hereby
amended to read as follows:
501.1 Scope. Buildings and structures shall be constructed in accordance with
the California building code and this code. (Remainder of section remains the
same.)
(Ord. 2696 § 1, 2008)
15.30.200: PROTECTION OF EAVES:
Section 504.3 of the international wildland-urban interface code is hereby
amended to read as follows:
504.3 Protection Of Eaves. Eaves and soffits shall be protected on the exposed
underside by materials approved for a minimum of 1-hour fire-resistance-rated
construction, 2-inch (51 mm) nominal dimension lumber, or 1-inch (25.4 mm)
nominal fire-retardant-treated lumber or 3/4-inch (19 mm) nominal fire-
retardant-treated plywood, identified for exterior use and meeting the
requirements of section 2303.2 of the California building code. Facias are
required and shall be protected on the backside by materials approved for a
minimum of 1-hour fire-resistance-rated construction or 2-inch (51 mm) nominal
dimension lumber.
(Ord. 2696 § 1, 2008)
15.30.210: SECTION 504.7 APPENDAGES AND PROJECTIONS:
Section 504.7 of the international wildland-urban interface code is hereby
amended to read as follows:
504.7 Appendages And Projections. Unenclosed accessory structures attached to
buildings with habitable spaces and projections, such as decks, shall be a
minimum of 1-hour fire-resistance-rated construction, heavy timber construction
or constructed of approved noncombustible materials or fire-retardant-treated
wood identified for exterior use and meeting the requirements of section 2303.2
of the California building code. (Remainder of section remains the same.)
(Ord. 2696 § 1, 2008)
15.30.220: SECTION 505.7 APPENDAGES AND PROJECTIONS:
Section 505.7 of the international wildland-urban interface code is hereby
amended to read as follows:
505.7 Appendages And Projections. Unenclosed accessory structures attached to
buildings with habitable spaces and projections, such as decks, shall be a
minimum of 1-hour fire-resistance-rated construction, heavy timber construction
or constructed of approved noncombustible materials or fire-retardant-treated
wood identified for exterior use and meeting the requirements of section 2303.2
of the California building code. (Remainder of section remains the same.)
(Ord. 2696 § 1, 2008)
15.30.230: PENALTIES:
If any person shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter, or fail to
comply with any of the mandatory requirements of this chapter, such person
shall be guilty of an infraction. Any person convicted of an infraction shall
be punishable by: a) a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for
a first violation; b) a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a
second violation of this chapter within one year; and c) a fine not exceeding
five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each additional violation of this chapter
within one year. Each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense
for every day during such portion of which any violation of this chapter is
committed, continued or permitted by such person, and shall be punishable
therefor as provided by this chapter. (Ord. 2696 § 1, 2008)
CHAPTER 15.32
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
SECTION:
15.32.005: Statutory Authorization
15.32.010: Purpose
15.32.020: Definitions
15.32.030: Applicability Of Chapter Provisions
15.32.040: Establishing The Areas Of Special Flood Hazard
15.32.050: Compliance Required
15.32.060: Abrogation Or Greater Restrictions
15.32.070: Interpretation
15.32.080: Warning And Disclaimer Of Liability
15.32.090: Development Permit; Required; Application
15.32.100: Chief Building Official; Duties And Responsibilities
15.32.110: Construction Standards
15.32.120: Utility Standards
15.32.130: Subdivision Standards
15.32.140: Standards For Manufactured Homes
15.32.150: Standards For Recreational Vehicles
15.32.160: Floodways
15.32.170: Mudslide (Mudflow) Prone Areas
15.32.180: Appeal Board
15.32.190: Variance Conditions
15.32.005: STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION:
The legislature of the state of California has in Government Code sections
65302, 65560, and 65800 conferred upon local governments the authority to adopt
regulations designed to promote the public health, safety and general welfare
of its citizenry. Therefore, the city of Redlands of San Bernardino County does
hereby adopt the following floodplain management regulations. (Ord. 2837, 2016)
15.32.010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health, safety and
welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in
specific areas by establishing requirements and restrictions designed to
protect human life and health, minimize expenditure of public money for costly
flood control projects and damage to public facilities and utilities, minimize
the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally
undertaken at the expense of the general public, maintain a stable tax base by
providing for the sound use and development of areas of special hazards so as
to minimize future flood blight areas and ensure that potential buyers are
notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard. (Ord. 2837, 2016)
15.32.020: DEFINITIONS:
The following words shall have the meanings ascribed to them:
   ACCESSORY USE: A use which is incidental and subordinate to the principal
use of the parcel of land on which it is located.
   ALLUVIAL FAN: A geomorphologic feature characterized by a cone or fan shaped
deposit of boulders, gravel, and fine sediments that have been eroded from
mountain slopes, transported by flood flows, and then deposited on the valley
floors, and which is subject to flash flooding, high velocity flows, debris
flows, erosion, sediment movement and deposition, and channel migration.
   APEX: The point of highest elevation on an alluvial fan, which on
undisturbed fans is generally the point where the major stream that formed the
fan emerges from the mountain front.
   APPEAL: A request for a review of the chief building official's
interpretation of any provision of this chapter.
   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING: A designated AO or AH zone on the flood insurance
rate map (FIRM) where the base flood depths range from one to three feet (3'),
a clearly defined channel does not exist, the path of flooding is unpredictable
and indeterminate, and velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is
characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
   BASE FLOOD: A flood which has a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year (also called the "100-year flood"). Base flood is
the term used throughout this chapter.
   BASEMENT: Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
   DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings, structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of
equipment or materials.
   ENCROACHMENT: The advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill,
excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development into a floodplain
which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.
   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date
of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
   FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM): The official map on which the
federal emergency management agency or federal insurance administration has
delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the floodway.
   FLOOD, FLOODING, OR FLOODWATER: A. A general and temporary condition of
partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of
inland or tidal waters, the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface
waters from any source, and/or mudslides (i.e., mudflows); and
   B.   The condition resulting from flood related erosion.
   FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP: The official map on which the federal emergency
management agency or federal insurance administration has delineated the areas
of flood hazards.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM): The official map on which the federal
emergency management agency or federal insurance administration has delineated
both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk of premium zones
applicable to the community.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY: The official report provided by the federal insurance
administration that includes flood profiles, the flood insurance rate map, the
flood boundary and floodway map and the water surface elevation of the base
flood.
   FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR: The city's chief building official.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT: The operation of an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing,
where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including, but not limited
to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management
regulations and open space plans.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS: This chapter, subdivision regulations,
building codes, health regulations, ordinances (such as grading and erosion
control) and other applications of police power regulations which control
development in flood prone areas. This term describes federal, state or local
regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for preventing
and reducing flood loss and damage.
   FLOODPLAIN OR FLOOD PRONE AREA: Any land area susceptible to being inundated
by water from any source (see definition of Flood, Flooding, Or Floodwater).
   FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
   FLOODWAY: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot (1')
(referred to as "regulatory floodway").
   FLOODWAY FRINGE: That area of the floodplain on either side of the
"regulatory floodway" where encroachment may be permitted.
   FRAUD AND VICTIMIZATION: As related to sections
15.32.180 and
15.32.190 of this chapter, means that the variance granted must not cause fraud
on or victimization of the public. In examining this requirement, the city will
consider the fact that every newly constructed building adds to government
responsibilities and remains a part of the city for fifty (50) to one hundred
(100) years. Buildings that are permitted to be constructed below the base
flood elevation are subject during all those years to increased risk of damage
from floods, while future owners of the property and the city as a whole are
subject to all the costs, inconvenience, danger, and suffering that those
increased flood damages bring. In addition, future owners may purchase the
property, unaware that it is subject to potential flood damage, and can be
insured only at very high flood insurance rates.
   FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE: A use which cannot perform its intended purpose
unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water.
   GOVERNING BODY: The city council of the city of Redlands that is empowered
to adopt and implement regulations to provide for the public health, safety and
general welfare of its citizenry.
   HARDSHIP: As related to section
15.32.190 of this chapter, means the exceptional hardship that would result
from a failure to grant a requested variance. The city council requires that
the variance be exceptional, unusual, and peculiar to the property involved.
Mere economic or financial hardship alone is not exceptional. Inconvenience,
aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences, or the
disapproval of one's neighbors likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as an
exceptional hardship. All of these problems can be resolved through other means
without granting a variance, even if the alternative is more expensive, or
requires the property owner to build elsewhere or put the parcel to a different
use than originally intended.
   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE: The highest natural elevation of the ground surface
prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE: Any structure that is:
   A.   Listed individually in the national register of historic places (a
listing maintained by the department of interior) or preliminarily determined
by the secretary of the interior as meeting the requirements for individual
listing on the national register;
   B.   Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as
a registered historic district;
   C.   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the secretary
of the interior; or
   D.   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either
by an approved state program as determined by the secretary of the interior or
directly by the secretary of the interior in states without approved programs.
   LEVEE: A manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and
constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control
or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary
flooding.
   LEVEE SYSTEM: A flood protection system which consists of a levee, or
levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which
are constructed and operated in accord with sound engineering practices.
   LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including
basement (see definition of Basement), for:
   A.   An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure below the lowest floor that
is usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area
other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor
provided it conforms to applicable nonelevation design requirements, but not
limited to:
      1.   The wet floodproofing standard in subsection
15.32.110C of this chapter;
      2.   The anchoring standards in subsection
15.32.110A of this chapter;
      3.   The construction materials and methods standards in subsection
15.32.110B of this chapter; and
      4.   The standards for utilities in section
15.32.120 of this chapter.
   B.   Residential structures, all subgrade enclosed areas are prohibited as
they are considered to be basements (see definition of Basement). This
prohibition includes below grade garages and storage areas.
   MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term
"manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle".
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
   MARKET VALUE: The cost to replace the structure in new condition and
adjusting that cost figure by the amount of depreciation which has accrued
since the structure was constructed. The cost of replacement of the structure
shall be based on a square foot cost factor determined by reference to a
building cost estimation guide recognized by the building construction
industry. The amount of depreciation shall be determined by taking into account
the age and physical deterioration of the structure and functional obsolescence
as approved by the floodplain administrator, but shall not include economic or
other forms of external obsolescence. Use of replacement costs or accrued
depreciation factors different from those contained in recognized building cost
estimation guides may be considered only if such factors are included in a
report prepared by an independent professional appraiser and supported by
written explanation of the differences.
   MEAN SEA LEVEL: For purposes of the national flood insurance program, the
national geodetic vertical datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base
flood elevation shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced.
   MINIMUM NECESSARY: To afford relief with a minimum of deviation from the
requirements of this chapter.
   MUDSLIDE (MUDFLOW) PRONE AREA: An area with land surfaces and slopes of
unconsolidated material where the history, geology, and climate indicate a
potential for mudflow.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION: For floodplain management purposes, means structures for
which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of
floodplain management regulations adopted by this community, and includes any
subsequent improvements to such structures.
   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective
date of floodplain management regulations adopted by this city.
   OBSTRUCTION: Any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment,
protection, excavation, channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building,
wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill structure, vegetation or other material
in, along, across or projection into any watercourse which may alter, impede,
retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the flow of water, or due to
its location, its propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of
water, or its likelihood of being carried downstream.
   PUBLIC SAFETY AND NUISANCE: As related to section
15.32.190 of this chapter, means that the granting of a variance must not
result in anything which is injurious to safety or health of an entire
community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, or unlawfully
obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any navigable
lake or river, bay, stream, canal, or basin.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicle which is:
   A.   Built on a single chassis;
   B.   Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
   C.   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck; and
   D.   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
   REGULATORY FLOODWAY: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot
(1').
   REMEDY A VIOLATION: To bring a structure or other development into
compliance with state and local floodplain management regulations, or, if that
is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that impacts
may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected development
from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of this chapter or
otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing state or federal
financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development.
   RIVERINE: Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including
tributaries), stream or brook.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA): An area in the floodplain subject to a one
percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any given year and is shown on an
FHBM or FIRM as zone A, AO, A1-30, AE, A99, or AH.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION: Includes substantial improvement, and other proposed
new development and means the date the building permit was issued; provided,
the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, placement or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180)
days of the permit date. The "actual start" means either the first placement of
permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or
footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work
beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of manufactured home on a
foundation. "Permanent construction" does not include land preparation, such as
clearing, grading and filling, the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor
does it include the excavation of basements, footings, piers or foundations or
the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the
property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as
dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial
improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any
wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not
that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
   STRUCTURE: A walled and roofed building that is principally above ground;
including a gas or liquid storage tank or a manufactured home.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal
or exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or
other proposed new development of a structure, the cost of which equals or
exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the
start of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which
have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either:
   A.   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations or state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications
which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are
the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
   B.   Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic
structure.
   VARIANCE: A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which
permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this
chapter.
   VIOLATION: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with this chapter. A structure or other development without the
elevation certificate, other certification, or other evidence of compliance
required by this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.
   WATER SURFACE ELEVATION: The height, in relation to the national geodetic
vertical datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or the datum, where specified), of floods of
various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine
areas.
   WATERCOURSE: A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, arroyo, channel or other
topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically.
Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood
damage may occur. (Ord. 2837, 2016)
15.32.030: APPLICABILITY OF CHAPTER PROVISIONS:
This chapter applies to all areas of special flood hazards within the
jurisdiction of the city. (Ord. 2837, 2016)
15.32.040: ESTABLISHING THE AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD:
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the federal insurance
administration (FIA) of the federal emergency management agency (FEMA) in the
flood insurance study (FIS) dated July 3, 1978, and the flood insurance rate
map (FIRMs) and flood boundary and floodway maps (FBFMs), dated January 3,
1979, and all subsequent amendments and/or revisions, are adopted by reference
and declared to be a part of this chapter. This flood insurance study (FIS) and
attendant mapping is the minimum area of applicability of this chapter and may
be supplemented by studies for other areas which allow implementation of this
chapter and which are recommended to the city council by the chief building
official. The study, FIRMs and FBFMs are on file at 35 Cajon Street, Suite 20,
department of building and safety. (Ord. 2837, 2016)
15.32.050: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted or altered without full compliance with the provisions of this
chapter and other applicable regulations. Any violations of the provisions of
this chapter by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including
violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with
conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Nothing in this chapter shall
prevent the city from taking any action necessary to prevent or remedy a
violation. (Ord. 2837, 2016)
15.32.060: ABROGATION OR GREATER RESTRICTIONS:
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and
another ordinance, easement, covenant or deed restriction conflicts or
overlaps, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
(Ord. 2837, 2016)
15.32.070: INTERPRETATION:
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be
considered as minimum requirements, liberally construed in favor of the city
and deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state
statutes. (Ord. 2837, 2016)
15.32.080: WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on occasions and flood heights
may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that
land outside the areas of special flood hazards, or uses permitted within such
areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not
create liability on the part of the city, any elected official, officer or
employee thereof, the state of California, or the federal insurance
administration, federal emergency management agency, for any flood damages that
result from reliance on this chapter or any rule or regulation made pursuant to
this chapter. (Ord. 2837, 2016)
15.32.090: DEVELOPMENT PERMIT; REQUIRED; APPLICATION:
A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development
begins within any area of special flood hazard. Application for a development
permit shall be made on forms furnished by the chief building official and may
include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the
nature, location, dimensions and elevation of the area in question; existing or
proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities and the
location of the foregoing; provided, however, the following information is
required:
   A.   Site plan, including, but not limited to:
      1.   For all structures, spot ground elevations at building corners and
twenty foot (20') or smaller intervals along the foundation footprint, or foot
contour elevation throughout the building site; and
      2.   Proposed location of water supply, sanitary sewer, and utilities;
and
      3.   If available, the base flood elevation from the flood insurance
study and/or flood insurance rate maps; and
      4.   If applicable, the location of the regulatory floodway; and
   B.   Foundation design detail, including, but not limited to:
      1.   Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest
floor (including basement) of all structures; and
      2.   For a crawl space foundation, located and total net area of
foundation opening as required in section
15.32.110 of this chapter; and
      3.   For foundations placed on fill, the location and height of fill, and
compaction requirements (compacted to 95 percent using the standard proctor
test method); and
   C.   Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any
nonresidential structure will be floodproofed, as required in section
15.32.110 of this chapter; and
   D.   All appropriate certification listed in section
15.32.110 of this chapter; and
   E.   Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development. (Ord. 2837, 2016)
15.32.100: CHIEF BUILDING OFFICIAL; DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
The chief building official, as the designated floodplain administrator, shall
administer, implement, and enforce this chapter by granting or denying
development permits in accordance with its provisions and the chief building
official duties and responsibilities shall include, but not be limited to:
   A.   Permit Review:
      1.   Review all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied;
      2.   Ensure that all other state and federal permits have been obtained;
      3.   Determine that the site is reasonably safe from flooding; and
      4.   The proposed development does not adversely affect the carrying
capacity of areas where base flood elevations have been determined but a
floodway has not been designated. For purposes of this chapter, "adversely
affects" means that the cumulative effect of the proposed development when
combined with all other existing and anticipated development will increase the
water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot (1') at any point.
   B.   Review, Use And Development Of Other Base Flood Data:
      1.   When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance
with section
15.32.040 of this chapter, the chief building official shall obtain, review and
utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal,
state or other sources, or if no base flood elevation data is available from a
federal or state agency or other source, in order to administer section
15.32.110 of this chapter. Any such information shall be submitted to the city
for adoption; or
      2.   If no base flood elevation data is available from a federal or state
agency or other source, then a base flood elevation shall be obtained using one
of the two (2) methods from the FEMA publication "Managing Floodplain
Development In Approximate Zone A Areas-A Guide Of Obtaining And Developing
Base (100-Year) Flood Elevations" dated July 1995, in order to administer
section
15.32.110 of this chapter.
         a.   Simplified method:
            (1)   100-year or base flood discharge shall be obtained using the
appropriate regression equation found in a U.S. geological survey publication,
or the discharge-drainage area method; and
            (2)   Base flood elevation shall be obtained using the Quick-
2 computer program developed by FEMA; or
         b.   Detail method:
            (1)   100-year or base flood discharge shall be obtained using the
U.S. army corps of engineers' HEC-HMS computer program; and
            (2)   Base flood elevation shall be obtained using the U.S. army
corps of engineers' HEC-RAS computer program.
   C.   Notification Of Other Agencies:
      1.   In alteration or relocation of a watercourse:
         a.   Notify adjacent communities and the California department of
water resources prior to alteration or relocation;
         b.   Submit evidence of such notification to the FEMA; and
         c.   Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse is maintained.
      2.   Base Flood Elevation Changes Due To Physical Alterations:
         a.   Within six (6) months of information becoming available or
project completion, whichever comes first, the floodplain administrator shall
submit or assure that the permit applicant submits technical or scientific data
to FEMA for a Letter of Map Revision (LOMR).
         b.   All LOMR’s for flood control projects are approved prior to the
issuance of building permits. Building permits must not be issued based on
Conditional Letters of Map Revision (CLOMR’s). Approved CLOMR’s allow
construction of the proposed flood control project and land preparation as
specified in the “start of construction” definition.
      Such submissions are necessary so that upon confirmation of those
physical changes affecting flooding conditions, risk premium rates and
floodplain management requirements are based on current data.
      3.   Changes In Corporate Boundaries:
         a.   Notify FEMA in writing whenever the corporate boundaries have
been modified by annexation or other means and include a copy of a map of the
community clearly delineating the new corporate limits.
   D.   Documentation Of Floodplain Development: Obtain and maintain for public
inspection and make available as needed the following:
      1.   Certification required by sections
15.32.110 and
15.32.140 of this chapter (lowest floor elevations);
      2.   Certification required by subsection
15.32.110C4 of this chapter (elevation or floodproofing of nonresidential
structures);
      3.   Certification of elevation required by subsection
15.32.110C5 of this chapter (wet floodproofing standards);
      4.   Certification of elevation required by section
15.32.130, "Subdivision Standards", of this chapter;
      5.   Certification required by section
15.32.160 of this chapter (floodway encroachments);
      6.   Reports required by section
 15.32.170 of this chapter (mudflow standards).
   E.   Map Determinations: Make interpretations, where needed, as to the exact
location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example,
where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field
conditions). Any person contesting the location of a boundary shall be given a
reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in sections
15.32.180 and
15.32.190 of this chapter.
   F.   Remedial Action: Take action to remedy violations of this chapter.
(Ord. 2914 § 1 (part), 2020; Ord. 2837, 2016)
15.32.110: CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are required:
   A.   Anchoring:
      1.   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored
to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting
from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
      2.   All manufactured homes shall meet the anchoring standards of section
 15.32.140 of this chapter.
   B.   Construction Materials And Methods:
      1.   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with flood resistant materials and utility equipment resistant to
flood damage;
      2.   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage;
      3.   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air
conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding; and
      4.   If within zone AH or AO, adequate drainage paths around structures
on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
   C.   Elevation And Floodproofing:
      1.   Residential construction, new or substantial improvement of any
structure in zone AE, AH, or A1-30 shall have the lowest floor, including
basement, elevated two feet (2') above the base flood elevation. Upon the
completion of the structure the elevation of the lowest floor including
basement shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor,
or verified by the chief building official to be properly elevated.
      2.   Residential construction, new or substantial improvement, of any
structure in zone AO shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated
above the highest adjacent grade to a height exceeding the depth number
specified in feet on the FIRM by at least two feet (2'), or elevated at least
four feet (4') above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is
specified. Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest
floor including basement shall be certified by a registered professional
engineer or surveyor, or by the chief building official to be properly
elevated.
      3.   Residential construction, new or substantial improvement of any
structure in zone A shall have the lowest floor, including basement, be
elevated at least two feet (2') above the base flood elevation. Upon the
completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor including
basement shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor,
or by the chief building official to be properly elevated.
      4.   Nonresidential construction, new or substantial improvement, shall
either be elevated in conformance with subsection C1 or C2 of this section or
together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be floodproofed so that
below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water, have structural components capable of
resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy, and be
certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the standards
of this subsection are satisfied. Such certifications shall be provided to the
chief building official.
      5.   All new construction and substantial improvements, that fully
enclose areas below the lowest floor (excluding basements) that are usable
solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, and which are
subject to flooding, shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic
flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of
floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement shall either be certified by
a registered professional engineer or architect and must meet or exceed the
following minimum criteria:
         a.   Have a minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not
less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot (1')
above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other
coverings or devices; provided, that they permit the automatic entry and exit
of floodwaters; or
         b.   Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect.
      6.   Manufactured homes shall satisfy the standards in section
15.32.140 of this chapter. (Ord. 2914 § 1 (part), 2020; Ord. 2837, 2016)
15.32.120: UTILITY STANDARDS:
   A.   All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall
be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the
system and discharge from the systems into floodwaters.
   B.   On site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to
them or contamination from them during flooding. (Ord. 2837, 2016)
15.32.130: SUBDIVISION STANDARDS:
   A.   All preliminary subdivision proposals shall identify the special flood
hazard area and the elevation of the base flood.
   B.   All final subdivision plans shall provide the elevation of proposed
structures and pads. If the site is filled above the base flood elevation, the
lowest floor and pad elevation shall be certified by a registered professional
engineer or surveyor and provided to the chief building official.
   C.   All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize
flood damage.
   D.   All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to
minimize flood damage.
   E.   All subdivisions shall provide adequate drainage to reduce exposure to
flood hazards. (Ord. 2837, 2016)
15.32.140: STANDARDS FOR MANUFACTURED HOMES:
   A.   All manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within
zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's flood insurance rate map, on sites
located: 1) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; 2) in a new
manufactured home park or subdivision; 3) in an expansion to an existing
manufactured home park or subdivision; 4) in an existing manufactured home park
or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage"
as the result of a flood, shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that
the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to at least two feet (2')
above the base flood elevation and be securely fastened to an adequately
anchored foundation system to resist flotation collapse and lateral movement.
   B.   All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on sites
in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within zones A1-30, AH,
and AE on the community's flood insurance rate map that are not subject to the
provisions of subsection A of this section will be fastened to an adequately
anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement,
and to be elevated so that either:
      1.   The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at least two feet (2')
above the base flood elevation; or
      2.   The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or
other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than
thirty six inches (36") in height above grade. Upon completion of the
structure, the elevation of the lowest floor including basement shall be
certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor, and verified by
the city building inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification and
verification shall be provided to the chief building official. (Ord. 2837,
2016)
15.32.150: STANDARDS FOR RECREATIONAL VEHICLES:
All recreational vehicles placed on sites within a floodplain shown on the
city's flood insurance rate map will either:
   A.   Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive
days;
   B.   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational vehicle is
ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to
the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has
no permanently attached additions; or
   C.   Meet the permit requirements of this chapter and the elevation and
anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in section
15.32.140 of this chapter. (Ord. 2837, 2016)
15.32.160: FLOODWAYS:
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section
15.32.040 of this chapter are areas designated as floodways. Because the
floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters
which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following
provisions shall apply:
   A.   Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, and other development unless certification by a registered
professional engineer or architect is provided demonstrating that encroachments
shall not result in any increase in the base flood levels during the occurrence
of the base flood discharge.
   B.   If the above is satisfied, all new construction, substantial
improvements, and proposed development shall comply with all other applicable
flood hazard reduction provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2837, 2016)
15.32.170: MUDSLIDE (MUDFLOW) PRONE AREAS:
   A.   The chief building official shall review permits for proposed
construction of other development to determine if it is proposed within a
mudslide area.
   B.   Permits shall be reviewed to determine that the proposed site and
improvement will be reasonably safe from mudslide hazards. Factors to be
considered in making this determination include, but are not limited to: 1) the
type and quality of soils; 2) evidence of groundwater or surface water
problems; 3) depth and quality of any fill; 4) overall slope of the site; 5)
weight that any proposed development will impose on the slope.
   C.   Within areas which may have mudslide hazards, the chief building
official shall require that: 1) a site investigation and further review be made
by persons qualified in geology and soils engineering; 2) the proposed grading,
excavation, new construction, and substantial improvement be adequately
designed and protected against mudslide damages; 3) the proposed grading,
excavation, new construction, and substantial improvement not aggravate the
existing hazard by creating either on site or off site disturbances; 4)
drainage, planting, watering, and maintenance not endanger slope stability.
(Ord. 2837, 2016)
15.32.180: APPEAL BOARD:
   A.   The planning commission shall hear and decide the appeals and requests
for variances from the requirements of this chapter when it is alleged that
there is an error in any requirement, decision or determination made by the
chief building official in the enforcement or administration of this chapter.
In passing upon such applications, the planning commission shall consider all
technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other
provisions of this chapter, and:
      1.   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
      2.   The danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
      3.   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the existing individual owner and
future owners of the property;
      4.   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
      5.   The necessity for the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
      6.   The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which
are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
      7.   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
      8.   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and
floodplain management program for that area;
      9.   The safety of access to the property in time of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
      10.   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the floodwaters expected at the site; and
      11.   The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical and water system, and streets and bridges.
   B.   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor
elevation below the regulatory flood elevation and that the cost of flood
insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the
reduced lowest floor elevation. A copy of the notice shall be recorded by the
chief building official in the office of the county recorder for San Bernardino
County and shall be recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of
title to the affected parcel of land.
   C.   Upon consideration of the factors listed in this section and the
purposes of this chapter, the planning commission may attach such conditions to
the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this
chapter. The chief building official shall maintain the records of all appeal
actions and report any variances to the federal insurance administration upon
request. (Ord. 2837, 2016)
15.32.190: VARIANCE CONDITIONS:
   A.   Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and substantial
improvements, and other proposed new development to be erected on a lot of one-
half (1/2) acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with
existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing sections
15.32.090 through
15.32.170 of this chapter have been fully considered. As the lot size increases
beyond one-half (1/2) acre, the technical justification required for issuing
the variance increases.
   B.   Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or
restoration of historic structures listed in the national register of historic
places or the state inventory of historic places, upon a determination that the
proposed reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is
the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure.
   C.   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
   D.   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance
is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
   E.   Variances shall be issued upon:
      1.   A showing of good and sufficient cause;
      2.   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
      3.   A determination that the granting of a variance would not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary
public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of, the
public or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
   F.   Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial
improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a
functionally dependent use; provided, that the provisions of this chapter are
satisfied and that the structure or other development is protected by methods
that minimize flood damages during the base flood and creates no additional
threats to public safety and does not create a public nuisance.
   G.   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice over the signature of a community official that:
      1.   The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base
flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to
amounts as high as twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for one hundred dollars
($100.00) of insurance coverage; and
      2.   Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life
and property. A copy of the notice shall be recorded by the floodplain
administrator in the Office of the San Bernardino County Recorder and shall be
recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected
parcel of land.
   H.   The floodplain administrator will maintain a record of all variance
actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such variances
issued in its biennial report submitted to the Federal Emergency Management
Agency. (Ord. 2914 § 1 (part), 2020; Ord. 2837, 2016)
CHAPTER 15.36
SIGN CODE
SECTION:
Article I. General Provisions
15.36.010: Short Title
15.36.020: Intent And Purpose
15.36.030: Applicability
Article II. Sign Definitions And Measurement
15.36.040: Definitions
15.36.050: Area Measurement
15.36.060: Height Measurement
Article III. General Sign Standards
15.36.070: General Standards
15.36.080: Permits And Fees
15.36.090: Permit Submittal Requirements
15.36.100: Sign Approval Required
15.36.110: Construction And Maintenance Standards
15.36.120: Standards For Monument And Pedestal Signs
15.36.130: Maximum Brightness
15.36.140: Prohibited Signs
15.36.150: Signs Under Canopies Or Overhangs
15.36.160: Sign Programs
15.36.170: Temporary, Non-Commercial Signs On Private Property
Article IV. Sign Standards For Commercial Zoning Districts
15.36.190: General Commercial Sign Standards
15.36.200: C-1 And C-2 Zoning Districts
15.36.210: C-3 Zoning District
15.36.220: C-4 Zoning District
15.36.230: C-M Zoning District
15.36.240: Signs In The Downtown Business District
15.36.250: C-D Overlay District
15.36.260: A-P, A-P-C, And MF Zoning Districts
15.36.270: EV/AP Zoning District
Article V. Sign Standards For Residential Zoning Districts
15.36.280: For Sale, For Lease, For Rent Signs
15.36.290: Identification Signs In Multiple-Family Residential Districts
15.36.300: Identification Signs For Single-Family Residential Districts
15.36.305: Mobilehome Parks Zoning District
15.36.310: Signs For Nonresidential Uses In Residential Zoning Districts
Article VI. Sign Standards For Other Zoning Districts
15.36.330: MF, M-P, M-1, I-P, And M-2 Zoning Districts
15.36.340: E Zoning District
15.36.350: T Zoning District
15.36.360: P Zoning District
15.36.370: O Zoning District
15.36.380: A-D Zoning District
15.36.385: A-1 Zoning District
Article VII. Sign Standards For Specific Sign Types
15.36.390: Automobile And Watercraft Dealership Signs
15.36.400: Changeable Copy Signs
15.36.410: Freeway Facing Signs
15.36.420: Freeway Oriented Signs
15.36.430: Mandatory Signs
15.36.440: Movie Theater Signs
15.36.450: Multi-Tenant Signs
15.36.460: Neon On Buildings
15.36.470: Regional Shopping Center Signs
15.36.480: Regional Mall Signs
15.36.490: Service Station Signs
15.36.500: Main Identification Signs For Buildings Over One Hundred Thousand
Square Feet In Area
15.36.510: Signs For Buildings Exceeding Three Stories In Height
Article VIII. Temporary Signs
15.36.520: General Regulations For Banner Signs
15.36.530: Banner Signs In Commercial And Industrial Zoning Districts
15.36.540: Banner Signs In Residential And Other Noncommercial And
Nonindustrial Zoning Districts
15.36.550: Construction Signs
15.36.560: Open House Signs
15.36.570: Sale, Rent, And Lease Signs
15.36.580: Searchlights
15.36.590: Subdivision Signs
15.36.600: Window Signs
Article IX. Sign Code Enforcement And Administration
15.36.610: Abatement Of Nonconforming Signs
15.36.620: Notice Of Violation; Removal
15.36.630: Variance From Structural Requirements
15.36.640: Nonconforming Signs
15.36.650: Violation; Penalty
15.36.660: Judicial Review
ARTICLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS
15.36.010: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the SIGN CODE. (Ord. 2552 § 1, 2004)
15.36.020: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
   A.   This chapter establishes regulations for the erection, maintenance and
use of signs and other exterior advertising media within the City to:
      1.   Safeguard and enhance property values;
      2.   Protect public and private investment in buildings and open spaces;
      3.   Improve the appearance of the City as a place in which to live and
work, and as an attraction to nonresidents who come to visit or trade;
      4.   Encourage sound signing practices as an aid to business, and to
provide information to the traveling public;
      5.   Prevent excessive and confusing sign displays;
      6.   Reduce hazards to motorists and pedestrians; and
      7.   Promote the public health, safety, and general welfare.
   B.   The City has a reputation as a community of natural beauty rendering it
highly attractive to visitors and potential future residents. The City Council
has determined that the natural, traditional and manmade advantages of the City
substantially contribute to the residential character of the community and to
its aesthetic, cultural and economic values. The unregulated and uncontrolled
erection and maintenance of signs, billboards and advertising structures
results in a gaudy and garish atmosphere that would be out of harmony with the
fine attributes and excellent character of the City. The City Council further
determines that the lack of regulation and control of signs results in costly
and unfair competition for the public eye through the proliferation, increased
height, and size of signs, and that the safety of the general public requires
that the structural elements and location of signs be regulated.
   C.   The reasonable and proper regulation of signs and advertising
structures is conducive to the fullest enjoyment by the people of the community
of natural and traditional advantages, and necessary to prevent depreciation of
property values, and the regulation of signs results in a more fair and
equitable public exposure of the advertising displays of all businesses, large
and small, and that the appearance of the commercial areas will be protected.
   D.   It is also the intent of this chapter to recognize that the eventual
elimination of existing signs that do not conform with the provisions of this
chapter is as important as is prohibiting new signs that would violate these
regulations. (Ord. 2552 § 1, 2004)
15.36.030: APPLICABILITY:
   A.   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all zones established by
title 18 of this Code. Except as noted below, a "sign", as defined in this
chapter, may be affixed, erected, constructed, placed, established, mounted or
maintained only in compliance with the standards, procedures and other
requirements of this chapter. The standards regarding number and size of signs
regulated by this chapter are maximum standards, unless otherwise stated. In
those areas of the City where specific plan sign standards or sign programs
have been adopted by ordinance or resolution, those sign standards or sign
programs shall apply; provided, however, the "substitution" provisions of this
section shall apply to such programs and plans. This chapter shall not apply to
the following signs:
      1.   Signs which are not visible from any public vehicular or pedestrian
right of way;
      2.   Signs required by federal or state law which do not exceed the
minimum number and dimensional requirements of such law;
      3.   Signs and advertising for the California state lottery as authorized
by Government Code section 8800 et seq.;
      4.   Signs containing a maximum area of two (2) square feet or less;
      5.   Holiday decorations and lights;
      6.   Flags and any other insignia of any government that do not display a
commercial message and are attached to poles; provided that no more than three
(3) flags/poles are permitted on property containing less than one acre of
land, and no more than six (6) flags/poles are permitted on property containing
more than one acre of land. Poles for flags and insignia shall not exceed
thirty feet (30') in height and flags shall not exceed forty two (42) square
feet in surface area. Such flags shall be maintained in good condition and free
of tattering or tearing. The city has a compelling interest in permitting the
identification of government facilities;
      7.   Street address signs. The city has a compelling interest in
permitting such signs to promote the identification of property to guide
emergency response personnel; provided such signs shall not exceed two (2)
square feet in area or the size required by the city's fire department,
whichever is greater;
      8.   Official traffic signs or other municipal directional signs, legal
notices, advertisements prescribed by law and placed by governmental entities,
and signs indicating the location of buried utility lines or any notices posted
by a governmental officer in the scope of the officer's duty. The city has a
compelling interest in permitting such signs to comply with state and local
laws and to promote public safety;
      9.   Memorial tablets and identification plaques installed by a
recognized governmental historical agency. The city has a compelling interest
in permitting such signs to promote interest in historical structures and
events and to promote public safety and identification;
      10.   Time and temperature signs containing no advertising copy. The city
has a compelling interest in permitting such signs to promote awareness of
local conditions for individuals with medical problems;
      11.   Signs not exceeding two (2) square feet and carried by individuals
who are standing, sitting or traveling along any public sidewalk or other
public property;
      12.   Signs located on city owned property;
      13.   Signs located in the interior of a building or enclosed area;
      14.   Signs designated by the city as a historic resource, provided that
the original verbiage, symbols and structure of the sign are retained.
   B.   All sign programs that were approved prior to the effective date hereof
are subject only to the "substitution" provisions of this section; provided,
however, that if any such sign program is proposed for amendment to increase
overall sign area allowed, then the sign program shall be amended to conform
with all development and design standards of this chapter.
   C.   In each instance, and under the same conditions in which this chapter
permits any sign, a sign containing an ideological, political or other
noncommercial message of the same dimensions shall be permitted. Noncommercial
messages may be placed on any sign otherwise permitted by this chapter.
   D.   Real estate signs may be placed as authorized by Civil Code section 713
et seq., provided they shall comply with the type, number, area, height,
special restrictions and permitting requirements applicable to temporary signs
in the zoning district in which the real estate sign is located. (Ord. 2552 §
1, 2004)
ARTICLE II. SIGN DEFINITIONS AND MEASUREMENT
15.36.040: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply. Terms used
in this chapter which are not defined below shall be used as otherwise defined
in this code.
   AREA OF A SIGN: Refers to the area as measured in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter.
   AWNING: Either an appendage or shelter (which may be covered in fabric or
more durable materials) supported entirely from the exterior wall of a
building. An awning which does not contain words or symbols is not considered a
sign. (See definition of Canopy.)
   BANNER: Any type of fabric, vinyl, or similar sign attached to a building or
other structure. Banners may be displayed only as provided in this chapter.
   BILLBOARD: A sign which, except for signs located in unified centers,
advertises a business, commodity, industry or other activity which is sold,
offered or conducted elsewhere than on the premises upon which such sign is
located. (See definition of Premises.)
   BUILDING LINE: A line established by ordinance beyond which no building may
extend. Depending upon the zoning district or other applicable development
standards, a building line may be a property line.
   CANOPY: An awning which is supported from the exterior wall of a building
and from supports to the ground below. (See definition of Awning.)
   CHANGEABLE COPY: Copy containing, displaying or having media or letters each
of which can be readily changed without tools, where allowed by this chapter.
(See definition of Reader Board.)
   CONSTRUCTION SIGN: A sign available for a construction project.
   CORNER CUTOFF AREA: A triangle formed as shown in figure 1 herein. Note: The
dimensions of "corner cutoff areas" may vary, depending on roadway type,
zoning, and other features. See section
18.16.010 of this code.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6bf866ad80925317f7b0510a75f8f7309a69c8b4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-28.png]
   DIRECTOR: The city's community development director or his or her designee.
   ELEVATION DRAWING: A scale drawing of the side, front, or rear of a sign or
structure.
   ENTITY: An independent, separate and individual business. For the purpose of
this code, separately owned and operated businesses housed in a single building
shall not be considered separate entities unless all of the following apply:
   A.   The business is completely separated from the remainder of the building
by walls and ceilings, and
   B.   The business has at least one wall forming the exterior of the
building, and
   C.   The business has a customer entrance through this exterior wall.
   EXTERNALLY ILLUMINATED SIGN: Any sign which is illuminated from a light
source which shines directly on the exterior of the sign.
   FASCIA: Refers to a vertical surface in the form of a flat horizontal band
on the face of a building.
   FASCIA SIGN: A sign applied to the fascia of a building. (See definition of
Fascia.)
   FREESTANDING SIGN: Any sign supported by a structural element which is not
attached to any part of a building. This definition includes pole signs, ground
signs, pedestal signs, portable signs, and monument signs.
   FREEWAY: Shall be as defined in the Streets and Highways Code of the state
of California.
   FREEWAY ORIENTED SIGN: A pole mounted sign for a motorist serving business.
Freeway oriented signs shall be regulated as provided in this chapter. (See
definition of Motorist Serving Business.)
   FRONTAGE:
      Building Frontage: The portion(s) of a building which face a public
street, alleyway or public parking lot, even if there is no entrance or exit
for use by the general public. No store or lease space shall be credited with
more than one building frontage.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6bf866ad80925317f7b0510a75f8f7309a69c8b4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-30.png]
      Lot Frontage: That portion of a legal lot which abuts a public street.
For the purposes of determining sign area as defined in this chapter, only one
frontage per lot may be measured; corner lots or lots fronting on two (2) or
more streets may be credited with only one frontage.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6bf866ad80925317f7b0510a75f8f7309a69c8b4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-32.png]
   GRADE: The elevation of the nearest public sidewalk or paved area adjoining
the property upon which a sign or building is erected or the natural surface of
the ground supporting a sign or building, whichever is the lower surface.
   HEIGHT OF SIGN: The height of a sign measured as defined in this chapter.
   HISTORIC SIGN: A sign that has been designated by the historic and scenic
preservation commission to be of historic, architectural or cultural importance
to the city.
   ILLUMINATED SIGN: A sign which is lighted in any way. (See definitions of
Externally Illuminated Sign and Internally Illuminated Sign.)
   INDIRECTLY LIGHTED OR SHADOW LIGHTED SIGN: An illuminated sign constructed
so that the immediate source of the illumination is not visible when the sign
is lighted, and which does not exceed ten (10) candlepower per square foot,
measured at ten feet (10') from the sign.
   INTERIOR SIGN: In the context of a regional mall, is any sign which is
located entirely within the interior portion of the mall.
   INTERNALLY ILLUMINATED SIGN: Any sign in which the source of illumination is
located within the sign structure and shines through a translucent surface
(such as plastic), through holes in an opaque surface, or directly from the
illumination source (as with a "reader board" sign). (See definition of Reader
Board.)
   MAIN IDENTIFICATION SIGN: A sign with an area greater than twenty four (24)
square feet and located on any building or parcel.
   MAJOR REGIONAL MALL ENTRY: A combination of a landscaped area and a major
mall entry sign. Major mall entries must be located within the boundary of the
regional mall. (See definition of Regional Mall.)
   MAJOR REGIONAL MALL ENTRY SIGN: A sign used within a major mall vehicle
entry. (See definition of Regional Mall.)
   MAJOR TENANT: In a regional mall, is defined as a single store containing at
least one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of gross floor area. In all
other cases, a major tenant is a single store containing at least fifty
thousand (50,000) square feet of gross floor area. (See definition of Regional
Mall.)
   MAJOR TENANT ENTRY: The pedestrian entry into a major tenant at a regional
mall. (See definition of Regional Mall.)
   MINOR TENANT: In a regional mall, is defined as any store which is not large
enough to be considered a major tenant. (See definitions of Major Tenant and
Regional Mall.)
   MONUMENT SIGN: A freestanding sign not more than four feet (4') in height
which is detached from a building, and the support structure of which is a
solid base constructed of a permanent material such as concrete block or brick.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6bf866ad80925317f7b0510a75f8f7309a69c8b4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-34.png]
   MOTORIST SERVING BUSINESS: A business especially oriented to provide
services to the freeway traveling public. Motorist serving businesses shall be
limited to those whose primary products or services are food, lodging, or motor
vehicle fuel. A motorist serving business shall be open to the public a minimum
of twelve (12) hours per day, seven (7) days per week.
   OBSOLETE SIGN: A sign relating to a business, product or service no longer
available on the premises.
   OFF SITE: Refers to a sign which is not located on the same parcel as the
business, product, or activity it identifies or advertises.
   OUTPARCEL: In the context of a regional mall project, is any individual
parcel of land on which a single building not physically connected to the mall
itself will be constructed. (See definition of Regional Mall.)
   PAINTED SIGN: A sign which is comprised only of paint applied on a building
or structure.
   PEDESTAL SIGN: A freestanding sign in excess of four feet (4') in height.
The support structure of a pedestal sign and the sign face itself shall be
designed as one architecturally unified and proportional element. The combined
width of the supports of pedestal sign shall be at least one-fourth (1/4) the
width of the sign face. Pedestal signs may not exceed twelve feet (12') in
height. (See definitions of Monument Sign and Pole Sign.)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6bf866ad80925317f7b0510a75f8f7309a69c8b4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-36.png]
   PERMANENT SIGN: A sign which is permanently affixed to a support or
structure and comprised of durable materials such as wood, metal, or
fiberglass.
   POLE SIGN: A freestanding sign which is supported by one or more structural
elements that are either: a) architecturally dissimilar to the design of the
sign or b) less than one-fourth (1/4) the width of the sign face.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6bf866ad80925317f7b0510a75f8f7309a69c8b4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-38.png]
   PORTABLE SIGN: Any freestanding sign which is not permanently attached to
the ground or a building.
   PREMISES: For the purposes of this chapter shall include the parcel or lot
upon which a building is located or to any unified center. (See definition of
Unified Center.)
   PROJECTING SIGN: A sign mounted on the face or vertical surfaces of a
building or structure, the display surfaces of which are not parallel to the
supporting structures.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6bf866ad80925317f7b0510a75f8f7309a69c8b4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-40.png] 
   PROJECTION: The distance by which a sign extends beyond the vertical surface
of the building.
   READER BOARD: As used in this chapter is a sign in which automated electric
lights or other animated devices are used to form letters and/or symbols,
generally in an animated or changing display. (See definition of Changeable
Copy.)
   REAL ESTATE SIGN: A sign indicating that the premises on which the sign is
located, or any portion thereof, is for sale, lease, or rent.
   REGIONAL MALL: A master planned retail development in which at least three
(3) major tenants and other minor tenants are arranged around an enclosed,
interior courtyard. Regional malls are typified by a pedestrian orientation, in
which a customer will drive to the mall, enter the mall, and visit individual
stores on foot. Regional malls shall have a minimum gross land area of seventy
five (75) acres. (See definitions of Major Tenant and Minor Tenant.)
   REGIONAL MALL DIRECTIONAL SIGN: A sign within the parking area of a regional
mall which provides information to motorists. (See definition of Regional
Mall.)
   REGIONAL SHOPPING CENTER: A master planned retail development with a land
area of at least thirty five (35) acres and a building area of at least three
hundred fifty thousand (350,000) square feet.
   RETAIL CENTER ENTRY, PRIMARY: In a regional mall, a "primary retail center
entry" shall be the main pedestrian entrance(s) into the interior mall area.
Primary retail center entries shall be distinguished by enhanced architecture
or landscaping, or both. The number of primary retail center entries shall not
exceed one and one-half (11/2) times the number of major tenants (e.g., a mall
with 4 major tenants could be provided with 6 primary retail center entries).
An entry directly into a retail store is not considered a retail center entry.
(See definition of Major Tenant Entry.)
   RETAIL CENTER ENTRY, SECONDARY: In a regional mall, a "secondary retail
center entry" shall be any pedestrian entry into the interior mall area which
is not a primary retail center entry. An entry directly into a retail store is
not considered a retail center entry. (See definition of Major Tenant Entry.)
   ROOF SIGN OR ROOF MOUNTED SIGN: A sign erected or painted wholly on or above
the roof covering any portion of a building.
   SF: An abbreviation for "square foot" or "square feet", depending on the
context in which it is used.
   SEARCHLIGHT: An apparatus containing a light source and a reflector for
projecting a high intensity beam of approximately parallel rays of light.
   SECONDARY SIGN: A sign with an area less than or equal to twenty four (24)
square feet and located on any building or parcel. An interior tenant qualifies
for a secondary sign if that tenant has frontage on city right of way or any
other public area.
   SIGN: Any writing, pictorial presentation, emblem, banner, or any other
device, figure or similar character, including a physical structure or paint
placed on another structure, containing words and/or illustrations in any
combination which are intended to advertise, notify, inform, or otherwise
impart information about any business, special event, or other public or
private purpose. For the purposes of this chapter, any frame or background
which is an integral part of a sign is considered part of the sign.
   SIGN STRUCTURE: A. For a freestanding sign or a sign which projects from
another structure, the "sign structure" shall be a physical structure upon
which letters or symbols are placed;
      B.   For a sign placed parallel to the surface of a building, the sign
structure shall consist of all elements placed directly upon the building,
including individually mounted letters.
   UNIFIED CENTER: For the purposes of this chapter shall mean a commercial or
industrial center designed for occupancy by two (2) or more tenants and in
which access to parking and/or the parking area itself is shared by two (2) or
more tenants, either physically or formally (as through easements or
agreements). Buildings in a unified center may share a common architectural
theme, but may also have differing exterior treatments.
   WALL SIGN: A sign attached parallel to the exterior wall of a building, not
projecting more than eighteen inches (18") therefrom.
   WIND SIGN OR DEVICE: Any sign or device in the nature of a banner, flags or
other object, designed and installed in such a manner as to move upon being
subject to pressure by wind or breeze. Banner signs permitted by this chapter
which are not designed to be moved by wind shall not be considered wind signs.
   WINDOW SIGN: Any sign painted or hung on either the inside or outside
surface of a window, not including merchandise displayed inside a window. Any
sign hung more than twelve inches (12") from the inside surface of a window
shall not be considered a window sign and shall not be counted toward maximum
permitted window sign area. (Ord. 2552 § 1, 2004)
15.36.050: AREA MEASUREMENT:
   A.   Sign area shall be measured as defined and illustrated below:
      1.   For signs whose shape is a regular geometric figure (square,
rectangle, circle, oval, etc.), the area shall be calculated using standard
formulas (H x W, p x R2, etc.).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6bf866ad80925317f7b0510a75f8f7309a69c8b4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-42.png]
      2.   For signs whose shape is irregular (such as individual letters
placed on a wall or a monument sign), the area shall be measured by enclosing
the sign elements within up to eight (8) straight, intersecting lines.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6bf866ad80925317f7b0510a75f8f7309a69c8b4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-44.png]
   B.   Where a sign has two (2) faces, the area of the largest sign face shall
be included in determining the area of the sign, so long as the two (2) sides
are within five degrees (5°) of parallel.
Where a sign has two (2) or more faces which are more than five degrees (5°)
from parallel, the sign area shall be computed as the sum of the area of each
sign face.
   C.   The area of spherical, cylindrical, or other three-dimensional signs
shall be measured by calculating the area of an elevation drawing of the sign.
   D.   Where a sign contains a frame, background, or other material used to
differentiate the sign from the background on which it is placed, the sign area
shall be measured to include the entire frame, background, or other material.
   E.   The area of a monument sign which is supported by a base which is
architecturally distinct from the sign face itself shall not include the area
of the base. See figure 11 of this section.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6bf866ad80925317f7b0510a75f8f7309a69c8b4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-46.png]
   F.   The supports of a pedestal sign shall not be included in the area of a
sign, unless they form an integral part of the sign face.
   G.   The following standards shall be used to determine the area of signs
containing multiple elements. Figure 12 herein illustrates these measurement
methods.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6bf866ad80925317f7b0510a75f8f7309a69c8b4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-48.png]
      1.   Regardless of their spacing, the letters forming a word or name
shall be considered a single sign.
      2.   When two (2) or more separate items in a sign (such as a word and a
logo) are separated horizontally or vertically by less than twice the width or
height of the largest item, the items shall be considered a single sign, and
the area shall be determined by measuring the area enclosed by a perimeter
enclosing all of the items.
      3.   When two (2) or more separate items (such as a word and a logo) are
separated horizontally or vertically by more than twice the width or height of
the largest item, the items shall be considered two (2) signs, and the area of
each item shall be determined individually.
   H.   For signs placed on an awning or other translucent surface lighted from
below or behind (other than a window), the sign area shall be calculated to
include the entire lighted area of the awning. (Ord. 2552 § 1, 2004)
15.36.060: HEIGHT MEASUREMENT:
   A.   The height of all signs shall be measured from the top edge of the sign
and/or support structure to the average finished grade of the ground below the
sign and/or support structure, as shown below. If the sign is adjacent to a
sidewalk or curb, the height shall be measured from the average top of sidewalk
or curb.
   B.   The following shall apply to signs located within ten feet (10') of a
sidewalk or curb:
      1.   If the sign is located on a mound or other raised area, any mounding
more than one foot (1') in height will be added to the height of the sign. (For
example, a 4 foot high sign structure located atop a 3 foot high mound will be
considered to be 6 feet in height.)
      2.   If the sign is located in a depression or similar lowered area, up
to one foot (1') in elevation will be deducted from the height of the sign.
(For example, a 4 foot high sign located in a depression 2 feet lower than the
adjacent sidewalk will be considered to be 3 feet high.) (Ord. 2552 § 1, 2004)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6bf866ad80925317f7b0510a75f8f7309a69c8b4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-50.png]
ARTICLE III. GENERAL SIGN STANDARDS
15.36.070: GENERAL STANDARDS:
   A.   Temporary signs are for sales, special events, business promotions, and
other events which occur over a limited time.
   B.   Both faces of a dual faced sign (except as otherwise specifically
permitted by this chapter) shall contain the same words, artwork and logo.
(Ord. 2552 § 1, 2004)
15.36.080: PERMITS AND FEES:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to erect, construct, reconstruct,
install, place, build, hang, paint, draw, affix, fasten, alter, relocate, or
maintain a "sign", as defined in this chapter, without first obtaining all
required approvals and permits, and making payment of fees as required by the
city, except as noted in subsection B of this section and for specific sign
types in this chapter. Permits may include planning, building and/or electrical
permits or sign permits.
   B.   No sign permit shall be required for the following types of signs.
Building or electrical permits may be required.
      1.   Open house signs.
      2.   Sale, rent, and lease signs.
      3.   Window signs.
      4.   Exempt signs. (Ord. 2552 § 1, 2004)
15.36.090: PERMIT SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS:
All applications for sign approvals and/or permits shall be made on forms
provided by the community development department. The director shall determine
the required information to be specified on these forms. (Ord. 2552 § 1, 2004)
15.36.100: SIGN APPROVAL REQUIRED:
   A.   Sign Approvals: All signs, except as specifically noted in this
chapter, require approval by the city. The following sections describe required
sign related approvals.
   B.   Freestanding Signs: The location size and architectural design of all
freestanding signs and support structures (except construction and temporary
signs) shall be approved by the planning commission. Replacement of a sign
without any structural change, such as replacement of sign elements including,
but limited to, individual channel letters or increase in sign area, on
existing freestanding sign structures shall be approved by the director.
   C.   Roof Signs: Roof signs or roof mounted signs are discouraged. However,
such signs may be permitted upon the finding that: 1) the sign is an integral
part of the design of a building, such as signs incorporated into roof screens
or parapet walls; 2) the sign is compatible with the design of the building;
and 3) the location of the sign is aesthetically consistent with the project
and nearby building and architecture.
   D.   Building Mounted Signs: Unless specified otherwise in a specific plan,
sign program, or other regulation, the location, size, and architectural design
of all building mounted signs may be approved by the director. Replacement of
sign copy on existing building mounted signs may be approved by the director
with reasonable conditions to ensure compliance with this chapter.
   E.   Sign Programs: The planning commission shall approve all sign programs
and amendments to sign programs.
   F.   Signs Larger Than One Hundred Twenty Square Feet In Area: All signs and
sign programs that have signs larger than one hundred twenty (120) square feet
shall be permitted upon approval of a conditional use permit application. The
city council shall approve the sign or sign program by a four-fifths (4/5) vote
of the entire authorized membership of the city council.
      1.   Approval Of Application; Findings: The city council, in approving a
conditional use permit, shall find as follows:
         a.   The size of the sign is compatible with the design, architecture,
and scale of the building(s) and/or project.
         b.   The size of the sign is aesthetically consistent with the
project, adjacent areas, and the city.
         c.   The size of the sign is needed to provide necessary project
identity for the benefit of the general public.
      2.   Public Hearing By City Council: A public hearing shall be held by
the city council after a complete application has been filed and legally
required notice given for the hearing.
         a.   Notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation,
not less than ten (10) days before the date set for the council hearing. The
notice shall contain all data related to the case.
         b.   Notices shall be mailed not less than ten (10) days prior to the
date of the meeting to owners of property within a radius of three hundred feet
(300') of the external boundaries of the property described in the application,
using for this purpose the name and address of such owners as are shown on the
latest official tax roll of the county. Such notice shall contain all data
related to the case.
   G.   Permit Issuance Does Not Prevent Stop Work Orders: The granting of a
permit shall not prevent the city from thereafter requiring the correction of
errors in the work, or from preventing further operations being carried on
thereunder when in violation of the provisions of this chapter or any other
ordinance of the city. (Ord. 2552 § 1, 2004)
15.36.110: CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE STANDARDS:
All signs shall comply with the following criteria:
   A.   All transformers, equipment, programmers and other related items shall
be screened, painted to match the building, or concealed within the sign
structure.
   B.   To reduce energy use, all sign illumination systems shall incorporate
contemporary energy saving techniques and materials.
   C.   All permanent signs shall be constructed of quality, low maintenance
materials such as metal, concrete, natural stone, glass or acrylics. Techniques
shall be incorporated during construction to reduce fading and damage caused by
exposure to sunlight.
   D.   All signs shall be constructed in compliance with all applicable
building, electrical and other codes in effect at the time of construction or
maintenance, with particular respect to wind and seismic loads and overturning
moment.
   E.   All freestanding signs which incorporate lighting shall have
underground utility service.
   F.   Signs shall be cleaned, updated and/or repaired as necessary to
maintain an attractive appearance and to ensure safe operation of the sign.
Unacceptable sign conditions include broken or missing sign faces, broken or
missing letters, chipped or peeling paint, missing or inoperative lights,
exposed mechanical or electrical components and missing or broken fasteners.
Failure to respond to a written request from the city to perform maintenance
work shall result in revocation of the sign's permit.
   G.   All temporary signs and banners shall be made of a material designed to
maintain an attractive appearance for as long as the sign is displayed.
   H.   No sign support shall be attached to, or supported by, a fire escape.
   I.   All illuminated signs shall be of such an intensity or arranged in such
a manner so as not to create glare for abutting properties or vehicular
traffic. (Ord. 2552 § 1, 2004)
15.36.120: STANDARDS FOR MONUMENT AND PEDESTAL SIGNS:
   A.   No monument or pedestal sign within one hundred feet (100') of a
residential zoning district shall be lighted unless the illumination is
concentrated upon the area of the sign and does not cast glare upon any
dwelling.
   B.   Monument or pedestal signs shall not extend over public property or
right of way.
   C.   Monument or pedestal signs in a corner cutoff area shall not extend
higher than three feet (3') above the adjacent curb top (or road centerline if
there is no curb). (Ord. 2552 § 1, 2004)
15.36.130: MAXIMUM BRIGHTNESS:
Internally illuminated signs shall be limited to the following maximum
brightness:
   A.   Neon signs: Shall not exceed thirty milliamps (30 mA).
   B.   Exposed incandescent bulbs: Shall not exceed fifteen (15) watts. (Ord.
2552 § 1, 2004)
15.36.140: PROHIBITED SIGNS:
The following sign types are not permitted:
   A.   Any sign not specifically identified in this chapter as permitted shall
be prohibited.
   B.   No person, except a public officer or employee in performance of a
public duty or a contractor for a public agency, shall place or fasten any type
of sign or advertising on public property or on any public structure
(including, but not limited to, pavement, sidewalk, parking place, step,
curbstone, lamppost, pole, signpost, hydrant, bridge, wall or tree) except as
may be required by ordinance or law or as authorized in the downtown business
district in compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
   C.   The following types of signs are prohibited:
      1.   Any sign, any portion of which (including its supports) may obstruct
any fire escape, stairway or standpipe.
      2.   A sign that may interfere with human exit through any window or any
room located above the first floor of any building.
      3.   A sign where the sign or its supports may obstruct any exterior door
or required exit of any building.
      4.   A sign that may obstruct any legally required light and ventilation.
      5.   A sign that, as a result of the intensity, direction or color of its
lighting or illumination, may interfere with the proper operation of, or cause
confusion to the operator of, a motor vehicle on the public streets.
      6.   Billboard signs, reader boards, bench signs, or wind signs or
devices.
      7.   Combination signs.
      8.   A sign with outline tubing or neon used on the sign support
structures or running from the sign across the building and thereby
invalidating the sign area limitations. Note: The use of neon on a building is
permitted, as provided in this chapter.
      9.   Obsolete signs unless designated as historic.
      10.   Pennants, streamers, or other similar signs including those which
are suspended from ropes, strings, or similar devices, except as provided in
section
15.36.390, "Automobile And Watercraft Dealership Signs", of this chapter.
      11.   Portable signs not permanently attached to the ground or a
building, except for banner signs which are regulated by this chapter and
portable and projecting signs as permitted within the downtown business
district in accordance with this chapter, and portable signs regulated by
chapter 12.55 of this code.
      12.   Projecting signs, except as permitted in section
15.36.240 of this chapter.
      13.   Pole signs, except as freeway signs and automobile dealership signs
in accordance with this chapter.
      14.   Balloons of any shape or size, except as permitted in section
15.36.390 of this chapter. (Ord. 2552 § 1, 2004)
15.36.150: SIGNS UNDER CANOPIES OR OVERHANGS:
Signs located under canopies or overhangs shall meet the following
requirements:
   A.   The sign may have a double face; the area of one face may not exceed
three (3) square feet.
   B.   The sign shall be perpendicular to the wall of the building or property
line.
   C.   A clearance of eight feet (8') shall be maintained over the pavement or
grade directly below.
   D.   The sign area shall be considered part of the maximum allowable for the
entity concerned.
   E.   Only one under canopy or under marquee sign shall be permitted for each
entity. (Ord. 2552 § 1, 2004)
15.36.160: SIGN PROGRAMS:
Sign programs are encouraged as a means to provide consistency among signs. A
sign program shall include the following elements:
   A.   A sign program may specify standards more restrictive or specific than
this chapter or another applicable regulation, but may not contain standards
less restrictive or less specific.
   B.   All unified centers, as defined in this chapter, shall prepare a sign
program.
   C.   A sign program shall contain the following information for all signs,
including on site directional and informational signs:
      1.   Design Elements: The design, materials of construction, colors,
(graphically shown), lighting and dimensions shall be clearly illustrated.
      2.   Plot Plan: A plot plan illustrating all improved areas, including
landscaping, and signs drawn to scale to show the location of each sign.
      3.   Elevations: All signs are to be illustrated and dimensioned in
elevation drawings. When a sign is attached to a building, the illustration
shall be a composite of the sign and the building, rendered to scale.
      4.   Side View Illustration: Side view and any other illustration(s)
required for clarity.
   D.   A sign program may also contain other information as necessary to
establish regulations to ensure that signs are consistent and attractive,
including:
      1.   Size standards, if different from the standards for the underlying
zoning district, specific plan, or other approval;
      2.   Sign colors;
      3.   Letter style;
      4.   Sign materials;
      5.   Types of signs permitted;
      6.   Sign review and approval procedures, if different from the standards
for the underlying zoning district, specific plan, or other approval;
      7.   Transfer of unused sign area from one business to another. (Ord.
2552 § 1, 2004)
15.36.170: TEMPORARY, NON-COMMERCIAL SIGNS ON PRIVATE PROPERTY:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this title, the following provisions
shall control the placement of non-commercial, temporary signs on private
property.
   A.   One or more signs identifying, displaying, directing, or attracting
attention to, or conveying a particular idea for, a non-commercial event
occurring on a certain identifiable date may be placed on any parcel of
privately-owned real property.
   B.   Any sign identifying, displaying, directing or attracting attention to,
or conveying an idea related to, a non-commercial event which is to occur on a
certain identifiable date shall not be placed on a privately-owned parcel of
property more than sixty (60) days prior to the date of the event, and shall be
removed no later than seven (7) days after the date of the event.
   C.   All signs subject to this section shall be constantly maintained in a
state of security, safety, and good repair. If the City determines that a sign
subject to this section is unsafe or not secured, or otherwise causes a hazard
to the public safety, or has been constructed, erected, relocated or altered in
violation of this title, the City shall give written notice to the owner of the
sign, or the person who claims responsibility for the sign, that: 1) the sign
is in violation of this section, 2) shall specify the nature of the violation,
and 3) shall direct the owner of, or the person responsible for, the sign to
remove, or alter such sign, to alleviate the hazard or violation. If the City
cannot determine the owner of the sign, or person responsible therefor, the
City shall post such notice on, or adjacent to, each sign found in violation of
this section. If the owner of the sign, or the person responsible therefor,
fails to comply with the notice within five (5) days after the date such notice
is given, the sign shall be deemed abandoned and the City may cause such sign
to be removed and the cost thereof shall be paid to the City by the owner of,
or person responsible for, the sign. (Ord. 2874, 2018)
ARTICLE IV. SIGN STANDARDS FOR COMMERCIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
15.36.190: GENERAL COMMERCIAL SIGN STANDARDS:
   A.   Except as provided elsewhere in this chapter, each business is
permitted to install one main identification sign; all other signs shall be
considered secondary signs and shall conform to the size criteria established
in the following table.
   B.   Permitted sign areas for commercial zoning districts are shown below:
 
Zoning District     Maximum Permitted    Maximum Size Of Main Maximum Size Of
                    Sign Area            Identification Sign  Secondary Sign(s)
                    1/2 square foot of   50 square feet1.
C-1 and C-2         sign area for each   Each business is     24 square feet
                    linear foot of       limited to 1 main
                    building frontage    identification sign.
                    The greater of the   1 square foot of
                    following:           sign area for each
                    1. 1 square foot of  linear foot of
                    sign area for each   building frontage up
                    linear foot of       to 120 linear feet
C-3 and C-4 Zoning  building frontage up plus 1/4 square foot
Districts and other to 120 linear feet   of sign area for
zoning districts    plus 1/2 square foot each foot of
referencing C-      of sign area for     frontage in excess   24 square feet
4 standards (except each foot of         of 120 linear feet
as noted in this    frontage in excess   up to a maximum 300
chapter)            of 120 linear feet   square feet2
                    or                   Each business is
                    2. 1/2 square foot   limited to 1 main
                    of sign area for     identification sign.
                    each linear foot of  See also specific
                    lot frontage         standards for
                                         regional mall signs.
                    The greater of the
                    following:
                    1. 1 square foot of
                    sign area for each 1 120 square feet3.
C-M                 linear foot of       Each business is     24 square feet
                    building frontage or limited to 1 main
                    2. 1/2 square foot   identification sign.
                    of sign area for
                    each 1 linear foot
                    of lot frontage
                    Maximum main identification sign of 20    See A-P/A-P-C/MF
A-P, A-P-C, and MF  square feet, regardless of frontage       regulations for
                    See A-P/A-P-C regulations for specific    specific criteria
                    criteria for other signs                  for other signs
                    1/2 square foot of
EV/AP               sign area for each   50 square feet       24 square feet
                    linear foot of
                    building frontage
 
Notes:
   1.   For exception see subsection 15.36.210C of this article.
   2.   For maximum sizes in industrial zoning districts, see specific zoning
district standards.
   3.   Signs in industrial zoning districts which face a residential zoning
district may not exceed 75 square feet in size.
(Ord. 2552 § 1, 2004)
15.36.200: C-1 AND C-2 ZONING DISTRICTS:
The following standards apply within the C-1 and C-2 zoning districts:
   A.   Sign Approval Required: The location, size and architectural design of
all freestanding signs and roof signs shall be approved by the planning
commission. Replacement of a sign without any structural change, such as
replacement of sign elements including, but limited to, individual channel
letters or increase in sign area, on existing freestanding sign structures
shall be approved by the director.
The location, size, and architectural design of all building mounted signs
shall be approved by the director. Replacement of a sign without any structural
change, such as replacement of sign elements including, but limited to,
individual channel letters or increase in sign area, on existing building
mounted signs shall be approved by the director.
   B.   Size: The permitted size of signs in the C-1 and C-2 zoning districts
is as shown in section
15.36.190 of this article. Major tenant signs may be increased in area up to a
maximum of seventy five (75) square feet in area if approved as part of a
complete sign program approved for the shopping center upon the determination
that the increased area is appropriate to improve the aesthetics of the
project.
   C.   Location: The following regulations apply to the location of permanent
and temporary signs in the C-1 and C-2 zoning districts:
      1.   Signs may only be erected on the side of a building where a street
right of way or public entryway to the store is located. One unlighted sign not
to exceed two (2) square feet in area may be placed on the rear of the building
for service and delivery identification.
      2.   All signs shall be placed parallel to the vertical surface of the
structure occupied by the use to which a sign pertains, and may not extend out
from such surface more than twelve inches (12").
      3.   No sign shall be placed within any required yard or setback area.
   D.   Special Signs:
      1.   One overall identification sign for a unified shopping center may be
approved for each street frontage, subject to the following regulations:
         a.   This sign shall be placed parallel to the vertical surface and
below the top of the required three foot (3') high wall adjacent to the
required front yard area.
         b.   The dimensions of each letter shall not exceed ten inches (10"),
and the maximum area of each sign shall not exceed twenty (20) square feet.
         c.   If more than one identification sign is provided for a center,
each identification sign shall be identical in size and color.
         d.   Center identification signs shall not be included in the sign
area for any individual use.
      2.   Directional signs of two (2) square feet or less are exempt from
this chapter.
   E.   Specific Limitations:
      1.   All illuminated signs shall be of such an intensity or arranged in
such a manner so as not to create glare for abutting properties or vehicular
traffic. Signs shall not be lighted between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00)
P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M.
      2.   No freestanding signs are permitted in the C-1 and C-2 zoning
districts, except center identification signs as described in subsection D of
this section.
   F.   Portable A-Frame Signs: Portable A-frame signs are permitted within a
unified center if included within an approved sign program. (Ord. 2552 § 1,
2004)
15.36.210: C-3 ZONING DISTRICT:
The sign provisions of the C-4 zone apply to all signs located in the C-
3 zoning district. In addition, the following requirements shall apply:
   A.   Second Floor Windows: Signs permanently painted on second floor windows
facing the street are permitted by the director.
   B.   Individual Businesses: Individual businesses having public access on
more than one side of a building are permitted to have a second main
identification sign.
   C.   Multiple-Tenant Buildings: Multiple-tenant buildings containing
storefronts having no direct access or street frontage are permitted to install
a directory type sign. This directory sign shall conform to the following
standards:
      1.   The directory sign shall be a "secondary sign", as defined in this
chapter.
      2.   The size of the sign shall be limited to two (2) square feet for
each tenant in the building.
   D.   Portable A-Frame Signs: Portable A-frame signs are permitted within a
unified center if included within an approved sign program. (Ord. 2552 § 1,
2004)
15.36.220: C-4 ZONING DISTRICT:
The following regulations apply to signs in the C-4 zoning district:
   A.   Architectural Compatibility: All signs shall be harmonious with the
character and architectural style of the structure upon which they are placed.
   B.   Sign Approval Required:
      1.   The location, size and architectural design of all freestanding
signs and support structures shall be approved by the planning commission.
Replacement of a sign without any structural change, such as replacement of
sign elements including, but limited to, individual channel letters or increase
in sign area, on existing freestanding sign structures shall be approved by the
director.
      2.   The location, size, and architectural design of all building mounted
signs shall be approved by the director. Replacement of a sign without any
structural change, such as replacement of sign elements including, but limited
to, individual channel letters or increase in sign area, on existing building
mounted signs shall be approved by the director.
   C.   Size: The maximum size of signs is shown in section
15.36.190 of this article (unless further restricted by an approved sign
program).
   D.   Location: All signs shall be placed parallel to the vertical surface of
the building, and shall not protrude from the farthest surface of the building,
marquee or canopy more than twelve inches (12"), except that one under canopy
area sign containing less than three (3) square feet in area is permitted for
each street that the building faces.
   E.   Freestanding Signs: The following regulations apply to freestanding
signs:
      1.   Types Of Freestanding Signs: The following freestanding signs are
permitted:
         a.   Monument signs with a height not exceeding four feet (4').
         b.   Pedestal signs with a height not exceeding twelve feet (12').
      2.   Exceptions To Allotment: One freestanding sign per street frontage
per parcel or unified center is permitted, except as follows:
         a.   Each freestanding sign for an individual tenant shall count
toward the allowable signage for that tenant. Shopping center signage shall not
count towards maximum signage and shall not exceed the requirements of
subsection E7 of this section.
         b.   For commercial centers in excess of thirty five (35) acres, two
(2) freestanding signs identifying the center are permitted. One of the signs
may be oriented to the freeway if located on land designated as freeway
oriented property (see figure 16 in section
15.36.420 of this chapter) and shall meet the design criteria for freeway
oriented signs. If not considered a sign oriented to the freeway, the maximum
height of the sign shall be twenty feet (20').
      3.   Obstruction Of Other Signs Prohibited: No freestanding sign shall be
placed in such a manner that it obstructs signs on adjacent properties from
public view.
      4.   Main Identification Sign: A freestanding sign in excess of twenty
four (24) square feet shall be considered a main identification sign.
      5.   Proximity To Other Freestanding Signs: No freestanding sign may be
placed closer than forty feet (40') to another freestanding sign.
      6.   Extension Of Public Right Of Way: No portion of a freestanding sign
shall extend over existing or future public right of way.
      7.   Size Criteria: The following size criteria apply to freestanding
signs:
 
Size Of Parcel Or Unified Center Maximum Size Of Freestanding Sign
   Up to 5 acres              24 square feet
   >5 to 10 acres             50 square feet
   >10 to 35 acres            75 square feet (unless sign is freeway
                                 oriented as defined by this chapter)
   Greater than 35 acres      120 square feet (unless sign is freeway
                                 oriented as defined by this chapter)
 
The area of a sign identifying a unified center shall not be counted toward the
maximum sign area for any tenant.
   F.   Miscellaneous Provisions:
      1.   One sign is permitted for each forty feet (40') of frontage of the
structure or building.
      2.   Directional signs of two (2) square feet or less are exempt from
this chapter.
      3.   Sign standards for specific types of businesses are contained in
article VII of this chapter.
      4.   Standards and regulations for multi-tenant freestanding signs are
contained in article VII of this chapter.
      5.   Portable A-frame signs are permitted within a unified center if
included within an approved sign program.
      6.   The planning commission, as a part of its review of a sign program,
may exempt certain signs or areas from the requirements of this section if the
following criteria are met:
         a.   The signs cannot be seen from the public rights of way, parking
areas or other public areas.
         b.   The signs are oriented to the interior of a pedestrian retail or
recreation area.
      7.   Monument signs in historic districts or for designated structures
may have a base which is not solid in order to be consistent with the historic
integrity of the property. The sign shall be approved by the planning
commission and the historic and scenic preservation commission. (Ord. 2552 § 1,
2004)
15.36.230: C-M ZONING DISTRICT:
The sign provisions of the C-4 zoning district shall apply to all properties in
the C-M zoning district. (Ord. 2552 § 1, 2004)
15.36.240: SIGNS IN THE DOWNTOWN BUSINESS DISTRICT:
The downtown business district is a unique commercial area within the city. Due
to the pedestrian orientation and historic nature of the district, signage
which is unique and separate from other uses within the city is warranted. The
following sign regulations shall apply only to businesses within the boundaries
of the downtown business district:
   A.   Downtown Business District: The boundaries of the downtown business
district are described and illustrated in figure 14 in this section.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6bf866ad80925317f7b0510a75f8f7309a69c8b4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-52.png]
 
   B.   General Limitations:
      1.   A maximum of one portable or projecting sign shall be permitted per
business. The sign shall be directly related to the business frontage and shall
be located at the main entrance to the business. Businesses with a main
entrance facing an alley shall place the sign at the alley entrance.
      2.   Multiple-tenancy buildings shall be allowed one portable or
projecting sign.
      3.   Buildings/businesses with freestanding signs shall not be permitted
to have portable or projecting signs.
      4.   No objects shall be attached to portable or projecting signs. This
includes balloons, banners, merchandise and electrical devices.
      5.   Portable signs shall be removed at the daily close of business.
      6.   Portable signs shall comply with all maintenance criteria for
temporary signs contained in this chapter.
   C.   Design: To ensure uniformity of design, portable and projecting signs
shall be designed so as to be aesthetically pleasing and consistent with the
"theme" of the business (where such a "theme" exists).
      1.   All portable and projecting signs visible from both sides shall be
double sided.
      2.   Projecting signs should function as visual enhancements and should
be graphically oriented.
   D.   Size: It is intended that the area of all signs shall be maintained at
the minimum determined adequate to advertise a particular business.
      1.   The maximum allowable sign area for portable and projecting signs
shall not exceed six (6) square feet.
      2.   The sign shall not exceed three feet (3') in height and two feet
(2') in width, including all structural elements.
   E.   Location: The figure below shows permitted sign locations:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6bf866ad80925317f7b0510a75f8f7309a69c8b4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-54.png]
 
      1.   All portable signs located in the public right of way shall conform
with
chapter 12.55 of this code.
      2.   Projecting signs shall be secured to the building and cannot extend
into the public right of way more than two feet (2'). The lowest portion of the
projecting sign shall not be less than eight feet (8') from the ground.
      3.   Portable signs may be placed on private property as long as they are
oriented to the main entrance.
      4.   No sign shall be placed in such a manner that it obstructs
pedestrian or vehicular traffic or visibility. Signs shall not be placed in
crosswalks and all corner cutoffs shall be maintained.
      5.   Portable signs shall not be located within eight feet (8') of
permanent pedestrian seating areas.
      6.   Portable signs shall not be placed in parkways.
      7.   Portable signs shall be self-standing and shall not lean against or
be attached to any public tree, pole or other fixture. Signs shall not be
placed over grates, planters, etc.
   F.   Sign Approval Required: The type, size, location and design of signs
and support structures allowed under this section shall be approved by the
director.
      1.   Decisions made by the director may be appealed to the planning
commission.
      2.   If approved by the director, a permit shall be issued. (Ord. 2552 §
1, 2004)
15.36.250: C-D OVERLAY DISTRICT:
All commercial signs located in the C-D civic design district shall be approved
as provided in this code. (Ord. 2552 § 1, 2004)
15.36.260: A-P, A-P-C, AND MF ZONING DISTRICTS:
The following regulations shall apply in the A-P, A-P-C, and MF zoning
districts:
   A.   Residential Uses: When signs are used for residential purposes, the
regulations of the residential districts shall apply.
   B.   Nonresidential Uses:
      1.   Signs Permitted: Only one main identification sign per street
frontage will be permitted for each property. No other signs will be permitted
with buildings having one main entrance. On buildings with more than one public
entrance, a supplementary directional sign indicating the names of the
occupants and suite numbers may be located as near as practical to the public
entrance.
      2.   Area Of Sign:
         a.   Any size sign may be used, to a maximum of twenty (20) square
feet or total sign area per building or site. The maximum area shall include
any directory type listings incorporated in the sign. If a directory type
listing is used to designate individual businesses, the maximum area provided
for each business shall be one square foot, which shall be counted toward the
total sign area.
         b.   For the supplementary directional signs for buildings having more
than one public entrance, the maximum area of the sign shall be three (3)
square feet or one-half foot (1/2') per business, whichever provides the lesser
area. If this sign is less than two (2) square feet or less, it shall not count
toward total sign area.
      3.   Wall Signs: If the sign is to be attached to the building, it shall
be placed parallel to the surface of the building, and may not extend out from
the building more than twelve inches (12").
      4.   Freestanding Signs: Freestanding signs shall be constructed as
monument signs, and shall be parallel with the street and located not closer
than ten feet (10') from the street property line or future right of way line.
      5.   Freestanding Signs On Corner Lots: A monument sign may be placed on
a corner lot with a setback of ten feet (10') from each of the streets. The
sign may have two (2) faces, each parallel with a street and a maximum area of
ten (10) square feet for each face.
      6.   Illumination Of Sign: The sign illumination shall be of such
intensity or arranged in such a manner so as not to create glare for abutting
properties or vehicular travelers. (Ord. 2552 § 1, 2004)
15.36.270: EV/AP ZONING DISTRICT:
The purpose of the regulations in this section is to acknowledge the larger
scale administrative-professional development occurring in the east valley
corridor specific plan area and to provide adequate signage that is
architecturally compatible with the development.
   A.   Sign Approval Required: The location, size and architectural design of
all signs and support structures shall be reviewed and approved by the planning
commission. Replacement of a sign that entails structural change, such as
replacement of sign elements including, but limited to, individual channel
letters or increase in sign area, on existing sign structures shall be reviewed
and approved by the director.
   B.   Area Of Signage: Total allowable signage is calculated at a ratio of
one-half (1/2) square foot in area for each foot of the structure or portion
thereof wherein the pertaining use is conducted. Buildings on corner lots or
lots fronting on two (2) or more streets may be credited with only one
frontage. No office shall be credited with more than one frontage. One main
identification sign will be permitted for each property. The main
identification sign shall not exceed fifty (50) square feet. Auxiliary signs
shall not exceed twenty four (24) square feet.
   C.   Signs Permitted: The following sign types are permitted in the EV/AP
land use district:
      1.   Monument Signs: One freestanding monument sign per parcel or unified
complex, having a maximum of four feet (4') in height, shall be permitted;
except that a parcel abutting two (2) street frontages, but not located on the
corner of an intersection, is permitted such a monument sign on each street
frontage. Only the letters of the sign may be illuminated, and translucent
backgrounds are prohibited.
      2.   Wall Signs: If the sign is to be attached to the building, it shall
be placed parallel to the surface of the building, and may not extend out from
the building more than twelve inches (12"). No sign shall be permitted on the
roof or project above the roofline.
      3.   Directional Signs: Directional signs containing a maximum area of
two (2) square feet each may be permitted, to facilitate on site vehicular
circulation. An "emergency" directional sign may be permitted, having a maximum
of eight (8) square feet.
      4.   Supplementary Directory Signs: One directory sign may be placed near
the pedestrian entrance to the building. The maximum area of the sign shall be
three (3) square feet or one-half foot (1/2') per business, whichever provides
the lesser area.
   D.   Location: Signage may only be erected on the side of a building where a
street right of way or public entryway to the business is located. One
unlighted sign not to exceed two (2) square feet in area may be placed on the
rear of the building for service and delivery identification.
   E.   General Limitations:
      1.   All illuminated signs shall be of such an intensity or arranged in
such a manner so as not to create glare for abutting properties or vehicular
traffic.
      2.   Developments designed for occupancy by more than one tenant shall
comply with section
15.36.160 of this chapter. (Ord. 2735 § 1, 2010: Ord. 2552 § 1, 2004)
ARTICLE V. SIGN STANDARDS FOR RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
15.36.280: FOR SALE, FOR LEASE, FOR RENT SIGNS:
For sale, for rent, lease or exchange signs may be used in accordance with the
regulations contained in article VIII, "Temporary Signs", of this chapter.
(Ord. 2552 § 1, 2004)
15.36.290: IDENTIFICATION SIGNS IN MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS:
Identification signs in the multiple-family residential districts are subject
to the following:
   A.   Multiple residential developments located on lots of one hundred feet
(100') or less in width may be permitted one sign with a maximum area of five
(5) square feet.
   B.   Multiple residential developments located on lots exceeding one hundred
feet (100') in width may be permitted one sign with a maximum area of fifteen
(15) square feet.
   C.   Multiple-family projects containing fifty (50) residential dwelling
units or more may locate a freestanding sign anywhere along the project's
pedestrian entry.
   D.   Signs may be illuminated with an external light source only. All
lighting shall be directed away from the street and adjacent properties.
   E.   Except as permitted in subsection C of this section, the sign shall be
fastened parallel to the surface of the building, or be constructed as a ground
sign parallel with the main building, with a maximum of four feet (4') in
height, and shall not project farther than five feet (5') from the building. No
sign shall be permitted on the roof, eave vents, or on the wall above the first
floor. (Ord. 2727 § 1, 2010)
15.36.300: IDENTIFICATION SIGNS FOR SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS:
Single-family residential subdivisions may be permitted the use of subdivision
identification signs, subject to the following provisions:
   A.   Single-family residential subdivisions containing a minimum of fifty
(50) units may be permitted subdivision identification signs at primary
entrances to the development with a maximum sign area of twenty (20) square
feet per face. The proposed signs at primary entrances may be located on both
sides of the street. Any one development may have a maximum of two (2) primary
entrances with subdivision identification signs.
   B.   The identification signs adjacent to each primary entrance shall be
incorporated into a monumentation style structure, constructed of decorative
block/brick and/or similar material, located behind the corner cutoff area, and
have a maximum height of six feet (6'). Signs with a maximum height of three
feet (3') may be located within the corner cutoff area.
   C.   Additional subdivision identification signs with a maximum height of
six feet (6') may be permitted adjacent to all secondary entrances to the
development provided they are located behind the corner cutoff area, and have a
maximum height of six feet (6'). The actual sign face shall not exceed five (5)
square feet. Signs with a maximum height of three feet (3') may be located
within the corner cutoff area.
   D.   All subdivision signs, if lighted, shall be externally illuminated and
all lighting shall be directed away from the street and adjacent properties.
   E.   Height of all signs shall be measured from the adjacent grade
elevation.
   F.   An entity, such as a homeowners' association or a landscape and
lighting district, shall be formed, empowered, and required to maintain all
permitted subdivision identification signs. (Ord. 2552 § 1, 2004)
15.36.305: MOBILEHOME PARKS ZONING DISTRICT:
The standards for multiple-family residential zoning districts shall apply in
the mobilehome parks zoning district. (Ord. 2552 § 1, 2004)
15.36.310: SIGNS FOR NONRESIDENTIAL USES IN RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS:
   A.   The sign provisions for the A-P zoning district shall apply to
nonresidential uses within any residential district where permitted by a
conditional use permit.
   B.   Institutional uses in residential zoning districts may display banners
as permitted by this chapter. (Ord. 2552 § 1, 2004)
ARTICLE VI. SIGN STANDARDS FOR OTHER ZONING DISTRICTS
15.36.330: MF, M-P, M-1, I-P, AND M-2 ZONING DISTRICTS:
The provisions of the C-4 zoning district shall apply. (Ord. 2552 § 1, 2004)
15.36.340: E ZONING DISTRICT:
The following standards shall apply to all educational uses in the E zoning
district. Residential uses in the E zoning district shall be subject to the
standards for single-family or multiple- family zones, as contained in this
chapter.
   A.   Entry Walls: Signs of up to twenty four (24) square feet may be placed
on entry walls at roadway intersections leading to educational institutions in
the E zoning district.
   B.   Banner Program: Within the E zoning district, temporary banners
advertising activities which benefit the public may be installed consistent
with the time limits for banner signs established in this chapter.
   C.   Building Identification Monument Signs: Two (2) building identification
monument signs may be installed for each building, up to a maximum of twenty
four (24) square feet in size, only if identification signs are not placed on
the building itself.
   D.   Building Mounted Identification Signs: Two (2) building mounted
identification signs may be installed on each building, up to a maximum of
twenty four (24) square feet per sign, and only if freestanding building
identification signs are not used.
   E.   Recreational/Entertainment Facilities Signs: Signs for stadiums, ball
fields, and other large recreational/entertainment facilities shall be
permitted up to one sign per street frontage, up to a maximum of one-half (1/2)
square foot per linear foot of frontage and in accordance with an approved sign
program.
   F.   Vehicle Directional Signs: Directional signs of up to ten (10) square
feet in size may be installed in the E zoning district to direct motorists to
buildings within an educational facility. These signs may be double faced.
   G.   Sign Program Required: Each use in the E zoning district which proposes
to construct signs visible from a public right of way should be required to
submit a sign program for approval by the planning commission. This sign
program must include at least the following:
      1.   Specific designs for each sign type (size, height, letter style,
etc.).
      2.   Locations of all proposed signs by sign type.
   H.   External Illumination: Signs in the E zoning district may have external
illumination only. (Ord. 2552 § 1, 2004)
15.36.350: T ZONING DISTRICT:
The following regulations shall apply to properties in the T transitional
zoning district:
   A.   When used for residential purposes, the sign regulations for single-
family residential uses shall apply.
   B.   When used for off street parking in conjunction with a commercial,
industrial or administrative and professional use, the total area of signs
permitted at any entry or exit shall not exceed one square foot for each one
thousand (1,000) square feet of lot area. The maximum area of any one sign
shall not exceed twenty four (24) square feet. Illumination of all such signs
shall not adversely affect abutting residential properties or vehicular
traffic. (Ord. 2552 § 1, 2004)
15.36.360: P ZONING DISTRICT:
All signs in the P parking district are subject to the provisions of the T
transitional district. (Ord. 2552 § 1, 2004)
15.36.370: O ZONING DISTRICT:
The following signs are permitted in the O open district:
   A.   Signs related to a public use or purpose.
   B.   Private signs subject to review and approval by the director.
   C.   Signs for commercial/industrial uses, subject to the C-4 zoning
district regulations contained in this chapter. (Ord. 2552 § 1, 2004)
15.36.380: A-D ZONING DISTRICT:
Signs in the A-D zoning district shall be subject to the requirements of the C-
3 zoning district, with the addition of the following regulations:
   A.   Flight Safety Considerations: All signs located in the A-D airport
district are subject to flight safety considerations, and must be approved by
the director.
   B.   Permitted Signs: The following sign types are permitted:
      1.   For rent, sale, or lease signs.
      2.   Directional signs to direct motorists to destinations within the
airport.
      3.   One freestanding sign per airport, which may include a directory
type listing of tenants at the airport.
      4.   Signs painted in accordance with FAA regulations, for the use of air
navigation and ground traffic.
   C.   Sign Sizes: Sign sizes shall be as specified in the C-4 zoning district
standards.
   D.   Sign Locations: With the exception of the freestanding airport
identification sign, all signs shall be painted or mounted parallel to the
fascia of a building. (Ord. 2552 § 1, 2004)
15.36.385: A-1 ZONING DISTRICT:
Commercial signs for agritourism uses in the A-1 zoning district shall be
subject to the following requirements:
   A.   The sign provisions for the Administrative and Professional Office (A-
P) zoning district (Section 15.36.260 of this title) shall apply to approved
nonresidential uses within the A-1, Agricultural District subject to a building
permit and/or applicable sign permit.
   B.   A temporary sign or banner shall be permitted for approved
nonresidential uses that include seasonal sales of agricultural products or
approved seasonal or periodic activities, subject to the applicable development
standards and design criteria contained in Sections 15.36.520 and 15.36.530 of
this title.
   C.   One (1) portable or A-frame sign shall be permitted per property for
the seasonal sales of agricultural products or approved seasonal or periodic
activities, subject to the applicable development standards and design criteria
contained in Section 15.36.240 (subsections B through F) of this title. (Ord.
2961, 2024)
ARTICLE VII. SIGN STANDARDS FOR SPECIFIC SIGN TYPES
15.36.390: AUTOMOBILE AND WATERCRAFT DEALERSHIP SIGNS:
Automobile and watercraft dealerships, due to the nature of their operations
which include large outdoor sales areas, the need for site identification to
compete on a regional basis, and importance as significant economic resources
to the city, warrant and require signs which are unique and separate from other
uses within the city. The following regulations shall apply only to automobile
and watercraft dealerships where the principal use is the sale of new cars,
motorcycles, motor homes or watercraft:
   A.   Sign Area And Sizes: Total sign area and sign sizes shall be within the
total allowed for the zoning district in which it is located. Except as
provided in this section, the provisions of the zone district in which the
automobile dealer is located shall govern signs for the site.
   B.   Number And Height Of Main Identification Signs: One main identification
sign shall be permitted for each street frontage of the site up to a maximum of
four (4) main identification signs. Main identification signs shall have a
maximum height of twenty feet (20').
   C.   Auto Center Sign: Where more than one auto dealership is located
adjacent or directly across the street from another and the area is identified
as an auto center or unified complex, an additional main identification sign up
to one hundred twenty (120) square feet in area may be permitted. The sign may
be located on a building or be a freestanding sign. An auto center sign shall
not count toward the total sign area or number for any individual dealership.
   D.   Multi-Tenant Auto Center Sign: One multi-tenant auto center sign is
permitted for all automobile dealerships in the city. The multi-tenant auto
center sign shall not count toward the sign area or number of signs for any
individual dealership. The location, size, height and architectural design
shall be approved by the planning commission under the provisions of section
15.36.100 of this chapter. Signs larger than one hundred twenty (120) square
feet in area or over twenty feet (20') in height shall be considered by the
city council under a sign conditional use permit as described in subsection
15.36.100F of this chapter.
   E.   Uniformity Of Design: Signs shall be uniform throughout the project and
shall be designed so as to be compatible with the architecture and scale of the
structures on the site.
   F.   Miscellaneous Signs: Temporary signs, pennants, streamers, banners on
poles, or similar signs shall be permitted provided they are maintained in
accordance with this code, are located on site, do not obstruct the visibility
of adjacent businesses, or obstruct traffic.
   G.   Balloons: Balloons of any shape with a maximum diameter of two feet
(2'), shall be permitted for automobile dealerships on Saturday(s), Sunday(s),
and/or holidays. (Ord. 2552 § 1, 2004)
15.36.400: CHANGEABLE COPY SIGNS:
Changeable copy signs are permitted subject to the following regulations:
   A.   Changeable copy signs are permitted for the following types of uses:
      1.   Places of worship.
      2.   Movie theaters and similar entertainment venues at which shows,
performers, or entertainers change on a regular basis.
      3.   Schools, universities, and other public or private educational
establishments.
      4.   Motels and hotels.
   B.   Changeable copy signs shall be approved by the planning commission.
   C.   The area of a changeable copy sign shall include the entire area in
which changeable letters may be placed. (Ord. 2552 § 1, 2004)
15.36.410: FREEWAY FACING SIGNS:
The following regulations shall apply to signs in a unified center directly
adjacent to a freeway or freeway right of way (including on and off ramps)
which are located on the rear of a building or tenant space which: a) faces the
freeway or freeway right of way and b) does not have a public entrance:
   A.   Signs meeting the criteria defined above shall be limited to a maximum
of twenty four (24) square feet in size.
   B.   A sign program shall be required for all freeway facing signs as
defined above. This sign program shall contain the following mandatory
standards:
      1.   All freeway facing signs shall be of a consistent font and letter
style. This font and letter style need not match other signs in the unified
center which are not freeway facing.
      2.   All freeway facing signs in a unified center shall use the same
color. Only one color may be used per unified center.
      3.   All freeway facing signs in a unified center shall use a consistent
letter height. In no case may letters exceed three feet (3') in height.
The sign program may also contain other standards as determined necessary by
the city. (Ord. 2552 § 1, 2004)
15.36.420: FREEWAY ORIENTED SIGNS:
Motorist serving businesses and regional shopping centers and new automobile
dealerships which are within the areas identified in figure 16 of this section
herein may install freeway oriented signs, subject to the regulations and
standards of this code. The following regulations and standards shall apply to
freeway oriented signs:
   A.   Only regional shopping centers, new automobile dealerships in
accordance with subsection
15.36.390 D of this chapter, and businesses which are "motorist serving" as
defined in this chapter may install freeway oriented signs. In no case may a
regional mall or any use within a "regional mall" (as defined in this chapter)
install a freeway oriented sign.
   B.   The maximum height of freeway oriented signs shall be twenty five feet
(25'), unless a taller sign is necessary to achieve visibility a minimum of
three-tenths (3/10) of one mile from at least one approach to an off ramp
serving the business. If determined necessary by a flag test as described
below, a sign higher than twenty five feet (25') may be constructed.
   C.   The maximum size of a freeway oriented sign shall be one hundred twenty
(120) square feet, unless a conditional use permit is approved for such a sign
pursuant to subsection
15.36.100 F of this chapter. The area of a freeway oriented sign shall not be
counted toward the maximum sign area for the business.
   D.   Flag tests for freeway oriented signs shall be conducted as follows:
      1.   A flag or object no smaller than thirty two (32) square feet shall
be lifted vertically in the location of the proposed freeway oriented sign,
starting at a height of twenty five feet (25') (measured from the bottom of the
object).
      2.   City personnel shall be stationed at locations three-tenths (3/10)
of one mile from the beginning of the off ramps directly serving the business
for which the sign will be installed.
      3.   City personnel shall observe whether the object is visible at a
height of twenty five feet (25'). If the object is not visible, it shall be
raised in ten foot (10') increments until it is visible from one direction at a
distance of three-tenths (3/10) of one mile from the start of the off ramp
approach. If a greater height is needed for visibility from one of the two (2)
off ramp approaches, the planning commission may permit the greater height to
be used if it is determined that visibility from that direction is needed.
      4.   The height established in subsection D3 of this section (or by the
planning commission, as noted in subsection D3 of this section) shall be
maximum height for the sign.
   E.   No freeway oriented sign shall be erected which would obscure another
sign when viewed from the freeway.
   F.   No freeway oriented sign shall be erected that will be closer than one
hundred feet (100') from another freeway oriented sign.
   G.   The minimum size letter in the text of a freeway oriented sign shall be
one foot (1') in vertical or horizontal dimension. The maximum size letter
shall be three feet (3'), vertical or horizontal dimension.
   H.   No more than one freeway oriented sign is permitted per property;
provided, however, that a freeway oriented property which is located within a
freeway oriented unified shopping center may be permitted an additional freeway
oriented sign if it is located on a separate parcel and the sign would meet all
other standards in this section.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6bf866ad80925317f7b0510a75f8f7309a69c8b4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9240.png]
 
(Ord. 2963, 2024: Ord. 2744, 2014: Ord. 2552 § 1, 2004)
15.36.430: MANDATORY SIGNS:
Mandatory signs (such as signs for street names and signs for traffic safety)
shall be installed per the requirements of the city or other public agency
(such as Caltrans) having jurisdiction. (Ord. 2552 § 1, 2004)
15.36.440: MOVIE THEATER SIGNS:
The following standards shall apply to signs for movie theaters in any zoning
district in which they are permitted:
   A.   Signs Subject To Review: All movie theater signs, including building
mounted signs and marquees, shall be subject to review and approval by the
city.
   B.   Additional Signs Allowed: Movie theaters may use any or all of the
following types of signs:
      1.   Building mounted marquee to identify the movie theater and any or
all of the movies showing in the theater.
      2.   Freestanding marquee to identify the movie theater and any or all of
the movies showing in the theater.
      3.   Building mounted signs to identify the movie theater.
      4.   A marquee directly over the ticket window(s) for the convenience of
ticket buyers to identify movies and showtimes.
      5.   Movie posters to display current and coming attractions.
   C.   Sign Sizes: The following size limits shall apply to signs for movie
theaters:
      1.   Building mounted marquee signs shall be limited to the larger of
either two hundred (200) square feet or twenty (20) square feet per screen in a
multiscreen theater. All screens in a multiscreen theater may be used to
calculate the marquee size.
      2.   Freestanding marquee signs shall be limited to the larger of either:
a) two hundred (200) square feet or b) twenty (20) square feet per screen in a
multiscreen theater. Freestanding marquee signs may be increased to a maximum
of twenty five (25) square feet per screen, subject to approval by the planning
commission, if it is determined that the sign's architectural design is of such
a quality and/or character as to warrant the increase in marquee size. All
screens in a multiscreen theater may be used to calculate the marquee size.
      3.   The size of a building mounted marquee shall be calculated
separately from a freestanding marquee. Allowable sign area in excess of the
amount used may not be transferred from a building marquee to freestanding
marquee or from a freestanding marquee to a building marquee.
      4.   Building mounted signs (exclusive of marquees) shall be limited to a
maximum of two hundred (200) square feet. One sign may be increased in size in
excess of two hundred (200) square feet, subject to approval by the planning
commission, if it is determined that the sign's architectural design is of such
a quality and/or character as to warrant the increase in size. Up to two (2)
square feet of sign per foot of building frontage may be permitted, subject to
approval by the planning commission, if it is determined that the design of
proposed signs is of such a quality and/or character as to warrant the increase
of total area.
   D.   No Maximum Marquee Size Established: No maximum size for box office
marquees is established, other than the limit on letter height contained in
this section. The size of a box office marquee shall not be counted toward the
total sign area on a theater.
   E.   Exterior Poster Cases: Exterior poster cases shall be limited to a
maximum size of thirty nine inches (39") wide by fifty two inches (52") high.
The size of poster cases shall not be counted toward the total sign area on a
theater.
   F.   No Maximum Letter Height Established: No maximum letter height shall be
established for movie theaters, with the exception that letters on box office
marquee signs identifying the movies and/or showtimes shall be no more than
three inches (3") high.
   G.   Sign Height:
      1.   Freestanding Theater Marquee: Twenty feet (20') to the top of the
marquee area. The overall height of the sign structure may exceed twenty feet
(20') (up to the maximum height limit in the land use district), subject to
approval by the planning commission, if it is determined that the sign's
architectural design is of such quality and/or character as to warrant the
increase in height. In no case shall the top of the marquee area exceed twenty
feet (20') in height above the ground.
      2.   Signs On Building: These height limits shall not apply to signs
located on a movie theater building.
   H.   Number Of Signs: The following limits shall apply to the number of
signs at a movie theater:
      1.   Building mounted marquee: Maximum of one sign.
      2.   Freestanding marquee: Maximum of one sign.
      3.   Exterior poster cases: Maximum of one poster case for every two (2)
screens. Poster cases must be located within forty feet (40') of an entrance
into the theater lobby. Poster cases may be located in a freestanding structure
more than forty feet (40') from a lobby entrance if approved by the planning
commission. Poster cases on a freestanding structure shall be limited to a
maximum of one for every four (4) screens. (Ord. 2552 § 1, 2004)
15.36.450: MULTI-TENANT SIGNS:
Multi-tenant signs may be permitted only subject to the following standards and
regulations:
   A.   Multi-Tenant Signs Permitted: Multi-tenant signs are permitted for
unified centers that meet the following criteria:
      1.   This criteria only applies to the C-3 and C-4 districts or in a
specific plan land use district which references the sign criteria for these
zoning districts.
      2.   Two hundred twenty five feet (225') of frontage on a dedicated right
of way.
      3.   Lot frontage shall have a ten foot (10') minimum setback area,
inclusive of buildings and driveways, of landscaping from the street right of
way.
      4.   The multi-tenant sign shall be located in a minimum fifty foot (50')
linear landscape setback area.
   B.   Exceptions To Certain Criteria: Multi-tenant signs are permitted for
unified centers that do not meet the criteria in subsection A of this section
when the planning commission determines: 1) one or more businesses within the
center are not visible from the roadway fronting the property; 2) no other
alternatives exist within the center to provide reasonable business
identification for those businesses; and 3) the shape or location of the
unified center, the orientation of the buildings, or other unique conditions
lead to the finding that it is in the public interest for the center to be
permitted a multi-tenant sign. Multi-tenant signs shall be freestanding.
   C.   Standards For Multi-Tenant Signs:
      1.   The number of multi-tenant signs permitted in a unified center shall
comply with subsection 15.36.220E2 of this chapter.
      2.   All multi-tenant signs shall be within unified centers having a sign
program that allows multi-tenant signs and complies with the following
standards and incorporates the architectural design of the center or
surrounding neighborhood area into the sign:
         a.   The size of any freestanding sign is governed by the criteria of
subsection 15.36.220E7 of this chapter.
         b.   The size of each tenant panel shall be calculated within the
allowable signage for that tenant based on the store frontage.
         c.   Decorative walls may be used as a background for multi-tenant
panel signage with up to a total of three (3) tenant panels. Each tenant panel
sign shall be composed of individual channel letters and the area of the sign
shall be determined by the area within the eight (8) straight lines around the
content as described in subsection
15.36.050A2 of this chapter.
      3.   In unified centers that meet the criteria in subsection B of this
section, up to four (4) tenant panels for tenants are permitted on each face of
the multi-tenant sign. For all other unified centers, the maximum number of
tenant panels is three (3) on each face of the multi-tenant sign.
      4.   All tenant panels shall have the same size and height.
      5.   Standards for multi-tenant signs affecting buildings in the C-
3 zoning district are contained in article IV of this chapter.
      6.   All multi-tenant freestanding signs shall be approved by the
planning commission pursuant to section 15.36.220 of this chapter and shall be
architecturally consistent with the surrounding area or unified center. (Ord.
2552 § 1, 2004)
15.36.460: NEON ON BUILDINGS:
Neon tubing may be installed on a building (unless prohibited by a specific
plan or other site specific design standard or regulation), subject to the
following:
   A.   Installation of neon on a building shall require a commission review
and approval, or a revision to an existing commission review and approval or
conditional use permit for the building.
   B.   Neon tubing which is physically or visually connected to a sign shall
be considered part of the sign and its area included in the total area of the
sign.
   C.   Neon may only be installed on a building within an architectural
feature designed and intended for neon tubing.
   D.   All transformers, ballast, etc., shall be contained within the building
or otherwise shielded from view.
   E.   Neon tubing shall conform with the maximum brightness standards
contained in section
15.36.130 of this chapter. (Ord. 2552 § 1, 2004)
15.36.470: REGIONAL SHOPPING CENTER SIGNS:
The following standards shall apply to regional shopping centers as defined in
this chapter:
   A.   C-4 Zoning District Provisions: Except as otherwise provided in this
section, the provisions of the C-4 zoning district (section 15.36.220 of this
chapter) shall apply.
   B.   Sign Program: Each regional shopping center shall be required to
prepare a sign program, which shall be subject to review and approval by the
planning commission. The sign program shall address each of the types of signs
which are proposed to be constructed as part of the regional shopping center
project.
   C.   Secondary Signs: The planning commission may allow secondary signs to
be increased in area up to a maximum size of fifty percent (50%) of that
permitted for the main identification sign if it is determined by the planning
commission that the architectural design of the building(s) and the design of
the proposed signs is of such a quality and/or character as to warrant the
increase in the sign area.
   D.   Increase In Maximum Sign Area: The planning commission may allow an
increase in the maximum sign area to be increased from a maximum of one square
foot per linear foot of building frontage to 1.25 square feet per linear foot
of building frontage for the first two hundred feet (200') plus one square foot
per linear foot of building frontage in excess of two hundred (200) linear feet
if it is determined by the planning commission that the architectural design of
the building(s) and the design of the proposed signs is of such a quality and/
or character as to warrant the increase in the sign area.
   E.   Multi-Tenant Sign Permitted Within A Regional Shopping Center: Multi-
tenant sign(s) may be permitted within a regional shopping center upon the
finding that the consolidation of tenants on the same freestanding sign is
architecturally and aesthetically superior to allowing a freestanding sign for
each tenant otherwise permitted such a sign within this code. No more than four
(4) tenant panels shall be permitted for any multi-tenant sign.
   F.   Increase In Height: The planning commission may allow an increase in
the height of freestanding sign(s) up to a maximum of thirty feet (30') high
within a regional shopping center when it is determined by the planning
commission that the height of the sign(s) is proportionate and aesthetically
superior to warrant an increase in height.
   G.   Sign Area Transfer: The planning commission may allow a transfer of
sign area from one tenant to another upon the finding that the transfer will
complement the architectural design of the building(s) and/or the design of the
proposed signs for the project. (Ord. 2552 § 1, 2004)
15.36.480: REGIONAL MALL SIGNS:
The following standards shall apply to regional malls, as defined in this
chapter:
   A.   Sign Program: Each regional mall project shall be required to prepare a
sign program, which shall be subject to review and approval by the planning
commission. The sign program shall address each of the following types of signs
which are proposed to be constructed as part of the regional mall project.
   B.   Interior Signs: All signs located inside the regional mall building(s)
shall be exempt from city review or approval.
   C.   Freeway Oriented Signs Prohibited: Regional malls may not install
freeway oriented signs, as defined in this chapter.
   D.   Signs Permitted: Regional malls may install the following types of
signs, subject to the regulations and requirements noted below:
      1.   Major Entry Signs:
         a.   Location(s): Major entry signs shall be located on a major
arterial roadway at either an intersection with another public street or at
vehicle entrances to the regional mall. Major entry sign locations shall be
identified in the sign program for the regional mall. For the purposes of
measuring sign area, each corner of an intersection shall be considered a
separate sign, subject to the area criteria below.
         b.   Major Entry Sign Height: Maximum height of twenty feet (20').
         c.   Major Entry Sign Area: Maximum of two hundred (200) square feet
per sign face. Up to three (3) sign faces per sign. For signs placed on another
structure, only the area of the sign shall be measured.
         d.   Tenant Identification On Major Entry Sign: Up to five (5) tenant
panels may be identified on a major entry sign, along with overall site
identification.
         e.   Major Entry; Minimum Area Required: Each major entry sign shall
be located in a landscaped area of at least two thousand (2,000) square feet in
size.
         f.   Design Approval Required: Design of each major entry sign shall
be approved by planning commission as part of the sign program for the regional
mall.
      2.   Major Tenant Signs: Two (2) types of signs shall be permitted to
identify major tenants within a regional mall: primary and secondary. Standards
for these sign types are as follows:
         a.   Number Of Signs: Primary signs: One building mounted sign per
parking lot frontage. Secondary signs: One building mounted sign per customer
entrance.
         b.   Size: Primary signs: Maximum size based on location of sign on
building:
            (1)   0.75 square foot per linear foot of building facing a parking
lot for signs located forty feet (40') or less from adjacent ground level.
            (2)   1.0 square foot per linear foot of building facing a parking
lot for signs located more than forty feet (40') above adjacent ground level.
         c.   Transfer Of Square Footage Prohibited: Transfer of allowable
square footage from one building frontage to another is not permitted.
         d.   Size: Secondary signs: Maximum of twenty four (24) square feet.
         e.   Overall Height: No maximum.
         f.   Letter Height: No maximum.
         g.   Logo Height: No maximum.
         h.   Location: Signs to be mounted to the major tenant's building; not
to be placed on any mall building not occupied by the major tenant.
         i.   Illumination: Signs may be internally or externally illuminated
or backlit. Sign design and placement for major tenant identification signs
shall be approved by planning commission as part of the sign program for the
regional mall.
      3.   Minor Tenant Signs:
         a.   Type And Number Of Signs Permitted: The C-4 standards contained
in this chapter shall apply to all minor tenants. Exterior signs for minor
tenants within an enclosed mall may be permitted only for tenants with customer
entrances on the exterior of the mall.
         b.   Size, Overall Height, Letter Height, Logo Height, Location,
Illumination: Per C-4 standards contained in this chapter.
      4.   Primary Retail Center Entry Signs:
         a.   Type And Number Of Signs Permitted: "Primary retail center entry
sign locations" shall be defined as part of the sign program for the regional
mall. No specific limit is placed on the number of signs.
         b.   Size: Maximum of one hundred fifty (150) square feet of total
text area per primary retail center entry, as follows:
            (1)   Mall identification and/or logo: Up to one hundred fifty
(150) square feet.
            (2)   Secondary signs: Up to twenty four (24) square feet (to be
considered part of overall maximum 150 square feet).
         c.   Overall Height: No maximum height.
         d.   Letter Height: No maximum height.
         e.   Logo Height: No maximum height.
         f.   Location: To be located at major pedestrian entrances into the
interior of the mall, not including entrances through a tenant space. Exact
locations shall be determined as part of the sign program for the regional
mall.
         g.   Illumination: May be internally or externally illuminated or
backlit.
      5.   Secondary Retail Center Entry Signs:
         a.   Type And Number Of Signs Permitted: Secondary retail center entry
sign locations shall be designated in the sign program prepared for the
regional mall. No specific limit is placed on the number of signs.
         b.   Size: Fifty (50) square feet maximum per secondary entry.
         c.   Overall Height: No maximum height.
         d.   Letter Height: No maximum height.
         e.   Logo Height: No maximum height.
         f.   Location: To be located at secondary pedestrian entrances into
the interior of the mall. Exact locations to be determined by planning
commission at the time of architectural/design approval.
         g.   Illumination: May be internally or externally illuminated or
backlit.
      6.   Directional Signs At Regional Malls:
         a.   Type And Number Of Signs Permitted: Allow use of monument signs,
street signs, directional/information signs, and decorative semipermanent
banners/flags. Banners or flags used as directional signs shall not be subject
to regulations affecting temporary advertising signs.
         b.   Size: Sign sizes to be limited as follows:
            (1)   Monument signs: Maximum of twenty four (24) square feet.
            (2)   Street/directional signs: Maximum of two (2) square feet per
sign.
            (3)   Banners/flags: Maximum of eight (8) square feet per banner or
flag.
         c.   Overall Height: Sign heights to be limited as follows:
            (1)   Monument signs: Maximum of four feet (4').
            (2)   Street/directional signs: Maximum of eight feet (8').
            (3)   Banners/flags: Maximum of twenty feet (20').
         d.   Letter/Logo Height: No maximum.
         e.   Location: Locations to be determined by planning commission as
part of the sign program for the regional mall. Directional signs may be
located on private property only.
         f.   Illumination: Directional signs may incorporate decorative or
safety lighting, but may not be internally lit.
         g.   Materials/Maintenance: Materials and construction used in
directional/decorative signs shall be capable of sustaining an attractive
appearance throughout the projected lifetime of the sign. Materials/
construction specifications to be approved as part of the sign program for the
regional mall. (Ord. 2552 § 1, 2004)
15.36.490: SERVICE STATION SIGNS:
The following regulations address the specific sign needs of service stations:
   A.   Temporary signs shall be permitted in accordance with the regulations
contained in this chapter.
   B.   Changeable price signs are permitted as required by state law, but must
comply with all requirements of this chapter. One freestanding price sign per
street frontage is permitted, up to a maximum of two (2) signs.
   C.   The planning commission may allow a second freestanding identification
sign if such signs incorporate price signs as required by state law, if the
service station is located on a corner lot, if both signs are monument signs,
and if the planning commission determines that two (2) signs are
architecturally and aesthetically superior to allowing a single freestanding
sign.
   D.   Signs required by state law or to indicate required inspection services
shall be allowed with no permit. Signs shall not exceed two (2) square feet,
and may not be placed on the supports of other signs. (Ord. 2552 § 1, 2004)
15.36.500: MAIN IDENTIFICATION SIGNS FOR BUILDINGS OVER ONE HUNDRED THOUSAND
SQUARE FEET IN AREA:
   A.   Buildings in the C-3, general commercial district; C-4, highway
commercial district and in other zoning districts that apply these two (2)
zoning districts' sign standards are permitted two (2) main identification
signs provided the following criteria is satisfied:
      1.   The building upon which the sign will be located exceeds one hundred
thousand (100,000) square feet in floor area.
      2.   The building has "lot frontage" as defined in section
15.36.040 of this chapter, on two (2) major arterials or a freeway.
      3.   The two (2) main identification signs do not exceed seventy five
percent (75%) of the otherwise allowable signage for the building. (Ord. 2552 §
1, 2004)
15.36.510: SIGNS FOR BUILDINGS EXCEEDING THREE STORIES IN HEIGHT:
The following standards shall apply to signs for all buildings exceeding three
(3) stories in height, including the ground floor, which are hereinafter
referred to as "multiple-story buildings".
   A.   Approval Required: Any sign with an area in excess of one hundred
twenty (120) square feet shall be approved by the city council in accordance
with the requirements of the city's general plan.
   B.   Types Of Signs Permitted: Multiple-story buildings may use any or all
of the following types of signs:
      1.   Main Identification Sign: "Main identification sign" means a sign
greater than twenty four (24) square feet in area.
         a.   "Main identification upper fascia sign" means a main
identification sign located on the uppermost fascia of the building which does
not extend beyond the roofline of the building. A total of four (4) main
identification upper fascia signs (1 per each side of the building) are
permitted per building.
         b.   "Main identification ground level sign" means a main
identification sign located at the ground level at the building site. Each
building shall be allowed one main identification ground level sign. Said sign
shall be in compliance with subsection
15.36.190B of this chapter.
      2.   Freestanding Signs: A total of four (4) freestanding signs shall be
permitted per building site. A freestanding sign is one of the following:
         a.   Monument sign(s) which shall comply with section
15.36.040 of this chapter.
         b.   Pedestal sign(s) which shall comply with section
15.36.040 of this chapter.
         c.   Corner sign(s) which shall be located on a wall at the corner of
a lot. There can be a maximum of two (2) corner signs for any one building, but
not located on the same corner.
      3.   Multiple Business Sign: One "multiple business sign" with letters
measuring a minimum size of four inches (4") with a maximum of twenty four (24)
square feet of sign area on each side.
      4.   Entry Sign: "Entry sign" means a sign located over a pedestrian
entry of a building. A maximum of four (4) entry signs, one on each side of the
building, is permitted per building.
   C.   Sign Sizes: The following size limits shall apply to signs for
multiple-story buildings:
      1.   "Main identification upper fascia signs" shall be limited to a
baseline size for each fascia sign in accordance with the size limitations of
subsection
15.36.190B of this chapter; provided, however, that the baseline size of the
sign may be increased by the product of ten percent (10%) multiplied by the
number of floors constituting the building. For example, a six (6) story
building may have a fascia sign with an increase of sixty percent (60%) over
the limitations of subsection
15.36.190B of this chapter. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this
chapter, the square footage of main identification upper fascia signs shall be
computed separately and shall not count towards any square footage sign
limitation imposed upon any other signage on the building or premises.
      2.   The total maximum area for all signage other than main
identification upper fascia signs shall be calculated pursuant to subsection
15.36.190B of this chapter.
      3.   All signs placed on a wall shall comply with section
15.36.050 of this chapter. (Ord. 2552 § 1, 2004)
ARTICLE VIII. TEMPORARY SIGNS 1
 
Notes
1 1. The regulations contained in this article shall apply to all temporary
  signs, regardless of their content.
15.36.520: GENERAL REGULATIONS FOR BANNER SIGNS:
The following regulations apply to the display of banner signs in all zoning
districts:
   A.   Banners shall be attached flat against the wall or fascia of a
building. Banners shall not be hung from poles, trees, awnings, eaves or
similar structures.
   B.   Banners shall be hung with permanent attachments, such as bolts or
screws. Banners shall not be tied to a structure with rope, string, twine, or
similar materials.
   C.   All banners require a permit issued by the community development
director.
   D.   All banners shall be maintained and replaced when necessary as defined
in section
15.36.110 of this chapter. Banners that are faded and/or torn are not
considered to be maintained. (Ord. 2552 § 1, 2004)
15.36.530: BANNER SIGNS IN COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL ZONING DISTRICTS:
The following regulations apply to the display of banner signs in all
commercial and industrial zoning districts:
   A.   Each business may display a banner sign for not more than one hundred
twenty (120) days in a calendar year.
   B.   There is no minimum display period for any one business. However, no
more than ten (10) display periods per calendar year are permitted and no
"waiting period" exists between display periods.
   C.   The maximum size of a banner shall be equivalent to the maximum
permitted area for a permanent sign.
   D.   The area of banner shall not be counted toward the maximum permitted
area of a permanent sign. (Ord. 2552 § 1, 2004)
15.36.540: BANNER SIGNS IN RESIDENTIAL AND OTHER NONCOMMERCIAL AND
NONINDUSTRIAL ZONING DISTRICTS:
The following regulations apply to banner signs in all zoning districts other
than commercial end industrial districts:
   A.   Institutional uses only may display one banner sign. Commercial uses
and residential uses may not display banner signs.
   B.   Banner signs shall be limited to sixteen (16) square feet in size.
   C.   Each business is permitted to display a banner sign for a total of one
hundred twenty (120) days in a calendar year.
   D.   There is no minimum display period for any business. However, no more
than ten (10) display periods per calendar year are permitted and there is no
"waiting period" between display periods.
   E.   The area of a banner shall not be counted toward the maximum permitted
area of a permanent sign. (Ord. 2552 § 1, 2004)
15.36.550: CONSTRUCTION SIGNS:
One construction sign may be installed on a building site, subject to the
following conditions:
   A.   The maximum area of the sign shall be thirty two (32) square feet;
   B.   The sign shall not be installed until the project has been approved by
the planning commission;
   C.   The sign shall be removed if there is no building permit or
construction work commenced within one year of project approval, unless an
extension is approved by the director;
   D.   The sign shall be removed prior to final inspection and approval of the
project;
   E.   All freestanding construction signs shall require a staff sign review
and a building permit. (Ord. 2552 § 1, 2004)
15.36.560: OPEN HOUSE SIGNS:
   A.   For the purpose of this chapter, an "open house" is defined as a period
of time during which a house or an apartment for sale is held open for public
viewing.
   B.   The temporary sign, including any framework or supporting member, shall
be displayed only during such time as the model house or houses are open and
available for inspection by any person. No such sign shall be displayed unless
the owner or his representative is at the house or building when such signs are
on display. No sign permit shall be required for temporary open house
directional signs as described in this section.
   C.   Open house signs shall not require review by the city or the issuance
of a building permit. (Ord. 2552 § 1, 2004)
15.36.570: SALE, RENT, AND LEASE SIGNS:
The following regulations shall apply to real estate signs advertising property
for sale, rent, lease, or trade:
   A.   All Residential Zoning Districts:
      1.   Maximum Size: Maximum size shall be three (3) square feet.
      2.   Maximum Height: Maximum height shall be six feet (6').
      3.   Location/Number: One such sign may be placed on the property per
street frontage, up to a maximum of two (2) signs.
      4.   Attachments: Sign attachments, such as "sold" signs, may be used. No
limitations are placed on the materials or design of these attachments.
      5.   Limit: Signs shall be limited to the lot for sale except for lots
not located directly on a public street where an off site directional sign may
be allowed when granted permission to do so by the owner of the off site
property.
   B.   A-P And A-P-C Zoning Districts: The standards for single- family
residential districts shall apply.
   C.   Commercial And Industrial Zoning Districts: For sale, rent, or lease
signs shall be limited to the following sizes (except in the A-P and A-P-
C zoning districts, as noted above):
      1.   Size: Maximum size shall be thirty two (32) square feet.
      2.   Height: Maximum overall height shall be six feet (6'), except in
corner cutoff areas, where height is limited to three feet (3').
      3.   Location: Signs shall not be located closer than five feet (5') from
street right of way lines nor closer than three hundred feet (300') from any
other for sale, for rent or for lease sign on the property.
   D.   No Review Required: Sale, rent, or lease signs shall not require review
by the city or the issuance of a building permit.
See also sections
 15.36.560, "Open House Signs", and 15.36.590, "Subdivision Signs", of this
article. (Ord. 2552 § 1, 2004)
15.36.580: SEARCHLIGHTS:
The following regulations shall apply to the use of any type of searchlight:
   A.   Searchlights must be operated in a manner which does not introduce
light or glare onto a street or other right of way or into any residential
area.
   B.   Each business is limited to displaying searchlights a maximum of two
(2) display periods per calendar year of seven (7) days each.
   C.   Searchlights may be operated in commercial zoning districts only.
   D.   Searchlights may not be operated after twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight
if all adjacent zoning districts are commercial and/or industrial. When used
adjacent to a residential zoning district, the searchlight may not be operated
after ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
   E.   Searchlights shall require a city permit. Items submitted to the city
with an application for such a permit shall include, but not be limited to:
      1.   The address of the proposed searchlight use.
      2.   A site plan of the proposed location of the searchlight.
      3.   The type of searchlight, including its power source. (Ord. 2552 § 1,
2004)
15.36.590: SUBDIVISION SIGNS:
Signs may be erected for the purpose of advertising the sale of land or new
dwellings in subdivisions. Such subdivision signs must conform with the
following criteria:
   A.   Location: These signs may be located only within the boundaries of the
subdivision. No other directional signs, such as posters or trailer mounted
signs, may be used outside the boundaries of the subdivision.
   B.   Installation And Removal: Subdivision signs shall not be installed
until a building permit has been issued for one or more residential unit(s) in
the subdivision. Such subdivision signs shall be removed when eighty percent
(80%) of the dwelling units have been sold, or by the time six (6) months have
elapsed after the final inspection by the city of the last residential unit in
the subdivision.
   C.   Size: Subdivision signs shall not have an area exceeding fifty (50)
square feet, nor shall the sign exceed ten feet (10') in length. The overall
height of the sign shall not exceed ten feet (10').
   D.   Proximity To Other Signs: Subdivision signs shall not be placed closer
than six hundred feet (600') to another subdivision sign, nor within three feet
(3') from the street right of way. Subdivision signs placed in a corner cutoff
area may not exceed three feet (3') in overall height.
   E.   Lighting: Illumination of any sign, sales office or model home shall be
concentrated only upon the area of the sign, office or model home, and shall
not project glare upon any street or adjacent property. (Ord. 2552 § 1, 2004)
15.36.600: WINDOW SIGNS:
Businesses in commercial zoning districts shall be permitted to display window
signs, subject to the following regulations:
   A.   No time limit is placed on the display of window signs.
   B.   The area of a window sign shall be calculated as the gross window area
for all the windows on the same floor, building frontage or facing the same
direction. Buildings with setbacks facing the same direction shall be
considered one side for the purposes of calculating window sign area.
   C.   Window signs may cover no more than twenty five percent (25%) of the
total window area of the business, as defined in subsection B of this section.
   D.   Between November 15 and January 10, window signs may cover up to fifty
percent (50%) of the total window area of the business.
   E.   Public service fliers or posters shall be exempt from the area limits
specified above.
   F.   No permit is required for window signs.
   G.   Window signs shall be repaired as necessary to maintain an attractive
appearance. Unacceptable sign conditions include, but are not limited to:
broken, faded or missing letters, broken, faded or missing sign faces or any
other portion of the sign, chipped or peeling paint, missing or inoperative
lights, exposed mechanical or electrical components. Failure to respond to a
written request from the city to perform maintenance work shall result in
removal of the sign. (Ord. 2552 § 1, 2004)
ARTICLE IX. SIGN CODE ENFORCEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION
15.36.610: ABATEMENT OF NONCONFORMING SIGNS:
   A.   Abatement Of Nonpermitted Signs: Any sign erected without permits or
without compliance with all provisions of this chapter, as amended, and in
effect at the time of its construction, erection or use, shall immediately be
removed from the site by the owner, without compensation.
   B.   Amortization Of Nonconforming Signs: All signs rendered nonconforming
by the provisions of this chapter, or any other provision of this code, as
amended, shall be removed twenty (20) years after the date of becoming
nonconforming.
   C.   Abatement Of Nonconforming Signs Enumerated: Any sign made
nonconforming by the provisions of this chapter, as amended, shall immediately
be removed from the site, without compensation, under any of the criteria as
follows:
      1.   Any sign whose use has ceased, or the structure upon which the sign
is located has been abandoned by its owner for ninety (90) consecutive days.
      2.   Any sign which has been more than fifty percent (50%) destroyed or
damaged (other than destruction of the facial copy).
      3.   Any sign whose owner remodels the sign, except for the change of
copy.
      4.   Any sign whose owner relocates the sign.
      5.   Any sign which is or may become a danger to the public or is unsafe.
      6.   Any sign which constitutes a traffic hazard (not created by the
relocation of any street or highway or by any other act of the city).
      7.   Any sign where there is a change in type of business that the sign
advertises. For example, if the sign is for a florist and a shoe store moves
into the space, the sign must be brought into compliance.
      8.   Any sign where there is a change in the name of the person licensed
to operate the business.
   D.   Nonconforming Signs For Automobile Dealerships: Existing automobile
dealership legal, nonconforming signs may continue as long as the automobile
dealership continues operation of the same parcel. A legal, nonconforming sign
may be modified as follows, subject to the area and height of the sign
remaining equal to or less than the existing sign:
      1.   The sign may be remodeled including, but not limited to, change of
copy, sign face design, and structural improvements.
      2.   The sign may be relocated within the boundaries of the parcel in
which the dealership is located.
      3.   Any modification or relocation of a nonconforming sign shall be
subject to review and approval by the planning commission. (Ord. 2552 § 1,
2004)
15.36.620: NOTICE OF VIOLATION; REMOVAL:
   A.   No citation will be issued until the director has issued a notice of
violation to the owner, agent or person having a beneficial interest in the
building or the premises on which a prohibited sign or any other sign which
violates any provision of this chapter is located. The person having a
beneficial interest in the sign shall remove or alter the sign to comply with
the provisions of this chapter within seventy two (72) hours of the date of the
notice. The notice shall also state that if the sign is not removed or brought
into compliance within seventy two (72) hours of the date of the notice the
director may cause it to be removed.
   B.   If the director causes the sign to be removed, the sign must be
retained for fifteen (15) days, during which the owner, agent or person having
a beneficial interest may protest the action and reclaim the sign. At the
expiration of fifteen (15) days, any unclaimed sign shall be deemed abandoned
and may be discarded.
   C.   The cost of removal, alteration and/or storage of any sign erected or
maintained in violation of this chapter shall be paid by a permittee, sign
owner, agent or person having a beneficial interest in the sign. The cost of
removal and storage shall be determined by resolution of the city council. The
cost of removal and storage or alteration shall become a debt owing the city
for the collection of which the city may maintain a civil action in its name.
   D.   The director may summarily and without notice cause the removal of any
sign which is an immediate safety threat to person or property. (Ord. 2552 § 1,
2004)
15.36.630: VARIANCE FROM STRUCTURAL REQUIREMENTS:
In cases where the strict application of the provisions of this chapter would
deprive a property of privileges commonly enjoyed by other properties in the
same zone, a variance may be requested in accordance with chapter 18.196 of
this code. (Ord. 2552 § 1, 2004)
15.36.640: NONCONFORMING SIGNS:
   A.   Except for normal repair and maintenance, and any modification required
for national electrical code compliance, no nonconforming sign shall be
expanded, structurally or electronically altered (not including a change in
sign face or sign copy), moved or relocated unless the sign is brought into
compliance with all provisions of this chapter. Nonconforming signs shall be
permitted to remain until such time as any of the events listed in subsection B
of this section occurs. At such time, the sign must be removed or brought into
conformance with this chapter.
   B.   A nonconforming sign shall lose its status as a nonconforming sign if
any of the following occurs:
      1.   The sign is relocated or replaced;
      2.   The structure, height or size of the sign is altered in any way
except toward compliance with this chapter. Face changes and normal maintenance
are allowed;
      3.   The sign structure is damaged or destroyed by more than fifty
percent (50%) of its value at the time of damage or destruction.
   C.   The city shall comply with California Business and Professions Code
section 5490 et seq., in connection with the enforcement and removal of off
premises advertising displays and signs. (Ord. 2552 § 1, 2004)
15.36.650: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
   A.   It is illegal to use, occupy or maintain property in violation of this
chapter.
   B.   Violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor, but may be prosecuted
as either a misdemeanor or an infraction in the discretion of the city
attorney.
   C.   Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a
separate offense for each day, or portion thereof, during which the violation
continues.
   D.   Violation of this chapter which threatens to be continuing in nature is
a public nuisance which may be abated or enjoined in accordance with law. (Ord.
2552 § 1, 2004)
15.36.660: JUDICIAL REVIEW:
An applicant who has been denied a permit under this chapter for a sign that is
not a prohibited sign may seek immediate judicial review of the denial or
within ten (10) days of the denial may request in writing to the city clerk or
the city attorney that the city commence a judicial action to review the permit
denied. If so requested, the city will commence an action within ten (10) days
of the written request if the request is to judicially review matters that are
protected by the first amendment. The burden of proof shall be on the city
where required by law and shall otherwise be upon the applicant. (Ord. 2552 §
1, 2004)
CHAPTER 15.40
MOVING OF BUILDINGS
SECTION:
15.40.010: Permit; Required To Move Buildings
15.40.020: Proposed Routes; Application; Information
15.40.030: Proposed Routes; Inspection Required
15.40.040: Application; Fee
15.40.050: Moving Operation Equipment Inspections
15.40.060: Bonds; Required When
15.40.070: Planning Commission Review And Approval
15.40.010: PERMIT; REQUIRED TO MOVE BUILDINGS:
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to move any building or
structure over the public streets or alleys of the city without first obtaining
a permit from the department of building and safety. (Ord. 2029 § 1, 1988)
15.40.020: PROPOSED ROUTES; APPLICATION; INFORMATION:
Any person, firm or corporation (hereinafter called the "applicant") applying
for such a permit shall file with the director of building and safety an
application setting forth the following information:
   A.   Present location of building proposed to be moved, or location of point
of entry of building into city;
   B.   Route proposed to be followed in moving the building;
   C.   Location of proposed building site or the location of the point of exit
from the city;
   D.   Date and hours that the building will be on city streets;
   E.   Name, address, home phone number and business phone number of the owner
of the building being moved into or through the city;
   F.   Name, address, home phone number and business phone number of the
moving company moving the building into or through the city;
   G.   Indicate the total height of the building being moved including the
trailer height;
   H.   Indicate the total width of the building being moved;
   I.   Indicate the approximate weight of the building being moved. (Ord. 2029
§ 1, 1988)
15.40.030: PROPOSED ROUTES; INSPECTION REQUIRED:
An inspection shall be made of the proposed route by the applicant, community
services department and the engineering department to determine in advance the
need for moving, removing or dropping any utility lines, poles, streetlights,
street trees and traffic control devices. (Ord. 2029 § 1, 1988)
15.40.040: APPLICATION; FEE:
A fee as established by resolution of the city council shall be paid upon
filing the application. The fee is in addition to any other applicable fees or
charges required by the city or any other jurisdiction. The building moving
processing fees may be waived, per the adopted fee resolution for city
designated historic buildings. (Ord. 2029 § 1, 1988)
15.40.050: MOVING OPERATION EQUIPMENT INSPECTIONS:
The city engineer and the police department shall have the right to inspect all
rollers, truck wheels, dollies, tractors or other apparatus proposed to be used
in the moving operations, and they shall be the judge as to the adequacy of
such equipment and may require the use of such apparatus which in their
judgment will not cause damage to streets and/or pavements. (Ord. 2029 § 1,
1988)
15.40.060: BONDS; REQUIRED WHEN:
The city engineer may require the applicant to file a cash bond with the city
of Redlands as a condition to moving a structure over city streets, if, in his
opinion, the streets, public utilities, street trees or other property may be
subject to damages resulting from the moving of the structure. The amount of
the cash bond will be in the amount as determined by the city engineer as
necessary to pay for the estimated costs of all damages which may result by
reason of the moving. (Ord. 2029 § 1, 1988)
15.40.070: PLANNING COMMISSION REVIEW AND APPROVAL:
No permit shall be issued for the moving of any building or structure onto a
lot in the city from another location in the city or from a location outside
the city without the review and approval of the planning commission as
specified in chapter 18.180 of this code. (Ord. 2029 § 1, 1988)
CHAPTER 15.44
DEMOLITION OF BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES
SECTION:
15.44.010: Title
15.44.020: Purpose And Intent
15.44.030: Applicability
15.44.040: Definitions
15.44.050: Demolition Permit Application
15.44.060: Director Determination; Structures Less Than Fifty Years Old
15.44.070: Historic And Scenic Preservation Commission Review
15.44.080: Appeal Of Commission Decision
15.44.090: Mitigation Measures And Conditions Of Approval
15.44.100: Issuance Of Permit
15.44.110: Dangerous Buildings
15.44.120: Premature Demolition; Violations; Penalties
15.44.010: TITLE:
The ordinances codified in this chapter shall be collectively known as the CITY
BUILDING AND STRUCTURE DEMOLITION ORDINANCE. (Ord. 2899 §5, 2019)
15.44.020: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The City Council finds that historically significant structures situated within
the City constitute a cultural treasure for the entire community to enjoy, and
that the preservation of these structures will promote the general welfare by
maintaining an invaluable link to the City's rich and distinguished past. The
City's permit procedures for demolishing structures therefore recognize that
the City's historic structures should be preserved and, that if a structure is
approved for demolition, mitigation measures and conditions should be
considered and imposed prior to the demolition which provide the opportunity
for persons to rescue potentially historic structures from destruction by
purchasing the structure's site, relocating the structure, or otherwise
preserving for posterity the historic and cultural significance of the
structure. (Ord. 2899 §5, 2019)
15.44.030: APPLICABILITY:
This chapter shall apply to any structure for which an application for a
demolition permit is made. No structure shall be demolished until a demolition
permit is issued by the City's Community Development Department in accordance
with this chapter. (Ord. 2899 §5, 2019)
15.44.040: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, as used in this chapter, still have the meanings herein
prescribed for them:
   CEQA: The California Environmental Quality Act, contained in California
Public Resources Code section 21000 et seq., as amended from time to time.
   CHARACTER DEFINING FEATURES:The distinctive physical forms, elements,
material, details, and/or characteristics that convey the significance of a
designated historic resource.
   COMPLETE DEMOLITION: Removal of all above-grade portions of a building,
structure or object that is a designated historic resource, or of a resource
that is pending designation as a historic resource.
   CONTRIBUTOR: A historic resource in a designated or pending historic
district, as defined in
Chapter 2.62 of this Code, which was built within the period of significance
and/or retains enough historic integrity to contribute to the overall character
and significance of other buildings and structures within the historic district
which are unified aesthetically by plan or physical development.
   DEMOLITION: The act or process of destroying, knocking down, pulling down,
tearing down, flattening, razing, or leveling a building, structure, or object.
For purposes of this chapter, demolition can be either complete or partial.
   DIRECTOR: Shall mean the City's Development Services Director, or his or her
designee.
   ELIGIBLE HISTORIC RESOURCE: A resource that is either: (1) on the register
of properties compiled and maintained by the City's Historic and Scenic
Preservation Commission as described in Section
2.24.060 D of this Code; or (2) is determined by the City to be a historic
resource pursuant to Public Resources Code section 21084.1, or (3) otherwise
satisfies the definition of a Historic Resource as described in this chapter.
   HISTORICAL RESOURCE: All buildings or structures listed in, or determined to
be eligible for listing in, the California Register of Historical Resources.
Buildings or structures actually designated as historically significant in any
local register of historic resources, or identified as significant in a
historical resource survey meeting the requirements of the State Historical
Resources Law, are presumed to be historically or culturally significant. The
City shall treat any such resource as significant unless the preponderance of
evidence demonstrates that this resource is not historically or culturally
significant.
   HISTORICAL SIGNIFICANCE: A building or structure shall be determined to be
of "historical significance" if it satisfies any of the following criteria:
   A.   The building or structure is associated with events that have made a
significant contribution to the broad patterns of California's history and
cultural heritage;
   B.   The building or structure is associated with the lives and persons
important in our past;
   C.   The building or structure embodies the distinctive characteristics of a
type, period, region or method of construction, or represents the work of an
important creative individual, or possesses high artistic values;
   D.   The building or structure has yielded, or may be likely to yield,
information important in prehistory or history;
   E.   The building or structure is significant in the "cultural annals of
California" as demonstrated by substantial evidence in light of the whole
record presented to the City regarding an application for a demolition permit;
or
   F.   The building or structure qualifies as a historical resource.
   NON-CONTRIBUTOR: A resource in a designated or pending historic district
that was either not built within the historic district's period of significance
or does not retain enough historic integrity to contribute to the overall
character and significance of the historic district.
   PARTIAL DEMOLITION: The removal, alteration, or destruction of one or more
character-defining features of a designated historic resource, of a resource
that is pending designation as a historic resource, or of an eligible historic
resource, that have been identified as character-defining in a property-
specific historic assessment, in a historic resource assessment prepared by a
person meeting the Secretary of the Interior's Professional Qualification
Standards in Historic Architecture or Architectural History, or by the
Director.
   SECRETARY OF THE INTERIOR'S PROFESSIONAL QUALIFICATION STANDARDS: The set of
requirements issued by the US Department of the Interior, National Park Service
(36 CFR Part 61) that define minimum education and experience required to
perform identification, evaluation, registration, and treatment activities.
   SECRETARY OF THE INTERIOR'S STANDARDS FOR REHABILITATION: The set of
standards issued by the US Department of the Interior, National Park Service
(36 CFR Part 67) and the publications of the National Park Service (NPS),
Preservation Assistance Division, Guidelines for Rehabilitation Historic
Buildings (1992, NPS) and the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for the
Treatment of Historic Properties with Guidelines for Preserving,
Rehabilitating, Restoring and Reconstructing Historic Buildings (1995, NPS),
and any subsequent publication on the Secretary's Standards by the NPS.
   STATE HISTORICAL RESOURCES LAW: The State laws governing historical
structures contained in Public Resources Code sections 5020 et seq., as amended
from time to time. (Ord. 2899 §5, 2019)
15.44.050: DEMOLITION PERMIT APPLICATION:
An application for a demolition permit shall:
   A.   Be completed by the owner of the structure proposed for demolition, or
the owner's authorized representative, and submitted to the Development
Services Department with payment of all applicable fees. Concurrent with the
filing of an application for a demolition permit, if the Director determines
the application is not exempt under CEQA, application shall also be made for
any required environmental review pursuant to CEQA.
   B.   The application shall identify the structure to be demolished by
providing a description of the structure, its address, legal description and
Tax Assessor's parcel number.
   C.   The applicant shall specify whether the structure is listed as a
historic or cultural resource or has been determined to have historical
significance, by any Federal, State, regional or local listing or designation,
or as that term is defined in this chapter.
   D.   The application shall specify the date that construction of the
structure was completed, and include documentation verifying that date to the
satisfaction of the City. If documentation is unavailable to reasonably
establish the date of completed construction, the applicant shall write "age of
structure unknown no documentation available" on the permit application. (Ord.
2899 §5, 2019)
15.44.060: DIRECTOR DETERMINATION; STRUCTURES LESS THAN FIFTY YEARS OLD:
   A.   Permit Application: Demolition permit applications for structures less
than fifty (50) years of age shall be scheduled for review by the City's
Director who shall determine whether the application is exempt under CEQA or
whether an initial study shall be prepared, in accordance with CEQA, by City
staff.
   B.   Director Determination: The Director shall review any initial study
that has been prepared, the staff report, the documentation supporting the
application, and any testimony from the applicant, and make a determination of
the historical significance of the structure proposed to be demolished.
      1.   If the Director determines that the structure has no historical
significance and demolition of the structure is determined to be exempt from
the preparation of a negative declaration or environmental impact report under
CEQA, the Director shall thereafter issue the demolition permit in accordance
with this Code.
      2.   If the Director determines that the structure may have historical
significance and/or that its demolition requires the preparation of a negative
declaration or an environmental impact report under CEQA, the demolition permit
application shall be referred to the City's Historic and Scenic Preservation
Commission for further review and action. (  (Ord. 2899 §5, 2019)
15.44.070: HISTORIC AND SCENIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION REVIEW:
   A.   Demolition permit applications for structures fifty (50) years of age
and older shall be scheduled for review by the Historic and Scenic Preservation
Commission, and an initial study shall be prepared in accordance with CEQA by
City staff. Notice of the commission's meeting shall be given to the applicant
and the public in accordance with the City's guidelines implementing CEQA.
Review of such applications shall occur in accordance with subsections B and C
of this section.
   B.   Upon referral of a demolition permit application from the Director, the
Historic and Scenic Preservation Commission shall schedule the application for
review, with at least ten (10) days' prior written notice provided to the
applicant and the public. A report shall be prepared by the City's Historic
Preservation Officer regarding the application and, if the structure proposed
for demolition is part of a Fire Department training exercise, a representative
of the Fire Department shall also review and sign the report as "concurring"
with its contents prior to its distribution to the Historic and Scenic
Preservation Commission. A copy of the report shall be provided to the
applicant.
   C.   The Historic and Scenic Preservation Commission shall determine the
potential historical significance of the structure and the need for any further
environmental review, and make its own determinations whether the structure is
historically significant and/or subject to further environmental review under
CEQA. The commission may then subsequently approve, condition or deny the
permit application after completion of any required environmental review.
Following action by the commission, the Historic Preservation Officer shall
notify the applicant (and in the case of a fire training exercise, the Fire
Chief) in writing of the determination of the commission and the applicant's
right of appeal pursuant to section
15.44.080 of this chapter.
      1.   If the commission determines that the structure has no historical
significance and the permit application is approved, the application shall be
exempt from further review by the City under this chapter unless an appeal is
made to the City Council. If no appeal is filed within the time provided for by
this chapter, the Community Development Department shall thereafter issue the
demolition permit in accordance with this Code.
      2.   If the commission determines that the structure has historical
significance, the commission shall conduct the appropriate environmental review
and subsequently approve, condition or deny the application.  (Ord. 2899 §5,
2019)
15.44.080: APPEAL OF COMMISSION DECISION:
   A.   Any person may appeal a decision of the Historic and Scenic
Preservation Commission to the City Council. The person making the appeal shall
file the same within ten (10) days of the date of the commission's decision
with the City Clerk. The appeal shall be in writing, on the form provided by
the City Clerk, and shall be accompanied by payment of the applicable fees.
Upon receiving a request for an appeal to the City Council, the City Clerk
shall notify the applicant for the demolition permit, in writing, and shall
place the appeal on the agenda for the next regular Council meeting scheduled
to be held at least ten (10) days after the date on which the appeal is
received.
   B.   At the appeal, the City Council shall hear testimony from the
applicant, staff and the public concerning the historical, architectural or
cultural significance of the structure. After considering the determination by
the commission, together with all testimony from interested persons, the City
Council shall confirm, modify or reject the decision of the commission.
   C.   After hearing testimony at the public hearing, if the City Council
determines that the demolition of the structure is justified, the permit to
demolish the structure shall be issued in accordance with this Code. If the
City Council determines, after hearing evidence at the public hearing, that the
demolition shall be postponed as ordered by the commission, the demolition
permit shall not be issued until expiration of the period for delay imposed by
the commission. The decision of the City Council shall be final.  (Ord. 2899
§5, 2019)
15.44.090: MITIGATION MEASURES AND CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL:
   A.   The City shall identify potentially feasible measures to mitigate
significant adverse changes in the significance of a historical resource. The
City shall ensure that any adopted mitigation measures to mitigate or avoid
significant adverse changes are fully enforceable through permit conditions,
agreements or other measures. In rendering any decision under this chapter, the
City recognizes that a project which is mitigated or conditioned to follow the
Secretary of the Interior's "Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties
With Guidelines for Preserving, Rehabilitating, Restoring, and Reconstructing
Historic Buildings"; or the Secretary of the Interior's "Standards for
Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings" (1995),
Weeks and Grimmer, shall be considered as mitigated to a level of less than a
significant impact on the historical resource.
   B.   In addition to any mitigation measures that might be imposed pursuant
to the authority of CEQA, the City shall have the right to reasonably condition
the issuance of a demolition permit to further the goals of this chapter and to
protect the public health, safety and welfare interests of its citizens.
   C.   If a demolition permit application is conditioned by the imposition of
a delay of its issuance, the City shall reasonably cooperate with the applicant
and the owner of the structure for the purposes of saving the structure through
purchase of the property, relocating the structure, or by any other means to
rescue the structure from demolition, in the shortest time possible. The City
shall make every reasonable effort to provide for the preservation of the
structure, but nothing in this chapter shall require the City to purchase,
relocate or otherwise expend City funds in connection with the efforts to save
the structure.  (Ord. 2899 §5, 2019)
15.44.100: ISSUANCE OF PERMIT:
   A.   On or after the eligible date for demolition to occur, the applicant
may obtain the demolition permit from the Development Services Department.
After verifying that the demolition permit process has occurred in compliance
with this Code, the Development Services Department shall issue a demolition
permit.
   B.   In the event demolition of the structure is part of a Fire Department
training exercise, the Fire Department shall obtain a copy of the demolition
permit from the owner of the structure. Prior to the training exercise, a copy
of the demolition permit shall be affixed to the structure. The City's Fire
Chief shall personally inspect and verify that a copy of the demolition permit
is affixed to the structure prior to initiating the training exercise.  (Ord.
2899 §5, 2019)
15.44.110: DANGEROUS BUILDINGS:
Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the alteration, repair or demolition of
any structure to remedy a condition determined dangerous to the general public
by the City's Development Services Department.
   A.   Structures Having Historical Significance: In the event a structure has
been damaged by fire, flood, earthquake or other calamity to such an extent
that, in the opinion of the City, the structure cannot be reasonably repaired
or restored, the structure may be demolished or removed in accordance with
State and City laws governing dangerous structures.
   B.   Structures Having Historical Significance: In the event a structure has
been damaged by fire, flood, earthquake or other calamity to such an extent
that, in the opinion of the City, the structure cannot be reasonably repaired
or restored, the structure may be demolished in accordance with State and City
laws governing the emergency demolition of dangerous buildings having
historical significance. Such City laws shall be adopted by resolution of the
City Council and shall be incorporated into the City's disaster management
plans adopted pursuant to title 2, chapter 2.52 of this Code.  (Ord. 2899 §5,
2019)
15.44.120: PREMATURE DEMOLITION; VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
   A.   Demolition of any structure prior to the issuance of a demolition
permit is unlawful and a violation of this chapter. Any person, firm or
corporation committing such an unlawful act, or allowing such an unlawful act
to occur, shall be subject to the penalties as prescribed by law and this Code.
   B.   In addition to any other remedies provided herein, any violation of
this chapter may be enforced by civil action brought by the City. Remedies
under this chapter are in addition to, and do not supersede or limit, any and
all other civil or criminal remedies. The remedies provided for herein are
cumulative and not exclusive. In any such action, the City may seek as
appropriate, any or all of the following remedies:
      1.    A temporary or permanent injunction, or both;
      2.   Assessment of the violator for the costs of any investigation,
inspection or monitoring survey that led to the establishment of the violation,
and for the reasonable costs of preparing and bringing legal action under this
subsection; and
      3.   Assessment of the violator of civil penalties pursuant to
Chapter 1.22 of this Code.
   C.   In addition to any other remedies provided herein, in the event a
designated historic resource, a resource pending designation as a historic
resource, or an eligible historic resource, is completely or partially
demolished in violation of this chapter, as a penalty no building or
construction related permits shall be issued for the property upon which the
demolition took place for a period of three (3) years from the date of
demolition. Said penalty shall be issued and enforced either by the City
Council following a public hearing, or by a civil action filed by the City
Attorney and adjudicated by a court of competent jurisdiction. The City shall
also record an instrument imposing covenants on real property with the county
of San Bernardino that memorializes the time period during which permit
issuance is prohibited. A demolition shall be presumed to have occurred on the
date the City had actual knowledge of the demolition.
   D.   In addition to any other remedies provided herein, any property that
remains undeveloped pursuant to this section shall be maintained in such a
manner so as to not constitute a public or private nuisance, or otherwise
violate this Code. The property shall be maintained in a clean and orderly
manner free of junk, trash, debris, litter, abandoned or inoperable vehicles,
stagnant water, abandoned excavations, appliances and furniture, storage
containers, vegetation that is not in a healthy or living state, and overgrown
vegetation. Living vegetation, including trees and shrubs, shall be retained
and fully maintained, including necessary watering and trimming, during the
construction prohibition period. Living grasses and groundcovers shall also be
retained and fully maintained and new grass and/or groundcover shall be planted
at any areas of bare soil to control dust and erosion. All grasses and
groundcovers shall not exceed an overall height of six (6) inches.
Additionally, vehicles of any type shall not be parked or stored on the
property and no remunerative use of any kind shall be allowed.
   E.   In addition to any other remedies provided herein, in the event a
designated historic resource, a resource pending designation as a historic
resource, or an eligible historic resource is completely demolished in
violation of this chapter, any new buildings or structures proposed for
construction on the site after the expiration of the construction permit ban
set forth in this section shall be limited to the same footprint, height, and
square footage as the demolished buildings or structures. The foregoing
notwithstanding, the City's Director shall have discretion to allow deviations
from this provision to cure prior non-conforming conditions and to make changes
that would benefit the community in order to achieve compliance with the design
review guidelines described in
Chapter 2.62 of this Code, and with this chapter. In the event the owner of a
designated historic resource, a resource pending designation as a historic
resource, or an eligible historic resource that was completely demolished
applies to subdivide the property into two (2) or more lots, and proposes to
build two (2) or more buildings or structures, after the expiration of the
construction permit ban set forth in this section, the application shall be
considered under Title 17 of this Code. Provided, however, at least one of the
structures shall be limited to the same footprint, height and square footage as
the demolished buildings or structures. The design of the remaining one (1) or
more structures shall be considered based on the City's design review standards
and guidelines.
   F.   In addition to any other remedies provided herein, in the event a
designated historic resource, a resource pending designation as a historic
resource, or an eligible historic resource is partially demolished through
removal of one or more character defining features in violation of this
chapter, the missing features shall be reconstructed and/or replaced in kind to
match the original in terms of size, proportions, design, details, materials,
and overall appearance. In the event that aspects of the original features
cannot be discerned through documentary and/or physical evidence, the City's
Director shall determine the preferred method of reconstruction or replacement.
(Ord. 2899 §5, 2019)
CHAPTER 15.48
SWIMMING POOLS
(Rep. by Ord. 2690 § 1, 2008)
CHAPTER 15.52
UNIFORM CODE FOR BUILDING CONSERVATION
(Rep. by Ord. 2816, 2015)
CHAPTER 15.54
WATER EFFICIENT LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS
SECTION:
15.54.010: Purpose
15.54.020: Applicability
15.54.030: Definitions
15.54.040: Provisions For New Construction Or Rehabilitated Landscapes
15.54.050: Compliance With Landscape Documentation Package
15.54.060: Penalties
15.54.070: Elements Of The Landscape Documentation Package
15.54.080: Water Efficient Landscape Worksheet
15.54.090: Soil Management Report
15.54.100: Landscape Design Plan
15.54.110: Irrigation Design Plan
15.54.120: Grading Design Plan
15.54.130: Certification Of Completion
15.54.140: Irrigation Scheduling
15.54.150: Landscape And Irrigation Maintenance Schedule
15.54.160: Irrigation Audit, Irrigation Survey, And Irrigation Water Use
Analysis
15.54.170: Irrigation Efficiency
15.54.180: Recycled Water
15.54.190: Graywater Systems
15.54.200: Stormwater Management And Rainwater Retention
15.54.210: Public Education
15.54.220: Environmental Review
15.54.230: Provisions For Existing Landscapes
15.54.240: Irrigation Audit, Irrigation Survey, And Irrigation Water Use
Analysis
15.54.250: Water Waste Prevention
15.54.260: Effective Precipitation
15.54.270: Reporting
15.54.280: Evapotranspiration Table
15.54.290: Water Budget Calculation
15.54.300: Certificate Of Completion
15.54.310: Prescriptive Compliance Option
15.54.010: PURPOSE:
   A.   The city council of the city of Redlands finds:
      1.   That the waters of the state are of limited supply and are subject
to ever increasing demands;
      2.   That the continuation of California's economic prosperity is
dependent on the availability of adequate supplies of water for future uses;
      3.   That it is the policy of the state to promote the conservation and
efficient use of water and to prevent the waste of this valuable resource;
      4.   That landscapes are essential to the quality of life in California
by providing areas for active and passive recreation and as an enhancement to
the environment by cleaning air and water, preventing erosion, offering fire
protection, and replacing ecosystems lost to development;
      5.   That landscape design, installation, maintenance and management can
and should be water efficient; and
      6.   That section 2 of Article X of the California constitution specifies
that the right to use water is limited to the amount reasonably required for
the beneficial use to be served and the right does not and shall not extend to
waste or unreasonable method of use.
   B.   Consistent with the legislative findings, the purpose of the model
ordinance codified in this chapter is to:
      1.   Promote the values and benefits of landscaping practices that
integrate and go beyond the conservation and efficient use of water;
      2.   Establish a structure for planning, designing, installing,
maintaining and managing water efficient landscapes in new construction and
rehabilitated projects by encouraging the use of a watershed approach that
requires cross-sector collaboration of industry, government and property owners
to achieve the many benefits possible;
      3.   Establish provisions for water management practices and water waste
prevention for existing landscapes;
      4.   Use water efficiently without waste by setting a maximum applied
water allowance as an upper limit for water use and reduce water use to the
lowest practical amount;
      5.   Promote the benefits of consistent landscape ordinances with
neighboring local and regional agencies;
      6.   Encourage local agencies and water purveyors to use economic
incentives that promote the efficient use of water, such as implementing a
tiered-rate structure; and
      7.   Encourage local agencies to designate the necessary authority that
implements and enforces the provisions of the model water efficient landscape
ordinance or its local landscape ordinance.
   C.   Landscapes that are planned, designed, installed, managed and
maintained with the watershed based approach can improve California's
environmental conditions and provide benefits and realize sustainability goals.
Such landscapes will make the urban environment resilient in the face of
climatic extremes. Consistent with the legislative findings and purpose of this
chapter, conditions in the urban setting will be improved by:
      1.   Creating the conditions to support life in the soil by reducing
compaction, incorporating organic matter that increases water retention, and
promoting productive plant growth that leads to more carbon storage, oxygen
production, shade, habitat and esthetic benefits.
      2.   Minimizing energy use by reducing irrigation water requirements,
reducing reliance on petroleum based fertilizers and pesticides, and planting
climate appropriate shade trees in urban areas.
      3.   Conserving water by capturing and reusing rainwater and graywater
wherever possible and selecting climate appropriate plants that need minimal
supplemental water after establishment.
      4.   Protecting air and water quality by reducing power equipment use and
landfill disposal trips, selecting recycled and locally sourced materials, and
using compost, mulch and efficient irrigation equipment to prevent erosion.
      5.   Protecting existing habitat and creating new habitat by choosing
local native plants, climate adapted non-natives and avoiding invasive plants.
Utilizing integrated pest management with least toxic methods as the first
course of action. (Ord. 2917, 2021: Ord. 2724 § 1, 2009)
15.54.020: APPLICABILITY:
   A.   This chapter shall apply to all of the following landscape projects:
      1.   New construction projects with an aggregate landscape area equal to
or greater than five hundred (500) square feet requiring a building or
landscape permit, plan check or design review;
      2.   Rehabilitated landscape projects with an aggregate landscape area
equal to or greater than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet
requiring a building or landscape permit, plan check, or design review;
      3.   Existing landscapes limited to sections
15.54.230,
15.54.240 and
15.54.250; and
      4.   Cemeteries. Recognizing the special landscape management needs of
cemeteries, new and rehabilitated cemeteries are limited to sections
15.54.080,
15.54.150 and
15.54.160; and existing cemeteries are limited to sections
15.54.230,
15.54.240 and
15.54.250.
   B.   For local land use agencies working together to develop a regional
water efficient landscape ordinance, the reporting requirements of the
ordinance codified in this chapter became effective December 1, 2015, and the
remainder of such ordinance as effective no later than February 1, 2016.
   C.   Any project with an aggregate landscape area of two thousand five
hundred (2,500) square feet or less may comply with the performance
requirements of this chapter or conform to the prescriptive measures contained
in section
15.54.310, Appendix D.
   D.   This chapter does not apply to:
      1.   Registered local, state or federal historical sites;
      2.   Ecological restoration projects that do not require a permanent
irrigation system;
      3.   Mined land reclamation projects that do not require a permanent
irrigation system; or
      4.   Existing plant collections, as part of botanical gardens and
arboretums open to the public. (Ord. 2917, 2021: Ord. 2724 § 1, 2009)
15.54.030: DEFINITIONS:
The terms used in this chapter shall have the meanings set forth below:
APPLIED WATER:     The portion of water supplied by the irrigation system to the landscape.
AUTOMATIC          A timing device used to remotely control valves that operate an irrigation
IRRIGATION         system. Automatic irrigation controllers are able to self-adjust and schedule
CONTROLLER:        irrigation events using either evapotranspiration (weather-based) or soil
                   moisture data.
BACKFLOW           A safety device used to prevent pollution or contamination of the water supply
PREVENTION DEVICE: due to the reverse flow of water from the irrigation system.
CERTIFICATE OF     The document required under section
COMPLETION:        15.54.130.
                   A person certified to design irrigation systems by an accredited academic
CERTIFIED          institution, a professional trade organization or other program such as the
IRRIGATION         U.S. environmental protection agency's WaterSense irrigation designer
DESIGNER:          certification program and Irrigation Association's certified irrigation
                   designer program.
CERTIFIED          A person certified to perform landscape irrigation audits by an accredited
LANDSCAPE          academic institution, a professional trade organization or other program such
IRRIGATION         as the U.S. environmental protection agency's WaterSense irrigation auditor
AUDITOR:           certification program and Irrigation Association's certified landscape
                   irrigation auditor program.
CHECK VALVE OR     A valve located under a sprinkler head, or other location in the irrigation
ANTI- DRAIN VALVE: system, to hold water in the system to prevent drainage from sprinkler heads
                   when the sprinkler is off.
COMMON INTEREST    Community apartment projects, condominium projects, planned developments, and
DEVELOPMENTS:      stock cooperatives per Civil Code section 1351.
COMPOST:           The safe and stable product of controlled biologic decomposition of organic
                   materials that is beneficial to plant growth.
CONVERSION FACTOR  The number that converts acre-inches per acre per year to gallons per square
(0.62):            foot per year.
DISTRIBUTION       The measure of the uniformity of irrigation water over a defined area.
UNIFORMITY:
                   Any non-spray low volume irrigation system utilizing emission devices with a
DRIP IRRIGATION:   flow rate measured in gallons per hour. Low volume irrigation systems are
                   specifically designed to apply small volumes of water slowly at or near the
                   root zone of plants.
ECOLOGICAL         A project where the site is intentionally altered to establish a defined,
RESTORATION        indigenous, historic ecosystem.
PROJECT:
EFFECTIVE
PRECIPITATION OR   The portion of total precipitation which becomes available for plant growth.
USABLE RAINFALL
(EPPT):
EMITTER:           A drip irrigation emission device that delivers water slowly from the system
                   to the soil.
ESTABLISHED        The point at which plants in the landscape have developed significant root
LANDSCAPE:         growth into the soil. Typically, most plants are established after one or two
                   (2) years of growth.
                   The first year after installing the plant in the landscape or the first two
ESTABLISHMENT      (2) years if irrigation will be terminated after establishment. Typically,
PERIOD OF THE      most plants are established after one or two (2) years of growth. Native
PLANTS:            habitat mitigation areas and trees may need three (3) to five (5) years for
                   establishment.
ESTIMATED TOTAL    The total water used for the landscape as described in section
WATER USE (ETWU):  15.54.080 of this chapter.
                   A factor of 0.55 for residential areas and 0.45 for non-residential areas,
                   that, when applied to reference evapotranspiration, adjusts for plant factors
ET ADJUSTMENT      and irrigation efficiency, two major influences upon the amount of water that
FACTOR (ETAF):     needs to be applied to the landscape. The ETAF for new and existing (non-
                   rehabilitated) special landscape areas shall not exceed 1.0. The ETAF for
                   existing non-rehabilitated landscapes is 0.8.
EVAPOTRANSPIRATION The quantity of water evaporated from adjacent soil and other surfaces and
RATE:              transpired by plants during a specified time.
FLOW RATE:         The rate at which water flows through pipes, valves and emission devices,
                   measured in gallons per minute, gallons per hour, or cubic feet per second.
                   An inline device installed at the supply point of the irrigation system that
                   produces a repeatable signal proportional to flow rate. Flow sensors must be
FLOW SENSOR:       connected to an automatic irrigation controller, or flow monitor capable of
                   receiving flow signals and operating master valves. This combination flow
                   sensor/controller may also function as a landscape water meter or submeter.
                   A soil condition that is easily crumbled or loosely compacted down to a
FRIABLE:           minimum depth per planting material requirements, whereby the root structure
                   of newly planted material will be allowed to spread unimpeded.
FUEL MODIFICATION  Guidelines from a local fire authority to assist residents and businesses that
PLAN GUIDELINE:    are developing land or building structures in a fire hazard severity zone.
                   Untreated wastewater that has not been contaminated by any toilet discharge,
                   has not been affected by infectious, contaminated, or unhealthy bodily wastes,
                   and does not present a threat from contamination by unhealthful processing,
GRAYWATER:         manufacturing, or operating wastes. GRAYWATER includes, but is not limited to,
                   wastewater from bathtubs, showers, bathroom washbasins, clothes washing
                   machines, and laundry tubs, but does not include wastewater from kitchen sinks
                   or dishwashers (Health and Safety Code Section 17922.12).
HARDSCAPES:        Any durable material (pervious and non- pervious).
HYDROZONE:         A portion of the landscaped area having plants with similar water needs and
                   rooting depth. A hydrozone may be irrigated or non-irrigated.
INFILTRATION RATE: The rate of water entry into the soil expressed as a depth of water per unit
                   of time (e.g., inches per hour).
                   Species of plants not historically found in California that spread outside
INVASIVE PLANT     cultivated areas and can damage environmental or economic resources. Invasive
SPECIES:           species may be regulated by county agricultural agencies as noxious species.
                   Lists of invasive plants are maintained at the California invasive plant
                   inventory and USDA invasive and noxious weeds database.
                   An in-depth evaluation of the performance of an irrigation system conducted by
                   a certified landscape irrigation auditor. An irrigation audit includes, but is
                   not limited to: inspection, system tune up, system test with distribution
IRRIGATION AUDIT:  uniformity or emission uniformity, reporting overspray or runoff that causes
                   overland flow, and preparation of an irrigation schedule. The audit must be
                   conducted in a manner consistent with the Irrigation Association’s landscape
                   irrigation auditor certification program or other U.S. Environmental
                   Protection Agency “Watersense” labeled auditing program.
                   The measurement of the amount of water beneficially used divided by the amount
IRRIGATION         of water applied. Irrigation efficiency is derived from measurements and
EFFICIENCY (IE):   estimates of irrigation system characteristics and management practices. The
                   irrigation efficiency for purposes of this chapter are 0.75 for overhead spray
                   devices and 0.81 for drip systems.
                   An evaluation of an irrigation system that is less detailed than an irrigation
IRRIGATION SURVEY: audit. An irrigation survey includes, but is not limited to: inspection,
                   system test, and written recommendations to improve performance of the
                   irrigation system.
IRRIGATION WATER   An analysis of water use data based on meter readings and billing data.
USE ANALYSIS:
LANDSCAPE          A person who holds a license to practice landscape architecture in the state
ARCHITECT:         of California per Business and Professions Code section 5615.
                   All the planting areas, turf areas, and water features in a landscape design
                   plan subject to the maximum applied water allowance calculation. The landscape
LANDSCAPE AREA:    area does not include footprints of buildings or structures, sidewalks,
                   driveways, parking lots, decks, patios, gravel or stone walks, other pervious
                   or nonpervious hardscapes, and other nonirrigated areas designated for
                   nondevelopment (e.g., open spaces and existing native vegetation).
LANDSCAPE          A person licensed by the state of California to construct, maintain, repair,
CONTRACTOR:        install, or subcontract the development of landscape systems.
LANDSCAPE          The documents required under section
DOCUMENTATION      15.54.070 of this chapter.
PACKAGE:
                   Total area of landscape in a project as defined in "landscape area" herein for
LANDSCAPE PROJECT: the purposes of this chapter, meeting requirements under section
                   15.54.020 of this chapter.
LANDSCAPE WATER    An inline device installed at the irrigation supply point that measures the
METER:             flow of water into the irrigation system and is connected to a totalizer to
                   record water use.
LATERAL LINE:      The water delivery pipeline that supplies water to the emitters or sprinklers
                   from the valve.
                   A city or county, including a charter city or charter county, that is
LOCAL AGENCY:      responsible for adopting and implementing this chapter. The city is
                   responsible for the enforcement of this chapter, including but not limited to,
                   approval of a permit and plan check or design review of a project.
LOCAL WATER        Any entity, including a public agency, city, county, or private water company
PURVEYOR:          that provides retail water service.
                   The application of irrigation water at low pressure through a system of tubing
LOW VOLUME         or lateral lines and low volume emitters such as drip, drip lines, and
IRRIGATION:        bubblers. Low volume irrigation systems are specifically designed to apply
                   small volumes of water slowly at or near the root zone of plants.
MAIN LINE:         The pressurized pipeline that delivers water from the water source to the
                   valve or outlet.
                   An automatic valve installed at the irrigation supply point which controls
MASTER SHUT-OFF    water flow into the irrigation system. When this valve is closed water will
VALVE:             not be supplied to the irrigation system. A master valve will greatly reduce
                   any water loss due to a leaky station valve.
                   The upper limit of annual applied water for the established landscaped area as
                   specified in section
                   15.54.080. It is based upon the area's reference evapotranspiration, the ET
MAXIMUM APPLIED    adjustment factor, and the size of the landscape area. The estimated total
WATER ALLOWANCE    water use shall not exceed the maximum applied water allowance. Special
(MAWA):            landscape areas, including recreation areas, areas permanently and solely
                   dedicated to edible plants such as orchards and vegetable gardens, and areas
                   irrigated with recycled water are subject to the MAWA with an ETAF not to
                   exceed 1.0. MAWA = (ETo) (0.62) [(ETAF x LA) + ((1-ETAF) x SLA)]
MEDIAN:            An area between opposing lanes of traffic that may be unplanted or planted
                   with trees, shrubs, perennials, and ornamental grasses.
                   The climate of a small, specific area that may contrast with the climate of
MICROCLIMATE:      the overall landscape area due to factors such as wind, sun exposure, plant
                   density, or proximity to reflective surfaces.
MINED LAND         Any surface mining operation with a reclamation plan approved in accordance
RECLAMATION        with the surface mining and reclamation act of 1975.
PROJECTS:
                   Any organic material such as leaves, bark, straw, compost, or inorganic
                   mineral materials such as rocks, gravel, or decomposed granite left loose and
MULCH:             applied to the soil surface for the beneficial purposes of reducing
                   evaporation, suppressing weeds, moderating soil temperature, and preventing
                   soil erosion.
                   For the purposes of this chapter, a new building with a landscape or other new
NEW CONSTRUCTION:  landscape, such as a park, playground, or greenbelt without an associated
                   building.
                   Landscapes in commercial, institutional, industrial and public settings that
NON-RESIDENTIAL    may have areas designated for recreation or public assembly. It also includes
LANDSCAPE:         portions of common areas of common interest developments with designated
                   recreational areas.
OPERATING          The pressure at which the parts of an irrigation system are designed by the
PRESSURE:          manufacturer to operate.
OVERHEAD SPRINKLER
IRRIGATION SYSTEMS
OR OVERHEAD SPRAY  Systems that deliver water through the air (e.g., spray heads and rotors).
IRRIGATION
SYSTEMS:
OVERSPRAY:         The irrigation water which is delivered beyond the target area.
PARKWAY:           The area between a sidewalk and the curb or traffic lane. It may be planted or
                   unplanted, and with or without pedestrian egress.
PERMIT:            An authorizing document issued by local agencies for new construction or
                   rehabilitated landscapes.
PERVIOUS:          Any surface or material that allows the passage of water through the material
                   and into the underlying soil.
                   A factor, when multiplied by ETo, estimates the amount of water needed by
                   plants. For purposes of this chapter, the plant factor range for very low
                   water use plants is 0 to 0.1, the plant factor range for low water use plants
PLANT FACTOR OR    is 0.1 to 0.3, the plant factor range for moderate water use plants is 0.4 to
PLANT WATER USE    0.6, and the plant factor range for high water use plants is 0.7 to 1.0. Plant
FACTOR:            factors cited in this chapter are derived from the publication "Water Use
                   Classification Of Landscape Species". Plant factors may also be obtained from
                   horticultural researchers from academic institutions or professional
                   associations as approved by the California Department of Water Resources
                   (DWR).
                   The individual or entity submitting a landscape documentation package required
                   under section
PROJECT APPLICANT: 15.54.070 of this chapter, to request a permit, plan check, or design review
                   from the city. A project applicant may be the property owner or his or her
                   designee.
RAIN SENSOR OR
RAIN SENSING       A component which automatically suspends an irrigation event when it rains.
SHUTOFF DEVICE:
RECORD DRAWING OR  A set of reproducible drawings which show significant changes in the work made
AS-BUILTS:         during construction and which are usually based on drawings marked up in the
                   field and other data furnished by the contractor.
                   Areas, excluding private single-family residential areas, designated for
RECREATIONAL AREA: active play, recreation or public assembly in parks, sports fields, picnic
                   grounds, amphitheaters or golf course tees, fairways, roughs, surrounds and
                   greens.
RECYCLED WATER,    Treated or recycled wastewater of a quality suitable for nonpotable uses such
RECLAIMED WATER,   as landscape irrigation and water features. This water is not intended for
OR TREATED SEWAGE  human consumption.
EFFLUENT WATER:
                   A standard measurement of environmental parameters which affect the water use
                   of plants. ETo is expressed in inches per day, month, or year as represented
REFERENCE          in Appendix A, and is an estimate of the evapotranspiration of a large field
EVAPOTRANSPIRATION of four (4) to seven inch (7") tall, cool season grass that is well watered.
OR ETo:            Reference evapotranspiration is used as the basis of determining the maximum
                   applied water allowances so that regional differences in climate can be
                   accommodated.
REGIONAL WATER     A local ordinance adopted by two (2) or more local agencies, water suppliers
EFFICIENT          and other stakeholders for implementing a consistent set of landscape
LANDSCAPE          provisions throughout a geographical region. Regional ordinances are strongly
ORDINANCE:         encouraged to provide a consistent framework for the landscape industry and
                   applicants to adhere to.
                   Any relandscaping project that requires a permit, plan check, or design
REHABILITATED      review, meets the requirements of section
LANDSCAPE:         15.54.020, and the modified landscape area is equal to or greater than two
                   thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet.
RESIDENTIAL        Landscapes surrounding single or multifamily homes.
LANDSCAPE:
                   Water which is not absorbed by the soil or landscape to which it is applied
RUNOFF:            and flows from the landscape area. For example, runoff may result from water
                   that is applied at too great a rate (application rate exceeds infiltration
                   rate) or when there is a slope.
SOIL MOISTURE
SENSING DEVICE OR  A device that measures the amount of water in the soil. The device may also
SOIL MOISTURE      suspend or initiate an irrigation event.
SENSOR:
SOIL TEXTURE:      The classification of soil based on its percentage of sand, silt, and clay.
SPECIAL LANDSCAPE  An area of the landscape dedicated solely to edible plants, recreational
AREA (SLA):        areas, areas irrigated with recycled water, or water features using recycled
                   water.
SPRINKLER HEAD OR  A device which delivers water through a nozzle.
SPRAY HEAD:
STATIC WATER       The pipeline or municipal water supply pressure when water is not flowing.
PRESSURE:
STATION:           An area served by one valve or by a set of valves that operate simultaneously.
                   An irrigation component that provides a flexible, leak free connection between
SWING JOINT:       the emission device and lateral pipeline to allow movement in any direction
                   and to prevent equipment damage.
SUBMETER:          A metering device to measure water applied to the landscape that is installed
                   after the primary utility water meter.
                   A ground cover surface of mowed grass. Annual bluegrass, Kentucky bluegrass,
TURF:              perennial rye grass, red fescue, and tall fescue are cool season grasses.
                   Bermuda grass, kikuyu grass, seashore paspalum, St. Augustine grass,
                   zoysiagrass, and buffalo grass are warm season grasses.
VALVE:             A device used to control the flow of water in the irrigation system.
WATER CONSERVING   A plant species identified as having a very low or low plant factor.
PLANT SPECIES:
                   A design element where open water performs an aesthetic or recreational
                   function. Water features include ponds, lakes, waterfalls, fountains,
                   artificial streams, spas, and swimming pools (where water is artificially
                   supplied). The surface area of water features is included in the high water
WATER FEATURE:     use hydrozone of the landscape area. Constructed wetlands used for on-site
                   wastewater treatment or stormwater best management practices that are not
                   irrigated and used solely for water treatment or stormwater retention are not
                   water features and, therefore, are not subject to the water budget
                   calculation.
WATERING WINDOW:   The time of day irrigation is allowed.
                   The "Water Use Classification Of Landscape Species" published by the
WUCOLS:            University of California cooperative extension and the department of water
                   resources 2014. (Ord. 2917, 2021: Ord. 2724 § 1, 2009)
 
15.54.040: PROVISIONS FOR NEW CONSTRUCTION OR REHABILITATED LANDSCAPES:
The city may designate by mutual agreement, another agency, such as a water
purveyor, to implement some or all of the requirements contained in this
chapter. Local agencies may collaborate with water purveyors to define each
entity’s specific responsibilities relating to this chapter. (Ord. 2917, 2021)
15.54.050: COMPLIANCE WITH LANDSCAPE DOCUMENTATION PACKAGE:
   A.   Prior to construction, the city shall:
      1,   Provide the project applicant with the ordinance and procedures for
permits, plan checks or design reviews;
      2.   Review the landscape documentation package submitted by the project
applicant;
      3.   Approve or deny the landscape documentation package;
      4.   Issue a permit or approve the plan check or design review for the
project applicant; and
      5.   Upon approval of the landscape documentation package, submit a copy
of the water efficient landscape worksheet to the local water purveyor.
   B.   Prior to construction, the project applicant shall:
      1.   Submit a landscape documentation package to the city.
   C.   Upon approval of the landscape documentation package by the city, the
project applicant shall:
      1.   Receive a permit or approval of the plan check or design review and
record the date of the permit in the certificate of completion;
      2.   Submit a copy of the approved landscape documentation package along
with the record drawings, and any other information to the property owner or
his/her designee; and
      3.   Submit a copy of the water efficient landscape worksheet to the
local water purveyor. (Ord. 2917, 2021: Ord. 2724 § 1, 2009)
15.54.060: PENALTIES:
The city may establish and administer penalties to the project applicant for
non- compliance with the ordinance to the extent permitted by law. (Ord. 2917,
2021)
15.54.070: ELEMENTS OF THE LANDSCAPE DOCUMENTATION PACKAGE:
   A.   The landscape documentation package shall include the following six (6)
elements:
      1.   Project information:
         a.   Date;
         b.   Project applicant;
         c.   Project address (if available, parcel and/or lot number[s]);
         d.   Total landscape area (square feet);
         e.   Project type (e.g., new, rehabilitated, public, private,
cemetery, homeowner installed);
         f.   Water supply type (e.g., potable, recycled, well) and identify
the local retail water purveyor if the applicant is not served by a private
well;
         g.   Checklist of all documents in landscape documentation package;
         h.   Project contacts to include contact information for the project
applicant and property owner;
         i.   Applicant signature and date with statement, "I agree to comply
with the requirements of the water efficient landscape ordinance and submit a
complete Landscape Documentation Package";
      2.   Water efficient landscape worksheet:
         a.   Hydrozone information table;
         b.   Water budget calculations;
            (1)   Maximum applied water allowance (MAWA);
            (2)   Estimated total water use (ETWU);
      3.   Soil management report;
      4.   Landscape design plan;
      5.   Irrigation design plan; and
      6.   Grading design plan. (Ord. 2917, 2021: Ord. 2724 § 1, 2009)
15.54.080: WATER EFFICIENT LANDSCAPE WORKSHEET:
   A.   A project applicant shall complete the water efficient landscape
worksheet in Appendix B which contains information on plant factor, irrigation
method, irrigation efficiency, and area associated with each hydrozone.
Calculations are then made to show that the evapotranspiration adjustment
factor (ETAF) for the landscape project does not exceed a factor of 0.55 for
residential areas and 0.45 for non-residential areas, exclusive of special
landscape areas. The ETAF for a landscape project is based on the plant factors
and irrigation methods selected. The maximum applied water allowance is
calculated based on the maximum ETAF allowed (0.55 for residential areas and
0.45 for non-residential areas) and expressed as annual gallons required. The
estimated total water use (ETWU) is calculated based on the plants used and
irrigation method selected for the landscape design. ETWU must be below the
MAWA.
      1.   In calculating the maximum applied water allowance and estimated
total water use, a project applicant shall use the ETo values from the
reference evapotranspiration table in Appendix A. For geographic areas not
covered in Appendix A, use data from other cities located nearby in the same
reference evapotranspiration zone, as found in CIMIS reference
evapotranspiration zones map, department of water resources, 1999.
   B.   Water budget calculations shall adhere to the following requirements:
      1.   The plant factor used shall be from WUCOLS or from horticultural
researchers with academic institutions or professional associations as approved
by the California department of water resources (DWR). The plant factor ranges
from 0 to 0.1 for very low water using plants, 0.1 to 0.3 for low water use
plants, from 0.4 to 0.6 for moderate water use plants, and from 0.7 to 1.0 for
high water use plants.
      2.   All water features shall be included in the high water use hydrozone
and temporarily irrigated areas shall be included in the low water use
hydrozone.
      3.   All special landscape areas shall be identified and their water use
calculated as shown in Appendix B.
      4.   ETAF for new and existing (non-rehabilitated) special landscape
areas shall not exceed 1.0. (Ord. 2917, 2021: Ord. 2724 § 1, 2009)
15.54.090: SOIL MANAGEMENT REPORT:
   A.   In order to reduce runoff and encourage healthy plant growth, a soil
management report shall be completed by the project applicant, or his/her
designee, as follows:
      1.   Submit soil samples to a laboratory for analysis and
recommendations.
         a.   Soil sampling shall be conducted in accordance with laboratory
protocol, including protocols regarding adequate sampling depth for the
intended plants.
         b.   The soil analysis shall include:
            (1)   Soil texture;
            (2)   Infiltration rate determined by laboratory test or soil
texture infiltration rate table;
            (3)   pH;
            (4)   Total soluble salts;
            (5)   Sodium;
            (6)   Percent organic matter; and
            (7)   Recommendations.
         c.   In projects with multiple landscape installations (i.e.
production home developments) a soil sampling rate of 1 in 7 lots or
approximately 15% will satisfy this requirement. Large landscape projects shall
sample at a rate equivalent to 1 in 7 lots.
      2.   The project applicant, or his/her designee, shall comply with one of
the following:
         a.   If significant mass grading is not planned, the soil analysis
report shall be submitted to the city as part of the landscape documentation
package; or
         b.   If significant mass grading is planned, the soil analysis report
shall be submitted to city as part of the certificate of completion.
      3.   The soil analysis report shall be made available, in a timely
manner, to the professionals preparing the landscape design plans and
irrigation design plans to make any necessary adjustments to the design plans.
      4.   The project applicant, or his/her designee, shall submit
documentation verifying implementation of soil analysis report recommendations
to the city with certificate of completion. (Ord. 2917, 2021: Ord. 2724 § 1,
2009)
15.54.100: LANDSCAPE DESIGN PLAN:
   A.   For the efficient use of water, a landscape shall be carefully designed
and planned for the intended function of the project. A landscape design plan
meeting the following design criteria shall be submitted as part of the
landscape documentation package:
      1.   Plant Material:
         a.   Any plant may be selected for the landscape, providing the
estimated total water use in the landscape area does not exceed the maximum
applied water allowance. Methods to achieve water efficiency shall include one
or more of the following:
            (1)   Protection and preservation of native species and natural
vegetation;
            (2)   Selection of water conserving plant, tree and turf species,
especially local native plants;
            (3)   Selection of plants based on local climate suitability,
disease and pest resistance;
            (4)   Selection of trees based on applicable local tree ordinances
or tree shading guidelines, and size at maturity as appropriate for the
planting area;
            (5)   Selection of plants from local and regional landscape program
plant lists; and
            (6)   Selection of plants from local fuel modification plan
guidelines.
         b.   Each hydrozone shall have plant materials with similar water use,
with the exception of hydrozones with plants of mixed water use, as specified
in section
15.54.110(a)(2)(D) of this chapter.
         c.   Plants shall be selected and planted appropriately based upon
their adaptability to the climatic, geologic, and topographical conditions of
the project site. Methods to achieve water efficiency shall include one or more
of the following:
            (1)   Use the sunset western climate zone system which takes into
account temperature, humidity, elevation, terrain, latitude, and varying
degrees of continental and marine influence on local climate;
            (2)   Recognize the horticultural attributes of plants (i.e.,
mature plant size, invasive surface roots) to minimize damage to property or
infrastructure (e.g., buildings, sidewalks, power lines); allow for adequate
soil volume for healthy root growth; and
            (3)   Consider the solar orientation for plant placement to
maximize summer shade and winter solar gain.
         d.   Turf is not allowed on slopes greater than twenty five percent
(25%) where the toe of the slope is adjacent to an impermeable hardscape and
where twenty five percent (25%) means one foot (1') of vertical elevation
change for every four feet (4') of horizontal length (rise divided by run x 100
= slope percent).
         e.   High water use plants, characterized by a plant factor of 0.7 to
1.0, are prohibited in street medians.
         f.   A landscape design plan for projects in fire prone areas shall
address fire safety and prevention. A defensible space or zone around a
building or structure is required per Public Resources Code section 4291(a) and
(b). Avoid fire prone plant materials and highly flammable mulches. Refer to
the local fuel modification plan guidelines.
         g.   The use of invasive plant species, such as those listed by the
California invasive plant council, is strongly discouraged.
         h.   The architectural guidelines of a common interest development,
which include community apartment projects, condominiums, planned developments,
and stock cooperatives, shall not prohibit or include conditions that have the
effect of prohibiting the use of low water use plants as a group.
      2.   Water Features:
         a.   Recirculating water systems shall be used for water features.
         b.   Where available, recycled water shall be used as a source for
decorative water features.
         c.   Surface area of a water feature shall be included in the high
water use hydrozone area of the water budget calculation.
         d.   Pool and spa covers are highly recommended.
      3.   Soil Preparation, Mulch And Amendments:
         a.   Prior to the planting of any materials, compacted soils shall be
transformed to a friable condition. On engineered slopes, only amended planting
holes need meet this requirement.
         b.   Soil amendments shall be incorporated according to
recommendations of the soil report and what is appropriate for the plants
selected (see section
15.54.090).
         c.   For landscape installations, compost at a rate of a minimum of
four (4) cubic yards per one thousand (1,000) square feet of permeable area
shall be incorporated to a depth of six inches (6") into the soil. Soils with
greater than six percent (6%) organic matter in the top six inches (6") of soil
are exempt from adding compost and tilling.
         d.   A minimum three inch (3") layer of mulch shall be applied on all
exposed soil surfaces of planting areas except in turf areas, creeping or
rooting ground covers, or direct seeding applications where mulch is
contraindicated. To provide habitat for beneficial insects and other wildlife,
up to five percent (5%) of the landscape area may be left without mulch.
Designated insect habitat must be included in the landscape design plan as
such.
         e.   Stabilizing mulching products shall be used on slopes that meet
current engineering standards.
         f.   The mulching portion of the seed/mulch slurry in hydroseeded
applications shall meet the mulching requirement.
         g.   Organic mulch materials made from recycled or post- consumer
shall take precedence over inorganic materials or virgin forest products unless
the recycled post-consumer organic products were not locally available. Organic
mulches are not required where prohibited by local fuel modification plan
guidelines or other applicable local ordinances.
   B.   The landscape design plan, at a minimum, shall:
      1.   Delineate and label each hydrozone by number, letter, or other
method;
      2.   Identify each hydrozone as low, moderate, high water, or mixed water
use. Temporarily irrigated areas of the landscape shall be included in the low
water use hydrozone for the water budget calculation;
      3.   Identify recreational areas;
      4.   Identify areas permanently and solely dedicated to edible plants;
      5.   Identify areas irrigated with recycled water;
      6.   Identify type of mulch and application depth;
      7.   Identify soil amendments, type, and quantity;
      8.   Identify type and surface area of water features;
      9.   Identify hardscapes (pervious and nonpervious);
      10.   Identify location, installation, and 24-hour retention or
infiltration capacity of any applicable stormwater best management practices
that encourage on-site retention and infiltration of stormwater. Project
applicants shall refer to the city or regional water quality control board for
information on any applicable stormwater technical requirements. Stormwater
best management practices are encouraged in the landscape design plan and
examples are provided in section
15.54.200;   
      11.   Identify any applicable rain harvesting or catchment technologies
as discussed in section
15.54.200 and their 24-hour retention or infiltration capacity;
      12.   Identify any applicable graywater discharge piping, system
components and area(s) of distribution;
      13.   Contain the following statement: "I have complied with the criteria
of Chapter 15.54 of the Redlands Municipal Code and applied them for the
efficient use of water in the landscape design plan"; and
      14.   Bear the signature of a licensed landscape architect, licensed
landscape contractor, or any other person authorized to design a landscape.
(See sections 5500.1, 5615, 5641, 5641.1, 5641.2, 5641.3, 5641.4, 5641.5,
5641.6, 6701, 7027.5 of the Business and Professions Code, section 832.27 of
title 16 of the California Code of Regulations, and section 6721 of the Food
and Agricultural Code.) (Ord. 2917, 2021: Ord. 2724 § 1, 2009)
15.54.110: IRRIGATION DESIGN PLAN:
   A.   This section applies to landscaped areas requiring permanent
irrigation, not areas that require temporary irrigation solely for the plant
establishment period. For the efficient use of water, an irrigation system
shall meet all the requirements listed in this section and the manufacturers'
recommendations. The irrigation system and its related components shall be
planned and designed to allow for proper installation, management, and
maintenance. An irrigation design plan meeting the following design criteria
shall be submitted as part of the landscape documentation package.
      1.   System:
         a.   Landscape water meters, defined as either a dedicated water
service meter or private submeter, shall be installed for all non-residential
irrigated landscapes of one thousand (1,000) square feet but not more than five
thousand (5,000) square feet (the level at which water code 535 applies) and
residential irrigated landscapes of five thousand (5,000) square feet or
greater. A landscape water meter may be either:
            (1)   A customer service meter dedicated to landscape use provided
by the local water purveyor; or
            (2)   A privately owned meter or submeter.
         b.   Automatic irrigation controllers utilizing either
evapotranspiration or soil moisture sensor data utilizing non-volatile memory
shall be required for irrigation scheduling in all irrigation systems.
         c.   If the water pressure is below or exceeds the recommended
pressure of the specified irrigation devices, the installation of a pressure
regulating device is required to ensure that the dynamic pressure at each
emission device is within the manufacturer’s recommended pressure range for
optimal performance.
            (1)   If the static pressure is above or below the required dynamic
pressure of the irrigation system, pressure regulating devices such as inline
pressure regulators, booster pumps, or other devices shall be installed to meet
the required dynamic pressure of the irrigation system.
            (2)   Static water pressure, dynamic or operating pressure and flow
reading of the water supply shall be measured at the point of connection. These
pressure and flow measurements shall be conducted at the design stage. If the
measurements are not available at the design stage, the measurements shall be
conducted at installation.
         d.   Sensors (rain, freeze, wind, etc.), either integral or auxiliary,
that suspend or alter irrigation operation during unfavorable weather
conditions shall be required on all irrigation systems, as appropriate for
local climatic conditions. Irrigation should be avoided during windy or
freezing weather or during rain.
         e.   Manual shutoff valves (such as a gate valve, ball valve, or
butterfly valve) shall be required, as close as possible to the point of
connection of the water supply, to minimize water loss in case of an emergency
(such as a main line break) or routine repair.
         f.   Backflow prevention devices shall be required to protect the
water supply from contamination by the irrigation system. A project applicant
shall refer to the applicable city code (i.e., public health) for additional
backflow prevention requirements.
         g.   Flow sensors that detect high flow conditions created by system
damage or malfunction are required for all on non-residential landscapes and
residential landscapes of five thousand (5,000) square feet or larger.
         h.   Master shut-off valves are required on all projects except
landscapes that make use of technologies that allow for the individual control
of sprinklers that are individually pressurized in a system equipped with low
pressure shut down features.
         i.   The irrigation system shall be designed to prevent runoff, low
head drainage, overspray, or other similar conditions where irrigation water
flows onto nontargeted areas, such as adjacent property, nonirrigated areas,
hardscapes, roadways, or structures.
         j.   Relevant information from the soil management plan, such as soil
type and infiltration rate, shall be utilized when designing irrigation
systems.
         k.   The design of the irrigation system shall conform to the
hydrozones of the landscape design plan.
         l.   The irrigation system must be designed and installed to meet, at
a minimum, the irrigation efficiency criteria as described in section
15.54.080 of this chapter, regarding the maximum applied water allowance.
         m.   All irrigation emission devices must meet the requirements set in
the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) standard, American Society of
Agricultural and Biological Engineers’/International Code Council’s (ASABE/ICC)
802-2014 “Landscape Irrigation Sprinkler and Emitter Standard.” All sprinkler
heads installed in the landscape must document a distribution uniformity low
quarter of 0.65 or higher using the protocol defined in ASABE/ICC 802-2014.
         n.   It is highly recommended that the project applicant or city
inquire with the local water purveyor about peak water operating demands (on
the water supply system) or water restrictions that may impact the
effectiveness of the irrigation system.
         o.   In mulched planting areas, the use of low volume irrigation is
required to maximize water infiltration into the root zone.
         p.   Sprinkler heads and other emission devices shall have matched
precipitation rates, unless otherwise directed by the manufacturer's
recommendations.
         q.   Head to head coverage is recommended. However, sprinkler spacing
shall be designed to achieve the highest possible distribution uniformity using
the manufacturer's recommendations.
         r.   Swing joints or other riser protection components are required on
all risers subject to damage that are adjacent to high traffic areas of
turfgrass.
         s.   Check valves or antidrain valves are required on all sprinkler
heads where low point drainage could occur.
         t.   Areas less than ten (10) feet in width in any direction shall be
irrigated with subsurface irrigation or other means that produces no runoff or
overspray.
         u.   Overhead irrigation shall not be permitted within twenty four
inches (24") of any nonpermeable surface. Allowable irrigation within the
setback from nonpermeable surfaces may include drip, drip line, or other low
flow nonspray technology. The setback area may be planted or unplanted. The
surfacing of the setback may be mulch, gravel, or other porous material. These
restrictions may be modified if:
            (1)   The landscape area is adjacent to permeable surfacing and no
runoff occurs; or
            (2)   The adjacent nonpermeable surfaces are designed and
constructed to drain entirely to landscaping; or
            (3)   The irrigation designer specifies an alternative design or
technology, as part of the landscape documentation package and clearly
demonstrates strict adherence to irrigation system design criteria in
subsection A1i of this section. Prevention of overspray and runoff must be
confirmed during the irrigation audit.
         v.   Slopes greater than twenty five percent (25%) shall not be
irrigated with an irrigation system with a application rate exceeding 0.75
inches per hour. This restriction may be modified if the landscape designer
specifies an alternative design or technology, as part of the landscape
documentation package, and clearly demonstrates no runoff or erosion will
occur. Prevention of runoff and erosion must be confirmed during the irrigation
audit.
      2.   Hydrozone:
         a.   Each valve shall irrigate a hydrozone with similar site, slope,
sun exposure, soil conditions, and plant materials with similar water use.
         b.   Sprinkler heads and other emission devices shall be selected
based on what is appropriate for the plant type within that hydrozone.
         c.   Where feasible, trees shall be placed on separate valves from
shrubs, ground covers, and turf to facilitate the appropriate irrigation of
trees. The mature size and extent of the root zone shall be considered when
designing irrigation for the tree.
         d.   Individual hydrozones that mix plants of moderate and low water
use, or moderate and high water use, may be allowed if:
            (1)   Plant factor calculation is based on the proportions of the
respective plant water uses and their plant factor; or
            (2)   The plant factor of the higher water using plant is used for
calculations.
         e.   Individual hydrozones that mix high and low water use plants
shall not be permitted.
         f.   On the landscape design plan and irrigation design plan,
hydrozone areas shall be designated by number, letter, or other designation. On
the irrigation design plan, designate the areas irrigated by each valve, and
assign a number to each valve. Use this valve number in the hydrozone
information table (see appendix B, section A). This table can also assist with
the irrigation audit and programming the controller.
   B.   The irrigation design plan, at a minimum, shall contain:
      1.   Location and size of separate water meters for landscape;
      2.   Location, type and size of all components of the irrigation system,
including controllers, main and lateral lines, valves, sprinkler heads,
moisture sensing devices, rain switches, quick couplers, pressure regulators,
and backflow prevention devices;
      3.   Static water pressure at the point of connection to the public water
supply;
      4.   Flow rate (gallons per minute), application rate (inches per hour),
and design operating pressure (pressure per square inch) for each station;
      5.   Recycled water irrigation systems as specified in section
15.54.180 of this chapter;
      6.   The following statement: "I have complied with the criteria of
Chapter 15.54 of the Redlands Municipal Code and applied them accordingly for
the efficient use of water in the irrigation design plan"; and
      7.   The signature of a licensed landscape architect, certified
irrigation designer, licensed landscape contractor, or any other person
authorized to design an irrigation system. (See sections 5500.1, 5615, 5641,
5641.1, 5641.2, 5641.3, 5641.4, 5641.5, 5641.6, 6701, 7027.5 of the Business
and Professions Code, section 832.27 of title 16 of the California Code of
Regulations, and section 6721 of the Food and Agricultural Code.) (Ord. 2917,
2021: Ord. 2724 § 1, 2009)
15.54.120: GRADING DESIGN PLAN:
   A.   For the efficient use of water, grading of a project site shall be
designed to minimize soil erosion, runoff, and water waste. A grading plan
shall be submitted as part of the landscape documentation package. A
comprehensive grading plan prepared by a civil engineer for other city permits
satisfies this requirement.
      1.   The project applicant shall submit a landscape grading plan that
indicates finished configurations and elevations of the landscape area
including:
         a.   Height of graded slopes;
         b.   Drainage patterns;
         c.   Pad elevations;
         d.   Finish grade; and
         e.   Stormwater retention improvements, if applicable.
      2.   To prevent excessive erosion and runoff, it is highly recommended
that project applicants:
         a.   Grade so that all irrigation and normal rainfall remains within
property lines and does not drain on to non-permeable hardscapes;
         b.   Avoid disruption of natural drainage patterns and undisturbed
soil; and
         c.   Avoid soil compaction in landscape areas.
      3.   The grading design plan shall contain the following statement: “I
have complied with the criteria of Chapter 15.54 of the Redlands Municipal Code
and applied them accordingly for the efficient use of water in the grading
design plan” and shall bear the signature of a licensed professional as
authorized by law. (Ord. 2917, 2021)
15.54.130: CERTIFICATE OF COMPLETION:
   A.   The certificate of completion (see appendix C for a sample certificate)
shall include the following six (6) elements:
      1.   Project information sheet that contains:
         a.   Date;
         b.   Project name;
         c.   Project applicant name, telephone, and mailing address;
         d.   Project address and location; and
         e.   Property owner name, telephone, and mailing address;
      2.   Certification by either the signer of the landscape design plan, the
signer of the irrigation design plan, or the licensed landscape contractor that
the landscape project has been installed per the approved landscape
documentation package;
         a.   Where there have been significant changes made in the field
during construction, these "as built" or record drawings shall be included with
the certification;
         b.   A diagram of the irrigation plan showing hydrozones shall be kept
with the irrigation controller for subsequent management purposes;
      3.   Irrigation scheduling parameters used to set the controller (see
section
15.54.140 of this chapter);
      4.   Landscape and irrigation maintenance schedule (see section
15.54.150 of this chapter);
      5.   Irrigation audit report (see section
15.54.160 of this chapter); and
      6.   Soil analysis report, if not submitted with the landscape
documentation package, and documentation verifying implementation of soil
report recommendations (see section
15.54.090 of this chapter).
   B.   The project applicant shall:
      1.   Submit the signed certificate of completion to the city for review;
      2.   Ensure that copies of the approved certificate of completion are
submitted to the local water purveyor and property owner or his or her
designee. (Ord. 2917, 2021: Ord. 2724 § 1, 2009)
15.54.140: IRRIGATION SCHEDULING:
   A.   For the efficient use of water, all irrigation schedules shall be
developed, managed, and evaluated to utilize the minimum amount of water
required to maintain plant health. Irrigation schedules shall meet the
following criteria:
      1.   Irrigation scheduling shall be regulated by automatic irrigation
controllers.
      2.   Overhead irrigation shall be scheduled between eight o'clock (8:00)
P.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. unless weather conditions prevent it. If
allowable hours of irrigation differ from the local water purveyor, the
stricter of the two shall apply. Operation of the irrigation system outside the
normal watering window is allowed for auditing and system maintenance.
      3.   For implementation of the irrigation schedule, particular attention
must be paid to irrigation run times, emission device, flow rate, and current
reference evapotranspiration, so that applied water meets the estimated total
water use. Total annual applied water shall be less than or equal to maximum
applied water allowance (MAWA). Actual irrigation schedules shall be regulated
by automatic irrigation controllers using current reference evapotranspiration
data (e.g., CIMIS) or soil moisture sensor data.
      4.   Parameters used to set the automatic controller shall be developed
and submitted for each of the following:
         a.   The plant establishment period;
         b.   The established landscape; and
         c.   Temporarily irrigated areas.
      5.   Each irrigation schedule shall consider for each station all of the
following that apply:
         a.   Irrigation interval (days between irrigation);
         b.   Irrigation run times (hours or minutes per irrigation event to
avoid runoff);
         c.   Number of cycle starts required for each irrigation event to
avoid runoff;
         d.   Amount of applied water scheduled to be applied on a monthly
basis;
         e.   Application rate setting;
         f.   Root depth setting;
         g.   Plant type setting;
         h.   Soil type;
         i.   Slope factor setting;
         j.   Shade factor setting; and
         k.   Irrigation uniformity or efficiency setting. (Ord. 2917, 2021:
Ord. 2724 § 1, 2009)
15.54.150: LANDSCAPE AND IRRIGATION MAINTENANCE SCHEDULE:
   A.   Landscapes shall be maintained to ensure water use efficiency. A
regular maintenance schedule shall be submitted with the certificate of
completion.
   B.   A regular maintenance schedule shall include, but not be limited to,
routine inspection; auditing, adjustment and repair of the irrigation system
and its components; aerating and dethatching turf areas; topdressing with
compost, replenishing mulch; fertilizing; pruning; weeding in all landscape
areas, and removing obstructions to emission devices. Operation of the
irrigation system outside the normal watering window is allowed for auditing
and system maintenance.
   C.   Repair of all irrigation equipment shall be done with the originally
installed components or their equivalents or with components with greater
efficiency.
   D.   A project applicant is encouraged to implement established landscape
industry sustainable best practices for all landscape maintenance activities.
(Ord. 2917, 2021: Ord. 2724 § 1, 2009)
15.54.160: IRRIGATION AUDIT, IRRIGATION SURVEY, AND IRRIGATION WATER USE
ANALYSIS:
   A.   All landscape irrigation audits shall be conducted by the city
landscape irrigation auditor or a third party certified landscape irrigation
auditor. Landscape audits shall not be conducted by the person who designed the
landscape or installed the landscape.
   B.   In large projects or projects with multiple landscape installations
(i.e. production home developments) an auditing rate of 1 in 7 lots or
approximately fifteen percent (15%) will satisfy this requirement.
   C.   For new construction and rehabilitated landscape projects installed
after December 1, 2015, as described in section
15.54.050:
      1.   The project applicant shall submit an irrigation audit report with
the certificate of completion to the city that may include, but is not limited
to: inspection, system tune-up, system test with distribution uniformity,
reporting overspray or run off that causes overland flow, and preparation of an
irrigation schedule, including configuring irrigation controllers with
application rate, soil types, plant factors, slope, exposure and any other
factors necessary for accurate programming;
      2.   The city shall administer programs that may include, but not be
limited to, irrigation water use analysis, irrigation audits, and irrigation
surveys for compliance with the maximum applied water allowance. (Ord. 2917,
2021: Ord. 2724 § 1, 2009)
15.54.170: IRRIGATION EFFICIENCY:
For the purpose of determining estimated total water use, average irrigation
efficiency is assumed to be 0.75 for overhead spray devices and 0.81 for drip
system devices. (Ord. 2917, 2021: Ord. 2724 § 1, 2009)
15.54.180: RECYCLED WATER:
   A.   The installation of recycled water irrigation systems shall allow for
the current and future use of recycled water.
   B.   All recycled water irrigation systems shall be designed and operated in
accordance with all applicable local and state laws.
   C.   Landscapes using recycled water are considered special landscape areas.
The ET adjustment factor for new and existing (non-rehabilitated) special
landscape areas shall not exceed 1.0. (Ord. 2917, 2021: Ord. 2724 § 1, 2009)
15.54.190: GRAYWATER SYSTEMS:
Graywater systems promote the efficient use of water and are encouraged to
assist in on-site landscape irrigation. All graywater systems shall conform to
the California Plumbing Code (Title 24, Part 5, Chapter 16) and any applicable
local ordinance standards. Refer to section
15.54.020(D) for the applicability of this chapter to landscape areas less than
two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet with the estimated total water
use met entirely by graywater. (Ord. 2917, 2021)
15.54.200: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND RAINWATER RETENTION:
   A.   Stormwater management practices minimize runoff and increase
infiltration which recharges groundwater and improves water quality.
Implementing stormwater best management practices into the landscape and
grading design plans to minimize runoff and to increase on site retention and
infiltration are encouraged.
   B.   Project applicants shall refer to the city or regional water quality
control board for information on any applicable stormwater technical
requirements.
   C.   All planted landscape areas are required to have friable soil to
maximize water retention and infiltration. Refer to section
15.54.100A3.
   D.   It is strongly recommended that landscape areas be designed for capture
and infiltration capacity that is sufficient to prevent runoff from impervious
surfaces (i.e. roof and paved areas) from either: the one inch, 24-hour rain
event or the 85th percentile, 24-hour rain event, and/or additional capacity as
required by any applicable local, regional, state or federal regulation.
   E.   It is recommended that storm water projects incorporate any of the
following elements to improve on-site storm water and dry weather runoff
capture and use:
      1.   Grade impervious surfaces, such as driveways, during construction to
drain to vegetated areas.
      2.   Minimize the area of impervious surfaces such as paved areas, roof
and concrete driveways.
      3.   Incorporate pervious or porous surfaces (e.g., gravel, permeable
pavers or blocks, pervious or porous concrete) that minimize runoff.
      4.   Direct runoff from paved surfaces and roof areas into planting beds
or landscaped areas to maximize site water capture and reuse.
      5.   Incorporate rain gardens, cisterns, and other rain harvesting or
catchment systems.
      6.   Incorporate infiltration beds, swales, basins and drywells to
capture storm water and dry weather runoff and increase percolation into the
soil.
      7.   Consider constructed wetlands and ponds that retain water, equalize
excess flow, and filter pollutants. (Ord. 2917, 2021: Ord. 2724 § 1, 2009)
15.54.210: PUBLIC EDUCATION:
   A.   Publications: Education is a critical component to promote the
efficient use of water in landscapes. The use of appropriate principles of
design, installation, management and maintenance that save water is encouraged
in the community.
      1.   The city shall provide information to owners of permitted
renovations and new, single-family residential homes regarding the design,
installation, management, and maintenance of water efficient landscapes based
on a water budget.
   B.   Model Homes: All model homes that are landscaped shall use signs and
written information to demonstrate the principles of water efficient landscapes
described in this chapter.
      1.   Signs shall be used to identify the model as an example of a water
efficient landscape featuring elements such as hydrozones, irrigation
equipment, and others that contribute to the overall water efficient theme.
Signage shall include information about the site water use as designed per the
local ordinance; specify who designed and installed the water efficient
landscape; and demonstrate low water use approaches to landscaping such as
using native plants, graywater systems, and rainwater catchment systems.
      2.   Information shall be provided about designing, installing, managing,
and maintaining water efficient landscapes. (Ord. 2917, 2021)
15.54.220: ENVIRONMENTAL REVIEW:
The city must comply with the California environmental quality act (CEQA), as
appropriate. (Ord. 2917, 2021)
15.54.230: PROVISIONS FOR EXISTING LANDSCAPES:
The city may by mutual agreement, designate another agency, such as a water
purveyor, to implement some or all of the requirements contained in this
chapter. Local agencies may collaborate with water purveyors to define each
entity’s specific responsibilities relating to this chapter. (Ord. 2917, 2021)
15.54.240: IRRIGATION AUDIT, IRRIGATION SURVEY, AND IRRIGATION WATER USE
ANALYSIS:
   A.   This section shall apply to all existing landscapes that were installed
before December 1, 2015 and are over one (1) acre in size.
      1.   For all landscapes in this division A that have a water meter, the
city shall administer programs that may include, but not be limited to,
irrigation water use analyses, irrigation surveys, and irrigation audits to
evaluate water use and provide recommendations as necessary to reduce landscape
water use to a level that does not exceed the maximum applied water allowance
for existing landscapes. The maximum applied water allowance for existing
landscapes shall be calculated as: MAWA = (0.8)(ETo)(LA)(0.62).
      2.   For all landscapes in this division A that do not have a meter, the
city shall administer programs that may include, but not be limited to,
irrigation surveys and irrigation audits to evaluate water use and provide
recommendations as necessary in order to prevent water waste.
   B.   All landscape irrigation audits shall be conducted by a certified
landscape irrigation auditor. (Ord. 2917, 2021)
15.54.250: WATER WASTE PREVENTION:
   A.   Local agencies shall prevent water waste resulting from inefficient
landscape irrigation by prohibiting runoff from leaving the target landscape
due to low head drainage, overspray, or other similar conditions where water
flows onto adjacent property, non-irrigated areas, walks, roadways, parking
lots, or structures. Penalties for violation of these prohibitions shall be
established locally.
   B.   Restrictions regarding overspray and runoff may be modified if:
      1.   The landscape area is adjacent to permeable surfacing and no runoff
occurs; or
      2.   The adjacent non-permeable surfaces are designed and constructed to
drain entirely to landscaping. (Ord. 2917, 2021)
15.54.260: EFFECTIVE PRECIPITATION:
The city may consider effective precipitation (25% of annual precipitation) in
tracking water use and may use the following equation to calculate maximum
applied water allowance:
MAWA = (ETo - Eppt) (0.62) [(0.55 x LA) + (0.45 x SLA)] for residential areas.
MAWA = (ETo - EPPT) (0.62) [(0.45 x LA) + (0.55 x SLA)] for non-residential
areas. (Ord. 2917, 2021)
15.54.270: REPORTING:
   A.   The city shall report on implementation and enforcement by December 31,
2015. The city is responsible for administering this chapter and shall report
on their updated ordinance, while those agencies developing a regional
ordinance shall report on its existing ordinance. Those agencies crafting a
regional ordinance shall also report on their new ordinance by March 1, 2016.
Subsequently, reporting for all agencies will be due by January 31 of each
year. Reports shall be submitted to the department of water resources.
   B.   The city shall address the following:
      1.   State whether the city has adopted a single agency ordinance or a
regional agency alliance ordinance, and the date of adoption or anticipated
date of adoption.
      2.   Define the reporting period. The reporting period shall commence on
December 1, 2015 and end on December 28, 2015. For local agencies crafting
regional ordinances with other agencies, there shall be an additional reporting
period commencing on February 1, 2016 and ending on February 28, 2016. In
subsequent years, all local agency reporting will be for the calendar year.
      3.   State if using a locally modified water efficient landscape
ordinance (WELO) or the MWELO. If using a locally modified WELO, how is it
different than MWELO, is it at least as efficient as MWELO, and are there any
exemptions specified?
      4.   State the entity responsible for implementing the ordinance.
      5.   State number and types of projects subject to the ordinance during
the specified reporting period.
      6.   State the total area (in square feet or acres) subject to the
ordinance over the reporting period, if available.
      7.   Provide the number of new housing starts, new commercial projects,
and landscape retrofits during the reporting period.
      8.   Describe the procedure for review of projects subject to the
ordinance.
      9.   Describe actions taken to verify compliance. Is a plan check
performed; if so, by what entity? Is a site inspection performed; if so, by
what entity? Is a post-installation audit required; if so, by whom?
      10.   Describe enforcement measures.
      11.   Explain challenges to implementing and enforcing the ordinance.
      12.   Describe educational and other needs to properly apply the
ordinance. (Ord. 2917, 2021)
15.54.280: EVAPOTRANSPIRATION TABLE:
The following table, designated as appendix A to this chapter, should be used
in implementing the provisions of this chapter.
   APPENDIX A
   REFERENCE EVAPOTRANSPIRATION (ETo) TABLE1
County   Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr. May Jun. Jul. Aug. Sep. Oct. Nov. Dec. Annual ETo
And City
County And City      Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr. May  Jun. Jul. Aug. Sep. Oct. Nov. Dec. Annual
                                                                                 ETo
Plumas                                                                
   Portola        0.7  0.9  1.9  3.5  4.9  5.9  7.3  5.9  4.3  2.7  0.9  0.5  39.4
   Quincy         0.7  0.9  2.2  3.5  4.9  5.9  7.3  5.9  4.4  2.8  1.2  0.5  40.2
                                                                     
Riverside                                                             
   Beaumont       2.0  2.3  3.4  4.4  6.1  7.1  7.6  7.9  6.0  3.9  2.6  1.7  55.0
   Blythe         2.4  3.3  5.3  6.9  8.7  9.6  9.6  8.7  6.9  5.0  3.0  2.2  71.4
   Cathedral City 1.6  2.2  3.7  5.1  6.8  7.8  8.7  7.8  5.7  4.0  2.1  1.6  57.1
   Coachella      2.9  4.4  6.2  8.4  10.5 11.9 12.3 10.1 8.9  6.2  3.8  2.4  88.1
   Desert Center  2.9  4.1  6.4  8.5  11.0 12.1 12.2 11.1 9.0  6.4  3.9  2.6  90.0
   Elsinore       2.1  2.8  3.9  4.4  5.9  7.1  7.6  7.0  5.8  3.9  2.6  1.9  55.0
   Indio          3.1  3.6  6.5  8.3  10.5 11.0 10.8 9.7  8.3  5.9  3.7  2.7  83.9
   La Quinta      2.4  2.8  5.2  6.5  8.3  8.7  8.5  7.9  6.5  4.5  2.7  2.2  66.2
   Mecca          2.6  3.3  5.7  7.2  8.6  9.0  8.8  8.2  6.8  5.0  3.2  2.4  70.8
   Oasis          2.9  3.3  5.3  6.1  8.5  8.9  8.7  7.9  6.9  4.8  2.9  2.3  68.4
   Palm Desert    2.5  3.4  5.3  6.9  8.7  9.6  9.6  8.7  6.9  5.0  3.0  2.2  71.6
   Palm Springs   2.0  2.9  4.9  7.2  8.3  8.5  11.6 8.3  7.2  5.9  2.7  1.7  71.1
   Rancho Californ1.8  2.2  3.4  4.8  5.6  6.3  6.5  6.2  4.8  3.7  2.4  1.8  49.5
   Rancho Mirage  2.4  3.3  5.3  6.9  8.7  9.6  9.6  8.7  6.9  5.0  3.0  2.2  71.4
   Ripley         2.7  3.3  5.6  7.2  8.7  8.7  8.4  7.6  6.2  4.6  2.8  2.2  67.8
Riverside (cont.)                                                     
   Salton Sea Nort2.5  3.3  5.5  7.2  8.8  9.3  9.2  8.5  6.8  5.2  3.1  2.3  71.7
   Temecula East I2.3  2.4  4.1  4.9  6.4  7.0  7.8  7.4  5.7  4.1  2.6  2.2  56.7
   Thermal        2.4  3.3  5.5  7.6  9.1  9.6  9.3  8.6  7.1  5.2  3.1  2.1  72.8
   Riverside UC   2.5  2.9  4.2  5.3  5.9  6.6  7.2  6.9  5.4  4.1  2.9  2.6  56.4
   Winchester     2.3  2.4  4.1  4.9  6.4  6.9  7.7  7.5  6.0  3.9  2.6  2.1  56.8
                                                                     
Sacramento                                                            
   Fair Oaks      1.0  1.6  3.4  4.1  6.5  7.5  8.1  7.1  5.2  3.4  1.5  1.0  50.5
   Sacramento     1.0  1.8  3.2  4.7  6.4  7.7  8.4  7.2  5.4  3.7  1.7  0.9  51.9
   Twitchell Islan1.2  1.8  3.9  5.3  7.4  8.8  9.1  7.8  5.9  3.8  1.7  1.2  57.9
                                                                     
San Benito                                                              
   Hollister      1.5  1.8  3.1  4.3  5.5  5.7  6.4  5.9  5.0  3.5  1.7  1.1  45.1
   San Benito     1.2  1.6  3.1  4.6  5.6  6.4  6.9  6.5  4.8  3.7  1.7  1.2  47.2
   San Juan Valley1.4  1.8  3.4  4.5  6.0  6.7  7.1  6.4  5.0  3.5  1.8  1.4  49.1
                                                                     
San Bernardino                                                        
   Baker          2.7  3.9  6.1  8.3  10.4 11.8 12.2 11.0 8.9  6.1  3.3  2.1  86.6
   Barstow NE     2.2  2.9  5.3  6.9  9.0  10.1 9.9  8.9  6.8  4.8  2.7  2.1  71.7
   Big Bear Lake  1.8  2.6  4.6  6.0  7.0  7.6  8.1  7.4  5.4  4.1  2.4  1.8  58.6
   Chino          2.1  2.9  3.9  4.5  5.7  6.5  7.3  7.1  5.9  4.2  2.6  2.0  54.6
   Crestline      1.5  1.9  3.3  4.4  5.5  6.6  7.8  7.1  5.4  3.5  2.2  1.6  50.8
   Lake Arrowhead 1.8  2.6  4.6  6.0  7.0  7.6  8.1  7.4  5.4  4.1  2.4  1.8  58.6
   Lucerne Valley 2.2  2.9  5.1  6.5  9.1  11.0 11.4 9.9  7.4  5.0  3.0  1.8  75.3
   Needles        3.2  4.2  6.6  8.9  11.0 12.4 12.8 11.0 8.9  6.6  4.0  2.7  92.1
   Newberry Spring2.1  2.9  5.3  8.4  9.8  10.9 11.1 9.9  7.6  5.2  3.1  2.0  78.2
   San Bernardino 2.0  2.7  3.8  4.6  5.7  6.9  7.9  7.4  5.9  4.2  2.6  2.0  55.6
San Bernardino                                                     
(cont.)
   Twentynine Palm2.6  3.6  5.9  7.9  10.1 11.2 11.2 10.3 8.6  5.9  3.4  2.2  82.9
   Victorville    2.0  2.6  4.6  6.2  7.3  8.9  9.8  9.0  6.5  4.7  2.7  2.1  66.2
                                                                     
San Diego                                                             
   Chula Vista    2.2  2.7  3.4  3.8  4.9  4.7  5.5  4.9  4.5  3.4  2.4  2.0  44.2
   Escondido SPV  2.4  2.6  3.9  4.7  5.9  6.5  7.1  6.7  5.3  3.9  2.8  2.3  54.2
   Miramar        2.3  2.5  3.7  4.1  5.1  5.4  6.1  5.8  4.5  3.3  2.4  2.1  47.1
 
Note:
   1. The values in this table are derived from:
      a.   California irrigation management information system (CIMIS);
      b.   Reference evapotranspiration zones map, UC department of land, air
and water resources and California department of water resources, 1999; and
      c.   Reference evapotranspiration for California, University of
California, department of agriculture and natural resources (1987) bulletin
1922;
      d.   Determining daily reference evapotranspiration, cooperative
extension UC division of agriculture and natural resources (1987), publication
leaflet 21426.
(Ord. 2917, 2021: Ord. 2724 § 1, 2009)
15.54.290: WATER BUDGET CALCULATION:
The following table, designated as appendix B to this chapter, should be used
in implementing the provisions of this chapter.
   APPENDIX B
   SAMPLE WATER EFFICIENT LANDSCAPE WORKSHEET
    WATER EFFICIENT LANDSCAPE WORKSHEET
   This worksheet is filled out by the project applicant and it is a required
ele ment of the Landscape Documentation Package.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6bf866ad80925317f7b0510a75f8f7309a69c8b4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8717.png]
(Ord. 2917, 2021: Ord. 2724 § 1, 2009)
15.54.300: CERTIFICATE OF COMPLETION:
   Appendix C
   Sample Certificate of Completion
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6bf866ad80925317f7b0510a75f8f7309a69c8b4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8691.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6bf866ad80925317f7b0510a75f8f7309a69c8b4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8693.png]
(Ord. 2917, 2021)
15.54.310: PRESCRIPTIVE COMPLIANCE OPTION:
Appendix D
Prescriptive Compliance Option
   A.   This appendix contains prescriptive requirements which may be used as a
compliance option to the model water efficient landscape ordinance.
   B.   Compliance with the following items is mandatory and must be documented
on a landscape plan in order to use the prescriptive compliance option:
      1.   Submit a landscape documentation package which includes the
following elements:
         a.   Date;
         b.   Project applicant;
         c.   Project address (if available, parcel and/or lot number(s));
         d.   Total landscape area (square feet), including a breakdown of turf
and plant material;
         e.   Project type (e.g., new, rehabilitated, public, private,
cemetery, homeowner-installed);
         f.   Water supply type (e.g., potable, recycled, well) and identify
the local retail water purveyor if the applicant is not served by a private
well;
         g.   Contact information for the project applicant and property owner;
         h.   Applicant signature and date with statement, "I agree to comply
with the requirements of the prescriptive compliance option to the MWELO.”
      2.   Incorporate compost at a rate of at least four (4) cubic yards per
one thousand (1,000) square feet to a depth of six inches into landscape area
(unless contra-indicated by a soil test);
      3.   Plant material shall comply with all of the following;
         a.   For residential areas, install climate adapted plants that
require occasional, little or no summer water (average WUCOLS plant factor 0.3)
for seventy-five percent (75%) of the plant area excluding edibles and areas
using recycled water; For non-residential areas, install climate adapted plants
that require occasional, little or no summer water (average WUCOLS plant factor
0.3) for one hundred percent (100%) of the plant area excluding edibles and
areas using recycled water;
         b.   A minimum three inch (3") layer of mulch shall be applied on all
exposed soil surfaces of planting areas except in turf areas, creeping or
rooting groundcovers, or direct seeding applications where mulch is
contraindicated.
      4.   Turf shall comply with all of the following:
         a.   Turf shall not exceed twenty-five (25%) of the landscape area in
residential areas, and there shall be no turf in non-residential areas;
         b.   Turf shall not be planted on sloped areas which exceed a slope of
one foot (1') vertical elevation change for every four feet (4') of horizontal
length;
         c.   Turf is prohibited in parkways less than ten feet (10') wide,
unless the parkway is adjacent to a parking strip and used to enter and exit
vehicles. Any turf in parkways must be irrigated by sub-surface irrigation or
by other technology that creates no overspray or runoff.
      5.   Irrigation systems shall comply with the following:
         a.   Automatic irrigation controllers are required and must use
evapotranspiration or soil moisture sensor data and utilize a rain sensor.
         b.   Irrigation controllers shall be of a type which does not lose
programming data in the event the primary power source is interrupted.
         c.   Pressure regulators shall be installed on the irrigation system
to ensure the dynamic pressure of the system is within the manufacturer’s
recommended pressure range.
         d.   Manual shut-off valves (such as a gate valve, ball valve, or
butterfly valve) shall be installed as close as possible to the point of
connection of the water supply.
         e.   All irrigation emission devices must meet the requirements set in
the ANSI standard, ASABE/ICC 802-2014, "Landscape Irrigation Sprinkler and
Emitter Standard," All sprinkler heads installed in the landscape must document
a distribution uniformity low quarter of 0.65 or higher using the protocol
defined in ASABE/ICC 802-2014.
         f.   Areas less than ten feet (10') in width in any direction shall be
irrigated with subsurface irrigation or other means that produces no runoff or
overspray.
      6.   For non-residential projects with landscape areas of one thousand
(1,000) sq. ft. or more, a private submeter(s) to measure landscape water use
shall be installed.
   C.   At the time of final inspection, the permit applicant must provide the
owner of the property with a certificate of completion, certificate of
installation, irrigation schedule and a schedule of landscape and irrigation
maintenance. (Ord. 2917, 2021)
CHAPTER 15.56
FENCING AND SCREENING FOR BUILDING AND CONSTRUCTION SITES
SECTION:
15.56.010: Purpose
15.56.020: Fencing And Screening Required
15.56.010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to require building and construction sites to be
fenced and screened to protect adjacent properties from construction activities
and debris, to safeguard the public by restricting public access to such sites,
and to preserve the aesthetics of the neighborhood and minimize construction
nuisance by screening the clutter and disrepair of construction sites, thereby
ensuring the comfort, safety and welfare of the residents of the city. (Ord.
2744, 2014)
15.56.020: FENCING AND SCREENING REQUIRED:
Prior to the commencement of grading, excavation, construction of a new
structure or reconstruction of an existing structure, the city's development
services department shall require the site to be temporarily fenced and
screened for the duration of the construction project. The development services
director, or his designee, shall determine the height of the fence and the
fencing material, and the fencing material shall be overlaid on the exterior
with an opaque or decorative vinyl screen, or other screening material as
determined by the development services director. (Ord. 2744, 2014)
CHAPTER 15.58
ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING SYSTEMS
SECTION:
15.58.010: Definitions
15.58.020: Purpose
15.58.030: Applicability
15.58.040: Electric Vehicle Charging System Requirements
15.58.050: Duties Of The City's Chief Building Official
15.58.060: Permit Review Requirements
15.58.010: DEFINITIONS:
   ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATION OR CHARGING STATION: Means any level of
electric vehicle supply equipment station that is designed and built in
compliance with article 625 of the California Electrical Code and delivers
electricity from a source outside an electric vehicle into a plug-in vehicle.
   ELECTRONIC SUBMITTAL: Means the utilization of one or more of either
electronic mail, the internet, or facsimile.
   FEASIBLE METHOD TO SATISFACTORILY MITIGATE OR AVOID THE SPECIFIC ADVERSE
IMPACT: Includes, but is not limited to, any cost- effective method, condition
or mitigation imposed by the City on another similarly situated application in
a prior successful application for a similar permit.
   SPECIFIC ADVERSE IMPACT: Means a significant, quantifiable, direct, and
unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified, and written public health
or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date the
application was deemed complete. (Ord. 2869, 2018)
15.58.020: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to promote and encourage the use of electric
vehicles by creating an expedited, streamlined permitting process for electric
vehicle charging stations while promoting public health and safety and
preventing specific adverse impacts in the installation and use of such
charging stations. (Ord. 2869, 2018)
15.58.030: APPLICABILITY:
This chapter applies to the permitting of all electric vehicle charging systems
in the City. Electric vehicle charging systems legally established or permitted
prior to the effective date of this chapter are not subject to the requirements
of this chapter unless physical modifications or alterations are undertaken
that materially change the size, type, or components of an electric vehicle
charging system in such a way as to require new permitting. Routine operation
and maintenance or like-kind replacements shall not require a permit. (Ord.
2869, 2018)
15.58.040: ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   All electric vehicle charging systems shall meet the requirements of
the California Electrical Code, the Society of Automotive Engineers, the
National Electrical Manufacturers Association, and accredited testing
laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories, and rules of the Public
Utilities Commission regarding safety and reliability.
   B.   Installation of electric vehicle charging stations shall be
incorporated into the load calculations of all new or existing electrical
services and shall meet the requirements of the California Electrical Code.
Electric vehicle charging equipment shall be considered a continuous load.
   C.   Anchorage of either floor-mounted or wall-mounted electric vehicle
charging stations shall meet the requirements of the California Building or
Residential Code as applicable per occupancy, and the provisions of the
manufacturer's installation instructions. Mounting of charging stations shall
not adversely affect building elements. (Ord. 2869, 2018)
15.58.050: DUTIES OF THE CITY'S CHIEF BUILDING OFFICIAL:
   A.   All documents required for submission of an electric vehicle charging
system application shall be made publicly available on the City's website.
   B.   By resolution, the City Council shall adopt a checklist of all
requirements with which electric vehicle charging systems shall comply to be
eligible for expedited review.
   C.   The electric vehicle charging system permit process and checklist shall
substantially conform to recommendations contained in the most current version
of the Plug-In Electric Vehicle Infrastructure Permitting Checklist contained
in the Zero-Emission Vehicles in California: Community Readiness Guidebook
adopted by the Governor's Office of Planning and Research.
   D.   The chief building official shall allow the electronic submittal of the
electric vehicle charging station application. (Ord. 2869, 2018)
15.58.060: PERMIT REVIEW REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Review of the permit application shall be limited to the chief building
official's review of whether the application meets local, State and Federal
health and safety requirements. The application shall be administratively
reviewed by the chief building official as a nondiscretionary permit.
   B.   The City shall not condition approval of an application on the approval
of an association, as that term is defined by Civil Code section 4080.
   C.   An application for an electric vehicle charging station shall be deemed
complete and the permit available for issuance, when the chief building
official determines that the application satisfies all the requirements found
in the checklist.
   D.   If an application is deemed incomplete, a written plan check correction
notice will be available to the applicant within ten (10) working days,
detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information or
documentation required to be eligible for expedited permit issuance shall be
given to the applicant for resubmission.
   E.   The chief building official, in consultation with the Development
Services Director, may require an applicant to apply for a conditional use
permit if the chief building official finds, based on substantial evidence,
that the electric vehicle charging station could have a specific, adverse
impact upon the public health and safety. The chief building official's
decision to require a conditional use permit may be appealed by the applicant
to the Planning Commission pursuant to chapter 1.06 of this Code.
   F.   If a conditional use permit is required, the application for the
conditional use permit may be denied if the Planning Commission makes written
findings, based upon substantial evidence in the record, that the proposed
installation would have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health or
safety and there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the
specific, adverse impact. Such findings shall include the basis for the
rejection of potential feasible alternatives for preventing the specific,
adverse impact. Such decisions may be appealed to the City Council pursuant to
chapter 1.06 of this Code. (Ord. 2869, 2018)
CHAPTER 15.60
SAFETY ASSESSMENT PLACARDS
SECTION:
15.60.010: Purpose
15.60.020: Definition
15.60.030: Application Of Provisions
15.60.040: Placards
15.60.050: Violation; Penalty
15.60.010: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this chapter to establish standard placards to be used to
indicate the condition of a building or structure for continued occupancy after
any natural or manmade disasters. The chapter further authorizes the chief
building official and his or her authorized representatives to post the
appropriate placard at each entry point to a building or structure upon
completion of a safety assessment.
(Ord. 2901, 2019)
15.60.020: DEFINITION:
“Safety assessment" means a visual, nondestructive examination of a building or
structure for the purpose of determining the condition of the building or
structure for continued occupancy.
(Ord. 2901, 2019
15.60.030: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
The provisions of this chapter are applicable, following each natural or
manmade disaster, to all buildings and structures of all occupancies regulated
by the city of Redlands. The council may extend the provisions as necessary.
(Ord. 2901, 2019)
15.60.040: PLACARDS:
   A.   The following are verbal descriptions of the official jurisdiction
placards to be used to designate the condition for continued occupancy of
buildings or structures. Copies of actual placards are available in the
building division office and adopted by reference.
      1.   "INSPECTED - Lawful Occupancy Permitted" (Green Placard): The
placard describing this condition is to be posted on any building or structure
wherein no apparent structural hazard has been found. This placard is not
intended to mean that there is no damage to the building or structure.
Occupants should always be cautious of potential hazards following any natural
or manmade disasters.
      2.   "RESTRICTED USE - Off-Limits To Unauthorized Personnel" (Yellow
Placard): The placard describing this condition is to be posted on each
building or structure that has been damaged wherein the damage has resulted in
some form of restriction to the continued occupancy. The individual who posts
this placard will note in general terms the type of damage encountered and will
clearly and concisely note the restrictions on continued occupancy.
      3.   "UNSAFE - Do Not Enter Or Occupy" (Red Placard): The placard
describing this condition is to be posted on each building or structure that
has been damaged such that continued occupancy poses a threat to life safety.
Buildings or structures posted with this placard shall not be entered under any
circumstance except as authorized in writing by the building official, or his
or her authorized representative. Safety assessment teams shall be authorized
to enter these buildings at any time. This placard is not to be used or
considered as a demolition order. The individual who posts this placard will
note in general terms the type of damage encountered.
   B.   In addition to the above descriptive conditions, each placard shall
also contain the city building and safety division's address and telephone
number along with the ordinance number of this city chapter.
   C.   Once the placard has been attached to a building or structure, a
placard is not to be removed, altered or covered until done so by an authorized
representative of the building official or upon written notification from the
city building and safety division. It is unlawful for any person, firm or
corporation to alter, remove, cover or deface a placard unless authorized
pursuant to this section.
(Ord. 2901, 2019)
15.60.050: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
It is unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, partnership, or entity to do
or permit the following: erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move,
improve, remove, convert, demolish, equip, use or maintain any building in
violation of this chapter. Every person who violates any of the provisions of
this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. Such person shall be deemed guilty of
a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is committed, continued or
permitted. Upon conviction such person may be punishable by a fine not
exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by imprisonment in the county
jail for a period not exceeding six (6) months, or by both such fine and
imprisonment.
(Ord. 2901, 2019)
TITLE 16
GENERAL PLAN
CHAPTER 16.02
SOCIOECONOMIC ANALYSIS AND COST/BENEFIT STUDY REQUIREMENTS
SECTION:
16.02.010: Purpose
16.02.020: Definitions
16.02.030: Socioeconomic Cost/Benefit Study Required
16.02.040: Notice
16.02.050: Findings
16.02.060: Exemptions From Chapter Requirements
16.02.010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish regulations which implement the
goals and policies of the Redlands general plan relating to the processing and
approval of socioeconomic analyses and cost/benefit studies for private
development proposals. (Ord. 2557 § 2, 2003)
16.02.020: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, certain words and phrases are defined as set
forth below:
   APPROVING BODY: The city advisory committee or commission, the city council
or the city staff person with the authority to approve the application for the
development proposal.
   PROJECTS INVOLVING STRUCTURES LARGER THAN FIVE THOUSAND SQUARE FEET: Does
not include single-family residences, and square footage for these projects
shall be calculated as follows: a) the square footage shall include all
buildings, structures and any outdoor uses shown on the site plan for the
development proposal, excluding parking; and b) the square footage shall be the
cumulative total area of the described use. (For example, a 3,000 square foot
office building that is proposed to be expanded to include an additional 2,500
square feet is subject to this section. A 4,000 square foot nursery structure
that is proposed to be expanded by 500 square feet and which has outdoor
storage of 1,000 square feet is subject to this section.) (Ord. 2557 § 2, 2003)
16.02.030: SOCIOECONOMIC COST/BENEFIT STUDY REQUIRED:
Every private development proposal subject to the city's voter approved 1997
general plan amendment commonly known as "measure U" and which requires a
general plan amendment, zoning amendment, specific plan or preannexation
agreement for outside city utility connections to noncontiguous property, and
every private development proposal requiring a conditional use permit,
commission review and approval or other discretionary permit for a structure
and/or related outdoor use greater than five thousand (5,000) square feet,
shall make application to the city for a socioeconomic analysis and cost/
benefit study, which shall also be included in the environmental documents
prepared for the development proposal, to the extent permitted by law. The
socioeconomic analysis and cost/benefit study shall identify the source of
funding for necessary public infrastructure necessary to serve the development
proposal and reflecting the effect of the development proposal on the city. The
socioeconomic analysis and cost/benefit study shall also address the effect of
the development proposal on public school facilities and resources and, to the
extent permitted by law, recommend proposed mitigation measures for any
identified adverse impacts on school facilities. (Ord. 2557 § 2, 2003)
16.02.040: NOTICE:
The approving body for the development proposal shall conduct at least one
public hearing at which the public may appear and be heard to consider the
socioeconomic cost/benefit study after providing ten (10) days' prior notice,
published once in a newspaper of general circulation within the city. (Ord.
2557 § 2, 2003)
16.02.050: FINDINGS:
Except as otherwise provided for herein, approval of a development private
proposal requiring a socioeconomic study shall occur only if the approving body
for the development proposal determines that, based upon the socioeconomic
study and substantial evidence in the record that the private development
proposal: a) will not create unmitigated physical blight within the city or
overburden public services, including, without limitation, police and fire
protection services; and b) the benefit of the development proposal to the city
outweighs any direct cost to the city that may result. The approving body may,
however, approve a development proposal for which the socioeconomic study fails
to make the required findings or determinations if the approving body finds and
determines upon a four-fifths (4/5) vote of its total authorized membership
that the benefits to the city from the development proposal outweigh the
negative socioeconomic effects that may result. In addition to the aforesaid
findings, the approving body shall, in granting approval of the development
proposal, make any required findings for the particular land use applications
under review. (Ord. 2557 § 2, 2003)
16.02.060: EXEMPTIONS FROM CHAPTER REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Development proposals that directly further the primary institutional
purposes of churches, hospitals, schools (including private schools and
universities) and organizations such as the YMCA and YWCA, on sites held by
such entities as of March 1, 1997, are exempt from the provisions of this
chapter provided such development proposals are: 1) nonresidential in
character; or 2) provide only dormitory, staff housing or senior congregate
care facilities for those exempt entities.
   B.   Development proposals initiated by the city including, but not limited
to, general plan amendments, amendments to this code, zone changes, specific
plan amendments and other land use entitlement actions. (Ord. 2557 § 2, 2003)
CHAPTER 16.04
PROPERTY SLOPE CALCULATION
SECTION:
16.04.010: Purpose And Intent
16.04.020: Applicability
16.04.030: Calculation Of Slope
16.04.040: Provision Of Digital Data
16.04.010: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose and intent of this chapter is to implement the goals and policies
of the Redlands general plan relating to the calculation of property slope and
the determination of permitted densities by ensuring that the city employs the
most accurate, reasonably available data to determine the slope of the property
which is the subject of proposed development projects. As a prerequisite of
determining an application for a development project to be deemed complete, an
applicant shall obtain from the city's community development department, a
calculation of the natural cross slope of the property which is the subject of
the development project. (Ord. 2658 § 1, 2008)
16.04.020: APPLICABILITY:
This chapter shall apply to all applications submitted to the city for
development project proposals unless the city's community development director,
or the director's designee, concludes that the determination of average cross
slope for a property is unnecessary to the city's processing of the development
project proposal. (Ord. 2658 § 1, 2008)
16.04.030: CALCULATION OF SLOPE:
"Average cross slope" shall be determined by the city's community development
department, and shall mean the method of determining the natural cross slope of
property using the following equation:
 
         I x L x 0.0023
         A
I      = Contour interval in feet.
         Combined length in feet of contour lines measured on the property
         which is the site of the development project. Contour lines shall be
         produced using the highest resolution digital elevation model ("DEM")
L      = reasonably available to the city. (Coarse resolution DEMs produced
         overly simplified contour lines, resulting in artificially low natural
         core slope measurements.) As higher quality DEMs become available, the
         community development department shall evaluate use of such DEMs to
         perform the average cross slope analysis.
A      = The acreage of the property which is the subject of the development
         project.
0.0023 = A constant which converts square feet into acres and expresses slope
         in percent.
 
(Ord. 2658 § 1, 2008)
16.04.040: PROVISION OF DIGITAL DATA:
To assist the city in determining property slope, the applicant for a
development project subject to this chapter may be requested by the city to
submit to the city one copy of a digitized development project site plan and
elevations, including all CAD or GIS data used in, or to produce, the plan and
elevations. This data shall be in a format that requires no conversion or
translation for the city to make use of the data. The data may be used by the
city in its discretion dependent upon its determination of the accuracy of such
determination. (Ord. 2658 § 1, 2008)
TITLE 17
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 17.01
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
17.01.010: Citation And Authority
17.01.020: Purpose
17.01.030: Consistency
17.01.040: Application
17.01.050: Exceptions
17.01.060: Fees And Deposits
17.01.010: CITATION AND AUTHORITY:
This title is adopted pursuant to article XI, section 7 of the California
constitution, and to supplement and implement the subdivision map act, sections
66410 et seq., of the Government Code. This title may be cited as the
"subdivision ordinance" of the city of Redlands. (Ord. 2481 § 1, 2002)
17.01.020: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this title to regulate and control the division of land
within the city, and to implement and supplement the provisions of the
subdivision map act concerning the design, improvement and survey data of
subdivisions, the form and content of all required maps provided by the
subdivision map act, and the procedure to be followed in securing the official
approval of the city regarding the maps. To accomplish this purpose, the
regulations contained in this title are determined to be necessary to preserve
the public health, safety and general welfare; to promote orderly growth and
development and to promote open space, conservation, protection and proper use
of land; and to ensure provision for adequate traffic circulation, utilities
and other services in the city. (Ord. 2481 § 1, 2002)
17.01.030: CONSISTENCY:
No land shall be subdivided and developed for any purpose which is inconsistent
with the general plan or any applicable specific plan of the city, or which is
not permitted by title 18 or other applicable provisions of this code. The type
and intensity of land use as shown on the general plan and any applicable
specific plan shall determine, together with the requirements of the
subdivision map act and this title, the type of streets, roads, highways,
utilities and other public services that shall be provided by the subdivider.
(Ord. 2481 § 1, 2002)
17.01.040: APPLICATION:
The regulations set forth in this title shall apply to all, or parts, of
subdivisions within the city and to the preparation of subdivision maps and to
other maps provided for by the subdivision map act and this title. All
subdivisions and any parts thereof lying within the city shall be made, and all
subdivision maps shall be prepared and presented for approval, as provided for
in this title. (Ord. 2481 § 1, 2002)
17.01.050: EXCEPTIONS:
This title shall not apply to:
   A.   The financing or leasing of apartments, offices, stores or similar
space within apartment buildings, industrial buildings, commercial buildings,
mobile home parks or trailer parks.
   B.   Mineral, oil or gas leases.
   C.   Land dedicated for cemetery purposes under the State Health and Safety
Code.
   D.   A lot line adjustment among four (4) or less existing adjacent parcels,
where the land taken from one or more parcels is added to one or more adjacent
parcels, and where a greater number of parcels than originally existed is not
thereby created, provided that, subject to the provisions of section 66412(d)
of the subdivision map act, the lot line adjustment is approved by the
community development director.
   E.   Any separate assessment under section 2188.7 of the State Revenue and
Taxation Code.
   F.   Subject to the requirements of sections 66412(g) and 66412(h) of the
subdivision map act, the conversion of a community apartment project or a stock
cooperative to a condominium.
   G.   The leasing of, or the granting of an easement to, a parcel of land, or
any portion or portions thereof, in conjunction with the financing, erection
and sale or lease of a wind powered electrical generation device on the land,
if the project is subject to discretionary action by the city.
   H.   The financing or leasing of any parcel of land, or any portion thereof,
in conjunction with the construction of commercial or industrial buildings on a
single parcel, unless the project is not subject to review under other city
ordinances regulating design and improvements.
   I.   The financing or leasing of existing separate commercial or industrial
buildings on a single parcel.
   J.   The construction, financing or leasing of dwelling units pursuant to
section 65852.1, or second units pursuant to section 65852.2, of the Government
Code; but this title shall apply to the sale or transfer, but not leasing, of
those units.
   K.   Leasing for agricultural purposes, cultivation of food or fiber, and
grazing or pasturing of livestock.
   L.   Subdivisions of four (4) parcels or less for the construction of
removable commercial buildings having a floor area of less than one hundred
(100) square feet.
   M.   Any other mandatory exceptions as provided in the subdivision map act.
(Ord. 2481 § 1, 2002)
17.01.060: FEES AND DEPOSITS:
All persons submitting applications for the approval of maps or for other
approvals permitted by this title shall pay all fees and/or deposits as
required by this title and this code, and by the city council's resolutions
establishing applicable fees and deposits. The resolutions, as adopted and
subsequently amended from time to time, are hereby incorporated by this
reference as though fully set forth herein. (Ord. 2481 § 1, 2002)
CHAPTER 17.03
DEFINITIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
SECTION:
17.03.010: Definitions
17.03.020: Responsibilities
17.03.010: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this title, unless otherwise apparent from the context,
certain words and phrases used in this title are defined as set forth below.
All definitions provided in this code, and all definitions provided in the
subdivision map act, shall also be applicable to this title and the definitions
are hereby incorporated by this reference as though fully set forth herein.
   ACREAGE: Any parcel of land which is not a lot, as defined in this title,
and those areas where a legal subdivision has not been made previously, or
where a legal subdivision has declared such parcel as acreage.
   APPEAL BODY: The advisory or legislative body with the authority to hear
appeals on applications or actions pursuant to this title.
   APPROVING BODY: The advisory agency, legislative body or city staff person
with the authority to approve an application or action pursuant to this title.
   BLOCK: The area of land within a subdivision, which area is entirely bounded
by streets, highways or ways, except alleys, or the exterior boundary or
boundaries of the subdivision.
   CITY STREET: Any duly dedicated street, avenue or the like which the city
has accepted and regularly maintains, or which the county duly accepted and
regularly maintained prior to the incorporation of the city, or upon which
public funds have been expended for improvements or rights of way used by the
public generally.
   COLLECTOR STREET: A street, intermediate in importance between a local
street and either a major or secondary thoroughfare, which has the purpose of
collecting local traffic and carrying it to a thoroughfare.
   COMMUNITY APARTMENT PROJECT: Shall be defined as provided in section 11004
of the Business and Professions Code.
   CONDOMINIUM: An estate in real property consisting of an undivided interest
in common in a portion of a parcel of real property together with a separate
interest in space in a residential, industrial or commercial building on the
real property, such as an apartment, office or store. A condominium may
include, in addition, a separate interest in other portions of the real
property.
   CONVERSION: The creation of separate ownership of existing real property
together with a separate interest in space of residential, industrial or
commercial buildings.
   DAY: A calendar day unless otherwise specified.
   DEPARTMENT: The community development department.
   DESIGN: A. Street alignments, grades and widths;
   B.   Drainage, water, sewer and sanitary facilities and utilities, including
alignments and grades;
   C.   Location and size of all required easements and rights of way;
   D.   Fire roads and firebreaks;
   E.   Lot size and configuration;
   F.   Vehicular and bicycle traffic access;
   G.   Grading;
   H.   Land to be dedicated for park or recreational purposes; and
   I.   Such other specific physical requirements in the plan and configuration
of the entire subdivision as may be necessary to ensure consistency with, or
implementation of, the general plan or any applicable specific plan.
   DEVELOPMENT: The uses to which the land which is the subject of a map shall
be put, the buildings to be constructed on it, and all alterations of the land
and construction incident thereto.
   EASEMENT: An easement dedicated to the city, which shall be continuing and
irrevocable unless formally abandoned by the city, and any other easement
whether owned by a public entity, public utility or private party.
   FINAL MAP: A map showing a subdivision of five (5) or more parcels for which
a tentative and final map are required by, and prepared in accordance with, the
subdivision map act and this title, and designated to be filed for recordation
in the office of the county recorder.
   GENERAL PLAN: The general plan of the city.
   IMPROVEMENT: Streets, sidewalks, storm drainage facilities, water and sewer
facilities, utilities, landscaping to be installed or agreed to be installed,
by the subdivider on the land to be used for public or private streets,
highways, ways and easements, as are necessary for the general use of the lot
owners in the subdivision and local neighborhood traffic and acceptance of the
final map thereof. "Improvement" also means other specific improvements or
types of improvements, the installation of which, either by or by a combination
of, the subdivider, public agencies, private utilities, or any other entity
approved by the city, is necessary to ensure consistency with, or
implementation of, the general plan, or any applicable specific plan.
Improvements shall be constructed in accordance with standard engineering
specifications, where applicable.
   LOT LINE ADJUSTMENT: A shift or rotation of an existing lot line or other
adjustment among four (4) parcels or less where a greater number of parcels
than originally existed is not created, as approved by the community
development director.
   LOT OR PARCEL: A unit or portion of land separate from other units or
portions by description, as on a final map or parcel map, or by such other map
approved by the county or by the city under the provisions of the subdivision
map act and of city ordinances in effect at the time of such approval, for the
purpose of sale, lease or financing.
   MERGER: The joining of two (2) or more contiguous parcels of land under one
ownership into one parcel.
   PARCEL MAP: A map showing a subdivision of four (4) or less parcels as
required by, and prepared in accordance with, the subdivision map act and this
title, and designed to be filed for recordation in the office of the county
recorder.
   PERIPHERAL STREET: An existing street whose right of way is contiguous to
the exterior boundary of a subdivision.
   PRIVATE STREET: Any street, access way or the like, lying in whole or in
part within a subdivision for which dedication and ownership is privately held
and is utilized as access to a development. Private streets shall be
constructed in accordance with standard engineering specifications.
   REMAINDER: That portion of an existing parcel which is not designated on the
required map as part of the subdivision. The remainder shall not be considered
as part of the subdivision but shall be shown on the required map as part of
the area surrounding the subdivision. A remainder of five (5) acres or more
need not be shown on the map and its location need not be indicated as a matter
of survey, but only by deed reference to the existing boundaries of the
remainder.
   STANDARD ENGINEERING SPECIFICATIONS: Those standard subdivision improvement
plans and specifications as prepared and/or approved by the city's public works
director.
   STOCK COOPERATIVE: Shall be defined as provided in section 11003.2 of the
Business and Professions Code.
   SUBDIVIDER: A person, firm, corporation, partnership or association who
proposes to divide, divides or causes to be divided real property into a
subdivision for oneself or for others. Employees and consultants of such
persons or entities, acting in such capacity, are not "subdividers".
   SUBDIVISION: The division, by any subdivider, of any unit or units of
improved or unimproved land, or any portion thereof, shown on the latest
equalized county assessment roll as a unit or as contiguous units, for the
purpose of sale, lease or financing, whether immediate or future. Property
shall be considered as contiguous units, even if it is separated by roads,
streets, utility easements or railroad rights of way. "Subdivision" includes a
condominium project, as defined in section 1350 of the State Civil Code, a
community apartment project, as defined in section 11004 of the Business and
Professions Code, and the conversion of five (5) or more existing dwelling
units to a stock cooperative, as defined in section 11003.2 of the Business and
Professions Code. "Subdivision" includes any division of land by gift or
inheritance, but excludes a division for probate homestead. Any conveyance of
land to a governmental agency, public entity, public utility, or subsidiary of
a public utility for rights of way, shall not be considered a division of land
for purposes of computing the number of parcels.
   SUBDIVISION MAP ACT: Government Code sections 66410 et seq., inclusive.
   TENTATIVE MAP: A map made for the purpose of showing the design and
improvements of a proposed subdivision and the existing conditions in and
around it. "Tentative map" includes a tentative map prepared in connection with
a parcel map pursuant to the provisions of chapter 17.11, "Subdivisions Of Four
Or Less Parcels", of this title.
   VESTING TENTATIVE MAP: Shall be defined as provided in subsection
17.13.030A of this title. (Ord. 2481 § 1, 2002)
17.03.020: RESPONSIBILITIES:
   A.   City Attorney: The city attorney's responsibilities shall include
approving as to form all subdivision improvement agreements and security, and
all governing documents for a common interest development.
   B.   City Council: The city council shall have final jurisdiction in the
approval, conditional approval or denial of final maps and in the approval of
improvement agreements for subdivisions. The city council shall also have final
jurisdiction in the approval, conditional approval or denial of reversions to
acreage. The city council shall also act as the appeal board for hearing
appeals of the approval, conditional approval or denial of tentative maps and
vesting tentative maps. In instances when tentative maps or vesting tentative
maps are processed concurrently with other land use applications requiring city
council action, the city council shall have final jurisdiction in approval,
conditional approval, or denial of the tentative map or vesting tentative map
application.
   C.   Planning Commission: The planning commission's responsibilities shall
include approving, conditionally approving, or denying the application for
tentative map approval of subdivisions. In instances when tentative maps or
vesting tentative maps are processed concurrently with other land use
applications requiring city council action, the planning commission shall make
a recommendation to the city council for its determination.
   D.   City Engineer: The city engineer's responsibilities shall include:
      1.   Establishing design and construction details, standards and
specifications;
      2.   Determining if proposed subdivision improvements comply with the
provisions of the subdivision map act and this title;
      3.   The processing and certification of final maps, parcel maps,
reversion to acreage maps, and amended maps and the processing and approval of
subdivision improvement plans;
      4.   Examining and certifying that final maps and parcel maps are in
substantial compliance with the approved tentative map;
      5.   The approval of proposed street names;
      6.   Recommendation of the form of subdivision improvement agreements;
      7.   The inspection, approval and acceptance of subdivision improvements.
   E.   Community Development Department: The community development departments
responsibilities shall include:
      1.   The processing of tentative maps;
      2.   Recommending a maps conformity with general plan and zoning
standards;
      3.   Ensuring a maps compatibility with surrounding lots, land uses and
streets. (Ord. 2481 § 1, 2002)
CHAPTER 17.05
MAPS REQUIRED
SECTION:
17.05.020: Division Of Land; Five Or More Parcels
17.05.030: Division Of Land; Four Or Less Parcels
17.05.020: DIVISION OF LAND; FIVE OR MORE PARCELS:
A tentative and final map shall be required for all divisions of land when
determined by the department that such land may be divided into five (5) or
more parcels, five (5) or more condominiums, a community apartment project
containing five (5) or more parcels, or for the conversion of a dwelling to a
stock cooperative containing five (5) or more dwelling units, except where:
   A.   The land before division contains less than five (5) acres, each parcel
created by the division abuts upon a maintained public street or highway and no
dedications or improvements are required by the legislative body; or
   B.   Each parcel created by the division has a gross area of twenty (20)
acres or more and has an approved access to a maintained public street or
highway; or
   C.   The land consists of a parcel or parcels of land having approved access
to a public street or highway which comprises part of a tract of land zoned for
industrial or commercial development, and which has the approval of the
governing body as to street alignments and widths; or
   D.   Each parcel created by the division has a gross area of not less than
forty (40) acres or is not less than one-quarter of a quarter section. A parcel
map shall be required for those subdivisions described in subsections A, B, C
and D of this section, unless waived by the city in accordance with the
provisions of section
17.11.080 of this title. (Ord. 2481 § 1, 2002)
17.05.030: DIVISION OF LAND; FOUR OR LESS PARCELS:
A tentative and final parcel map shall be required for all divisions of land
into four (4) or less parcels, except that maps shall not be required for:
   A.   Subdivisions of a portion of the operating right of way of a railroad
corporation, defined by section 230 of the State Public Utilities Code, which
are created by short term leases terminable by either party on not more than
thirty (30) days' notice in writing.
   B.   Land conveyed to or from a governmental agency, public entity or public
utility, or for land conveyed to a subsidiary of a public utility for
conveyance to such public utility for rights of way, unless a showing is made
by the department in individual cases, upon substantial evidence, that public
policy necessitates a parcel map.
   C.   Lot line adjustments, provided:
      1.   No additional parcels or building sites are created;
      2.   The resulting parcels conform to title 18 of this code;
      3.   The lot line adjustment is approved by the community development
director. The community development director may impose conditions or exactions
on the approval of a lot line adjustment to conform to titles 18 and 15 of this
code, or to facilitate the relocation of existing utilities, infrastructure or
easements. Lot line adjustments which are being processed concurrently with
land use applications requiring action by the planning commission or the city
council shall be scheduled for review and action by the same approving body as
the other application(s). The lot line adjustment shall be reflected in a deed,
and a record of survey if required by state law, which shall be recorded. When
parcels subject to lot line adjustments are encumbered by deeds of trust,
mortgage liens or assessment liens, such deeds of trust and liens shall be
modified by the parcel owners to correspond to the new lot lines of these
parcels, to the satisfaction of the city, to ensure that foreclosure on such
deeds or liens does not create illegal parcels.
      Appeals of the community development director's action with respect to
lot line adjustments shall be made first to the planning commission and then to
the city council in accordance with the provisions of section
17.07.100 of this title. Appeals of the planning commission action on lot line
adjustments shall be made to the city council in accordance with the provisions
of section
17.07.100 of this title.
      If a lot line adjustment is approved or conditionally approved by the
approving body, the appeal body shall have the right to call up such approval
for appeal body review by a written request to the community development
director within ten (10) days of the final action by the approving body. If the
appeal body decides to review the lot line adjustment and conditions, it shall
conduct a public hearing after giving notice pursuant to subsection
17.07.070A of this title. The public hearing shall be held within thirty (30)
days after the date of the request for review. The appeal body may add, modify
or delete conditions if the appeal body determines that such changes are
necessary to ensure that the lot line adjustment conforms to the subdivision
map act and this code. Within ten (10) days following the conclusion of the
hearing, the appeal body shall render its decision. If the appeal body does not
act within the time limits set forth in this section, the lot line adjustment
shall be deemed to have been approved or conditionally approved as last
approved or conditionally approved by the approving body insofar as it complies
with all other applicable provisions of the subdivision map act, this title and
this code.
   D.   Parcel maps waived in accordance with the provisions of section
17.11.080 of this title. (Ord. 2985, 2025: Ord. 2481 § 1, 2002)
CHAPTER 17.07
TENTATIVE SUBDIVISION MAPS; FIVE OR MORE PARCELS
SECTION:
17.07.010: General
17.07.020: Form And Contents
17.07.030: Accompanying Data And Reports
17.07.040: Geotechnical Reports
17.07.050: Street Names
17.07.060: Department Review
17.07.070: Planning Commission Action
17.07.080: City Council Review
17.07.090: Extension Of Time For Planning Commission Or City Council Action
17.07.100: Appeals Of Planning Commission Action
17.07.110: Expiration
17.07.120: Extensions
17.07.130: Amendments To Approved Or Conditionally Tentative Map
17.07.010: GENERAL:
The form and contents, submittal, and approval of tentative maps for five (5)
or more parcels shall be governed by the provisions of this title. (Ord. 2481 §
1, 2002)
17.07.020: FORM AND CONTENTS:
The tentative map shall be prepared in a manner acceptable to the department
and shall be prepared by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor.
The tentative map shall be clearly and legibly drawn and shall contain not less
than the following:
   A.   A title which shall contain the subdivision number, subdivision name
and type of subdivision.
   B.   Name and address of legal owner, subdivider and person preparing the
map, including registration or license number.
   C.   Sufficient legal description to define the boundary of the proposed
subdivision.
   D.   The names and numbers of adjacent subdivisions and names of owners of
adjacent land.
   E.   Date, north arrow, scale, contour interval and source and date of
existing contours.
   F.   A statement of present zoning and of existing and proposed uses of the
property as well as any proposed zoning changes, whether immediate or future.
   G.   A vicinity map showing roads, adjoining subdivisions, creeks, railroads
and other data sufficient to locate the proposed subdivision and show its
relation to the community.
   H.   Existing topography of the proposed site and at least one hundred feet
(100') beyond its boundary, including, but not limited to:
      1.   Existing contours at two foot (2') intervals if the existing ground
slope is less than ten percent (10%) and at not less than five foot (5')
intervals for existing ground slopes equal or greater than ten percent (10%).
Contour intervals shall not be spread more than one hundred fifty feet (150')
apart. Existing contours shall be represented by dashed lines or by screened
lines.
      2.   Type, circumference and drip line of existing trees with a trunk
diameter of four inches (4") or more. Any trees proposed to be removed shall be
so indicated.
      3.   The location and outline of existing structures identified by type.
Structures to be removed shall be so marked.
      4.   The approximate location of all areas of potential storm water
overflow; the location, width and direction of flow of each watercourse; and
the flood zone designation as indicated on the flood insurance rate map
("FIRM").
      5.   The location, pavement and right of way width, grade and name of
existing streets or highways.
      6.   The widths, location and identity of all existing easements.
      7.   The location and size of existing sanitary sewers, fire hydrants,
water mains and storm drains. The approximate slope of existing sewers and
storm drains shall be indicated. The location of existing overhead utility
lines on peripheral streets shall be indicated.
      8.   Proposed improvements to be shown shall include, but not be limited
to:
         a.   The location, grade, centerline radius and arc length of curves,
pavement, right of way width and name of all streets. Typical sections of all
streets shall be shown. Proposed private streets shall be clearly indicated.
         b.   The location and radius of all curb returns and culs-de-sac.
         c.   The location, width and purpose of all easements.
         d.   The angle of intersecting streets if such angle deviates from a
right angle by more than four degrees (4°).
         e.   The approximate lot layout and the approximate dimensions of each
lot and each building site. Engineering data shall show the approximate
finished grading of each lot, the preliminary design of all grading, the
elevation of proposed building pads, the top and toe of cut and fill slopes to
scale, the number of each lot, and the elevation of adjacent parcels.
         f.   Proposed contours at two foot (2') intervals shall be shown if
the proposed ground slope is less than ten percent (10%) and not at less than
five foot (5') intervals for proposed ground slopes of ten percent (10%) or
more. A separate grading plan may be submitted.
         g.   Proposed recreation sites, trails and parks for private or public
use.
         h.   Proposed common areas and areas to be dedicated to public open
space.
         i.   The location and size of sanitary sewers, fire hydrants, water
mains and storm drains. Proposed slopes and approximate elevations of sanitary
sewers and storm drains shall be indicated. The proposed routing of storm water
runoff generated by a 100-year flood shall also be indicated.
         j.   A statement as to the intention of the subdivider in regard to
slope planting and erosion control.
         k.   The name or names of any geologist or soils engineer whose
services were required in the preparation of the design of the tentative map.
         l.   The size of each sheet shall be eighteen inches by twenty six
inches (18" x 26"). A marginal line shall be drawn completely around each
sheet, leaving an entirely blank margin of one inch (1"). The scale of the map
shall be not less than one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100') or as may
be necessary to show all details clearly, and enough sheets shall be used to
accomplish this end. The particular number of the sheet and the total number of
sheets comprising the map shall be stated on each of the sheets, and its
relation to each adjoining sheet shall be clearly shown. When four (4) or more
sheets including the certificate sheet are used, a key sheet shall be included.
All printing or lettering on the map shall be of one-eighth inch (1/8") minimum
height and of such shape and weight as to be readily legible on prints and
other reproductions made from the original drawings.
   I.   If the subdivider plans to develop the site in units or phases, the
proposed units or phases and their proposed sequence of construction shall be
shown.
   J.   The subdivider shall specify any deviation from city standards and the
justification for such deviation.
   K.   Upon the written request of the subdivider, the department may waive
any of the above tentative map requirements if the department determines that
the type of subdivision does not justify compliance with these requirements, or
if the department determines that other circumstances justify a waiver. The
department may require other drawings, data or information as deemed necessary
by the department to accomplish the purposes of the subdivision map act and
this title. (Ord. 2481 § 1, 2002)
17.07.030: ACCOMPANYING DATA AND REPORTS:
The tentative map shall be accompanied by the following data and reports:
   A.   Street Names: A list of proposed street names for any unnamed street or
alley for review by the city engineer; except in the case of tentative maps for
condominium conversions.
   B.   Soils Report: A preliminary soils report prepared in accordance with
the provisions of the uniform building code. If the preliminary soils report
indicates the presence of critically expansive soils or other soil problems
which, if not corrected, would lead to structural defects, the soils report
accompanying the final map shall contain an investigation of each lot within
the subdivision.
   C.   Title Report: A preliminary title report, acceptable to the department,
showing the legal owners at the time of filing the tentative map.
   D.   Environmental Review: Information shall be submitted as required by the
department to allow a determination on environmental review to be made in
accordance with CEQA. The subdivider shall deposit and pay all fees as may be
required for the preparation and processing of environmental review documents.
   E.   Preliminary Engineering Calculations: Information shall be submitted as
required by the standard engineering specifications to demonstrate the adequacy
of the design of the proposed improvements. Such information shall include
design parameters and engineering calculations.
   F.   Phasing: If the subdivider plans to file multiple final maps on the
tentative map, he shall submit a written notice to that effect to the community
development director.
   G.   Other Reports: Any other data or reports deemed necessary by the
department.
   H.   Drainage Study: Information shall be submitted prepared by a registered
civil engineer showing the amount of water coming through, and generated by,
the project and describing how these flows will be handled on site and
downstream. (Ord. 2481 § 1, 2002)
17.07.040: GEOTECHNICAL REPORTS:
   A.   Three (3) copies of a preliminary engineering soils report and
engineering geology report, prepared by a civil engineer and engineering
geologist registered in the state and based upon adequate borings, shall be
submitted to the city building official for subdivisions of five (5) or more
parcels. The city building official may require that such reports be submitted
for subdivisions of four (4) or less parcels.
   B.   A preliminary soils and/or geology report may be waived by the city
building official provided the city building official finds that, due to the
knowledge the city has as to the soil and geologic conditions in the
subdivision, no preliminary analysis is necessary. Such knowledge would include
the nature, distribution and strength of the existing soils, and the necessary
grading procedures and design criteria for corrective measures, and the geology
of the site and the effect of geologic conditions on the proposed development.
   C.   If the city has knowledge of, or the preliminary soils and geology
reports indicate, the presence of soil or geologic conditions which, if
corrective measures are not taken, could lead to structural defects, a soils
and/or geologic investigation of each lot in the subdivision may be required by
the city building official. Such soils and/or geologic investigation shall be
done by a civil engineer and/or geologist registered in the state who shall
recommend regarding the adequacy of the sites to be developed by the proposed
grading and the effect of the soil or geologic conditions on the proposed
development. The city may approve the subdivision, or portion thereof, where
soils or geologic problems exist if the city determines that the recommended
actions provide for procedures and design criteria for corrective measures as
necessary covering the structures and adequacy of the sites to be developed by
the proposed grading. A condition of the issuance of any building permit may
require that the approved recommended action be incorporated in the grading
plans and/or specifications and, if necessary, the plans and specifications for
the construction of each structure.
   D.   Where preliminary soils and/or geology reports are prepared, final
reports shall be submitted prior to the acceptance of the improvements or the
release of occupancy permits indicating the specific actions taken pursuant to
the preliminary report recommendations. Such reports shall have sufficient
field data submitted to indicate full compliance with the preliminary or
subsequent progress report recommendations as they were applied to specific
areas or improvements.
   E.   Geotechnical reports must also comply with applicable city
administrative policies and standards. (Ord. 2481 § 1, 2002)
17.07.050: STREET NAMES:
Each street which is to be dedicated which is a continuation of, or
approximately the continuation of, any existing dedicated street shall be shown
on the tentative map and shall be given the same name as such existing street.
The proposed name of each other street shown on the tentative map shall be
submitted to the city for approval in accordance with current city street
naming policies prepared by the public works department. The approved street
name shall be shown on the tentative map. (Ord. 2481 § 1, 2002)
17.07.060: DEPARTMENT REVIEW:
The tentative map application shall be filed with the department. The
application shall be determined by the department to be complete only when the
form and contents of the tentative map conform to the requirements of section
17.07.020 of this chapter and when all accompanying data and reports, as
required by section
17.07.030 of this chapter, and all fees and/or deposits as required by section
17.01.060 of this title, have been submitted and accepted by the department.
The subdivider shall file with the department the number of tentative maps the
community development director may deem necessary. The department shall forward
copies of the tentative map to the affected public agencies and utilities which
may, in turn, forward to the department their findings and recommendations.
(Ord. 2481 § 1, 2002)
17.07.070: PLANNING COMMISSION ACTION:
   A.   Notice Of Public Hearings: Upon receipt of a complete tentative map
application, the department shall prepare a report with recommendations. The
department shall set the matter for public hearing before the planning
commission. A copy of the department report shall be forwarded to the
subdivider at least three (3) days prior to the public hearing. At least ten
(10) calendar days before the public hearing, a notice shall be given of the
time, date and place of the hearing, including a general explanation of the
matter to be considered and a general description of the area affected, and the
street address, if any, of the property involved. The notice shall be published
at least once in a newspaper of general circulation, published and circulated
in the city.
In addition to notice by publication, the department shall give notice of the
hearing by mail or delivery to the subdivider, the owner of the subject real
property, if different from the subdivider, and to all persons, including
businesses, corporations, or other public or private entities, shown on the
last equalized assessment roll as owning real property within three hundred
feet (300') of the property which is the subject to the proposed application.
The department shall also give notice of the hearing by mail or delivery to
each agency expected to provide water, sewage, streets, roads, schools or other
essential facilities or services to the subdivision, whose ability to provide
those facilities and services may be significantly affected. A proposed
conversion of residential real property to a condominium, community apartment
or stock cooperative project shall be noticed in accordance with section
66451.3 of the subdivision map act.
In the event that the proposed application has been submitted by a person other
than the property owner shown on the last equalized assessment roll, the city
shall also give notice by mail or delivery to the owner of the property as
shown on the last equalized assessment roll. In addition, notice shall be given
by mail or personal delivery to any person who has filed a written request with
the city. The request may be submitted at any time during the calendar year and
shall apply for the balance of the calendar year. The department may give such
other notice that it deems necessary or advisable. Substantial compliance with
these provisions for notice shall be sufficient, and a technical failure to
comply shall not affect the validity of any action taken according to the
procedures in this title.
   B.   Action: The planning commission shall make its recommendation to the
city council, or shall approve, conditionally approve or deny the tentative map
if the planning commission is the approving body, and the department shall
report the decision of the planning commission to the city council and the
subdivider within fifty (50) days after the tentative map application has been
determined to be complete. If the approving body is the city council, the city
council shall approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the tentative map
within thirty (30) days after it receives the recommendation of the planning
commission. In reaching a decision upon the tentative map, the approving body
shall consider the effect of that decision on the housing needs of the region
and balance these needs against the public service needs of its residents and
available fiscal and environmental resources.
   C.   Approval: The tentative map may be approved or conditionally approved
by the approving body if it finds that the proposed subdivision, together with
the provisions for its design and improvement, is consistent with the general
plan, any applicable specific plan, and all applicable provisions of this code.
The approving body may require as a condition of its approval that the payment
by the subdivider of all development fees required to be paid at the time of
the application for, or issuance of, a building permit or other similar permit
shall be made at the rate for such fees in effect at the time of such
application or issuance.
The approving body may modify or delete any of the conditions of approval
recommended in the department's report. The approving body may add additional
requirements as a condition of its approval.
If no action is taken by the approving body within the time limits specified in
this section, the tentative map, as filed, shall be deemed to be approved if it
complies with all other applicable provisions of the subdivision map act, this
title, this code, and the general plan.
   D.   Denial: The tentative map may be denied by the planning commission on
any of the grounds provided by the subdivision map act or this code. The
planning commission shall deny approval of the tentative map if it makes any of
the following findings:
      1.   That the proposed map is inconsistent with the general plan or any
applicable specific plan, or other applicable provisions of this code;
      2.   That the site is not physically suitable for the type of
development;
      3.   That the site is not physically suitable for the proposed density of
development;
      4.   That the design of the subdivision or the proposed improvements are
likely to cause substantial environmental damage or substantially and avoidably
injure fish or wildlife or their habitat. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the
planning commission may approve such a tentative map if an environmental impact
report was prepared with respect to the project and a finding was made pursuant
to section 21081(c) of CEQA that specific economic, social or other
considerations make infeasible the mitigation measures or project alternatives
identified in the environmental impact report;
      5.   That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements are
likely to cause serious public health problems;
      6.   That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements will
conflict with easements, acquired by the public at large, for access through or
use of, property within the proposed subdivision. In this connection, the
planning commission may approve a map if it finds that alternate easements, for
access or for use, will be provided, and that these will be substantially
equivalent to ones previously acquired by the public. This subsection shall
apply only to easements of record or to easements established by judgment of a
court of competent jurisdiction, and no authority is hereby granted to the
planning commission to determine that the public at large has acquired
easements for access through or use of property within the proposed
subdivision; or
      7.   Subject to section 66474.4 of the subdivision map act, that the land
is subject to a contract entered into pursuant to the California land
conservation act of 1965 (commencing with section 51200 of the Government Code)
and that the resulting parcels following a subdivision of the land would be too
small to sustain their agricultural use. (Ord. 2744, 2014: Ord. 2481 § 1, 2002)
17.07.080: CITY COUNCIL REVIEW:
If a tentative map is approved or conditionally approved, the department shall
forthwith make a written report thereof to the city council. The city council
shall, by a majority vote, have the right to call up the tentative map for city
council review at a city council meeting by a request to the community
development director, which must be made within twenty one (21) days of the
final action by the planning commission or the date of the city council's next
regularly scheduled meeting after the planning commission's decision. If the
council decides to review the map, it shall conduct a public hearing after
giving notice pursuant to subsection
17.07.070A of this chapter. In addition, notice shall be given to the planning
commission. The public hearing shall be held within thirty (30) days after the
city council decides to review the map. The city council may add, modify or
delete conditions if the city council determines that such changes are
necessary to ensure that the tentative map conforms to the subdivision map act
and this code. The city council may deny the tentative map on any of the
grounds contained in subsection
17.07.070D of this chapter. Within ten (10) days following the conclusion of
the hearing, the city council shall render its decision. If the city council
does not act within the time limits set forth in this section, the tentative
map shall be deemed to have been approved or conditionally approved as last
approved or conditionally approved by the planning commission insofar as it
complies with all other applicable provisions of the subdivision map act, this
title, this code and the general plan. (Ord. 2481 § 1, 2002)
17.07.090: EXTENSION OF TIME FOR PLANNING COMMISSION OR CITY COUNCIL ACTION:
Any applicable time limits for acting on the tentative map application may be
extended by mutual consent of the subdivider and the planning commission or the
city council in accordance with state law. A waiver of applicable time limits
may be required to permit concurrent processing of related project approvals or
environmental review on the same development project. (Ord. 2481 § 1, 2002)
17.07.100: APPEALS OF PLANNING COMMISSION ACTION:
The subdivider or any interested person adversely affected by any planning
commission action, other than the city council, with respect to the tentative
map may, within ten (10) days after the decision, file an appeal in writing
with the city clerk or the community development director. The city council
shall consider the appeal within thirty (30) days after the date of filing of
the appeal, unless the appellant consents to a continuance. Within ten (10)
days following the conclusion of the hearing, the city council shall render its
decision. The appeal shall be a public hearing after notice has been given
according to subsection
17.07.070A of this chapter. In addition, notice shall be given to the planning
commission. The council may sustain, modify, reject or overrule any
recommendations or rulings of the planning commission and may make any findings
which are consistent with the provisions of the subdivision map act or this
title.
If the city council fails to act upon an appeal within the time limits set
forth in this section, the tentative map shall be deemed to be approved or
conditionally approved as last approved or conditionally approved by the
planning commission insofar as it complies with all other applicable provisions
of the subdivision map act, this title, this code and the general plan. (Ord.
2481 § 1, 2002)
17.07.110: EXPIRATION:
   A.   The approval or conditional approval of a tentative map shall expire
twenty four (24) months from its approval by either the planning commission or
city council, whichever occurs last. However, if in connection with a tentative
map for which the filing of multiple final maps is authorized, the subdivider
is made subject to a requirement of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00)
or more to construct or improve or finance the construction or improvement of
public improvements outside the boundaries of the tentative map, or if the
tentative map is on property subject to a development agreement authorized by
sections 65864 et seq., of the Government Code, then the expiration date shall
be extended in accordance with section 66452.6(a) of the subdivision map act.
An extension to the expiration date may also be approved as provided in section
17.07.120 of this chapter.
   B.   The period of time specified in subsection A of this section shall not
include any period of time during which a lawsuit has been filed and is pending
in a court of competent jurisdiction involving the approval or conditional
approval of a tentative map only if a stay of the time period is approved by
the planning commission. After service of the initial petition or complaint
upon the city, the subdivider shall, in writing, to the community development
director, request a stay in the time period of the tentative map. Within forty
(40) days after receiving the request, the planning commission shall either
stay the time period for up to five (5) years or deny the requested stay. The
request for the stay shall be a hearing with notice to the subdivider and to
the appellant, and upon conclusion of the hearing, the planning commission
shall, within ten (10) days, render its decision. The subdivider or any
interested person may appeal action of the planning commission on the stay to
the city council within ten (10) days of such action in accordance with section
17.07.100 of this chapter.
   C.   The period of time specified in subsection A of this section shall not
include any period of time during which a development moratorium is in effect
according to section 66452.6 of the subdivision map act. (Ord. 2481 § 1, 2002)
17.07.120: EXTENSIONS:
   A.   Request By Subdivider: The subdivider may request an extension of the
expiration date of the approved or conditionally approved tentative map by
written application to the department. The application shall be filed not less
than thirty (30) days before the map is to expire and shall state the reasons
for requesting the extension.
   B.   Planning Commission Action: The department shall review the request and
submit the application for the extension, together with a report, to the
planning commission for approval, conditional approval or denial at the next
regularly scheduled planning commission meeting. A copy of the department's
report shall be forwarded to the subdivider prior to the planning commission
meeting on the extension. In approving, conditionally approving or denying the
request for extension, the planning commission shall make findings supporting
its decision, including findings with respect to the potential impact of any
increases in applicable development fees which have occurred since the date of
the approval or conditional approval of the tentative map.
   C.   Time Limit Of Extensions: The time at which the tentative map expires
may be extended by the planning commission for a period not exceeding a total
of six (6) years.
   D.   Appeal Of Extension: The subdivider or any interested person adversely
affected may appeal any action of the planning commission on the extension to
the city council in accordance with section
17.07.100 of this chapter, except that any such appeal shall be filed within
fifteen (15) days after the action by the planning commission. If the council
does not act within the time limits set forth in section
17.07.100 of this chapter, the extension shall be deemed to have been approved
or conditionally approved as approved by the planning commission, insofar as
the tentative map complies with all other applicable provisions of the
subdivision map act, this title, this code and the general plan. (Ord. 2744,
2014: Ord. 2481 § 1, 2002)
17.07.130: AMENDMENTS TO APPROVED OR CONDITIONALLY TENTATIVE MAP:
Minor amendments to the approved or conditionally approved tentative map or
conditions of approval may be approved by the department upon application by
the subdivider or on the department's own initiative, provided:
   A.   No lots, units or building sites or structures are added;
   B.   Changes are consistent with the intent and spirit of the original
tentative map approval;
   C.   There are no resulting violations of the city's general plan, this
code, the subdivision map act or CEQA.
The amendment shall be indicated on the approved or conditionally approved
tentative map and certified by the community development director. Amendments
to the tentative map conditions of approval which, in the opinion of the
department, are not minor, shall be presented to the planning commission for
its approval. Processing shall be in accordance with the provisions for
processing a tentative map as set forth in this title. Any approved amendment
shall not alter the expiration date of the tentative map. (Ord. 2481 § 1, 2002)
CHAPTER 17.09
FINAL SUBDIVISION MAPS; FIVE OR MORE PARCELS
SECTION:
17.09.010: General
17.09.020: Phasing
17.09.030: Survey Required
17.09.040: Form
17.09.050: Contents
17.09.060: Preliminary Submittal For City Approval
17.09.070: Review By City Engineer
17.09.080: Approval By City Engineer
17.09.090: Approval By City Council
17.09.100: Denial By City Council
17.09.110: Filing With The County Recorder
17.09.010: GENERAL:
The form, contents, accompanying data and filing of the final map shall conform
to the provisions of the subdivision map act and this title. The final map
shall be prepared by or under the direction of a registered civil engineer or
licensed land surveyor. (Ord. 2481 § 1, 2002)
17.09.020: PHASING:
Multiple final maps relating to an approved or conditionally approved tentative
map may be filed prior to the expiration of the tentative map if the
subdivider, at the time the tentative map application is filed, notifies the
community development director in writing of the subdivider's intention to file
multiple final maps on the tentative map in accordance with subsection
17.07.030F of this title. In providing the notice, the subdivider shall not be
required to define the number or configuration of the proposed multiple maps.
The planning commission shall approve the sequence of map approvals. After
filing of the tentative map application, the community development director,
the city engineer and the subdivider shall concur in the filing of multiple
final maps.
The filing of a final map on a portion of an approved or conditionally approved
tentative map shall not invalidate any part of the tentative map. Each final
map which constitutes a part, or unit, of the approved or conditionally
approved tentative map shall have a separate subdivision number. The
subdivision improvement agreement executed by the subdivider shall provide for
the construction of improvements as required to constitute a logical and
orderly development of the whole subdivision. (Ord. 2481 § 1, 2002)
17.09.030: SURVEY REQUIRED:
An accurate and complete survey of the land to be subdivided shall be made by a
registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor. All monuments, property
lines, centerlines of streets, alleys and easements adjoining or within the
subdivision shall be tied into the survey. The allowable error of closure on
any portion of the final map shall not exceed 1/10,000 for field closures and
1/20,000 for calculated closures.
At the time of making the survey for the final map, the engineer or surveyor
shall set sufficient durable monuments to conform with the standards described
in section 8771 of the Business and Professions Code so that another engineer
or surveyor may readily retrace the survey. At least one exterior boundary line
shall be monumented prior to recording the final map. Other monuments shall be
set as required by the city engineer. (Ord. 2481 § 1, 2002)
17.09.040: FORM:
The form of the final map shall conform to the subdivision map act and as
follows:
   A.   The final map shall be legibly drawn, printed or reproduced by a
process guaranteeing a permanent record in black on polyester base film.
Certificates, affidavits and acknowledgments may be legibly stamped or printed
upon the map with opaque ink. If ink is used on polyester base film, the ink
surface shall be coated with a suitable substance to assure permanent
legibility.
   B.   The size of each sheet shall be eighteen inches by twenty six inches
(18" x 26"). A marginal line shall be drawn completely around each sheet,
leaving an entirely blank margin of one inch (1"). The scale of the map shall
be not less than one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100') or as may be
necessary to show all details clearly, and enough sheets shall be used to
accomplish this end. The particular number of the sheet and the total number of
sheets comprising the map shall be stated on each of the sheets, and its
relation to each adjoining sheet shall be clearly shown. When four (4) or more
sheets including the certificate sheet are used, a key sheet shall be included.
All printing or lettering on the map shall be of one-eighth inch (1/8") minimum
height and of such shape and weight as to be readily legible on prints and
other reproductions made from the original drawings. The final form of the
final map shall be as approved by the city engineer. (Ord. 2481 § 1, 2002)
17.09.050: CONTENTS:
The contents of the final map shall conform to the subdivision map act and as
follows:
   A.   Boundary: The boundary of the subdivision shall be designated by a
heavy black line in such a manner as not to obliterate figures or other data.
   B.   Title: Each sheet shall have a title showing the subdivision number and
name and the location of the property being subdivided with reference to maps
which have been previously recorded, or by reference to the plat of a United
States survey. The following words shall appear in the title, "City of
Redlands, San Bernardino County".
   C.   Certificates And Acknowledgments: All certificates and acknowledgments
shall be made as required by the subdivision map act and shall appear only once
on the cover sheet.
   D.   Scale, North Point And Basis Of Bearings: There must appear on each map
sheet the scale, the north point and the basis of bearings based on zone II of
the California coordinates, and the equation of the bearing to true north. The
basis of bearings shall be approved by the city engineer.
   E.   Linear, Angular And Radial Data: Sufficient linear, angular and radial
data shall be shown to determine the bearings and lengths of monument lines,
street centerlines, the boundary lines of the subdivision, the boundary lines
on every lot and parcel which is a part of the subdivision, and ties to
existing monuments used to establish the boundary. Arc length, curves shall be
shown. Ditto marks shall not be used in the dimensions and data shown on the
map.
   F.   Monuments: The location and description of all existing and proposed
monuments shall be shown. Standard city monuments shall be set at, or on city
engineer approved offsets, the following locations:
      1.   The intersection of street centerlines;
      2.   Beginning and end of curves or intersection of tangents on
centerlines;
      3.   At other locations as may be required by the city engineer.
   G.   Lot Numbers: Lot numbers shall begin with the number one in each
subdivision and shall continue consecutively with no omissions or duplications
except where contiguous lands, under the same ownership, are being subdivided
in successive units, in which event lot numbers may begin with the next
consecutive number following the last number in the preceding unit. Each lot
shall be shown entirely on one sheet of the final map, unless approved by the
city engineer.
   H.   Adjoining Properties: The adjoining corners of all adjoining
subdivisions shall be identified by subdivision number, or name when not
identified by official number, and reference to the book and page of the filed
map, showing such subdivision; and if no subdivision is adjacent, then by the
name of the owner and reference to the recorded deed by book and page number
for the last record owner.
   I.   City Boundaries: City boundaries which cross or join the subdivision
shall be clearly designated.
   J.   Street Names: The names of all streets, alleys or highways within or
adjoining the subdivision shall be shown.
   K.   Easements And Dedications: Easements and dedications for roads or
streets, paths, alleys, utilities, local transit facilities, storm water
drainage, sanitary sewers or other public use as may be required, shall be
dedicated to the public for acceptance by the city or other public agency, and
the use shall be specified on the map. All easements of record shall be shown
on the map, together with the name of the grantee and sufficient recording data
to identify the conveyance, e.g., recorders serial number and date, or book and
page of official records.
Easements not disclosed by the records in the office of the county recorder and
found by the surveyor or engineer to be existing, shall be specifically
designated on the map, identifying the apparent dominant tenements for which
the easement was created.
The sidelines of all easements of record shall be shown by dashed lines on the
final map with the widths, lengths and bearings of record. The width and
location of all easements shall be approved by the city engineer.
   L.   Greenbelt Areas: Greenbelt areas may be shown, subject to the approval
of the city. Public greenbelt areas shall be dedicated in fee unless otherwise
specified in the approval or conditional approval of the tentative map. Private
greenbelt areas shall be dedicated as open space easements unless otherwise
specified in the approval or conditional approval of the tentative map. (Ord.
2481 § 1, 2002)
17.09.060: PRELIMINARY SUBMITTAL FOR CITY APPROVAL:
The subdivider shall submit prints of the final map to the city engineer,
community development director and municipal utilities director for checking.
The preliminary prints shall be accompanied by the following data, plans,
reports and documents in a form as approved by the city engineer and, where
applicable the city attorney:
   A.   Improvement Plans: Improvement plans as required by section
17.17.060 of this title.
   B.   Soils Report: A soils report prepared in accordance with the uniform
building code.
   C.   Title Report: A title report showing the legal owners at the time of
submittal of the final map.
   D.   Tax Certificate: A certificate from the county tax collector stating
that all taxes due have been paid or that a tax bond or other adequate form of
security assuring payments of all taxes which are a lien but not yet payable
has been filed with the county.
   E.   Deeds For Easements Or Rights Of Way: Deeds for off site easements or
rights of way required for road or drainage purposes which have not been
dedicated on the final map. Written evidence acceptable to the city in the form
of rights of entry or permanent easements across private property outside of
the subdivision permitting or granting access to perform necessary construction
work and permitting the maintenance of the facility.
   F.   Traverse Closures: Traverse closures for the boundary blocks, lots,
easements, street centerlines and monument lines.
   G.   Hydrology And Hydraulic Calculations: Complete hydrology and hydraulic
calculations of all storm drains and flood flow.
   H.   Governing Documents: The submittal of the final map or parcel map for a
common interest development within the meaning of sections 1350 et seq., of the
State Civil Code shall include the proposed declaration of covenants,
conditions and restrictions containing the provisions described in section 1353
of the Civil Code, and all other governing documents for the subdivision as are
appropriate pursuant to section 1173 of the Civil Code. The submittal of the
final map or parcel map for all subdivisions other than a common interest
development shall include any declaration of covenants, conditions and
restrictions proposed to connection therewith. All documents shall be subject
to review and approval by the city engineer and city attorney.
   I.   Guarantee Of Title: A guarantee of title, in form acceptable to the
city engineer and city attorney, shall be issued by a competent title company
to and for the benefit and protection of the city and shall be continued
complete up to the instant of recording of the final map, guaranteeing that the
names of all persons whose consent is necessary to pass a clear title to the
land being subdivided, and all public easements being offered for dedication,
and all acknowledgments thereto, appear on the proper certificates and are
correctly shown on the map, both as to consents as to the making thereof and
affidavits of dedication where necessary.
   J.   Improvement Agreement: In the event sewer, water, drainage, grading,
paving or other improvements required pursuant to section
17.17.020 of this title have not been completed prior to the presentation of
the final map, an agreement in accordance with the requirements of section
17.17.070 of this title shall be filed for the improvement thereof. The
subdivider shall secure the performance of the agreement in accordance with the
requirements of section
17.17.080 of this title.
   K.   Liability Agreement And Insurance: A defense, indemnity and hold
harmless agreement obligating the subdivider to defend, indemnify and hold the
city and its officers, agents and employees harmless from any liability for
damages or claims for damages for personal injury or death which arise from the
operations of the subdivider and/or the subdivider/s subcontractors in
connection with the subdivision. A certificate of insurance reporting to the
city the amount of insurance the subdivider carries for the subdivider's own
liability for damages or claims for damages for personal injury or death which
arise from the operations of the subdivider or his subcontractors in connection
with the subdivision. The certificate of insurance shall name the city as an
additional insured. The agreement and certificate required by this subsection
shall be subject to prior review and approval by the city engineer and city
attorney.
   L.   Additional Information: Any additional data, reports, or information as
required by the city engineer or city attorney. (Ord. 2481 § 1, 2002)
17.09.070: REVIEW BY CITY ENGINEER:
The city engineer shall review the final map and any other required information
and the subdivider shall make corrections and/or additions until acceptable to
the city engineer. (Ord. 2481 § 1, 2002)
17.09.080: APPROVAL BY CITY ENGINEER:
The subdivider shall submit to the city engineer the original tracing of the
map and any duplicates per county requirements, corrected to its final form and
signed by all parties required to execute the certificates on the map. Original
signatures shall appear on the original drawing and on the blueline duplicate.
Upon receipt of all required certificates and submittals, the city engineer
shall sign the appropriate certificates and transmit the original map to the
city clerk. (Ord. 2481 § 1, 2002)
17.09.090: APPROVAL BY CITY COUNCIL:
The final map approved by the city engineer as complying with the approved or
conditionally approved tentative map shall be filed with the city council for
approval after all required certificates have been signed. The date the map
shall be deemed filed with the city council is the date on which the city clerk
receives the map. The city council shall consider the final map for approval at
its next regular meeting after the city clerk receives the map. Before
approving the final map, the city council shall consider approval of the
subdivision improvement agreement in accordance with the requirements of
section
17.17.070 of this title.
If the subdivision improvement agreement and final map are approved by the city
council, it shall instruct the city clerk to execute the agreement on behalf of
the city. At the time the city council approves the final map, it shall also
accept, accept subject to improvement or reject any offer of dedication. The
city clerk shall certify on the final map the action by the city council. If at
the time the final map is approved, any streets, paths, alleys, public utility
easements, rights of way for local transit facilities or storm drainage
easements are not accepted by the city council, the offer of dedication shall
remain open and the city council may, by resolution at any later date, and
without further action by the subdivider, rescind its action and accept and
open the streets, paths, alleys, rights of way for local transit facilities or
storm drainage easements, which acceptance shall be recorded in the office of
the county recorder.
The city may accept any dedications lying outside the subdivision boundary
which require a separate grant deed. The acceptance shall be recorded in the
office of the county recorder.
If the subdivision improvement agreement and/or final map is unacceptable, the
city council shall make its recommended corrections and instruct the city
engineer to draft a new agreement and/or revise the final map and defer
approval until an acceptable agreement and/or final map has been resubmitted.
The city council shall not postpone or refuse approval of a final map because
the subdivider has failed to meet a tentative map condition requiring
construction or installation of off site improvements on land which neither the
subdivider nor the city has sufficient title or interest to permit the
improvements to be made. In such a case, the city shall follow the procedure
according to subsection 17.17.020J of this title. (Ord. 2481 § 1, 2002)
17.09.100: DENIAL BY CITY COUNCIL:
The city council shall not deny approval of the final map if the city has
previously approved a tentative map for the proposed subdivision and if the
city council finds that the final map is in compliance with the requirements of
the subdivision map act, this title, and the tentative map and all conditions
thereof. (Ord. 2481 § 1, 2002)
17.09.110: FILING WITH THE COUNTY RECORDER:
Upon approval of the final map by the city council, the city clerk shall
execute the appropriate certificate on the certificate sheet and shall, subject
to the provisions of section 66464 of the subdivision map act, transmit the
map, or have an authorized agent forward the map, to the county recorder. (Ord.
2481 § 1, 2002)
CHAPTER 17.11
SUBDIVISIONS OF FOUR OR LESS PARCELS
SECTION:
17.11.010: General
17.11.020: Form And Contents, Accompanying Data And Reports
17.11.030: Department Review
17.11.040: Action By Planning Commission
17.11.050: Appeal Of Planning Commission Action
17.11.060: Expiration And Extensions
17.11.070: Amendments To Approved Or Conditionally Approved Tentative Map
17.11.080: Waiver Of Parcel Map Requirements And Waiver Of Tentative And Final
Maps
17.11.090: Parcel Maps
17.11.010: GENERAL:
The form and contents, submittal and approval of applications for tentative
maps for four (4) or less parcels shall be governed by the provisions of this
chapter. (Ord. 2481 § 1, 2002)
17.11.020: FORM AND CONTENTS, ACCOMPANYING DATA AND REPORTS:
The tentative map shall be prepared in a manner acceptable to the department
and shall be prepared by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor.
The form and contents shall comply and be consistent with the requirements of
section
17.07.020 of this title and the accompanying data and reports shall comply with
and be consistent with sections
17.07.030 through
17.07.050, inclusive, of this title. (Ord. 2481 § 1, 2002)
17.11.030: DEPARTMENT REVIEW:
The tentative map application shall be filed with the department for review in
accordance with the provisions of section
17.07.060 of this title. (Ord. 2481 § 1, 2002)
17.11.040: ACTION BY PLANNING COMMISSION:
   A.   Upon receipt of a tentative map application that is determined by the
department to be complete, the department shall prepare a report and set the
matter for a public hearing before the planning commission in accordance with
the provisions of subsection 17.07.070A of this title.
   B.   If the tentative map is being processed concurrently with an
application requiring action by the city council, the application shall be
reviewed by the planning commission and forwarded to the city council for
action. The hearing shall be noticed and held in accordance with the provisions
of section
17.07.070 of this title.
   C.   The tentative map may be approved, conditionally approved or denied by
the approving body in accordance with the provisions and findings set forth in
subsections
17.07.070B, C and D of this title.
   D.   If a tentative map is approved or conditionally approved by the
planning commission, the department shall forthwith make a written report
thereof to the city council. The city council shall have the right, by majority
action, to call up the tentative map for city council review at a city council
meeting, by a request to the community development director, which must be
within ten (10) days of the final action by the planning commission. If the
city council decides to review the map, it shall conduct a public hearing after
giving notice pursuant to subsection
17.07.070A of this title. In addition, notice shall be given to the planning
commission. The public hearing shall be held within thirty (30) days after the
city council decides to review the map. The city council may add, modify or
delete conditions if the city council determines that such changes are
necessary to ensure that the tentative map conforms to the subdivision map act
and this code. The city council may deny the tentative map on any of the
grounds contained in subsection
17.07.070D of this title. Within ten (10) days following the conclusion of the
hearing, the city council shall render its decision. If the city council does
not act within the time limits set forth in this section, the tentative map
shall be deemed to have been approved or conditionally approved as last
approved or conditionally approved by the planning commission insofar as it
complies with all other applicable provisions of the subdivision map act, this
chapter, this code and the city's general plan. (Ord. 2481 § 1, 2002)
17.11.050: APPEAL OF PLANNING COMMISSION ACTION:
Appeal of the planning commission action with respect to the tentative map
shall be made to the city council in accordance with the provisions of section
17.07.100 of this title. (Ord. 2481 § 1, 2002)
17.11.060: EXPIRATION AND EXTENSIONS:
The approval or conditional approval of a tentative map shall expire twenty
four (24) months from its approval by the planning commission or city council,
whichever occurs last, unless the expiration date is extended in accordance
with the provisions of section
17.07.110 of this title. The subdivider may request an extension of the
expiration date for action in accordance with the provisions of section
17.07.120 of this title, except that the planning commission shall be
responsible for the review of the request. The planning commission may approve,
conditionally approve, or deny the request for an extension. The subdivider or
any interested person adversely affected may appeal the action of the planning
commission to the city council in accordance with the provisions of subsection
17.07.120D of this title. (Ord. 2481 § 1, 2002)
17.11.070: AMENDMENTS TO APPROVED OR CONDITIONALLY APPROVED TENTATIVE MAP:
Amendments to the approved or conditionally approved tentative map or
conditions of approval shall be made in accordance with section
17.07.130 of this title; provided that amendments, which in the opinion of the
department are not minor, shall be presented to the planning commission for its
approval. Processing shall be in accordance with the provisions for processing
a tentative map as set forth in this title. Any approved amendment shall not
alter the expiration date of the tentative map. (Ord. 2481 § 1, 2002)
17.11.080: WAIVER OF PARCEL MAP REQUIREMENTS AND WAIVER OF TENTATIVE AND FINAL
MAPS:
The approving body may, in its discretion, waive all or part of the
requirements for a tentative and parcel map for the following:
   A.   Division of real property or interests therein created by probate,
eminent domain procedures, partition or other civil judgments or decrees;
   B.   Division of real property resulting from the conveyance of land or any
interest therein to or from the city, public entity or public utility for a
public purpose, such as schools sites, public building sites, or rights of way
or easements for streets, sewers, utilities and drainage;
   C.   Division of real property which has been merged pursuant to this title,
the subdivision map act;
   D.   Construction of a condominium project on a single parcel. The approving
body may also, in its discretion, waive the requirement for a tentative and
final map for construction of a condominium project on a single parcel; or
   E.   Any other division of real property which would otherwise require a
parcel map.
The approving body shall make a finding that the proposed division of land
complies with requirements as to area, improvement and design, floodwater
drainage control, appropriate improved public roads, sanitary disposal
facilities, water supply availability, environmental protection, and other
requirements of the subdivision map act, this title, this code and the general
plan.
Upon the waiver of the parcel map requirement, or the tentative and final map
requirement, pursuant to this section, the city engineer shall file with the
county recorder a certificate of compliance for the land to be divided, in
accordance with subsection
17.27.030B of this title, and a plat map showing the division. The certificate
shall include a certificate by the county tax collector.
A waiver by the approving body may be conditioned to provide for, among other
things, payment by the subdivider of park land dedication, drainage and other
fees that are permitted by law by a method approved by the approving body.
If any waiver is approved or conditionally approved pursuant to this section,
the department shall make a written report thereof to the appeal body. Any
member of the appeal body shall have the right to call up that waiver approval
for review by a written request to the community development director within
ten (10) days of the final action by the approving body. If the appeal body
decides to review the waiver and conditions, it shall conduct a public hearing
after giving notice pursuant to subsection
17.07.070A of this title. In addition notice shall be given to the approving
body. The public hearing shall be held within thirty (30) days after the date
of request for review. The appeal body may add, modify or delete conditions if
the appeal body determines that such changes are necessary to ensure that the
waiver conforms to the subdivision map act and this code. The appeal body may
deny the waiver on any of the grounds contained in this title. Within ten (10)
days following the conclusion the appeal body shall render its decision. If the
appeal body does not act on the hearing within the time limits set forth in
this section, the waiver shall be deemed to have been approved or conditionally
approved as last approved or conditionally approved by the approving body
insofar as it complies with all other applicable provisions of the subdivision
map act, this title, this code and the general plan. (Ord. 2481 § 1, 2002)
17.11.090: PARCEL MAPS:
The form and contents, submittal, approval and filing of parcel maps shall
conform to the provisions of the subdivision map act and this section.
   A.   Survey Required: An accurate and complete survey of the land to be
subdivided shall be made by a registered civil engineer or licensed land
surveyor. All monuments, property lines, centerlines of streets, alleys and
easements adjoining or within the subdivision shall be tied into the survey.
The allowable error of closure on any portion of the parcel map shall not
exceed 1/10,000 for field closures and 1/20,000 for calculated closures.
   B.   Form And Contents: The form and contents of the parcel map shall
conform to the final map form and contents requirements of sections
17.09.040 and
17.09.050 of this title.
   C.   Preliminary Submittal: The subdivider shall submit prints of the parcel
map to the city engineer for checking. The preliminary prints shall be
accompanied by copies of the data, plans, reports and documents as required for
final maps by section
17.09.060 of this title.
The city engineer may waive any of the requirements if the location and nature
of the proposed subdivision does not justify compliance with the requirements
of section
17.09.060 of this title.
   D.   Review And Approval By Planning Commission: The planning commission
shall review the parcel map and the subdivider shall make corrections and/or
additions until the map is acceptable to the planning commission. The
subdivider shall submit the original tracing of the map, corrected to its final
form and signed by all parties required to execute the certificates on the map,
to the planning commission. The city clerk or authorized agent shall, subject
to the provisions of section 66464 of the subdivision map act, transmit the
approved parcel map to the county recorder. The planning commission shall
approve the parcel map if it complies with the requirements of the subdivision
map act, this title, the tentative map and all conditions thereof.
If a parcel map is approved, the department shall make a written report thereof
to the city council. The city council shall have the right, by majority vote,
to call up the map for city council review by a written request to the
community development director within ten (10) days of the final action by the
planning commission. If the city council decides to review the map it shall
conduct a public hearing after giving notice pursuant to subsection
17.07.070A of this title. In addition, notice shall be given to the planning
commission. The public hearing shall be held within thirty (30) days after the
date of the request for review. The city council may deny the acceptance of the
map on any of the grounds contained in this title. Within ten (10) days
following the conclusion of the hearing, the city council shall render its
decision. If the city council does not act within the time limits set forth in
this section, the map shall be deemed to have been approved and accepted as
last approved and accepted by the planning commission insofar as it complies
with all other applicable provisions of the subdivision map act, this title,
this code and the general plan. (Ord. 2481 § 1, 2002)
CHAPTER 17.12
URBAN LOT SPLITS INTO TWO RESIDENTIAL PARCELS
SECTION:
17.12.010: General
17.12.020: Form And Contents, Accompanying Data And Reports
17.12.030: Requirements
17.12.040: Action By Development Services Director
17.12.050: Conditions Of Approval
17.12.060: Appeal Of Director Action
17.12.070: Expiration And Extension
17.12.080: Amendments And Extension For Approved Or Conditionally Approved
Tentative Parcel Map
17.12.090: Parcel Maps
17.12.010: GENERAL:
   A.   The form and contents, submittal, and approval of applications for
tentative parcel maps for urban lot splits consisting of two (2) residential
parcels pursuant to California Government Code Section 66411.7 shall be
governed by the provisions of this Chapter.
   B.   Definition: An "urban lot split" means the subdivision of an existing,
legally subdivided lot into two (2) lots in accordance with the requirements of
this section.
   C.   Before submitting a development application for a subdivision subject
to the streamlined, ministerial approval process described herein, the
development proponent shall submit to the Development Services Department a
preliminary application that includes all of the information described in
California Government Code Section 65941.1, as that section read on January 1,
2020.
   D.   The City may only accept an application for streamlined, ministerial
approval pursuant to this chapter if the procedures contained in Calif. Gov.
Code Section 65913.4(b) and 65913.4(b)(3) regarding scoping and/or consultation
with the applicable local tribal government(s) have been met.
   E.   A project shall not be eligible for the streamlined, ministerial
process pursuant to this chapter if any of the conditions contained in Calif.
Gov. Code Section 65913.4(b)(4) apply regarding tribal cultural resources.
(Ord. 2985, 2025)
17.12.020: FORM AND CONTENTS, ACCOMPANYING DATA AND REPORTS:
   A.   The tentative parcel map ("tentative parcel map") shall be prepared in
a manner acceptable to the Development Services Department and shall be
prepared by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor. The form and
contents shall comply and be consistent with the requirements of Section
17.07.020 of this Title and the accompanying data and reports shall comply with
and be consistent with Sections
17.07.030 through
17.07.050, inclusive, of this Title.
   B.   The required application submittal items shall include the following in
addition to the subdivision or development application form:
      1.   Tentative Parcel Map that includes the statement, "For SB 9 Urban
Lot Split," on the title page or cover sheet.
      2.   Supplemental application form for an urban lot split.
      3.   Chain of title for the last three (3) years, including a current
title report dated no more than ninety (90) days prior to the date of
application submittal.
      4.   Affidavit of owner-occupancy for a minimum period of three (3) years
from the date of final map recordation of an urban lot split.
      5.   Evidence of property vacancy or owner occupancy (such as: property
tax records, income tax records, utility bills, vehicle registration, or
similar documentation).
      6.   For two-unit development projects under Title 18 of the Redlands
Municipal Code (if applicable): a site plan with all information as listed on
the development application form; and for properties with on-site septic
systems, a Percolation Test conducted within the last five (5) years or a
recertification obtained within the last ten (10) years.
   C.   The applicant must obtain a certificate of compliance with the
Subdivision Map Act for the lot and provide the certificate with the
application.
   D.   Only a complete application will be considered. The City will inform
the applicant in writing of any incompleteness within thirty (30) days after
the application is submitted. (Ord. 2985, 2025)
17.12.030: REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Department Review: The tentative parcel map application shall be filed
with the Development Services Department for review in accordance with the
applicable provisions of Section
17.07.060 of this Title. The application shall be completed on the form(s)
provided by the Department and submitted with the applicable filing fee(s)
adopted by City Council resolution. The Development Services Department or city
engineer may waive, modify, or reduce any submittal requirements that may be in
conflict with California Government Code Section 66411.7.
   B.   The individual property owner(s) of the subject property may apply for
an urban lot split. "Individual property owner" means a natural person holding
fee title individually or jointly in the person's own name or a beneficiary of
a trust that holds fee title. Corporations, including but not limited to LLCs,
are not eligible applicants because they cannot satisfy the three (3) year
occupancy requirement. "Individual property owner" does not include any
corporation or corporate entity or person of any kind (partnership, LP, LLC, C
corp., S corp., etc.), except for a community land trust (as defined by Revenue
& Tax Code Section 402.1(a)(11)(C)(ii)) or a qualified nonprofit corporation
(as defined by Revenue & Tax Code Section 214.15).
   C.   Subdivision Map Act Compliance:
      1.   The urban lot split must conform to all applicable objective
requirements of the Subdivision Map Act (SMA) (Government Code Section 66410 et
seq.), including implementing requirements in this Code, except as otherwise
expressly provided in this section.
      2.   If an urban lot split violates any part of the SMA, the City's
subdivision regulations, including this section, or any other legal
requirement:
         a.   The buyer or grantee of a lot that is created by the urban lot
split has all the remedies available under the SMA, including but not limited
to an action for damages or to void the deed, sale, or contract.
         b.   The City has all the remedies available to it under the SMA,
including but not limited to the following:
            (1)   An action to enjoin any attempt to sell, lease, or finance
the property.
            (2)   An action for other legal, equitable, or summary remedy, such
as declaratory and injunctive relief.
            (3)   Criminal prosecution, punishable by imprisonment in county
jail or state prison for up to one year, by a fine of up to ten thousand
dollars ($10,000.00), or both; or a misdemeanor.
            (4)   Record a notice of violation.
            (5)   Withhold any or all future permits and approvals.
      3.   Notwithstanding Government Code Section 66411.1 of the SMA, no
dedication of rights-of-way or construction of off-site improvements is
required for an urban lot split.
   D.   Zone: The lot to be split shall be located within a single-family
residential zone. For purposes of this section, a single-family residential
zone is one of the following: Single Family Residential (R-1 and R-1-D);
Suburban Residential (R-S); Residential Estate (R-E and R-A); Residential
Estate Animals (R-A-A); Residential Rural (R-R); Residential Rural Animals (R-
R-A); and the single-family districts of adopted Specific Plans within the
City.
   E.   Lot Location Criteria: The lot to be split is not located on a site
that meets any of the applicable criteria contained in California Government
Code § 66411.7(a)(3)(C) (and incorporating Government Code section 65913.4(a)
(6)(B) - (K) by reference).
   F.   Objective Standards: The proposal shall be consistent with the
objective planning standards, development standards, and engineering standards
applicable to the design or improvements of a parcel. If the proposal conflicts
with any objective planning standards, written documentation shall be provided
to the applicant regarding which standard or standards the development
conflicts with, and an explanation for the reason or reasons the development
conflicts with that standard or standards, within sixty (60) days of
application submittal.
      1.   Lot Size: The following standards shall apply to urban lot splits:
         a.   The lot to be split must be a minimum of two thousand four
hundred (2,400) square-feet in area.
         b.   The resulting lots must each be a minimum of one thousand two
hundred (1,200) square-feet in area.
         c.   Each of the resulting lots must be between sixty percent (60%)
and forty percent (40%) of the original lot area.
      2.   Setbacks And Yards: The proposed lots shall be designed to allow the
existing and/or future dwelling units to comply with the applicable objective
standards for yards and setbacks. This setback standard is only enforced to the
extent that it does not prevent two (2) primary dwelling units on the lot at
eight hundred (800) square feet each. No setback shall be required for an
existing structure or a structure constructed in the same location and to the
same dimensions as an existing structure.
      3.   Lot Coverage: The proposed lots shall be designed to allow the
existing and/or future dwelling units to comply with the applicable objective
standard for maximum lot coverage, to the extent practicable. This lot coverage
standard is only enforced to the extent that it does not prevent two (2)
primary dwelling units on the lot at eight hundred (800) square feet each.
   G.   Not Historic: The lot to be split must not be a historic property or
within a historic district that is included in the State Historic Resources
Inventory. Nor may the lot be or be within a site that is designated by
ordinance as a city or county landmark or as a historic property or district.
   H.   No Prior Urban Lot Split: The lot to be split must not have been
established through a prior SB 9 urban lot split, and the lot to be split must
not be adjacent to any lot that was established through a prior SB 9 urban lot
split by the owner of the lot to be split or by any person acting in concert
with the owner.
   I.   Easements:
      1.   The owner must enter into an easement agreement with each public-
service provider to establish easements that are sufficient for the provision
of public services and facilities to each of the resulting lots.
      2.   Each easement must be shown on the tentative parcel map.
      3.   Copies of the unrecorded easement agreements must be submitted with
the Development Application. The easement agreements must be recorded against
the property before the final map may be approved, in accordance with Section
17.12.050 of this Chapter.
      4.   If an easement is recorded and the project is not completed, making
the easement moot, the property owner may request, and the City will provide, a
notice of termination of the easement, which the owner may record.
   J.   Lot Access: Each resulting lot shall have access to, provide access to,
or adjoin a public right-of-way. The minimum access width shall be at least
fifteen feet (15').
   K.   Utilities:
      1.   Development on each resulting lot shall be served by separate direct
utility connections.
      2.   Each primary dwelling unit on the resulting lots that is or that is
proposed to be connected to an onsite wastewater treatment system must first
have a percolation test completed within the last five (5) years or, if the
percolation test has been recertified, within the last ten (10) years.
   L.   Building And Safety: All structures built on the lot must comply with
all current local building standards. An urban lot split is a change of use.
   M.   No Impact On Protected Housing: The urban lot split shall not require
or include the demolition or alteration of any of the following types of
housing:
      1.   Housing that is income-restricted for households of moderate, low,
or very low income.
      2.   Housing that is subject to any form of rent or price control through
a public entity's valid exercise of its policy power.
      3.   Housing, or a lot that used to have housing, that has been withdrawn
from rental or lease under the Ellis Act (California Government Code Sections
7060 - 7060.7) at any time in the fifteen (15) years prior to submission of the
urban lot split application.
      4.   Housing that has been occupied by a tenant in the last three (3)
years. The applicant and the owner of a property for which an urban lot split
is sought must provide a sworn statement as to this fact with the application
for the parcel map. The City may conduct its own inquiries and investigation to
ascertain the veracity of the sworn statement, including but not limited to,
surveying owners of nearby properties; and the City may require additional
evidence of the applicant and owner as necessary to determine compliance with
this requirement.
   N.   Nonconforming Conditions: An urban lot split may be approved without
requiring a legal nonconforming zoning condition or lot standard to be
corrected. This provision shall supersede Section
18.184.040 (Nonconforming Lots) of Title 18 of the Redlands Municipal Code for
the duration that applicable State law remains in effect.
   O.   Fire Hazard Mitigation Measures: For a proposed subdivision on a lot
that is located in a fire hazard severity zone (as defined by the California
Department of Forestry and Fire Protection), the subject property shall comply
with the applicable provisions of the California Fire Code, and any amendments
thereto contained in the Redlands Municipal Code, that apply uniformly to
development within the underlying zone.
   P.   Regulation Of Land Uses:
      1.   Residential Use Only: No non-residential use is permitted on any lot
created by urban lot split.
      2.   No Short-Term Rental: No dwelling unit on a lot that is created by
an urban lot split may be rented for a period of less than thirty (30) days.
      3.   Owner Occupancy: The applicant for an urban lot split must sign an
affidavit stating that the applicant/subdivider intends to occupy one of the
dwelling units on one of the resulting lots as the applicant's principal
residence for a minimum of three (3) years after the urban lot split is
approved.
   Q.   Deed Restriction Required: The owner shall record a deed restriction,
acceptable to the City, that does each of the following:
      1.   Expressly prohibits any rental of any dwelling on the property for a
period of less than thirty (30) days.
      2.   Expressly prohibits any non-residential use of the lots created by
the urban lot split.
      3.   States that the property is formed by an urban lot split, and is
therefore subject to the City's urban lot split regulations, including all
applicable limits on dwelling size and development. (Ord. 2985, 2025)
17.12.040: ACTION BY DEVELOPMENT SERVICES DIRECTOR:
   A.   Upon receipt of a tentative parcel map application that is determined
by the Development Services Department to be complete, the Department shall
review the proposal and render a decision within the time limits prescribed by
State law. An application for a tentative parcel map for an urban lot split is
approved or denied ministerially, by the Development Services Director, without
discretionary review.
   B.   The tentative parcel map may be approved or conditionally approved by
the Development Services Director if staff finds that the proposed subdivision,
together with the provisions for its design and improvement, is consistent with
the general plan, any applicable specific plan, and all applicable provisions
of this code. The Development Services Director may require as a condition of
approval that the payment by the subdivider of all development fees required to
be paid at the time of the application for, or issuance of, a building permit
or other similar permit shall be made at the rate for such fees in effect at
the time of such application or issuance.
      If no action is taken by the Development Services Director within sixty
(60) days from the date the City receives a tentative map application, or such
other time limits specified in applicable State law, the tentative parcel map,
as filed, shall be deemed to be approved.
   C.   Conditions Of Approval:
      1.   A tentative parcel map for an urban lot split is approved
ministerially if it complies with all the requirements of this chapter. The
tentative parcel map may not be recorded. A final parcel map is approved
ministerially as well, but not until the owner demonstrates that the required
documents have been recorded, such as the deed restriction and any easements.
      2.   The approval shall require the owner and applicant to hold the City
harmless from all claims and damages related to the approval and its subject
matter.
      3.   The approval shall require the owner and applicant to reimburse the
City for all costs of enforcement, including attorneys' fees and costs
associated with enforcing the requirements of this code.
      4.   Other conditions of approval may be attached to enforce any other
requirements, including, but not limited to: applicable development standards;
standard requirements; engineering design requirements or other design
regulations; and any other conditions to protect the public health, safety, and
general welfare.
   D.   Denial: The tentative parcel map may be denied by the Development
Services Director on any of the grounds or objective standards provided by the
Subdivision Map Act, California Government Code Section 66411.7, or this Code.
The Development Services Director shall deny approval of the tentative parcel
map if the Department makes any of the following findings to the extent they
are related to the design or to improvements of a parcel, consistent with
Calif. Gov. Code section 66411.7:
      1.   That the proposed map is inconsistent with objective zoning
standards, objective subdivision standards, or objective design review
standards that are related to the design or to improvements of a parcel;
      2.   That the site is not located within a single-family residential
zone;
      3.   That the site is a designated historic property or located within a
historic district;
      4.   That the project site or design of the subdivision does not meet the
applicable criteria and requirements of California Government Code Section
66411.7, California Government Code Section 65913.4 (subparagraphs (B) to (K),
inclusive, of paragraph 6 of subdivision (a)), or the Subdivision Map Act;
      5.   That the proposed lot split would have a specific, adverse impact
upon public health and safety for which there is no feasible method to
satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse impact; or
      6.   That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements will
conflict with easements, acquired by the public at large, for access through or
use of, property within the proposed subdivision; provided, however, the
Development Services Director may approve a map if it finds that alternate
easements, for access or for use, will be provided, and that these will be
substantially equivalent to ones previously acquired by the public. This
subsection shall apply only to easements of record or to easements established
by judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction, and no authority is hereby
granted to the Development Services Director to determine that the public at
large has acquired easements for access through or use of property within the
proposed subdivision.
   E.   Specific Adverse Impacts:
      1.   Notwithstanding anything else in this section, the City may deny an
application for an urban lot split if the Building Official makes a written
finding, based on a preponderance of the evidence, that the project would have
a "specific, adverse impact" on public health and safety for which there is no
feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse
impact.
      2.   "Specific adverse impact" has the same meaning as in the California
Government Code Section 65589.5(d)(2): "a significant, quantifiable, direct,
and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified written public health or
safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date the
application was deemed complete" and does not include (1) inconsistency with
the zoning ordinance or general plan land use designation or (2) the
eligibility to claim a welfare exemption under Revenue and Taxation Code
Section 214(g).
      3.   The Building Official may consult with and be assisted by Planning
staff, Engineering staff, and others as necessary in making a finding of
specific, adverse impact.
   F.   Notice Of Denial: If an application for an urban lot split is denied,
then the Development Services Director shall notify the applicant within sixty
(60) days from receipt of the application and provide a full set of comments to
the applicant with a list of items that are defective or deficient and a
description of how the application can be remedied. (Ord. 2985, 2025)
17.12.050: CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL:
   A.   The following conditions of approval shall be applied to all urban lot
splits, in addition to the other standard conditions of approval, design
requirements, and standard requirements that are otherwise applicable to
subdivision maps as authorized by the Subdivision Map Act and California
Government Code Section 66411.7.
      1.   Affidavit signed by the property owner guaranteeing owner-occupancy
for a minimum period of three (3) years from the date of final map recordation,
and agreement by the property owner for verification of compliance upon request
by the City.
      2.   For Urban Lot Split Subdivisions (If Applicable): Execution and
recordation of a deed restriction entitled "Occupancy, Land Use, and
Development Restriction Agreement for Urban Lot Split" within thirty (30) days
of map approval.
      3.   For Two (2) Unit Development Projects (If Applicable): Execution and
recordation of a deed restriction entitled "Occupancy, Land Use, and
Development Restriction Agreement for Two-Unit Development" within thirty (30)
days of development approval.
      4.   Prohibit short-term rental for less than thirty (30) days of any
units created through an SB 9 urban lot split or two-unit development.
   B.   Conditions of approval shall not be imposed that conflict with the
applicable provisions of California Government Code Section 66411.7 for urban
lot splits, including requiring any: dedication of right-of-way; construction
of off-site improvements; correction of nonconforming zoning conditions or
improvements; any additional on-site parking spaces (if the criteria and
provisions of current State law are met); or other provisions in State law.
   C.   The Development Services Director may modify or delete any of the
additional conditions of approval recommended in the department's report. The
Development Services Director may add additional requirements as conditions of
approval. (Ord. 2985, 2025)
17.12.060: APPEAL OF DIRECTOR ACTION:
Appeal of the decision by the Development Services Director with respect to the
tentative parcel map for urban lot split shall be made to the planning
commission or city council in accordance with the provisions of Section
18.193.070 of Title 18 of the Redlands Municipal Code. (Ord. 2985, 2025)
17.12.070: EXPIRATION AND EXTENSION:
   A.   The approval or conditional approval of a tentative parcel map shall
expire six (6) months from its approval by the Development Services Director,
unless the expiration date is extended for not more than six (6) months in
accordance with the provisions of Section
17.07.120 of this Title.
   B.   The subdivider may request an extension of the expiration date for
action in accordance with the provisions of Section
17.07.120 of this Title, except that the Development Services Director shall be
responsible for the review of the request. The Development Services Director
may approve, conditionally approve, or deny the request for an extension.
   C.   The subdivider or any interested person adversely affected may appeal
the action of the Development Services Director to the planning commission or
city council in accordance with the provisions of section
18.193.070 of Title 18 of the Redlands Municipal Code. (Ord. 2985, 2025)
17.12.080: AMENDMENTS AND EXTENSION FOR APPROVED OR CONDITIONALLY APPROVED
TENTATIVE PARCEL MAP:
   A.   Amendments to the approved or conditionally approved tentative parcel
map or conditions of approval shall be made in accordance with Section
17.07.130 of this Title; provided that amendments, which in the opinion of the
department are not minor, shall be presented to the Development Services
Director for approval. Processing shall be in accordance with the provisions
for processing a tentative parcel map as set forth in this title. Any approved
amendment shall not alter the expiration date of the tentative parcel map.
   B.   Extension Of Time: The subdivider may request an extension of the
expiration date of the approved or conditionally approved tentative SB 9 map by
written application to the department with the payment of applicable filing
fees established by resolution of the City Council. The application shall be
filed not less than thirty (30) days before the map is to expire and shall
state the reasons for requesting the extension. One extension may be granted
for a period not to exceed one hundred eighty (180) days. The Development
Services Director may approve, conditionally approve, or deny the request for
an extension. The subdivider or any interested person adversely affected may
appeal the action of the Development Services Director to the planning
commission or city council in accordance with the provisions of section
18.193.070 of this Code. (Ord. 2985, 2025)
17.12.090: PARCEL MAPS:
The form and contents, submittal, approval and filing of final parcel maps
shall conform to the provisions of the subdivision map act and this section.
   A.   Survey Required: An accurate and complete survey of the land to be
subdivided shall be made by a registered civil engineer or licensed land
surveyor. All monuments, property lines, centerlines of streets, alleys and
easements adjoining or within the subdivision shall be tied into the survey.
The allowable error of closure on any portion of the parcel map shall not
exceed 1/10,000 for field closures and 1/20,000 for calculated closures.
   B.   Form And Contents: The form and contents of the parcel map shall
conform to the final map form and contents requirements of Sections
17.09.040 and
17.09.050 of this Title.
   C.   Preliminary Submittal: The subdivider shall submit prints of the parcel
map to the city engineer for checking. The preliminary prints shall be
accompanied by copies of the data, plans, reports and documents as required for
final maps by Section
17.09.060 of this Title.
      The city engineer may waive any of the requirements if the location and
nature of the proposed subdivision does not justify compliance with the
requirements of Section
17.09.060 of this Title.
   D.   Review And Approval By Development Services Department: The Development
Services Director or his/her designee shall review the parcel map and the
subdivider shall make corrections and/or additions until the map is acceptable
to the department. The subdivider shall submit the original tracing of the map,
corrected to its final form and signed by all parties required to execute the
certificates on the map, to the Development Services Department. The city clerk
or authorized agent shall, subject to the provisions of the California
Government Code Section 66464 of the Subdivision Map Act, transmit the approved
parcel map to the county recorder. The Development Services Director shall
approve the parcel map if it complies with the requirements of the subdivision
map act, this title, the tentative parcel map and all conditions thereof. (Ord.
2985, 2025)
CHAPTER 17.13
VESTING TENTATIVE MAPS
SECTION:
17.13.010: Authority And Purpose
17.13.020: Consistency
17.13.030: Definitions
17.13.040: Application
17.13.050: Filing And Processing
17.13.060: Fees
17.13.070: Expiration
17.13.080: Rights Of A Vesting Tentative Map
17.13.090: Amendment To Approved Vesting Tentative Map
17.13.100: Applications Inconsistent With Current Policies
17.13.010: AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE:
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by title 4.5
(commencing with section 66498.1) of the subdivision map act (hereinafter
referred to as the "vesting tentative map statute") and may be cited as the
REDLANDS VESTING TENTATIVE MAP ORDINANCE. The purpose of this chapter is to
establish appropriate local procedures for the implementation of the vesting
tentative map statute. To accomplish this purpose, the regulations contained in
this chapter are determined to be necessary for the preservation of the public
health, safety and general welfare, and for the promotion of orderly growth and
development. (Ord. 2481 § 1, 2002)
17.13.020: CONSISTENCY:
No land shall be submitted and developed pursuant to a vesting tentative map
for any purpose which is inconsistent with the general plan or any applicable
specific plan of the city or which is not permitted by title 18 or other
applicable provisions of this code. (Ord. 2481 § 1, 2002)
17.13.030: DEFINITIONS:
   A.   "Vesting tentative map" means a "tentative map" for a subdivision, as
defined in section
17.03.010 of this title, that shall have printed conspicuously on its face the
words "Vesting Tentative Map" at the time it is filed in accordance with
section
17.07.060 of this title, and is thereafter processed in accordance with the
provisions hereof. For purposes of this chapter, "vesting tentative map"
includes a vesting tentative map prepared in connection with a parcel map.
   B.   All other definitions set forth in this title are applicable to a
"vesting tentative map". (Ord. 2744, 2014)
17.13.040: APPLICATION:
   A.   This chapter shall apply to residential and nonresidential development.
Whenever a provision of the subdivision map act, as implemented and
supplemented by this title, requires the filing of a tentative map for a
development, a vesting tentative map may instead be filed, in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter.
   B.   If a subdivider does not seek the rights conferred by the vesting
tentative map statute, the filing of a vesting tentative map shall not be a
prerequisite to any approval for any proposed subdivision, permit for
construction, or work preparatory to construction. (Ord. 2744, 2014)
17.13.050: FILING AND PROCESSING:
A vesting tentative map shall be filed in the same form and have the same
contents, accompanying data and reports, and shall be processed in the same
manner as set forth in this title for a tentative map except as hereinafter
provided:
   A.   At the time a vesting tentative map is filed, it shall have printed
conspicuously on its face the words "Vesting Tentative Map".
   B.   At the time a vesting tentative map is filed, the subdivider shall also
provide the community development department with the following information:
      1.   Architectural landscaping plans;
      2.   Detailed information regarding the height, size and location of
buildings;
      3.   City approved plans for all required site and off site improvements,
including, but not limited to, streets, storm drains, water, sewer and
lighting;
      4.   Information on the uses to which the buildings will be put;
      5.   Detailed grading plans;
      6.   Geological studies, including soil reports for street design and
building purposes;
      7.   Complete hydrological study, when required by city staff and all
other necessary flood control information. (Ord. 2481 § 1, 2002)
17.13.060: FEES:
   A.   Upon filing a vesting tentative maps, the subdivider shall pay all fees
and/or deposits in accordance with section
 17.01.060 of this title.
   B.   The planning commission or city council, as the case may be, may
require as a condition of its approval that the payment by the subdivider of
all development fees required to be paid at the time of the application for, or
issuance of, a building permit or other similar permit shall be made at the
rate for such fees in effect at the time of such application or issuance. (Ord.
2481 § 1, 2002)
17.13.070: EXPIRATION:
The approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall expire at
the end of the same time period, and shall be subject to the same extensions,
established by sections
17.07.110 and
17.11.060 of this title for the expiration of the approval or conditional
approval of a tentative map. (Ord. 2481 § 1, 2002)
17.13.080: RIGHTS OF A VESTING TENTATIVE MAP:
   A.   The approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall
confer a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance
with the ordinances, polices and standards described in section 66474.2 of the
subdivision map act. However, if section 66474.2 is repealed, the approval or
conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall confer a vested right to
proceed with development in substantial compliance with the ordinances,
policies and standards in effect at the time the vesting tentative map is
approved or conditionally approved.
   B.   Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, a permit, approval,
extension or entitlement may be conditioned or denied if any of the following
are determined:
      1.   A failure to do so would place the residents of the subdivision or
the immediate community, or both, in a condition dangerous to their health or
safety, or both.
      2.   The condition or denial is required, in order to comply with state
or federal law.
   C.   The rights referred to herein shall expire if a final map is not
approved prior to the expiration of the vesting tentative map as provided in
section
17.13.050 of this chapter. If the final map is approved, these rights shall
last for the following periods of time:
      1.   An initial time period of one year beyond the recording of the final
map or parcel map. Where several final maps are recorded on various phases of a
project covered by a single vesting tentative map, this one year initial time
period shall begin for each phase when the final map for that phase is
recorded. All of such final maps or parcel maps must be recorded within the
time period set forth in section
17.13.070 of this chapter or the vesting tentative map approval shall expire
for those parcels for which final maps or parcel maps are not timely recorded.
      2.   The one year initial time period set forth in subsection C1 of this
section shall be automatically extended by any time used for processing a
complete application for a grading permit if one is required, or for any
required design or architectural review, if such processing exceeds thirty (30)
days from the date a complete application is filed.
      3.   A subdivider may apply to the planning commission for a one year
extension at any time before the initial time period set forth in subsection C1
of this section expires. If the extension is denied, the subdivider may appeal
that denial to the city council within fifteen (15) days in accordance with
subsection
17.07.120D of this title.
      4.   If the subdivider submits a complete application for a building
permit during the periods of time specified in subsections C1 through C3 of
this section, the rights referred to herein shall continue until the expiration
of that permit, or any extension of that permit.
   D.   Consistent with subsection A of this section, an approved or
conditionally approved vesting tentative map shall not limit the city from
imposing reasonable conditions on subsequent required approvals or permits
necessary for the development. (Ord. 2481 § 1, 2002)
17.13.090: AMENDMENT TO APPROVED VESTING TENTATIVE MAP:
Amendments to the approved or conditionally approved vesting tentative map
shall be made in accordance with section
17.13.090 of this chapter or section
17.11.070 of this title, as the case may be. (Ord. 2481 § 1, 2002)
17.13.100: APPLICATIONS INCONSISTENT WITH CURRENT POLICIES:
Notwithstanding any provisions of this title to the contrary, a property owner
or his or her designee may seek approvals or permits for the development which
depart from the ordinances, policies and standards described in subsection
17.13.080A of this chapter, and the city may grant these approvals or issue
these permits to the extent that the departures are authorized under this
chapter, this code, the general plan and other applicable law. (Ord. 2481 § 1,
2002)
CHAPTER 17.15
DEDICATIONS, RESERVATIONS AND DEVELOPMENT FEES
SECTION:
17.15.010: Dedication Of Streets, Alleys And Other Public Rights Of Way Or
Easements
17.15.020: Waiver Of Direct Access Rights
17.15.030: Dedications
17.15.040: Reservations
17.15.060: Local Transit Facilities
17.15.070: Bridges And Major Thoroughfares
17.15.080: Supplemental Improvement Capacity
17.15.090: Reserved
17.15.100: Solar Access Easements
17.15.110: Reimbursements To A Telephone Corporation Or Cable Television System
For Undergrounding Or Relocation
17.15.010: DEDICATION OF STREETS, ALLEYS AND OTHER PUBLIC RIGHTS OF WAY OR
EASEMENTS:
As a condition of approval of a tentative map, the subdivider shall dedicate or
make an irrevocable offer of dedication of all parcels of land within the
subdivision that are needed for streets and alleys, including access rights and
abutter's rights, drainage, public greenways, bicycle paths, trails, scenic
easements, public utility easements and other public easements. In addition,
the subdivider shall improve or agree to improve all streets and alleys,
including access rights and abutter's rights, drainage, public greenways,
bicycle paths, trails, public utility easements and other public easements.
Improvements shall be in accordance with chapter 17.17 of this title. (Ord.
2481 § 1, 2002)
17.15.020: WAIVER OF DIRECT ACCESS RIGHTS:
The city may require as a condition of approval of a tentative map that
dedications or offers of dedication of streets include a waiver of direct
access rights to any such street from any property within or abutting the
subdivision. Upon acceptance of the dedication, such waiver shall become
effective in accordance with its provisions. (Ord. 2481 § 1, 2002)
17.15.030: DEDICATIONS:
All dedications of property to the city for public purposes shall be made in
fee title, except that, in the city's discretion, a grant of an easement may be
taken for the following purposes: open space easements, scenic easements or
public utility easements. All dedications in fee and grants of easements shall
be free of liens and encumbrances except for those which the city, in its
discretion, determines would not conflict with the intended ownership and use.
The city may elect to accept an irrevocable offer of dedication in lieu of
dedication of fee title. (Ord. 2481 § 1, 2002)
17.15.040: RESERVATIONS:
   A.   General: As a condition of approval of a tentative map, the subdivider
shall reserve sites, appropriate in area and location, for parks, recreational
facilities, fire stations, libraries or other public uses according to the
standards and formula contained in this section.
   B.   Standards For Reservation Of Land: Where a park, recreational facility,
fire station, library or other public use is shown on the general plan or an
adopted specific plan, the subdivider may be required by the city to reserve
sites as so determined by the city in accordance with the policies and
standards contained in the general plan or the adopted specific plan. The
reserved area must be of such size and shape as to permit the balance of the
property within which the reservation is located to develop in an orderly and
efficient manner. The amount of land to be reserved shall not make development
of the remaining land held by the subdivider economically infeasible. The
reserved area shall be consistent with the general plan or the adopted specific
plan and shall be in such multiples of streets and parcels as to permit an
efficient division of the reserved area in the event that it is not acquired
within the prescribed period.
   C.   Procedure: The public agency for whose benefit an area has been
reserved shall, at the time of approval of the final map or parcel map, enter
into a binding agreement to acquire such reserved area within two (2) years
after the completion and acceptance of all improvements, unless the period of
time is extended by mutual agreement.
   D.   Payment To Subdivider: The purchase price for the reserved area shall
be the market value thereof at the time of the filing of the tentative map,
plus the taxes against the reserved area from the date of the reservation and
any other costs incurred by the subdivider in the maintenance of the reserved
area, including interest costs incurred on any loan covering the reserved area.
   E.   Termination: If the public agency for whose benefit an area has been
reserved does not enter into a binding agreement in accordance with this
section, the reservation of the area shall automatically terminate. (Ord. 2481
§ 1, 2002; amd. Ord. 2912, 7-21-2020)
17.15.060: LOCAL TRANSIT FACILITIES:
As a condition of approval of a tentative map, the subdivider shall dedicate,
or make an irrevocable offer of dedication, of land within the subdivision for
local transit facilities such as shelters, benches, bus turnouts, landing pads,
park and ride facilities and similar items which directly benefit the residents
of the subdivision, if:
   A.   The subdivision as shown on the tentative map has the potential for two
hundred (200) dwelling units or more if developed to the maximum density shown
on the general plan or contains one hundred (100) acres or more, and
   B.   If the city finds that transit services are or will, within a
reasonable time period, be made available to the subdivision.
The provisions of this section do not apply to condominium projects or stock
cooperatives which consist of the subdivision of airspace in an existing
apartment building which is more than five (5) years old when no new dwelling
units are added. (Ord. 2481 § 1, 2002; amd. Ord. 2912, 7-21-2020)
17.15.070: BRIDGES AND MAJOR THOROUGHFARES:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to make provision for assessing
and collecting fees as a condition of approval of a final map or as a condition
of issuing a building permit for the purpose of defraying the actual or
estimated cost of constructing bridges or major thoroughfares pursuant to
section 66484 of the subdivision map act, and in order to implement the
circulation-transportation element of the general plan and, in the case of
bridges, the transportation provisions thereof.
   B.   Definitions: For the purposes of this section, the following words and
phrases shall have the following meanings:
      CONSTRUCTION: Design, acquisition of right of way, administration of
construction contracts, actual construction and inspections.
      MAJOR THOROUGHFARE: A roadway as shown on the circulation- transportation
element of the general plan whose primary purpose is to carry through traffic
and provide a network connecting to the state highway system.
   C.   Payment Of Fees Generally:
      1.   Prior to filing a final map which includes land within an area of
benefit established pursuant to this section, the subdivider shall pay or cause
to be paid any fees established and apportioned to such property pursuant to
this section for the purpose of defraying the actual or estimated cost of
constructing bridges over waterways, railways, freeways or canyons or
constructing major thoroughfares.
      2.   Prior to the issuance of a building permit for construction on any
property within an area of benefit established pursuant to this section, the
applicant for such permit shall pay or cause to be paid any fees established
and apportioned pursuant to this section for the purpose of defraying the
actual or estimated cost of constructing bridges over waterways, railways,
freeways or canyons or constructing major thoroughfares, unless such fees have
been paid pursuant to subsection C1 of this section.
      3.   Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections C1 and C2 of this
section:
         a.   Payment of bridge fees shall not be required unless the planned
bridge facility is an original bridge serving the area or an addition to any
existing bridge facility servicing the area at the time of adoption of the
boundaries of the area of benefit.
         b.   Payment of major thoroughfare fees shall not be required unless
the major thoroughfares are in addition to, or a reconstruction of, any
existing major thoroughfares serving the area at the time of the adoption of
the area of benefit.
   D.   Consideration In Lieu Of Fees: Upon application by the subdivider or
applicant for a building permit, the city council, in the case of subdivisions
of five (5) or more parcels, or the planning commission, in the case of
subdivisions of four (4) or less parcels, may accept consideration in lieu of
the payment of fees required pursuant to this section; provided that the city
council or planning commission, as the case may be, first finds upon
recommendation of the public works director, that the substitute consideration
has a value equal to or greater than the fee; and provided further that the
substitute consideration is in a form acceptable to the city council or
planning commission, as the case may be.
   E.   Public Hearing: Prior to establishing an area of benefit, a public
hearing shall be held by the city council at which time the boundaries of the
area of benefit, the costs, whether actual or estimated, and a fair method of
allocation of costs to the area of benefit and fee apportionment, and the fee
to be collected, shall be established. Notice of the public hearing shall be
given pursuant to subsection
17.07.070A of this title and shall include preliminary information related to
the boundaries of the area of benefit, estimated cost and the method of fee
apportionment.
   F.   Amount: The amount of the fees and the areas of benefit established
pursuant to this section may be established by ordinance or resolution.
   G.   Exemptions: Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection F of this
section, payment of such fees shall not be required for:
      1.   The use, alteration or enlargement of an existing building or
structure or the erection of one or more buildings or structures accessory
thereto, or both, on the same lot or parcel of land; provided, that the total
value, as determined by the building official, of all such alteration,
enlargement or construction completed within any one year period does not
exceed one-half (1/2) of the current market value, as determined by the
building official, of all existing buildings on such lot or parcel of land, and
the alteration or enlargement of the building is not such as to change its
classification of occupancy as defined by the uniform building code.
      2.   The following accessory buildings and structures: private garages,
children's playhouses, radio and television receiving antennas, windmills,
silos, tank houses, shops, barns, coops and other buildings which are accessory
to one- family or two-family dwellings.
   H.   Protest:
      1.   At any time not later than the hour set for hearing objections to
the proposed bridge facility or major thoroughfare, any owner of property to be
benefitted by the improvement may file a protest against the proposed bridge
facility or major thoroughfare or against the extent of the area to be
benefitted by the improvements or against both of them. Such protests must be
in writing and must contain a description of the property in which each signer
thereof is interested, sufficient to identify such property, and, if the
signers are not shown on the last equalized assessment roll as the owners of
such property, must contain or be accompanied by written evidence that such
signers are the owners of such property. All such protests shall be delivered
to the city clerk and no other protest or objections shall be considered. Any
protest may be withdrawn, in writing, by the owners making such protests, at
any time prior to the conclusion of the public hearing.
      2.   If there is a written protest filed with the city clerk by the
owners of more than one-half (1/2) of the area of the property to be benefitted
by the improvement, and sufficient protests are not withdrawn so as to reduce
the area represented to less than one-half (1/2) of that to be benefitted, then
the proposed proceedings shall be abandoned and the city council shall not, for
one year from the filing of that written protest, commence or carry on any
proceedings for the same improvement, or that portion thereof so protested
against, under the provisions of this section. (Ord. 2481 § 1, 2002; amd. Ord.
2912, 7-21-2020)
17.15.080: SUPPLEMENTAL IMPROVEMENT CAPACITY:
   A.   As a condition of approval of a tentative map, there may be imposed a
requirement that improvements installed by the subdivider for the benefit of
the subdivision contain supplemental size, capacity, number or length for the
benefit of property not within the subdivision and that those improvements be
dedicated to the public. However, when such supplemental size, capacity, number
or length is solely for the benefit of property not within the subdivision, the
city shall, subject to the provisions of sections 66486 and 66487 of the
subdivision map act, enter into an agreement with the subdivider to reimburse
the subdivider for that portion of the cost of such improvements equal to the
difference between the amount it would have cost the subdivider to install such
improvements to serve the subdivision only and the actual cost of such
improvements.
   B.   The city council shall determine the method for payment of the costs
required by a reimbursement agreement, which method may include, but shall not
be limited to, the following:
      1.   The collection from other persons, including public agencies, using
such improvements for the benefit of real property not within the subdivision,
a reasonable charge for such use.
      2.   The contribution to the subdivider of that part of the cost of the
improvements that is attributable to the benefit of real property outside the
subdivision and the levy of a charge upon the real property benefitted to
reimburse the city for such costs, together with interest thereon, if any, paid
to the subdivider.
      3.   The establishment and maintenance of local benefit districts for the
levy and collection of such charge or costs from the property benefitted.
   C.   No charge, area of benefit or local benefit district shall be
established unless and until a public hearing is noticed and held thereon by
the city council in accordance with the provisions of subsection 17.15.080E of
this chapter and the city council finds that the charge, area of benefit or
local benefit district is reasonably related to the cost of such supplemental
improvements and the actual ultimate beneficiaries thereof.
   D.   In addition to the notice required by subsection
17.15.080E of this chapter, written notice of the hearing shall be given to
those who own property within the proposed area of benefit as shown on the last
equalized assessment roll, and the potential users of the supplemental
improvements insofar as they be ascertained at the time. Such notices shall be
mailed by the city clerk at least ten (10) days prior to the date established
for the hearing. (Ord. 2481 § 1, 2002; amd. Ord. 2912, 7-21-2020)
17.15.090: RESERVED:
(Ord. 2481 § 1, 2002)
17.15.100: SOLAR ACCESS EASEMENTS:
As a condition of approval of a tentative map, there may be imposed, in
accordance with the provisions of section 66475.3 of the subdivision map act, a
requirement that the subdivider dedicate easements for the purpose of assuring
that each parcel or unit in the subdivision shall have the right to receive
sunlight across adjacent parcels or units in the subdivision for any solar
energy system, as defined in section 801.5 of the State Civil Code. In
establishing such easements, consideration shall be given to feasibility,
contour, configuration of the parcel to be divided and cost. Required easements
shall not result in reducing allowable densities or the percentage of a lot
which may be occupied by a building or a structure under applicable planning
and zoning in force at the time such tentative map is filed.
At the time of tentative map approval, the planning commission, as the case may
be, shall specify the following:
   A.   The standards for determining the exact dimensions and locations of
such easements.
   B.   Any restrictions on vegetation, buildings and other objects which would
obstruct the passage of sunlight through the easement.
   C.   The terms for conditions, if any, under which an easement may be
revised or terminated.
The foregoing provisions of this section do not apply to condominium projects
which consist of the subdivision of airspace in an existing building where no
new structures are added. (Ord. 2481 § 1, 2002; amd. Ord. 2912, 7-21-2020)
17.15.110: REIMBURSEMENTS TO A TELEPHONE CORPORATION OR CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEM
FOR UNDERGROUNDING OR RELOCATION:
Whenever the city imposes as a condition to its approval of a tentative map or
a parcel map a requirement that necessitates replacing, undergrounding or
permanently or temporarily relocating existing facilities of a telephone
corporation or cable television system, the subdivider shall reimburse the
telephone corporation or cable television system for all costs for the
replacement, undergrounding or relocation. All these costs shall be billed to
the subdivider directly by the telephone corporation or cable television system
after they are incurred, and shall include a credit for any required advance
payments and for the salvage value of any facilities replaced. In no event
shall the telephone corporation or cable television system be reimbursed for
costs incurred in excess of the cost to replace the facilities with
substantially similar facilities. In no event shall the city be obligated for
such reimbursement. (Ord. 2481 § 1, 2002; amd. Ord. 2912, 7-21-2020)
CHAPTER 17.17
IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION:
17.17.010: General
17.17.020: Required Improvements
17.17.030: Deferred Improvement Agreements
17.17.040: Design
17.17.050: Access
17.17.060: Improvement Plans
17.17.070: Improvement Agreement
17.17.080: Improvement Security
17.17.090: Construction And Inspection
17.17.100: Completion Of Improvements
17.17.110: Acceptance Of Improvements
17.17.010: GENERAL:
The subdivider shall construct all required improvements, both on site and off
site, in accordance with the standard engineering specifications and other
approved standards as provided by this title and by the city council's
resolutions establishing such standards. No final map shall be presented to the
council, or parcel map to the planning commission, for approval until the
subdivider either completes the required improvements, or enters into an
agreement with the city agreeing to do the work. (Ord. 2481 § 1, 2002)
17.17.020: REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS:
   A.   General: In addition to all improvements required as conditions of
approval of the tentative map or by city ordinance or resolution, the
improvements set forth below shall be required of all subdivisions.
Requirements for construction of on site and off site improvements for
subdivisions of four (4) or less parcels shall be noted on the parcel map, or
waiver of parcel map or the subdivision improvement agreement recorded prior to
or concurrent with the parcel map. Completion of improvements shall be in
accordance with section
17.17.100  of this chapter.
   B.   Frontage Improvements: The frontage of each lot shall be improved to
its ultimate adopted geometric section, including street structural section,
curbs, sidewalks, driveway approaches and transitions.
   C.   Storm Drainage: Storm water runoff from the subdivision shall be
collected and conveyed by an approved storm drain system. The storm drain
system shall be designed for ultimate development of the watershed and shall be
capable of collecting and conveying runoff generated by a 100-year flood. The
storm drain system shall provide for ultimate development of the watershed and
shall be capable of collecting and conveying runoff generated by a 100- year
flood. The storm drain system shall provide for the protection of abutting and
off site properties that would be adversely affected by any increase in runoff
attributed to the development. Off site storm drain improvements may be
required to satisfy this requirement.
   D.   Sanitary Sewers: Each unit or lot within the subdivision shall be
served by an approved sanitary sewer system in accordance with the provisions
of this code.
   E.   Water Supply: Each unit or lot within the subdivision shall be served
by an approved domestic water system, in accordance with the provisions of this
code.
   F.   Utilities: Each unit or lot within the subdivision shall be served by
gas, electric, and other necessary facilities.
   G.   Underground Utilities:
      1.   All existing and proposed utilities within the subdivision or
development parcel, and along peripheral streets of the subdivision site or
development parcel, shall be placed underground except those facilities
exempted by the public utilities commission regulations, or unless specifically
exempt from this requirement under subsections a-e below. Undergrounding shall
be required for overhead lines on either side of peripheral streets.
         a.   A subdivision parcel map (not including any site development)
that creates only two (2) parcels, and does not exceed four (4) gross acres in
total area of the subdivision, shall not be subject to the undergrounding
requirement or payment of an in-lieu fee.
         b.   Affordable housing developments, where at least fifty percent
(50%) of the dwelling units are reserved for low- or very-low income
households, shall not be subject to the undergrounding requirement or payment
of an in-lieu fee.
         c.   Parcels with less than three hundred and fifty (350) linear feet
of street frontage may pay an in-lieu fee by right for the affected side(s)
that is less than three hundred fifty feet (350') in length.
         d.   Parcels with greater than three hundred and fifty (350) linear
feet of street frontage shall underground the utilities along the affected side
(s) that is greater than three hundred fifty feet (350') feet in length, or may
request a waiver of undergrounding with the findings contained in subsections
G3a and G3b of this section to be made and payment of an in-lieu fee.
         e.   Parcels with an existing private school educational facility to
which any modifications, building additions, or site expansions are proposed,
shall not be subject to the undergrounding requirement or payment of an in-lieu
fee.
      2.   The developer may request that the undergrounding requirement along
peripheral streets be waived by the approving body which may, at its
discretion, accept a fee in lieu of the undergrounding. The amount of fee shall
be determined by calculating the linear distance of the project site's street
frontage and applying the applicable linear foot fee(s) established by City
Council. The requirement for undergrounding or payment of an in lieu fee shall
be a condition of approval of the tentative map or applicable development
permit.
      3.   Undergrounding requirements may be waived or modified by the
approving body only upon making one of the following findings:
         a.   The subdivision or development parcel is within an area where
existing utilities have not been undergrounded and that undergrounding is
either impractical due to physical constraints, or the surrounding neighborhood
is absent of similar improvements; or
         b.   Requiring undergrounding is likely to result in a
disproportionate economic impact or time delay that would make the project
economically infeasible in the sole discretion of the decision-making body, and
based upon substantial evidence submitted by the applicant or developer.
      4.   A subdivision or development meeting the requirements of subsection
G1c and G1d, or where undergrounding requirements have been waived pursuant to
subsections G3a and G3b of this section, the in lieu fee as established by
calculating the linear distance of the project site's street frontage and
applying the applicable linear foot fee(s) established by City Council shall be
made a condition of approval of the tentative map.
      5.   In lieu fees shall be deposited in a special undergrounding account
to be used as approved by the city council for future undergrounding of
utilities throughout the city.
      6.   The provisions of this subsection are in addition to, and not in
substitution for or limitation of, the provisions of this code.
   H.   Fencing: Each parcel or lot within the subdivision that is adjacent to
property containing a public facility shall have an approved fence adequate to
prevent unauthorized access between the properties.
   I.   Other Improvements: Other improvements including, but not limited to,
grading, street lights, fire hydrants, signs, street lines and markings, street
trees and shrubs, landscaping, monuments, bicycle facilities, fences and smoke
detectors, or fees in lieu of any of the foregoing, shall also be required as
determined by the city engineer in accordance with this code, the general plan
and city standards and specifications.
   J.   Off Site Improvements: If the subdivider is required to construct off
site improvements on land in which neither the subdivider nor the city has
sufficient title or interest to allow construction, the city shall, within one
hundred twenty (120) days of recording the final map, acquire by negotiation or
commence condemnation of the land. If the city fails to meet the one hundred
twenty (120) day time limit, the condition for the construction shall be
waived. Prior to approval of the final map, the city may require the subdivider
to enter into an agreement to complete the off site improvements at the time
the city acquires title or an interest in the land. The subdivider shall pay
the cost of acquiring off site land or an interest in the land required to
construct the off site improvements. (Ord. 2966, 2024: Ord. 2481 § 1, 2002)
17.17.030: DEFERRED IMPROVEMENT AGREEMENTS:
   A.   Subdivisions Of Four Or Less Parcels: The frontage improvements along
peripheral streets may be deferred when deemed necessary by the city engineer.
When improvements are deferred, the subdivider and/or owner of the real
property shall enter into an agreement with the city, in form acceptable to the
city engineer and city attorney, for the installation of all frontage
improvements at a time in the future as specified by the city. The agreement
shall provide for the following:
      1.   Construction of improvements shall commence within ninety (90) days
of the receipt of the notice to proceed from the city and shall be completed
within the time specified by section
17.17.100 of this chapter.
      2.   That in the event of a default by the subdivider and/or owner, the
city is authorized to cause construction to be done and charge the entire cost
and expense to the subdivider and/or owner, including interest from the date of
notice of said cost and expense until paid.
      3.   That the agreement shall be recorded with the county recorder at the
expense of the subdivider and/or owner and shall constitute notice to all
successors and assigns of title to the real property of the obligations set
forth therein, and shall also constitute a lien in such amount necessary to
fully reimburse the city, including interest as provided above, subject to
foreclosure in the event of a default in payment.
      4.   That in event of litigation occasioned by any default of the
subdivider and/or owner, the subdivider and/or owner agree to pay all costs
involved, including reasonable attorneys fees, and that the same shall become a
part of the lien against the real property.
      5.   That the terms "subdivider" and "owner" include, respectively, not
only the subdivider and the present owner of the real property but also heirs,
successors, executors, administrators and assigns thereof, it being the intent
of the parties that the obligations undertaken shall run with the real property
and constitute a lien against it.
      6.   Any other improvement security as required by section
17.17.080 of this chapter.
      7.   Any other provisions required by the city as reasonably necessary to
effectuate the purposes and provisions of the subdivision map act and this
code.
The agreement shall not relieve the subdivider or owner from any other specific
requirements of the subdivision map act, this code or law. The construction of
deferred improvements shall conform to the provisions of this code in effect at
the time of construction.
   B.   Remainders: Where a remainder is made part of a final or parcel map,
the subdivider may enter into an agreement with the city to construct
improvements within the remainder at some future date and prior to the issuance
of a permit or other grant of approval for the development of a remainder. The
improvements shall be at the subdivider's expense. In the absence of such an
agreement, the city may require fulfillment of the construction requirements
within a reasonable time following approval of the final or parcel map and
prior to the issuance of a permit or other grant of approval for the
development of the remainder, upon a finding that fulfillment of the
construction requirements is necessary for reasons of:
      1.   The public health and safety, or
      2.   The required construction is a necessary prerequisite to the orderly
development of the surrounding area. (Ord. 2481 § 1, 2002)
17.17.040: DESIGN:
   A.   General: The design and layout of all required improvements, both on
site and off site, private and public, shall conform to generally accepted
engineering standards, standard engineering specifications, the subdivision map
act and applicable provisions of this code.
   B.   Energy Conservation: The design of a subdivision for which a tentative
map is required shall provide, to the extent feasible, for future passive or
natural heating or cooling opportunities in the subdivision.
Examples of passive or natural heating opportunities in subdivision design
include design of lot size and configuration to permit orientation of a
structure in an east-west alignment for southern exposure and to permit
orientation of a structure to take advantage of shade or prevailing breezes. In
providing for future passive or natural heating or cooling opportunities in the
design of a subdivision, consideration shall be given to local climate,
contour, configuration of the parcel to be divided and other design and
improvement requirements. The provision shall not result in reducing allowable
densities, or the percentage of a lot which may be occupied by a building or
structure under applicable planning and zoning in force at the time the
tentative map is filed.
The requirements of this subsection do not apply to condominium projects which
consist of the subdivision of airspace in an existing building when no new
structures are added.
For the purpose of this subsection, "feasible" means capable of being
accomplished in a successful manner within a reasonable period of time, taking
into account economic, environmental, social and technological factors.
   C.   Cable Television Service: The design of a subdivision for which a
tentative map or parcel map is required shall provide one or more appropriate
cable television systems an opportunity to construct, install and maintain, on
land identified on the map as dedicated or to be dedicated to public utility
use, any equipment necessary to extend cable television services to each
residential parcel in the subdivision. For the purpose of this subsection,
"appropriate cable television systems" means those franchised or licensed to
serve the geographical area in which the subdivision is located. This
subsection shall not apply to the conversion of existing dwelling units to
condominiums, community apartments, or stock cooperatives. (Ord. 2481 § 1,
2002)
17.17.050: ACCESS:
All lots or parcels shall have access to a public street improved to the
standards set forth in this title. Private streets shall not normally be
permitted. However, if the approving body determines that the most logical
development of the land requires that lots be developed with access to private
streets such a development may be approved. The subdivider shall submit a
development plan showing the alignment, width, grade and material
specifications of any proposed private street, the topography and means of
access to each lot and the drainage, sewer and water service and fire
protection for the lots served by such private street. The private street shall
be constructed in accordance with standard engineering specifications of the
city as approved by the city engineer. Construction of the private street shall
be completed prior to the completion of the construction and/or occupancy of
the lots. The subdivider shall be required to provide a feasible method for the
maintenance of such private streets, which method shall be subject to the prior
approval of the city engineer and city attorney.
If flag lots are approved as part of the subdivision, the requirements,
including the improvements to the stem of the flag lots, shall be as described
for private streets in the preceding paragraph. Reserve strips, or nonaccess at
the end of streets or at the boundaries of subdivisions, shall be dedicated
unconditionally to the city when required by the city. (Ord. 2481 § 1, 2002)
17.17.060: IMPROVEMENT PLANS:
   A.   General: Improvement plans shall be prepared under the direction of and
signed by a registered civil engineer licensed by the state. Improvement plans
shall include, but shall not be limited to, all improvements required pursuant
to section
17.17.020 of this chapter.
   B.   Form: Plans, profiles and details shall be legibly drawn, printed or
reproduced on twenty four inch by thirty six inch (24" x 36") sheets. A border
shall be made on each sheet providing one-half inch (1/2") at top, bottom and
right side and one and one-half inches (11/2") on the left side. A suitable
title block shall be placed in the lower right corner or along the right edge
and provide adequate space for approval by the city engineer and for approval
of plan revisions.
Plans and profiles shall be drawn to the scale of one inch equals forty feet
(1" = 40') or larger unless approved otherwise by the city engineer. Details
shall be drawn to such scale that clearly shows the facility being constructed.
The scales of various portions of the plans shall be shown on each sheet.
A vicinity map shall be shown on the first sheet of all sets of plans.
A north arrow shall be shown on each sheet when applicable.
Plans shall be laid out to orient north to the top or right edge of the sheet
unless approved otherwise by the city engineer.
All lettering shall be one-eighth inch (1/8") minimum.
If the plans include three (3) or more sheets, a cover sheet showing the
streets, lots, easements, storm drains, index and vicinity map shall be
included.
The form of all plans shall conform to additional requirements as may be
established by the city engineer. The final form of all plans shall be approved
by the city engineer.
   C.   Contents: The improvement plans shall show complete plans, profiles and
details for all required improvements to be constructed, both public and
private, including common areas.
Reference may be made to the city of Redlands or state standard plans in lieu
of duplicating the drawings.
   D.   Supplementary Plans And Calculations: Hydrology, hydraulic plans and
calculations, bond or other security estimates and any structural calculations
as may be required, shall be submitted with the improvement plans to the city
engineer. All calculations shall be legible, systematic and signed and dated by
a registered civil engineer licensed by the state and in a form approved by the
city engineer.
   E.   Review By The City Engineer: The subdivider shall submit the
improvement plans and all computations to the city engineer for review. Upon
completion of the review, one set of the preliminary plans, with any required
revisions indicated, will be returned to the subdivider.
   F.   Approval By The City Engineer: After completing any required revisions,
the subdivider shall transmit the originals of the improvement plans to the
city engineer for signature.
Upon finding that any required revisions have been made and that the plans
conform to all applicable city ordinances and plans, design requirements and
conditions of the approval of the tentative map, the city engineer shall sign
and date the plans. The city engineer may make a reproducible set of the plans
for use by the city. The originals will be returned to the subdivider.
Approval of the improvement plans shall not be construed as approval of the
gas, electric, telephone and cable television service construction plans.
Approval by the city engineer shall in no way relieve the subdivider or the
subdivider's engineer from responsibility for the design of the improvements
and for any deficiencies resulting from the design or from any required
conditions of approval of the tentative map.
   G.   Revision To Approved Plans:
      1.   By Subdivider: Requests by the subdivider for revisions to the
approved plans appearing necessary or desirable during construction shall be
submitted in writing to the city engineer or authorized representative and
shall be accompanied by revised drawings showing the proposed revision. If the
revision is acceptable to the city engineer and consistent with the tentative
map, the originals shall be submitted to the city engineer's office for
initialing. The originals shall be returned to the subdivider and the revised
plans shall be immediately transmitted to the city engineer. Construction of
any proposed revision will not be permitted to commence until revised plans
have been received and approved by the city engineer.
      2.   By City Engineer: When revisions are deemed necessary by the city
engineer to protect the public health and safety, or as field conditions may
require, a request in writing shall be made to the subdivider. The subdivider
shall revise the plans and transmit the originals to the city engineer for
initialing within the time specified by the city engineer.
Upon receipt of the initialized originals, the subdivider shall immediately
transmit revised drawings to the city engineer. Construction of all or any
portion of the improvements may be stopped by the city engineer until revised
drawings have been submitted.
The subdivider may appeal revisions required by the city engineer to the city
council by filing an appeal in writing with the city manager within fifteen
(15) days following receipt of the request to revise the plans.
      3.   Plan Checking And Inspection Costs For Revisions: Costs incurred by
the city for the checking of plans or calculations or inspection as a result of
revisions to the approved plans shall be borne by the subdivider at actual
cost. A deposit, when required, shall be submitted with the revised plans and
applied toward the actual costs. (Ord. 2481 § 1, 2002)
17.17.070: IMPROVEMENT AGREEMENT:
The improvement agreement shall initially be prepared by the city engineer and
approved as to form and substance by the city attorney. The agreement shall
provide for:
   A.   Construction of all improvements required pursuant to section
17.17.020 of this chapter, including any required off site improvements,
according to the approved plans and specifications on file with the city
engineer.
   B.   Completion of improvements within the time specified by section
17.17.100 of this chapter.
   C.   Right of the city to modify plans and specifications and to require the
subdivider to pay for modifications.
   D.   Warranty by the subdivider that construction will not adversely affect
any portion of adjacent properties.
   E.   Payment of inspection fees in accordance with the city's resolutions.
   F.   Payment of in lieu fees for undergrounding of utilities on peripheral
streets.
   G.   Payment of planned drainage facility fee.
   H.   Improvement security as required by section
 17.17.080 of this chapter.
   I.   Maintenance and repair of any defects or failures and their causes.
   J.   Release and indemnification of the city from all liability incurred in
connection with the development and payment of all reasonable attorney fees
that the city may incur because of any legal action or other proceeding arising
from the development.
   K.   Any other deposits, reimbursements, fees or conditions as required by
city ordinance or resolution and as may be required by the city.
   L.   Any other provisions required by the city as reasonably necessary to
effectuate the purposes and provisions of the subdivision map act and this
code.
   M.   The agreement required by this section may be entered into in behalf of
the city, and executed by any member of the city council or the city manager (a
"designated official"), with the approval of the city attorney. The designated
official's action may be appealed by the person or entity proposing to enter
into the improvement agreement with the city, to the city council for a
determination of the improvement agreement's conformance with this section and
the provisions of this chapter. In accordance with the state's subdivision map
act, the city council shall periodically review the delegation of authority
provided for in this section to the designated official. (Ord. 2633 § 1, 2006:
Ord. 2481 § 1, 2002)
17.17.080: IMPROVEMENT SECURITY:
   A.   General: Any improvement agreement, contract or act required or
authorized by the subdivision map act or this title, for which security is
required, shall be secured in accordance with section 66499 et seq., of the
subdivision map act and as provided below. No final map or parcel map shall be
signed by the city engineer or recorded until all improvement securities
required by this section have been received and approved.
   B.   Form Of Security: The form of security shall be one, or the combination
of, the following at the option and subject to the approval of the city:
      1.   Bond or bonds by one or more duly authorized corporate sureties. The
form of the bond or bonds shall be in accordance with sections 66499.1,
66499.2, 66499.3 and 66499.4 of the subdivision map act.
      2.   A deposit, either with the city or a responsible escrow agent or
trust company, at the option of the city, of money or negotiable bonds of the
kind approved for securing deposits of public monies.
      3.   An instrument of credit or letter of credit from one or more
financial institutions subject to regulation by the state or federal government
and pledging that the funds necessary to carry out the act or agreement are on
deposit and guaranteed for payment.
      4.   Any other form of security as provided in section 66499 of the
subdivision map act.
   C.   Amount Of Security: A performance bond or other security in the amount
of one hundred percent (100%) of the total estimated construction cost to
guarantee the construction or installation of all improvements shall be
required of all subdivisions. An additional amount of fifty percent (50%) of
the estimated construction cost shall be required to guarantee payment to
subdivider's contractor, subcontractors and to persons furnishing labor,
materials or equipment for the construction or installation of improvements. As
a part of the obligation guaranteed by the security and in addition to the full
amount of the security, there shall be included costs and reasonable expenses
and fees, including attorney fees, incurred by the city in enforcing the
obligations secured.
The estimate of improvements costs shall be as approved by the city engineer
and shall provide for:
      1.   Not less than five percent (5%) nor more than ten percent (10%) of
the total construction cost for contingencies.
      2.   Increase for projected inflation computed to the estimated midpoint
of construction.
      3.   All utility installation costs or a certification acceptable to the
city engineer from the utility company that adequate security has been
deposited to ensure installation.
   D.   Cash Bond: The subdivider shall deposit with the city not less than one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) cash for subdivisions of four (4) or less parcels,
and three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) for other subdivisions, or an additional
amount as required by the city engineer, not to exceed one percent (1%) of the
total estimated construction cost. The deposit may be used at the discretion of
the city to correct deficiencies and conditions caused by the subdivider,
contractor or subcontractors that may arise during or after the construction of
the subdivision. Any unexpended amount will be returned to the subdivider at
the time all bonds and other security are released.
   E.   Warranty Security: Upon acceptance of the subdivision improvements by
the city, the subdivider shall provide security in the amount as required by
the city engineer to guarantee the improvements against any defective work or
labor done or defective materials used in the performance of the improvements
throughout the warranty period which shall be the period of one year following
the completion and acceptance of the improvements. The amount of the warranty
security shall not be less than ten percent (10%) of the cost of the
construction of the improvements, including the cash bond which shall be
retained for the one year warranty period.
   F.   Reduction In Performance Security: The city engineer may authorize in
writing the release of a portion of the security in conjunction with the
acceptance of the satisfactory completion of a part of the improvements as the
work progresses upon application by the subdivider, but in no case shall the
security be reduced to less than ten percent (10%) of the total improvement
security given for faithful performance. The amount of reduction of the
security shall be determined by the city engineer; however, in no event shall
the city engineer authorize a release of the improvement security which would
reduce security to an amount below that required to guarantee the completion of
the improvements and any other obligation imposed by the subdivision map act,
this code or the improvement agreement.
   G.   Release Of Improvement Security:
      1.   Performance Security: The performance security shall be released
only upon acceptance of the improvements by the city and when an approved
warranty security has been filed with the city engineer. If a warranty security
is not submitted, performance security shall be released twelve (12) months
after acceptance of improvements and correction of all warranty deficiencies.
      2.   Material And Labor Security: Security given to secure payment to the
contractor, subcontractors and to persons furnishing labor, materials or
equipment may, six (6) months after the completion and acceptance of the
improvements by the city, be reduced to an amount equal to the amount of all
claims therefor filed and of which notice has been given to the city council.
The balance of the security shall be released upon the settlement of all claims
and obligations for which the security was given.
      3.   Warranty Security: The warranty security shall be released upon
satisfactory completion of the warranty period, provided:
         a.   All deficiencies appearing on the warranty deficiency list for
the subdivision have been corrected.
         b.   Not less than twelve (12) months have elapsed since the
acceptance of the improvements by the city. (Ord. 2481 § 1, 2002)
17.17.090: CONSTRUCTION AND INSPECTION:
The construction methods and materials for all improvements shall conform to
the standard engineering specifications and all other standard plans and
specifications of the city. Construction shall not commence until all required
improvement plans have been approved by the city engineer. All improvements are
subject to inspection by the city engineer or authorized personnel in
accordance with the city's approved specifications. (Ord. 2481 § 1, 2002)
17.17.100: COMPLETION OF IMPROVEMENTS:
   A.   Subdivisions Of Five Or More Parcels: The improvements for subdivisions
of five (5) or more parcels shall be completed by the subdivider within twelve
(12) months, or such later time as approved by the city, not to exceed thirty
six (36) months, from the recording of the final map, unless an extension is
granted by the city council. Should the subdivider fail to complete the
improvements within the specified time, the city may, by resolution of the city
council and at its option, cause any or all uncompleted improvements to be
completed and the parties executing the security or securities shall be firmly
bound for the payment of all necessary costs.
   B.   Subdivisions Of Four Or Less Parcels: The completion of improvements
for subdivisions of four (4) or less parcels shall not be required until a
permit or other grant of approval for the development of any parcel within the
subdivision is applied for. The completion of the improvements may be required
by a specified date by the city when the completion of the improvements are
found to be necessary for public health or safety or for the orderly
development of the surrounding area. This finding shall be made by the city
engineer or authorized representative. The specified date, when required, shall
be stated in the subdivision improvement agreement. Improvements shall be
completed prior to final building inspection or occupancy of any unit within
the subdivision.
   C.   Extensions: The completion date may be extended by the city council,
for subdivision of five (5) or more parcels, or by the planning commission, for
subdivision of four (4) or less parcels, upon written request by the subdivider
and the submittal of adequate evidence to justify the extension. The request
shall be made not less than thirty (30) days prior to expiration of the
subdivision improvement agreement.
The subdivider shall enter into a subdivision improvement agreement extension
with the city. For subdivisions of five (5) or more parcels, the agreement
shall be prepared by the city engineer, approved by the city attorney, executed
by the subdivider and surety and transmitted to the city council for its
consideration. If approved by the city council, the city clerk shall execute
the agreement on behalf of the city. For subdivisions of four (4) or less
parcels, the same procedure shall be followed, except that the agreement shall
be considered by the planning commission, and if approved, executed by the
mayor on behalf of the city.
If an extension for a subdivision of four (4) or less parcels is approved or
conditionally approved, the department shall make a written report thereof to
the planning commission prior to the extension agreement being executed by the
mayor, and the mayor shall not execute that agreement if it is called up by the
planning commission until the planning commission has completed its review as
set forth herein. Any member of the planning commission shall have the right to
call up that agreement for planning commission review by a written request to
the community development director within ten (10) days of the final action by
the planning commission. If the commission decides to review the agreement and
conditions, it shall conduct a public hearing after giving notice pursuant to
subsection
17.07.070A of this title. In addition, notice shall be given to the planning
commission. The public hearing shall be held within thirty (30) days after the
date of the request for review. The commission may add, modify or delete
conditions if the commission determines that such changes are necessary to
ensure that the agreement conforms to the subdivision map act and this code.
The planning commission may deny the agreement on any of the grounds contained
in this title. Within ten (10) days following the conclusion of the hearing,
the commission shall render its decision. If the planning commission does not
act within the time limits set forth in this section, the agreement shall be
deemed to have been approved or conditionally approved as last approved or
conditionally approved by the planning commission insofar as it complies with
all other applicable provisions of the subdivision map act, this title, this
code and the general plan.
In consideration of a subdivision improvement agreement extension, the
following may be required:
      1.   Revision of improvement plans to provide for current design and
construction standards when required by the city engineer;
      2.   Revised improvement construction estimates to reflect current
improvement costs as approved by the city engineer;
      3.   Increase of improvement securities in accordance with revised
construction estimates;
      4.   Inspection fees may be increased to reflect current construction
costs but shall not be subject to any decrease or refund.
The city council or planning commission, as the case may be, may impose
additional requirements as recommended by the city engineer or as it may deem
necessary as a condition to approving any time extension for the completion of
improvements. The costs incurred by the city in processing the agreement shall
be paid by the subdivider at actual cost plus twenty five percent (25%) of such
cost for overhead expenses.
   D.   As Built Plans: Upon completion of the improvements, the subdivider
shall submit to the city engineer a reproducible set of as built improvement
plans. (Ord. 2481 § 1, 2002)
17.17.110: ACCEPTANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS:
   A.   General: With respect to all subdivisions, when all improvement
deficiencies have been corrected and as built improvement plans submitted, the
completed subdivision improvements shall be considered by the city engineer for
acceptance.
Acceptance of the improvements shall imply only that the improvements have been
completed satisfactorily and that public improvements have been accepted for
public use.
   B.   Acceptance: If the subdivision improvements have been accepted by the
city engineer and public improvements have been dedicated on the final map or
parcel map, the city clerk shall file an acceptance of public improvements with
the county recorder.
   C.   Acceptance Of A Portion Of The Improvements: When requested by the
subdivider in writing, the city engineer may consider acceptance of a portion
of the improvements. Such improvements will be accepted by the city engineer
only if the city engineer finds that it is in the public interest to do so and
such improvements are for the use of the general public.
Acceptance of a portion of the improvements shall not relieve the subdivider
from any other requirements imposed by this title. (Ord. 2481 § 1, 2002)
CHAPTER 17.19
REVERSIONS TO ACREAGE
SECTION:
17.19.010: General
17.19.020: Initiation Of Proceedings
17.19.030: Contents Of Petition
17.19.040: Submittal Of Petition To The City Engineer
17.19.050: City Council Approval
17.19.060: Filing With County Recorder
17.19.010: GENERAL:
Subdivided property may be reverted to acreage pursuant to the provisions of
the subdivision map act and this chapter. This chapter shall apply to final
maps and parcel maps. Subdivisions may also be merged and resubdivided without
reverting to acreage pursuant to section 66499.20 1/2 of the subdivision map
act and this chapter. (Ord. 2481 § 1, 2002)
17.19.020: INITIATION OF PROCEEDINGS:
   A.   By Owners: Proceedings to revert subdivided property to acreage may be
initiated by petition of all of the owners of record of the property. The
petition shall be in a form prescribed by the city engineer. The petition shall
contain the information required by section
17.19.030 of this chapter and any other information as required by the city.
   B.   By City Council: The city council, at the request of any person or on
its own motion may, by resolution, initiate proceedings to revert property to
acreage. The city council shall direct the department to obtain the necessary
information to initiate and conduct the proceedings. (Ord. 2481 § 1, 2002)
17.19.030: CONTENTS OF PETITION:
The petition shall contain, but not be limited to, the following:
   A.   Evidence of title to the real property.
   B.   Evidence of the consent of all of the owners of an interest in the
property.
   C.   Evidence that none of the improvements required to be made have been
made within two (2) years from the date the final or parcel map was filed for
record, or within the time allowed by agreement for completion of the
improvements, whichever is later.
   D.   Evidence that no lots shown on the final or parcel map have been sold
within five (5) years from the date such final or parcel map was filed for
record.
   E.   A final or parcel map in the form, and with the contents, prescribed by
sections
17.09.040 and
17.09.050 or section
17.11.090 of this title, as the case may be, which delineates dedications which
will not be vacated and dedications required as a condition to reversion. Final
or parcel maps shall be conspicuously designated with the title, "The Purpose
of this Map is a Reversion to Acreage".
   F.   Fees and/or deposits in accordance with section
17.01.060 of this title. (Ord. 2481 § 1, 2002)
17.19.040: SUBMITTAL OF PETITION TO THE CITY ENGINEER:
The final or parcel map for the reversion, together with all other data as
required by this title, shall be submitted to the city engineer for review.
Upon finding that the petition meets with all the requirements of the
subdivision map act or this title, the city engineer shall submit the final or
parcel map, together with a report and recommendations of approval or
conditional approval of the reversion to acreage, to the city council for its
consideration. (Ord. 2481 § 1, 2002)
17.19.050: CITY COUNCIL APPROVAL:
A public hearing shall be held by the city council on all proposed reversions
to acreage. Notice of the public hearing shall be given by the city engineer as
provided in subsection
17.07.070A of this title. The city engineer may give such other notice that the
city engineer deems necessary or advisable. The city council may approve a
reversion to acreage only if it finds and records by resolution that:
   A.   Dedications or offers of dedication to be vacated or abandoned by the
reversion to acreage are unnecessary for present or prospective public
purposes; and
   B.   Either:
      1.   All owners of an interest in the real property within the
subdivision have consented to reversion; or
      2.   None of the improvements required to be made have been made within
two (2) years from the date the final or parcel map was filed for record, or
within the time allowed by agreement for completion of the improvements,
whichever is later; or
      3.   No lots shown on the final or parcel map have been sold within five
(5) years from the date such map was filed for record.
   C.   The city council may require as conditions of the reversion:
      1.   The owners dedicate or offer to dedicate streets, public rights of
way or easements.
      2.   The retention of all or a portion of previously paid subdivision
fees, deposits or improvement securities if the same are necessary to
accomplish any of the purposes or provisions of the subdivision map act or this
title.
      3.   Such other conditions of reversion as are necessary to accomplish
the purposes or provisions of the subdivision map act or this title or
necessary to protect the public health, safety or welfare. (Ord. 2481 § 1,
2002)
17.19.060: FILING WITH COUNTY RECORDER:
Upon approval of the reversion to acreage, the city clerk shall transmit the
final or parcel map, together with the city council resolution approving the
reversion, to the county recorder for recordation. Reversion shall be effective
upon the final map being filed for record by the county recorder. Upon filing,
all dedications and offers of dedication not shown on the final or parcel map
for reversion shall be of no further force and effect. (Ord. 2481 § 1, 2002)
CHAPTER 17.21
PARCEL MERGERS AND UNMERGERS
SECTION:
17.21.010: Mergers Required
17.21.020: Notice Of Intention To Determine Status
17.21.030: Hearing On Determination Of Status
17.21.040: Determination Of Merger
17.21.050: Appeals And City Council Review
17.21.060: Determination When No Hearing Is Requested
17.21.070: Request To Merge By Property Owner
17.21.080: Unmerged Parcels
17.21.090: Request For Determination By Owner
17.21.100: Fee For Mergers And Unmergers
17.21.010: MERGERS REQUIRED:
Two (2) or more contiguous parcels or units held by the same owner shall be
considered as merged if one of the parcels or units does not conform to the
minimum parcel or lot size required by title 18 of this code, and if all of the
following requirements are satisfied:
   A.   At least one of the affected parcels is undeveloped by any structure
for which a building permit was issued, or for which a building permit was not
required at the time of construction, or is developed only with an accessory
structure or accessory structures, or is developed with a single structure,
other than an accessory structure, that is also partially sited on a contiguous
parcel or unit.
   B.   With respect to any affected parcel, one or more of the following
conditions exists:
      1.   Comprises less than five thousand (5,000) square feet in area at the
time of the determination of merger.
      2.   Was not created in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances in
effect at the time of its creation.
      3.   Does not meet current standards for sewage disposal and domestic
water supply.
      4.   Does not meet slope stability standards.
      5.   Has no legal access which is adequate for vehicular and safety
equipment access and maneuverability.
      6.   Its development would create health or safety hazards.
      7.   Is inconsistent with the general plan and any applicable specific
plan, other than minimum lot size or density standards.
   C.   For purposes of determining whether contiguous parcels are held by the
same owner, ownership shall be determined as of the date that the notice of
intention to determine status is recorded pursuant to this title.
   D.   Subsection B of this section shall not apply if any of the conditions
stated in section 66451.11(b)(A), (B), (C) or (D) of the subdivision map act
exist. (Ord. 2481 § 1, 2002)
17.21.020: NOTICE OF INTENTION TO DETERMINE STATUS:
Prior to recording a notice of merger, the department shall mail, by certified
mail, a notice of intention to determine status to the current record owner of
the property. The notice shall state that the affected parcels may be merged
pursuant to this title and that, within thirty (30) days from the date the
notice of intention was recorded, the owner may request a hearing before the
planning commission to present evidence that the property does not meet the
criteria for merger. The notice of intention to determine status shall be filed
for record with the county recorder by the department on the same day that the
notice is mailed to the property owner. (Ord. 2481 § 1, 2002)
17.21.030: HEARING ON DETERMINATION OF STATUS:
The owner of the affected property may file a written request for a hearing
with the department within thirty (30) days after recording of the notice of
intention to determine status. Upon receipt of the request, the department
shall set a time, date and place for a hearing before the planning commission
and notify the owner by certified mail. The hearing shall be conducted within
sixty (60) days following the receipt of the owner's request, or may be
postponed or continued by mutual consent of the planning commission and the
property owner.
At the hearing, the property owner shall be given the opportunity to present
any evidence that the affected property does not meet the requirements for
merger specified in this chapter.
At the conclusion of the hearing, the planning commission shall determine
whether the affected parcels are to be merged or are not to be merged and shall
notify the owner of the determination. The notice of determination shall be
mailed to the property owner by the department within five (5) days of the date
of the hearing. (Ord. 2481 § 1, 2002)
17.21.040: DETERMINATION OF MERGER:
If the planning commission makes a determination that the parcels are to be
merged, a notice of merger shall be filed for record with the county recorder
by the department within thirty (30) days of the conclusion of the hearing,
unless the decision has been appealed pursuant to section
17.21.050 of this chapter. The notice of merger shall specify the name of the
record owner and a description of the property. The notice of merger under this
title shall be in a form approved by the city engineer and shall be approved by
the city engineer prior to being filed for record with the county recorder.
If the planning commission makes a determination that the parcels shall not be
merged, a release of the notice of intent to determine status shall be filed
for record with the county recorder by the department within thirty (30) days
after the planning commission determination, and a clearance letter shall be
mailed to the owner by the department. (Ord. 2481 § 1, 2002)
17.21.050: APPEALS AND CITY COUNCIL REVIEW:
The determination of the planning commission may be appealed to the city
council in accordance with section
17.07.100 of this title; provided that the appeal shall be filed within fifteen
(15) days of the date of the notice of determination and the city council shall
hear the appeal within sixty (60) days from the date of appeal. If, after
hearing, the city council grants the appeal and determines that the affected
property has not been merged pursuant to this title, the department shall,
within thirty (30) days after the city council determination, file for record
with the county recorder a release of the notice of intention to determine
status and mail a clearance letter to the owner.
When the planning commission makes a determination to merge or not merge
contiguous parcels or units, the department shall make a written report thereof
to the city council. Any member of the city council shall have the right to
call up the determination for city council review by a written request to the
community development director within ten (10) days of the final action by the
planning commission. If the city council decides to review the determination,
it shall conduct a public hearing after giving notice pursuant to subsection
17.07.070A of this title. In addition, notice shall be given to the planning
commission. The public hearing shall be held within thirty (30) days after the
date of the request for review. The city council may reverse or affirm the
determination on any of the grounds contained in this title. Within ten (10)
days following the conclusion of the hearing, the council shall render its
decision. If the city council does not act within the time limits set forth in
this section, the determination shall be deemed to have been affirmed as last
determined by the planning commission insofar as it complies with all other
applicable provisions of the subdivisions map act, this title, this code and
the general plan. (Ord. 2481 § 1, 2002)
17.21.060: DETERMINATION WHEN NO HEARING IS REQUESTED:
If the owner does not file a request for a hearing within thirty (30) days
after the recording of the notice of intention to determine status, the
planning commission may, at any time thereafter, make a determination that the
parcels are or are not to be merged. If they are to be merged, a notice of
merger shall be filed for record with the county recorder by the department
within ninety (90) days after the mailing of the notice of intention to
determine status pursuant to section
17.21.020 of this chapter. (Ord. 2481 § 1, 2002)
17.21.070: REQUEST TO MERGE BY PROPERTY OWNER:
If the merger of contiguous parcels or units is initiated by a record owner,
the owner may waive in writing the right to a hearing before the planning
commission and to all notices required by this title. Upon receipt of such
waiver, the department shall simultaneously file for record with the county
recorder a notice of intention to determine status, the waiver of right of
hearing and notice, and a notice of merger. (Ord. 2481 § 1, 2002)
17.21.080: UNMERGED PARCELS:
Any parcel which has merged under the provisions of any law prior to January 1,
1984, and for which a notice of merger had not been recorded on or before that
date, shall be unmerged if on that date:
   A.   The parcel meets each of the following criteria:
      1.   Contains at least five thousand (5,000) square feet in area.
      2.   Was created in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances in
effect at the time of its creation.
      3.   Meets current standards for sewage disposal and domestic water
supply.
      4.   Meets slope density standards.
      5.   Has legal access which is adequate for vehicular and safety
equipment access and maneuverability.
      6.   Its unmerger and development would create no health or safety
hazards.
      7.   The unmerged parcel would be consistent with the general plan and
any applicable specific plan, other than minimum lot size or density standards.
   B.   And, with respect to the parcel, none of the conditions stated in
section 66451.30(b)(1), (2), (3), (4) or (5) of the subdivision map act exist.
(Ord. 2481 § 1, 2002)
17.21.090: REQUEST FOR DETERMINATION BY OWNER:
Upon written application made by the owner to the department, the planning
commission shall make a determination that the affected parcels have merged or
are to be merged. If the planning commission determines that the parcels have
not merged, the owner shall be so notified by the department.
If the planning commission determines that the parcels have merged and that
they meet the requirements for unmerger in section
17.21.080 of this chapter, a notice of status, as approved by the city
engineer, shall be issued to the owner and filed for record with the county
recorder by the department, which shall identify each parcel and declare that
they are unmerged pursuant to this title.
If the planning commission determines that the parcels have merged and do not
meet the unmerger requirements in section
17.21.080 of this chapter, a notice of merger specifying the record owner and
description of the parcel shall be issued to the owner and filed for record
with the county recorder by the department. The owner may appeal the decision
of the planning commission as provided in section
17.21.050 of this chapter. The city council may review the planning commissions
determination as provided in section
17.21.050 of this chapter. (Ord. 2481 § 1, 2002)
17.21.100: FEE FOR MERGERS AND UNMERGERS:
A fee and/or deposit for processing mergers and unmergers at the request of an
owner shall be charged to the owner, in accordance with section 17.01.070 of
this title. (Ord. 2481 § 1, 2002)
CHAPTER 17.23
CORRECTION AND AMENDMENT OF MAPS
SECTION:
17.23.010: Requirements
17.23.020: Form And Contents
17.23.030: Submittal And Approval By City Engineer
17.23.040: Filing With The County Recorder
17.23.010: REQUIREMENTS:
After a final or parcel map is filed in the office of the county recorder, it
may be amended by a certificate of correction or an amending map:
   A.   To correct an error in any course or distance shown thereon;
   B.   To show any course or distance that was omitted therefrom;
   C.   To correct an error in the description of the real property shown on
the map;
   D.   To indicate monuments set after the death, disability or retirement
from practice of the engineer or surveyor charged with responsibilities for
setting monuments;
   E.   To show the proper location of any monument which has been changed in
location, or character, or originally was shown at the wrong location or
incorrectly as to its character;
   F.   To correct any other type of map error or omission as approved by the
city, which does not affect any property right. Errors and omissions may
include, but are not limited to, lot numbers, acreage, street names and
identification of adjacent record maps. Error does not include changes in
courses or distances from which an error is not ascertainable from the data
shown on the final or parcel map;
   G.   To make modifications when there are changes which make any or all of
the conditions of the map no longer appropriate or necessary and that the
modifications do not impose any additional burden on the present fee owner of
the property, and if the modifications do not alter any right, title or
interest in the real property reflected on the recorded map. The modification
shall be set for public hearing by the planning commission, in the case of a
final map, or the planning commission, in the case of a parcel map, in
accordance with section
17.07.070 or section
17.11.040 of this title, as the case may be. The planning commission shall
confine the hearing to consideration of, and action on, the proposed
modification. (Ord. 2481 § 1, 2002)
17.23.020: FORM AND CONTENTS:
The amending map or certificate of correction shall be prepared by a registered
civil engineer or licensed land surveyor. The form and contents of the amending
map shall conform to the requirements of sections
17.09.040 and 17.09.050 of this title if a final map, and subsection
 17.11.090B of this title if a parcel map. The certificate of correction shall
set forth in detail the corrections made and show the names of the present fee
owners of the property affected by the correction. (Ord. 2481 § 1, 2002)
17.23.030: SUBMITTAL AND APPROVAL BY CITY ENGINEER:
The amending map or certificate of correction, complete as to final form, shall
be submitted to the city engineer for review and approval. The city engineer
shall examine the amending map or certificate of correction and if the only
changes made are those set forth in section
17.23.010 of this chapter, this fact shall be certified by the city engineer on
the amending map or certificate of correction. (Ord. 2481 § 1, 2002)
17.23.040: FILING WITH THE COUNTY RECORDER:
The amending map or certificate of correction certified by the city engineer
shall be filed in the office of the county recorder. Upon such filing, the
county recorder shall index the names of the fee owners and the appropriate
subdivision designation shown on the amending map or certificate or correction
in the general index and map index, respectively. Thereupon, the original map
shall be deemed to have been conclusively so corrected, and thereafter shall
impart constructive notice of all such corrections in the same manner as though
set forth upon the original map. (Ord. 2481 § 1, 2002)
CHAPTER 17.25
CONDOMINIUM CONVERSIONS
SECTION:
17.25.010: Requirements
17.25.020: Intent
17.25.030: Purpose
17.25.040: Application Procedures
17.25.050: Required Reports And Information
17.25.060: Condominium Conversion Standards
17.25.070: Tenant Benefits And Notification
17.25.010: REQUIREMENTS:
In addition to the applicable requirements and procedures set forth in this
title and the subdivision map act, conversions of existing rental housing to
condominiums, community apartments, stock cooperatives, and any other
subdivision which is a conversion of existing rental housing shall be subject
to the additional requirements of this chapter. The provisions of this chapter
shall not apply to limited equity cooperatives, as defined in Health and Safety
Code section 33007.5, the subdivision of which shall be governed by the
procedures set forth in the subdivision map act 1 . At the time the tentative
map application is filed, the subdivider shall submit concurrently a complete
application for any required zoning approval. Nonresidential condominium
conversions need not comply with the additional requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 2481 § 1, 2002)
 
Notes
1 1. Gov.C. § 66410 et seq.
17.25.020: INTENT:
   A.   The conversion of residential structures from one individual ownership
to condominiums or any other form of multiple ownership interests creates
special community problems, both social and economic. Conversions may
significantly affect the balance between rental and ownership housing within
the city and thereby reduce the variety of individual choices of tenure, type,
price and location of housing; increase overall rents; decrease the supply of
rental housing for all income groups; displace individuals and families; and
disregard the needs of the prevailing consumer market.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide guidelines to evaluate those
problems, the impact any conversion application may have on the community, and
to establish requirements which shall be included in any conversion approval.
   B.   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to any conversion of a
residential structure from one individual ownership to any form of multiple
ownership, including, but not limited to, condominiums, stock cooperatives and
community housing projects, but not including limited equity cooperatives, the
subdivision of which shall be governed by the procedures set forth in the
subdivision map act. (Ord. 2481 § 1, 2002)
17.25.030: PURPOSE:
This chapter is enacted for the following reasons:
   A.   To establish procedures and standards for the conversion of existing
multiple-family rental housing to condominiums;
   B.   To reduce the impact of such conversions on tenants who may be required
to relocate due to the conversion of apartments to condominiums by providing
for procedures for notification and adequate time and assistance for relocation
to comparable rental housing and rates;
   C.   To assure that purchasers of converted housing have been properly
informed as to the physical condition of the structure which is offered for
purchase;
   D.   To ensure that converted housing achieves a high standard of
appearance, quality and safety, and is consistent with the goals of the city;
   E.   To ensure that the project sponsor provides for improvements or
rehabilitation to result in a project which provides housing which is in good
condition and without hidden needs for maintenance and repair;
   F.   To provide a desirable balance of rental and ownership housing and a
variety of individual choice of tenure, type, price and location of housing;
   G.   To provide the opportunity for low and moderate income persons to
participate in the ownership process, as well as to maintain a supply of rental
housing for low and moderate income persons; and
   H.   To assure that adequate rental housing is available in the community.
(Ord. 2481 § 1, 2002)
17.25.040: APPLICATION PROCEDURES:
The following procedures and regulations shall apply to condominium conversion
tentative map applications:
   A.   Tentative Maps: Condominium conversions may be permitted in any
residential district subject to the provisions as set forth in title 18 of this
code, and subject to the approval of a tentative map. Such applications shall
contain all the information required for a tentative map pursuant to this code.
   B.   Acceptance: The community development department shall accept
applications for condominium conversions if any one of the following factors
exists:
      1.   Conversions may be approved when the vacancy rate of multiple-
family rental developments within the city, as determined by the community
development director, is equal to or more than five percent (5%), unless the
conversion will result in a decrease of the vacancy rate to less than four and
nine-tenths percent (4.9%); or
      2.   Tenants lawfully in possession of seventy five percent (75%) of the
units indicate their desire (1 vote per unit) to convert such units to
condominium ownership in writing to the city. Tenants shall be provided with
information on all estimated costs, including, but not limited to, the unit
cost, down payment requirements, financing, estimated property management
costs, and homeowners' association fees. Specific estimates of such costs shall
be acknowledged in writing by the city. If the conversion is approved, the
developer shall provide information to the city on the number of tenants who
actually purchased. If at any time during the conversion approval process a
sufficient number of tenants decide not to purchase, or if misrepresentation is
discovered, the commission shall have sufficient grounds for denial; or
      3.   The applicant agrees to sell or rent at affordable prices forty
percent (40%) of the units to low or moderate income households, as defined in
section 50093 of the California Health and Safety Code, with a minimum of
twenty percent (20%) of the units affordable to lower income households, as
defined in section 50079.5 of the California Health and Safety Code. If the
units are to be made available for purchase, the sales price of such units
shall not exceed two and five-tenths (2.5) times the annual median income for
low or moderate income households as defined by California Health and Safety
Code section 50093. Resale controls shall be included as a deed restriction as
specified by the planning commission. If the units are to be for rental, they
shall either be included in the county administered section 8 program, or the
maximum rent allowed shall keep the units within the low or moderate income
housing stock. (Ord. 2481 § 1, 2002)
17.25.050: REQUIRED REPORTS AND INFORMATION:
The project as a whole shall be in good repair on the interior and the exterior
when offered for sale. As part of the material necessary for such determination
and to aid the review of the proposal, the reports and/or information required
by this section shall be submitted for review and action on the application.
The cost of all reports shall be paid by the applicant, and the persons
preparing the reports shall be approved by the city. The reports shall include
information on what improvements, if any, shall be accomplished by the
developer and at what point in the conversion proceedings such improvements
shall be completed. All improvements cited in the reports, whether required or
voluntary, shall be considered conditions of approval.
The applicant shall be responsible for the remedy of physical conditions within
individual units or common areas noted by a prospective purchaser and/or tenant
which have been missed by inspections or which occur subsequent to the
inspections but prior to the close of escrow. In case of disagreement between
the applicant and the prospective purchaser as to the actual condition, remedy,
or cause of deterioration, the burden of proof shall be that of the applicant.
   A.   Physical Elements Reports: A report on the physical elements of all
structures and facilities shall be submitted.
      1.   A report by a licensed structural or civil engineer detailing the
structural condition of all elements of the property, including, but not
limited to, foundations, electricity, plumbing, utilities, walls, ceilings,
windows, frames, recreational facilities, sound transmissions of each building,
mechanical equipment, and parking facilities. Such report shall also describe
the condition of refuse disposal facilities; swimming pools, saunas and
fountains; stone and brickwork; fireplaces; and exterior lighting. The report
shall also describe the condition of all structures and facilities with respect
to the extent of deferred maintenance, if any. Drainage facilities on the site
and their adequacy shall be described. Such report or supplement thereto shall
describe the present condition and useful life of all elements as deemed
pertinent;
      2.   A report by a licensed appliance repair contractor detailing the
following information which shall be submitted as part of the physical elements
report: regarding each such element, the report shall state to the best
knowledge or estimate of the applicant when such element was built or
installed; the condition of each element; when such element was replaced; the
approximate date upon which such element will require replacement; the cost of
replacing such element; and any variation of the physical condition of such
element from the current building, housing, mechanical and fire codes in effect
on the date of the tentative map application. The report shall identify any
defective or unsafe elements and set forth the proposed corrective measures to
be employed;
      3.   A report by a licensed structural termite and pest control
specialist certifying whether or not all attached or detached structures are
free of infestation and structural damage caused by pests and dry rot. The
report shall describe what procedures would be necessary to eliminate
infestation or damage, if present. Such report shall be updated within six (6)
months prior to the close of escrow, and any infestation shall be remedied
prior to sale;
      4.   Existing soils reports shall be submitted for review with a
statement regarding any known evidence of soils problems relating to the
structures. As required by the city engineer, a new or revised report shall be
prepared by a licensed soils engineer on soil or geological conditions on site
or off site which could adversely affect the project site or structures;
      5.   A report by a licensed painting contractor verifying the condition
of the painting throughout the project, including building interior and
exterior surfaces and an estimate of the remaining physical life of the paint.
A statement that new paint will be applied on all building interior and
exterior surfaces may take the place of such report. Such statement shall
include the brand name of the paint and the exterior colors to be used;
      6.   A report by a licensed roofing contractor verifying the condition of
the roofs of all structures and an estimate of the remaining physical life of
the roofs. A statement that new roof material will be applied may take the
place of such report. Such statement shall include the type, grade and color of
the proposed roofing material;
      7.   A resale/retrofit inspection report issued through the community
development department, building and safety division;
      8.   A declaration of the covenants, conditions, and restrictions and
rules and regulations which would be applied on behalf of any and all owners of
condominium units within the project. The declaration shall include, but not be
limited to, the conveyance of units, the assignment of parking and storage
areas, and an agreement for common area maintenance, together with an estimate
of any initial assessment fees anticipated for such maintenance and an
indication of appropriate responsibilities for the maintenance of all utility
lines and services for each unit. Such documents shall be approved by the city
attorney and recorded in the office of the county recorder;
      9.   Specific information concerning the demographic and financial
characteristics of the project, including, but not limited to, the following:
         a.   The square footage and number of rooms in each unit;
         b.   The rental rate history for each type of unit for the previous
three (3) years;
         c.   The monthly vacancy rate for each month during the preceding two
(2) years;
         d.   A complete list of the number of tenants and tenant households in
the project, including the following information:
            (1)   Households with persons sixty two (62) years of age and
older;
            (2)   The family size of households, including a breakdown of
households with children under five (5) years of age and between five (5) and
eighteen (18) years of age;
            (3)   Households with handicapped persons;
            (4)   The length of residence;
            (5)   The age of tenants; and
            (6)   The designation of low income and moderate income households
and whether receiving federal, state or local rent subsidies.
When the subdivider can demonstrate that demographic information is not
available, this requirement may be modified by the planning commission;
         e.   The proposed price range of the units;
         f.   The proposed homeowners' association fees; and
         g.   A statement of intent as to the types of financing programs to be
made available, including any incentive programs for existing residents;
      10.   Signed copies from each tenant of the notice of intent to convert,
as specified in this title. The subdivider shall submit evidence that a
certified letter of notification was sent to each tenant for whom a signed copy
of such notice is not submitted.
   B.   Acceptance Of Reports: The final form of the physical elements report
and other documents shall be approved by the planning commission. The reports
in their acceptable form shall remain on file with the department for review by
any interested person.
   C.   Copies To Purchasers: Prior to any purchaser executing any purchase
agreement or other contract to purchase a unit in the project, the subdivider
shall provide each purchaser with a copy of all reports in their final form as
accepted by the planning commission, except that the demographic information
and copies of the notice to each tenant concerning conversion do not need to be
distributed.
The developer shall give the purchaser sufficient time to review such reports.
Copies of the reports shall be made available at all times at the sales office.
17.25.060: CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION STANDARDS:
   A.   Compliance With Zoning, Building, Housing, Mechanical, And Fire Codes:
All units, as well as the common ownership facilities, shall be brought into
compliance with all applicable state and local zoning, building, housing,
mechanical and fire codes adopted for use by the city at the time the
conversion project shall be upgraded to conform with current codes. Where the
above is not possible, the subdivider shall demonstrate to the planning
commission that it is not feasible to meet current codes.
   B.   Parking Requirements: Regulations governing parking requirements shall
reflect the current city parking standards for single-family dwellings.
   C.   Handicapped Access Requirements: Handicapped access requirements shall
reflect current city or title 24 standards for single-family dwellings.
   D.   Sound Transmission Characteristics And Energy Conversation:
Condominiums present a unique problem in relation to sound transmission. The
following methods shall be utilized to regulate noise transmission:
      1.   Shock Mounting Of Mechanical Equipment: All permanent mechanical
equipment, such as motors, compressors, pumps and compactors, which are
determined by the building official to be a source of structural vibration or
structure borne noise, shall be shock mounted in inertia blocks or bases and/or
vibration isolators in a manner approved by the building official.
      2.   Noise Mitigation And Energy Conservation: Energy conservation
insulation shall be installed in all heated or cooled buildings, including
common ownership structures used for assembly purposes, in accordance with
title 24 of the California Administrative Code, as amended, or local code as
applicable and in effect on the date building permits are issued for
condominium conversion rework.
      3.   Exception No. 1: Common walls between dwelling units to be
constructed of a two inch by four inch (2" x 4") wall insulated with not less
than R-11 rated insulation, or an equivalent form of noise attenuation control
acceptable to the planning commission.
      4.   Exception No. 2: Common floor ceilings between dwellings units and
between dwellings and garages shall be insulated with not less than R-19 rated
insulation.
   E.   Fire Protection:
      1.   Smoke Detectors: Every dwelling unit shall be provided with a smoke
detector. Installations shall comply with National Fire Protection Association
pamphlet no. 74. The detector shall be approved by the state fire marshal. AC
primary power source shall be utilized. The detector shall be mounted on the
ceiling at a point centrally located in the corridor or areas giving access to
rooms used for sleeping purposes. Where sleeping rooms are on an upper level,
the detector shall be placed at the center of the ceiling directly above the
stairway.
      2.   Sprinkler And Other Systems: A sprinkler system, fire alarm, and/or
other fire protection devices shall be installed as required by the uniform
fire code adopted for use by the city at the time of the conversion
application.
   F.   Utilities:
      1.   Location: Each dwelling unit shall be served by gas and electric
services completely within the lot lines or ownership space of each separate
unit. No common gas or electrical connection or service shall be allowed.
Easements for gas and electric lines shall be provided in the common ownership
area where lateral service connections shall take place.
      2.   Undergrounding: All new utilities, both on site and off site, across
property frontage shall be underground.
      3.   Lockable Shutoff Valve: Developer agrees to furnish and install
individual, lockable shutoff valve, of a type approved by the municipal
utilities director, on the water service for each dwelling unit within this
condominium project. The location of the valve shall be approved by the
municipal utilities director. In addition, developer agrees to furnish to city
a permanent right of entry for use and maintenance of the valve. Said right of
entry shall be approved by the city attorney and shall be executed prior to
issuance of a certificate of occupancy for any unit within the condominium
project.
      4.   Utility Costs: Each dwelling unit shall be separately metered for
gas and electricity. Individual panel boards for electrical current shall be
provided for each unit. A plan for the equitable sharing of water, sewer,
drainage and other shared utility costs shall be included in the covenants,
conditions and restrictions.
   G.   Laundry Facilities: A laundry area shall be provided in each unit, or,
if common laundry areas are provided, such facilities shall consist of not less
than one automatic washer and dryer for each five (5) units or fraction
thereof.
   H.   Condition Of Equipment And Appliances: The developer shall provide a
minimum of one year warranty to the buyer of each unit at the close of escrow
on any dishwasher, garbage disposal, stove, range or oven, refrigerator, trash
compactor, hot water tank, air conditioning unit or heating system which is
provided. At such time as the homeowners' association takes over the management
of the development, the developer shall provide a one year warranty to the
association that any pool and/or spa and pool and/or spa equipment (filter,
pumps, and chlorinator) and any appliances and mechanical equipment to be owned
in common by the association is in operable working condition. The plumbing and
electrical systems in both the dwelling and the common ownership areas shall
also be covered by a one year warranty for proper and safe operation and
installation in a safe and workmanlike manner. Such warrant shall be offered by
an independent homeowner's warranty service licensed by the insurance
commission of the state for such purpose, except that new appliances may be
covered by the manufacturer's warranty. The developer shall provide options to
prospective buyers for new appliances and equipment or, alternatively,
acceptance of existing appliances with the warranty described in this
subsection.
   I.   Refurbishing And Restoration: All main buildings, structures, fences,
patio enclosures, carports, accessory buildings, sidewalks, driveways,
landscaped area, and additional elements as required by the planning
commission, shall be refurbished and restored as necessary to achieve a high
standard of appearance, quality and safety.
   J.   Contingency Fees: The intent of the city in requiring the creation of a
contingency or reserve fund for condominium conversions is to provide a surety
for unexpected or emergency repairs to common areas in the interest of the
economic, aesthetic and environmental maintenance of the community as well as
to protect the general welfare, public health and safety of the community. Upon
the close of escrow for each unit, the subdivider shall convey to the
homeowners' associations contingency fund a minimum fee per dwelling unit as
set forth in a community development schedule of fees and charges adopted by
resolution.
When forty nine percent (49%) or more of the total units in the project have
been sold, the subdivider, within thirty (30) days, shall convey such fee for
each of the unsold units. The amount of the fee, if conditions warrant, may be
increased above the established fee by the planning commission. Such funds
shall be used solely and exclusively as a contingency fund for emergencies
which may arise relating to open space areas, exterior portions of dwelling
units, and such other restoration or repairs as may be assumed by the
homeowners' association. (Ord. 2481 § 1, 2002)
17.25.070: TENANT BENEFITS AND NOTIFICATION:
Applications for condominium conversions shall include the following procedures
as they relate to tenant notifications:
   A.   Notices Of Intent: A notice of intent to convert shall be delivered to
each tenant at least ninety (90) days prior to filing the tentative map.
Evidence of the receipt of such notice shall be submitted with the application
for conversion. The form of the notice shall be in the form outlined by section
66452.9 of the subdivision map act, shall be approved by the department, and
shall contain not less than the following:
      1.   The name and address of the current owner;
      2.   The name and address of the proposed subdivider;
      3.   The approximate date on which the application and tentative map are
proposed to be filed;
      4.   The approximate date on which the final map or parcel map is to be
filed;
      5.   The approximate date on which the unit is to be vacated by
nonpurchasing tenants;
      6.   The tenant's right to purchase;
      7.   The tenant's right of notification to vacate;
      8.   The tenant's right to termination of the lease;
      9.   A statement of no rent increase;
      10.   Provisions for special cases;
      11.   The provision of moving expenses and the tenant's right to claim
any penalty imposed if timely payment is not made;
      12.   The anticipated price range of the units;
      13.   The proposed homeowners' association fees;
      14.   A statement of the types of financing programs to be made
available, including any incentive programs for existing residents; and
      15.   A copy of the city conversion regulations shall be attached to the
notice of intent.
   B.   Notification To Tenants:
      1.   Mailing: Two (2) separate stamped, preaddressed envelopes for each
resident of each unit shall be furnished to the department by the subdivider at
the time the subdivider submits an application for a tentative map. The
department shall use one envelope to notify the residents by mailing a copy of
the planning commission or public hearing notice to tenants not less than ten
(10) days prior to the proposed hearing date on the application. The notice
shall include notification of the tenant's right to appear and be heard. The
second envelope shall be used by the department to notify the residents of the
results of the public hearing by mailing notification of the decision of the
planning commission not more than seven (7) days following the planning
commission action. Failure of the department to mail such notice shall not
invalidate any proceeding or action taken by the city in considering a
conversion. The list of names and addresses of the residents of each unit in
the conversion project shall be current as of the day of submittal and shall be
certified as such by the subdivider.
      2.   Notices To Prospective Tenants: Commencing ninety (90) days prior to
the submittal of the application, any prospective tenants shall be notified in
writing by the subdivider of the intent to convert prior to leasing or renting
any unit pursuant to section 66452.8 of the subdivision map act.
      3.   Posting Notices: The notice of intent shall be posted by the
subdivider on site in at least one location readily visible to tenants.
   C.   Tenants' Discounts: Any present tenant of any unit at the time of an
application for conversion shall be given a nontransferable right of first
refusal to purchase the unit occupied at a discount of the price offered to the
general public. The amount of the discount shall be based on the longevity of
each tenant.
   D.   Vacation Of Units: Each nonpurchasing tenant, not in default under the
obligations of the rental agreement or lease under which the subject unit is
occupied, shall have not less than one hundred twenty (120) days after the date
of the tentative map approval by the city or until the expiration of the
tenant's lease to find substitute housing and to relocate. Tenants shall be
permitted to terminate leases or tenancy with one month's notice at any time
after a conversion application.
   E.   No Increase In Rent: A tenant's rent shall not be increased within two
(2) months prior to a project application, nor shall the rent be increased for
two (2) years from the time of the filing of the project application or until
relocation takes place. At the end of the two (2) year period, any increase in
rent shall first be approved by the planning commission. When reviewing
applications for rent increases, the planning commission shall consider the
University of California housing office apartment vacancy and rental rate
report or residential rent component of the San Bernardino area cost of living
index of the United States department of labor, the condition of the unit,
prevailing rents for similar units, and a reasonable rate of return on the
owner's investment.
   F.   Special Cases:
      1.   All nonpurchasing tenants sixty two (62) years of age or older and
all nonpurchasing medically proven permanently disabled tenants shall be
offered a lifetime lease. Rents for such tenants shall not be increased for two
(2) years after the filing of the project application. At the end of the two
(2) year period, any increase in rent shall first be approved by the planning
commission. When reviewing applications for rent increases, the planning
commission shall consider the residential rent component of the San Bernardino
area cost of living index of the United States department of labor, the
condition of the unit, prevailing rents for similar units, and a reasonable
rate of return on the owners investment.
      2.   The following nonpurchasing tenants shall receive a minimum of
twelve (12) months' relocation time, measured from the tentative map approval,
to find replacement housing:
         a.   Tenants with low or moderate incomes as defined in California
Health and Safety Code section 50093;
         b.   Tenants with minor children in school.
   G.   Moving Expenses: The subdivider shall provide moving expenses equal to
three (3) times the monthly rent to any tenant, in compliance with the terms of
the subject lease, who relocates from the building to be converted after city
approval of the tentative map. When the tenant has given notice of his intent
to move prior to city approval of the tentative map, eligibility to receive
moving expenses shall be forfeited.
   H.   Relocation Assistance: Relocation assistance shall be provided by the
subdivider to nonpurchasing tenants for a minimum period of four (4) months
following the tentative map approval. Information on available rental units in
the same general area with costs comparable to the preconverted apartments
shall be provided regularly and updated. Copies of the list shall be posted on
site, dated, and provided to the department.
   I.   Discrimination: No discrimination in the sale of any unit shall be
based on age, and a statement to this effect shall be included in the
covenants, conditions and restrictions. Projects created exclusively for the
purpose of providing senior citizen housing shall be exempted from this
requirement.
   J.   Certification Of Occupancy: A certificate of occupancy shall be issued
by the building official prior to the occupancy of units after sales.
   K.   Effect Of Proposed Conversions On The City's Low Income And Moderate
Income Housing Supply: In reviewing requests for the conversion of existing
apartments to condominiums, the planning commission shall also consider the
following:
      1.   Whether or not the amount and impact of the displacement of tenants,
if the conversion is approved, would be detrimental to the health, safety or
general welfare of the community;
      2.   The role the apartment structure plays in the existing housing
rental market. Particular emphasis will be placed on the evaluation of rental
structures to determine if the existing apartment complex is serving low income
and moderate income households. Standard definitions of low income and moderate
income and low income and moderate income rents used by the federal and state
governments shall be used in the evaluation;
      3.   The need and demand for lower cost home ownership opportunities
which are increased by the conversion of apartments to condominiums; and
      4.   If the planning commission determines that vacancies in the project
have been increased for the purpose of preparing the project for conversion,
the application may be disapproved. In the evaluation of the current vacancy
level under this subsection, the increase in rental rates for each unit over
the preceding three (3) years and the average monthly vacancy rate for the
project over the preceding two (2) years shall be considered.
   L.   Findings: The planning commission shall not approve an application for
a condominium conversion unless the planning commission finds that:
      1.   All the provisions of the subdivision map act, this title, and other
applicable provisions of this code are met;
      2.   The proposed conversion is consistent with the general plan and the
adopted housing element and any applicable specific plan;
      3.   The proposed conversion will conform to the provisions of this code
in effect at the time of the project approval, except as otherwise provided in
this section;
      4.   The overall design and physical condition of the condominium
conversion achieves a high standard of appearance, quality and safety;
      5.   The proposed conversion will not displace a significant percentage
of low income or moderate income, permanently or totally disabled, or senior
citizen tenants, or delete a significant number of low income and moderate
income rental units from the city's housing stock at the time when no
equivalent housing is readily available in the Redlands area;
      6.   The application process has conformed to all the requirements of the
subdivision map act and this title; and
      7.   The dwelling units to be converted have been constructed and used as
rental units for at least five (5) years prior to the application for
conversion or have received an approved housing allocation. (Ord. 2481 § 1,
2002)
CHAPTER 17.27
ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
17.27.010: Prohibition
17.27.020: Remedies
17.27.030: Certificate Of Compliance
17.27.040: Notice Of Violation
17.27.050: Violation As A Misdemeanor
17.27.010: PROHIBITION:
   A.   No person shall sell, lease or finance any parcel or parcels of real
property or commence construction of any building for sale, lease or financing
thereon, except for model homes, or allow occupancy thereof, for which a final
map is required by the subdivision map act or this title, until such a map, in
full compliance with the provisions of the subdivision map act and this title,
has been filed for record by the county recorder.
   B.   No person shall sell, lease or finance any parcel or parcels of real
property or commence construction of any building for sale, lease or financing
thereon, except for model homes, or allow occupancy thereof, for which a parcel
map is required by the subdivision map act or this title, until such a map, in
full compliance with the provisions of the subdivision map act and this title
has been filed for record by the county recorder.
   C.   Conveyances of any part of a division of real property for which a
final or parcel map is required by the subdivision map act or this title shall
not be made by parcel or block number, letter or other designation, unless and
until such map has been filed for record by the county recorder.
   D.   This section does not apply to any parcel or parcels of a subdivision
offered for sale or lease, contracted for sale or lease, or sold or leased in
compliance with or exempt from any law, including this title, regulating the
design and improvement of subdivisions in effect at the time the subdivision
was established.
   E.   Nothing contained in subsections A and B of this section shall be
deemed to prohibit an offer or contract to sell, lease or finance real property
or to construct improvements thereon where such sale, lease or financing, or
the commencement of such construction, is expressly conditioned upon the
approval and filing of a final map or parcel map, as required under subdivision
map act or this title. (Ord. 2481 § 1, 2002)
17.27.020: REMEDIES:
   A.   Any deed of conveyance, sale or contract to sell real property which
has been divided, or which has resulted from a division, in violation of the
provisions of the subdivision map act or this title, is voidable at the sole
option of the grantee, buyer or person contracting to purchase, any heirs,
personal representative, or trustee in insolvency or bankruptcy thereof within
one year after the date of discovery of such violation. The deed of conveyance,
sale or contract to sell is binding upon any successor in interest of the
grantee, buyer or person contracting to purchase, other than those above
enumerated, and upon the grantor, vendor or person contracting to sell, or his
or her assignee, heir or devisee.
   B.   Any grantee, or successor in interest thereof, of real property which
has been divided, or which has resulted from a division, in violation of the
provisions of this title or the subdivision map act may, within one year of the
date of discovery of such violation, bring an action in the superior court to
recover any damages suffered by reason of such division of property. The action
may be brought against the person who so divided the property and against any
successors in interest who have actual or constructive knowledge of such
division of property.
   C.   The provisions of this section shall not apply to the conveyance of any
parcel of real property identified in a certificate of compliance filed
pursuant to section
17.27.030 of this chapter or identified in a recorded final map or parcel map,
from and after the date of recording.
The provisions of this section shall not limit or affect in any way the rights
of a grantee or successor in interest under any other provision of law.
   D.   This section does not bar any legal, equitable or summary remedy to
which the city or other public agency, or any person, firm or corporation may
otherwise be entitled, and the city or other public agency, or such person,
firm or corporation may file a suit in the superior court to restrain or enjoin
any attempted or proposed subdivision or sale, lease, or financing in violation
of the subdivision map act or this title.
   E.   The city shall not issue a permit or grant any approval necessary to
develop any real property which has been divided, or which has resulted from a
division, in violation of the provisions of the subdivision map act or this
title if it finds that development of such real property is contrary to the
public health or the public safety. The authority to deny such a permit or
approval shall apply whether the applicant therefor was the owner of record at
the time of such violation or whether the applicant therefor is either the
current owner of record or a vendee thereof with, or without, actual or
constructive knowledge of the violation at the time of the acquisition of an
interest in such real property.
If the city issues a permit or grants approval for the development of any real
property illegally subdivided, the city may impose those additional conditions
which would have been applicable to the division of the property at the time
the current owner of record acquired the property. If the property has the same
owner of record as at the time of the initial violation, the city may impose
conditions applicable to a current division of the property. If a conditional
certificate of compliance has been filed for record in accordance with the
provisions of section
17.27.030 of this chapter, only those conditions stipulated in that certificate
shall be applicable. (Ord. 2481 § 1, 2002)
17.27.030: CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE:
   A.   Any person owning real property or a vendee of such person pursuant to
a contract of sale of such real property may request the planning commission to
determine whether the real property complies with the provisions of the
subdivision map act and this title.
   B.   If the planning commission determines that the real property complies
with the provisions of the subdivision map act and this title, the city
engineer shall file a certificate of compliance for record with the county
recorder. The certificate of compliance shall identify the real property and
shall state that the division thereof complies with the provisions of the
subdivision map act and this title.
   C.   If the planning commission determines that the real property does not
comply with the provisions of the subdivision map act or this title, the
planning commission may, as a condition to granting a certificate of
compliance, impose conditions in accordance with subsection
 17.27.020E of this chapter. Upon the planning commission's making such a
determination and establishing such conditions, the department shall file a
conditional certificate of compliance for record with the county recorder. Such
certificate shall serve as notice to the property owner or vendee who has
applied for the certificate, a grantee of the property owner or any subsequent
transferee or assignee of the property, that the fulfillment and implementation
of such conditions shall be required prior to subsequent issuance of a permit
or other grant of approval for development of the property. Compliance with
such conditions shall not be required until such time as a permit or other
grant of approval for development of such property is issued by the city.
   D.   A recorded final map or parcel map shall constitute a certificate of
compliance with respect to the parcels of property described within.
   E.   Subject to the provisions of section 66499.35(e) of the subdivision map
act, an official map prepared pursuant to section 66499.52(b) of the
subdivision map act shall constitute a certificate of compliance with respect
to the parcels of real property described therein.
   F.   A fee and/or deposit shall be charged to the applicant for making the
determination and processing the certificate of compliance in accordance with
section
17.01.060 of this title. (Ord. 2481 § 1, 2002)
17.27.040: NOTICE OF VIOLATION:
If the department has knowledge that real property has been divided in
violation of the provisions of the subdivision map act or this title, a notice
of intention to record a notice of violation shall be mailed by the department
by certified mail to the current owner of record. The notice shall describe the
property in detail, name the owners, describe the violation and state that the
owner will be given the opportunity to present evidence. The notice shall also
contain an explanation as to why the subject parcel is not lawful under
sections 66412.6(a) and (b) of the subdivision map act. The notice shall
specify the date, time and place for a meeting at which the owner may present
evidence to the planning commission why a notice of violation should not be
recorded.
The meeting shall be held no sooner than thirty (30) days and no later than
sixty (60) days from the date of mailing of the notice of intention to record a
notice of violation. If, within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the notice, the
owner fails to file with the department a written objection to recording the
notice of violation, the department shall file the notice of violation for
record with the county recorder. If, after the owner has presented evidence,
the planning commission determines that there has been no violation, the
department shall mail a clearance letter to the then current owner of record.
If, however, after the owner has presented evidence, the planning commission
determines that the property has in fact been illegally divided, the department
shall record the notice of violation for record with the county recorder. The
notice of violation, when recorded, shall be deemed to be constructive notice
of the violation to all successors in interest in such property. (Ord. 2481 §
1, 2002)
17.27.050: VIOLATION AS A MISDEMEANOR:
In addition to the remedies and procedures provided in this title, any person
violating any of the provisions, or failing to comply with any of the
regulatory requirements, of this title shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Any
person convicted of a misdemeanor under the provisions of this title shall be
punishable by imprisonment in the county jail not exceeding six (6) months or
by fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by both. Except as
otherwise provided in this title, each person shall be guilty of a separate
offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any
provision of this title is committed, continued or permitted by such person and
shall be punishable accordingly. (Ord. 2481 § 1, 2002)
CHAPTER 17.28
SIGNAGE AND MARKETING DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS FOR NEW
RESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISION DEVELOPMENT LOCATED WITHIN THE REDLANDS
AIRPORT INFLUENCE AREA
SECTION:
17.28.010: Purpose Of Chapter
17.28.020: Applicability
17.28.030: Signage Requirements
17.28.040: Fee; Payment
17.28.050: Marketing And Disclosure Requirements
17.28.060: Declaration Of Covenant And Waiver
17.28.010: PURPOSE OF CHAPTER:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish regulations and a fee for the
provision of signage and marketing disclosure requirements for new residential
subdivision development located within the Redlands airport influence area.
Pursuant to this chapter, the city shall design signs to be located within the
city's public rights of way to inform the public that certain subdivision
development is located within the Redlands airport influence area. The city's
public works director shall prepare a signage plan which includes the locations
and number of signs and architectural drawings of the signs in conformance with
section
17.28.030 of this chapter. (Ord. 2640 § 1, 2006)
17.28.020: APPLICABILITY:
This chapter shall apply to all applicants for new residential subdivision
development, after the effective date hereof, that is proposed to be located
within the Redlands airport influence area. The boundary of the Redlands
airport influence area, for purposes of this chapter, is defined as the
geographical area south of the Santa Ana River, east of Orange Street, north of
Lugonia Avenue and west of Sapphire Street. (Ord. 2640 § 1, 2006)
17.28.030: SIGNAGE REQUIREMENTS:
All applicants for residential subdivision development proposed within the
Redlands airport influence area shall be required, as a condition of approval
of the subdivision development, to pay a fee established by resolution of the
city council, for the city's costs of installation and maintenance of signs
notifying the public that the subdivision is located within the Redlands
airport influence area. Such signs shall be installed by the city at locations
determined by the city's public works director, or his or her designee. (Ord.
2640 § 1, 2006)
17.28.040: FEE; PAYMENT:
No building permit shall be issued for any unit (including model homes) within
any new residential subdivision development subject to the provisions of this
chapter until the required fee has been paid. (Ord. 2640 § 1, 2006)
17.28.050: MARKETING AND DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS:
All sales and marketing materials, and sales offices, for new residential
subdivision development located within the Redlands airport influence area
shall comply with the requirements of this section.
   A.   Required Posting Of Aerial Photograph Labeling Redlands Airport
Influence Area At Sales Offices:
      1.   All model homes and sales offices for new residential subdivision
development within the Redlands airport influence area shall post an aerial
photograph of the Redlands airport influence area in a location clearly visible
to prospective buyers. The aerial photograph shall be labeled as follows:
         a.   The title, "Redlands Airport Influence Area", shall be printed in
a font no smaller than font "40" at the top and center of the aerial
photograph. The aerial photograph shall be a minimum of six (6) square feet in
size.
         b.   The following text shall be printed in a font no smaller than
font "16" in the lower right corner of the photograph:
This property is currently located in the vicinity of the Redlands municipal
airport. This property may be subject to some of the annoyances or
inconveniences commonly associated with proximity to airport operations (for
example: noise, vibration or odors), including noise generated by general
aviation aircraft, including fixed wing aircraft and helicopters.
         c.   The color of the lettering shall contrast with the background of
the photograph to facilitate easy reading.
         d.   A copy of the aerial photograph shall be available on compact
disk for duplication by residential marketing representatives through the
city's municipal utilities department.
   B.   Notation On All Sales And Marketing Materials: All sales and marketing
brochures and flyers distributed for the sale of any residence located within
the Redlands airport influence area shall contain the following text of font
size "12" or larger:
This property is located in the vicinity of the Redlands Municipal airport.
This property may be subject to some of the annoyances or inconveniences
associated with proximity to airport operations (for example: noise, vibration
or odors), including noise from general aviation aircraft, but not limited to,
the landing and take-off of fixed wing aircraft and helicopters.
(Ord. 2640 § 1, 2006)
17.28.060: DECLARATION OF COVENANT AND WAIVER:
Execution of a declaration of covenant and waiver, in the form on file with the
city's community development department, shall be required as a condition of
approval for all residential subdivision development within the Redlands
airport influence area. The declaration of covenant and waiver shall be
executed by the owners of the property comprising the subdivision and delivered
to the city's community development department before a final map may be
recorded for the subdivision. (Ord. 2640 § 1, 2006)
TITLE 18
ZONING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 18.04
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
18.04.010: Title For Citation
18.04.020: Purpose Of Provisions
18.04.030: Continuation Of Regulations
18.04.040: Existing Uses
18.04.050: Existing Lots
18.04.060: Public Utilities And Public Services
18.04.010: TITLE FOR CITATION:
The ordinance codified herein shall be known as the LAND USE ZONING ORDINANCE
OF THE CITY OF REDLANDS. (Ord. 1000 § 2, 1955)
18.04.020: PURPOSE OF PROVISIONS:
An official land use zoning ordinance for the city is hereby adopted and
established as is hereinafter set forth in this title, in order to encourage
the most appropriate use of land; to conserve and stabilize the value of
property; to provide adequate open spaces for light and air, and to prevent and
permit adequate control of fires; to prevent undue concentration of population;
to lessen congestion on streets; to facilitate adequate provision for community
facilities and utilities, including transportation, water supply, sewage
disposal, schools, parks and other public requirements which tend to promote
the health, safety and public welfare; all in accordance with a comprehensive
plan for the orderly development of the city and its environs. (Ord. 1000 § 1,
1955)
18.04.030: CONTINUATION OF REGULATIONS:
The provisions of this title, insofar as they are substantially the same as
existing ordinances relating to the same subject matter, shall be construed as
restatements and continuations and not as new enactments. The adoption of the
ordinance codified herein shall not constitute a validation of any use not
conforming with the provisions of the zone in which it is located. (Ord. 1000 §
3, 1955)
18.04.040: EXISTING USES:
The existing use, or uses, of all buildings, improvements and premises not in
conformity with the standards or requirements of the land use zoning district
in which they are located, in accordance with the provisions of this title, and
which uses are legal, or for which permits, variances or conditional exceptions
were granted under previous zoning ordinances, may continue as nonconforming
uses or variances, as defined in this title, and subject to the provisions
regulating such nonconforming uses. (Ord. 1000 § 4, 1955)
18.04.050: EXISTING LOTS:
The area and dimension provisions of the sections dealing with property
development standards shall apply to all lots; provided, however, that where a
lot has a width or area less than that required in the zoning district of which
it is a part, and was held under separate ownership or was of record at the
time the ordinance codified in this title became effective, such lot may be
occupied by the uses permitted in the district, subject to the area per
dwelling unit and yard requirements, and such other regulations as apply
uniformly to all lots in that district. (Ord. 1000 § 5, 1955)
18.04.060: PUBLIC UTILITIES AND PUBLIC SERVICES:
The provisions of this title shall not be so construed as to limit or interfere
with the construction, installation, operation and maintenance, for public
utility purposes, of water and gas pipes, mains and conduits, electric light
and electric power transmission and distribution lines, telephone and telegraph
lines, oil pipelines, sewers and sewer mains, and incidental appurtenances.
(Ord. 1000 § 11, 1955)
CHAPTER 18.06
FAIR HOUSING REASONABLE ACCOMMODATIONS FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES
SECTION:
18.06.010: Purpose
18.06.020: Definitions
18.06.030: Application
18.06.040: Filing And Appeal Fees
18.06.050: Notice To Adjacent Properties
18.06.060: Determination On Application; Approval
18.06.070: Findings
18.06.080: Notice Of Decision
18.06.090: Appeal
18.06.010: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this chapter, in compliance with the fair housing laws, to
provide a procedure to evaluate requests for reasonable accommodation related
to specific applications of the zoning law in order to ensure that no person is
discriminated against because of race, color, religion, sex, sexual
orientation, familial status, marital status, disability, national origin,
source of income, or ancestry, as required by federal and/or state law, by
being denied an equal opportunity to use and enjoy their dwelling and to
authorize the application of exceptions to the city's zoning law and land
development standards, if warranted. (Ord. 2656 § 1, 2007)
18.06.020: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this chapter, shall have the
following meanings:
   APPLICANT: The person, business, or organization which has applied to the
city for a permit for a project on the subject property and which is making a
request for reasonable accommodation pursuant to this chapter.
   DWELLING OCCUPANT: The person who will occupy the subject property and who
is protected under the fair housing laws.
   FAIR HOUSING LAWS: Section 42 United States Code section 3604(f)(3)(B) and
California Government Code sections 12927(C)(1) and 12955.1, as those
provisions now exist and as they may be amended from time to time.
   PERSON WITH DISABILITY OR HANDICAP: Any person who has a physical or mental
impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities, or any
person having a record of such an impairment, but such term does not include
current, illegal use of, or an addiction to, a controlled substance. (Ord. 2656
§ 1, 2007)
18.06.030: APPLICATION:
   A.   Any person with a disability may submit an application for reasonable
accommodation to the city's residential development standards by submitting an
application to the city's community development director, or his or her
designee, on a form provided by the city.
   B.   The following information shall be provided in the application:
      1.   The applicant's name, mailing address and daytime phone number(s)
(and/or representatives) if so applicable;
      2.   Notarized written consent of the owner of the subject property if
the applicant is not the owner;
      3.   The address of the property for which the request is being made;
      4.   A map showing county of San Bernardino assessor's parcel numbers for
all properties within a three hundred foot (300') radius of the subject
property;
      5.   The specific zoning code, law, regulation, procedure or policy of
the city from which relief is sought;
      6.   An explanation of why the specified zoning code, law, regulation,
procedure or policy is preventing, or will prevent, the applicant's use and
enjoyment of the subject property;
      7.   The nature of the accommodation requested;
      8.   A site plan or illustrative drawing showing the proposed
accommodation; and
      9.   The basis for the claim that the fair housing laws consider the
applicant as protected (applicant should submit a letter from a medical doctor,
handicap license, or other similar supportive evidence). (Ord. 2656 § 1, 2007)
18.06.040: FILING AND APPEAL FEES:
   A.   A filing fee or an appeal fee, as applicable and in the amounts
established by city council resolution, shall be paid at the time of the filing
of an application or at the time of filing an appeal pursuant to this chapter.
   B.   If an applicant requires assistance in completing the application, the
city shall provide reasonable assistance to ensure that the application process
is accessible to the applicant. (Ord. 2656 § 1, 2007)
18.06.050: NOTICE TO ADJACENT PROPERTIES:
   A.   Notice of the filing of an application for reasonable accommodation
shall be mailed to the owners of record of all properties within three hundred
feet (300') of the property which is the subject of the application.
   B.   The notice shall set forth the address of the subject property, the
specific zoning code, law, regulation, procedure or policy from which relief is
being requested, and the nature of the accommodation requested. The notice
shall also inform surrounding property owners that they may contact the city's
community development director, or his or her designee, in order to request
written notice of any decisions made, or hearings scheduled, regarding the
application.
   C.   Any property owner making a request for such written notice shall be
deemed an "interested person" for purposes of this chapter. (Ord. 2656 § 1,
2007)
18.06.060: DETERMINATION ON APPLICATION; APPROVAL:
The request for reasonable accommodation shall be considered by the community
development director, who may deny, approve or conditionally approve the
request. The community development director may also refer the request for
reasonable accommodation, in his or her sole discretion, to the city committee
responsible for granting minor exception permits pursuant to section
18.168.060 of this title. Such referrals, if made, shall occur within fifteen
(15) days after the community development director's receipt of a complete
application. The committee shall act in the capacity of the community
development director in such cases, as authorized by, and in accordance with
the requirements of this chapter and section
18.168.060 of this title. (Ord. 2656 § 1, 2007)
18.06.070: FINDINGS:
The following findings shall be made, and the community development director,
or the committee acting in the capacity of the community development director
if applicable, shall approve an application upon a showing of all of the
following:
   A.   The person who will use the subject property is protected under the
fair housing laws;
   B.   The requested exception to the zoning code, law, regulation, procedure
or policy is necessary to make specific housing available to persons occupying
the subject property;
   C.   The requested accommodation will not impose an undue financial or
administrative burden on the city; and
   D.   The requested accommodation will not require a fundamental alteration
of the city's zoning or building laws, policies and/or procedures. (Ord. 2656 §
1, 2007)
18.06.080: NOTICE OF DECISION:
Within thirty (30) days after acceptance of a complete application for
reasonable accommodation the community development director or, if referred to
the committee established pursuant to section
18.168.060 of this title, within ten (10) days after such committee's decision,
the community development director shall provide the applicant with written
notification of the decision regarding the request, including any reasonable
conditions. (Ord. 2656 § 1, 2007)
18.06.090: APPEAL:
Within ten (10) days of the date of any decision made pursuant to section
18.06.080 of this chapter, any person aggrieved or affected by a decision of
the community development director, or the committee established by section
18.168.060 of this title, in granting or denying a request for reasonable
accommodation may appeal the decision to the city council. The city council
may, if determined to be in the public interest to do so, appeal any decision
rendered pursuant to this chapter at its next regularly scheduled meeting
following such decision. Notice of the city council hearing on the appeal
should be made in accordance with section
18.06.050 of this chapter. If a decision denying a reasonable accommodation is
reversed, or a decision granting a reasonable accommodation is modified, the
city council shall make the required findings as prescribed in section
18.06.070 of this chapter. (Ord. 2656 § 1, 2007)
CHAPTER 18.08
DEFINITIONS AND CONSTRUCTION
SECTION:
18.08.005: Definitions Generally
18.08.010: Interpretation Of Language
18.08.015: Accessory Buildings
18.08.020: Accessory Living Quarters
18.08.025: Accessory Use
18.08.030: Advisory Agency
18.08.035: Airport
18.08.040: Alley
18.08.045: Altered
18.08.050: Animal Hospital
18.08.055: Apartment
18.08.060: Apartment Hotel
18.08.065: Apartment House
18.08.070: Auto And/Or Trailer Camp
18.08.075: Automobile And Trailer Sales Lot
18.08.080: Automobile Service Stations
18.08.085: Automobile Trailer And/Or House Trailer
18.08.090: Automobile Wrecking
18.08.095: Basement
18.08.100: Block
18.08.110: Building
18.08.115: Building, Height Of
18.08.120: Building Line
18.08.125: Building, Main
18.08.130: Building Site
18.08.135: Building, Unit Group
18.08.145: Business Or Commercial
18.08.150: Camp Trailer
18.08.155: Carport
18.08.160: Centerline
18.08.165: Club, Private
18.08.168: Community Care Facility
18.08.170: Court
18.08.177: Daycare Center
18.08.180: Dormitory
18.08.185: Dump
18.08.190: Duplex
18.08.195: Dwelling
18.08.200: Dwelling Group
18.08.205: Dwelling, Multiple
18.08.210: Dwelling, One-Family
18.08.215: Dwelling, Three-Family Or Four-Family
18.08.220: Dwelling, Two-Family
18.08.225: Dwelling Units
18.08.230: Easement
18.08.235: Educational Institution
18.08.238: Employee Housing
18.08.240: Family
18.08.245: Farm Site
18.08.250: Fence
18.08.252: Flag Lot
18.08.253: Flag Lot, Body
18.08.254: Flag Lot, Staff
18.08.255: Front Wall
18.08.260: Frontage
18.08.265: Garage, Private
18.08.270: Garage, Public
18.08.275: Garage, Storage
18.08.280: Grade
18.08.285: Guest
18.08.290: Guesthouse (Accessory Living Quarters)
18.08.295: Guestroom
18.08.300: Half Story
18.08.305: Hedge
18.08.310: Height Of Building
18.08.315: Home Occupation
18.08.320: Hospital
18.08.325: Hospital, Animal
18.08.330: Hotel
18.08.340: Industry
18.08.345: Junkyard
18.08.350: Kennel
18.08.355: Kitchen
18.08.360: Loading Space
18.08.365: Lodging House
18.08.370: Lot
18.08.375: Lot Area
18.08.380: Lot, Corner
18.08.385: Lot, Corner, Reversed
18.08.390: Lot Depth
18.08.395: Lot, Interior
18.08.400: Lot, Key
18.08.405: Lot Line
18.08.410: Lot Line, Front
18.08.415: Lot Of Record
18.08.420: Lot, Through
18.08.425: Lot Width
18.08.430: Marquee
18.08.435: Mile
18.08.437: Minimum Frontage
18.08.438: Minimum Lot Size
18.08.440: Motel
18.08.445: Nonconforming Structure
18.08.450: Nonconforming Use
18.08.455: One-Half Mile
18.08.460: Parking Area, Private
18.08.465: Parking Area, Public
18.08.470: Parking Space, Automobile
18.08.475: Person
18.08.477: Private Residential Recreation Court
18.08.480: Rest Home
18.08.485: Room
18.08.490: Rooming House
18.08.495: School
18.08.500: Sign
18.08.505: Story
18.08.510: Street
18.08.515: Street Centerline
18.08.520: Structural Alterations
18.08.525: Structure
18.08.527: Supportive Housing
18.08.530: Tourist Home
18.08.535: Trailer Camp
18.08.540: Transient
18.08.542: Transitional Housing
18.08.545: Truck And Trailer Sales Lot
18.08.550: Urban Area
18.08.555: Urban Lot
18.08.560: Use
18.08.565: Visual Obstruction
18.08.570: Wall
18.08.575: Wall, Permanent
18.08.580: Yard
18.08.585: Yard, Front
18.08.590: Yard, Rear
18.08.595: Yard, Side
18.08.600: Zone
18.08.605: Zone, Change Of
18.08.610: Zone Map
18.08.615: Zoning Ordinance, Land Use Ordinance Or Ordinance
18.08.005: DEFINITIONS GENERALLY:
For the purposes of carrying out the intent of this title, words, phrases and
terms shall be deemed to have the meanings ascribed to them in the following
sections covering definitions. (Ord. 1000 § 6.00, 1955)
18.08.010: INTERPRETATION OF LANGUAGE:
   A.   When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense
include the future; words in the singular number include the plural, and those
in the plural number include the singular.
   B.   The word "building" includes the word "structure".
   C.   The word "City" means the City of Redlands.
   D.   The word "commission" means the Planning Commission of the City of
Redlands.
   E.   The word "Council" means the City Council of Redlands.
   F.   The word "shall" is mandatory and the word "may" is permissive.
   G.   The word "used" includes the words "arranged for, designed for,
occupied, or intended to be occupied for". (Ord. 1000 § 6.10, 1955)
18.08.015: ACCESSORY BUILDINGS:
"Accessory buildings" means a detached, subordinate building located on the
same lot with a main building, the use of which is customarily incidental to
that permitted in the main building, or to the land upon which the main
building is located. A garage attached to the main building shall be considered
a part of the main building. (Ord. 1000 § 6.20, 1955)
18.08.020: ACCESSORY LIVING QUARTERS:
For "accessory living quarters", see definition of guesthouse (accessory living
quarters). (Ord. 1000 § 6.20, 1955)
18.08.025: ACCESSORY USE:
"Accessory use" means a use incidental or subordinate to and devoted
exclusively to the main use of the land or building thereon. (Ord. 1000 § 6.20,
1955)
18.08.030: ADVISORY AGENCY:
The city planning commission is designated as the "advisory agency" to the
mayor and city council on all matters related to the zoning and use of land and
structures. (Ord. 1000 § 6.20, 1955)
18.08.035: AIRPORT:
"Airport" means any area which is used or is intended to be used for the taking
off and landing of aircraft, including helicopters, and any appurtenance areas
which are used, or are intended to be used, for airport buildings or
facilities, including open spaces, taxiways and tie down areas. (Ord. 1000 §
6.20, 1955)
18.08.040: ALLEY:
"Alley" means a public or private way, at the rear or side of property,
permanently reserved as a means of secondary vehicular access to abutting
property. (Ord. 1000 § 6.20, 1955)
18.08.045: ALTERED:
For "altered", see definition of Structural Alterations. (Ord. 1000 § 6.20,
1955)
18.08.050: ANIMAL HOSPITAL:
"Animal hospital" means a place where animals or pets are given medical or
surgical treatment and are cared for during the time of such treatment. The use
of the premises as a kennel or a place where animals or pets are boarded for
remuneration may be permitted only when incidental to the principal use. (Ord.
1000 § 6.20, 1955)
18.08.055: APARTMENT:
For "apartment", see definition of Dwelling Units. (Ord. 1000 § 6.20, 1955)
18.08.060: APARTMENT HOTEL:
"Apartment hotel" means a building or portion thereof containing individual
guestrooms or suites of rooms and dwelling units. (Ord. 1000 § 6.20, 1955)
18.08.065: APARTMENT HOUSE:
"Apartment house" means a building, or portion thereof, designed or used for
three (3) or more dwelling units, or a combination of three (3) or more
dwelling units, and not more than five (5) guestrooms or suites of rooms. (Ord.
1000 § 6.20, 1955)
18.08.070: AUTO AND/OR TRAILER CAMP:
"Auto and/or trailer camp" means any area or tract of land where space is
rented or held for rent to owners or users of trailer coaches, or where free
camping is provided owners or users of trailer coaches for the purpose of
securing their trade. (Ord. 1000 § 6.20, 1955)
18.08.075: AUTOMOBILE AND TRAILER SALES LOT:
"Automobile and trailer sales lot" means an open area used for the display,
sales and/or rental of new or used automobiles and trailer coaches, but where
no repair, repainting or remodeling is done. (Ord. 1000 § 6.20, 1955)
18.08.080: AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATIONS:
"Automobile service stations" means an area which provides for the servicing of
motor vehicles, including tube and tire repairs, battery charging, storage of
merchandise and supplies related to the servicing of motor vehicles, sale of
gasoline and lubricants, automobile washing (not including automatic carwash)
and grease racks, but excluding automobile repairs, body and fender work,
engine overhauling, and other similar activities. (Ord. 1000 § 6.20, 1955)
18.08.085: AUTOMOBILE TRAILER AND/OR HOUSE TRAILER:
"Automobile trailer and/or house trailer" means any building or structure used
for living or sleeping purposes, and equipped with wheels or other means to
facilitate movement from place to place, and vehicles when used for living or
sleeping purposes. (Ord. 1000 § 6.20, 1955)
18.08.090: AUTOMOBILE WRECKING:
"Automobile wrecking" means the wrecking or dismantling of used motor vehicles
or trailers, or the storage of, sale of or dumping of dismantled, partly
dismantled, obsolete or wrecked motor vehicles, or their parts. (Ord. 1000 §
6.20, 1955)
18.08.095: BASEMENT:
"Basement" means a space wholly or partly underground, and having more than
one-half (1/2) of its height, measuring from its floor to its ceiling, below
the average adjoining grade. If the finished floor level directly above a
basement is more than six feet (6') above grade at any point, such basement
shall be considered a "story". (Ord. 1000 § 6.20, 1955)
18.08.100: BLOCK:
"Block" means a parcel of land surrounded by public streets, highways,
freeways, railroad right of way, flood control channel, creek, wash, river, or
unsubdivided acreage, or any combination thereof. (Ord. 1000 § 6.20, 1955)
18.08.110: BUILDING:
"Building" means any structure having a roof and walls built and maintained for
the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or property of
any kind, including an apartment house, hotel or dwelling, either singly or in
combination. (Ord. 1000 § 6.20, 1955)
18.08.115: BUILDING, HEIGHT OF:
"Height of building" means the vertical distance, measured from the adjoining
curb level to the highest point of the structure, exclusive of chimneys and
ventilators; provided, however, that where buildings are set back from the
street line, the height shall be measured from the average elevation of the
finished grade at the front of the building. (Ord. 1000 § 6.20, 1955)
18.08.120: BUILDING LINE:
"Building line" means any private property line coterminous with a street, or a
building line established by the county or city ordinance. (Ord. 1000 § 6.20,
1955)
18.08.125: BUILDING, MAIN:
"Main building" means a building within which is conducted the principal use
permitted on the lot, as provided by this title. (Ord. 1000 § 6.20, 1955)
18.08.130: BUILDING SITE:
"Building site" means the ground area of a building, together with all open
space required by this title. (Ord. 1000 § 6.20, 1955)
18.08.135: BUILDING, UNIT GROUP:
"Unit group building" means two (2) or more buildings grouped on a lot. (Ord.
1000 § 6.20, 1955)
18.08.145: BUSINESS OR COMMERCIAL:
"Business" or "commercial" means the purchase, sale or other transaction
involving the handling or disposition (other than that included in the term
"industry", as defined in this chapter), of any article, substance or commodity
for profit or a livelihood, including, in addition, automobile or trailer
camps, tourist courts, and motels, public garages, office buildings, offices of
doctors and other professionals, outdoor advertising signs and structures,
public stables, recreational and amusement enterprises conducted for profit,
shops for the sale of personal services, places where commodities or services
are sold or are offered for sale, either by direct handling of merchandise or
by agreements to furnish them, but not including dumps and junkyards. (Ord.
1000 § 6.20, 1955)
18.08.150: CAMP TRAILER:
For "camp trailer", see definition of Auto And/Or Trailer Camp. (Ord. 1000 §
6.20, 1955)
18.08.155: CARPORT:
"Carport" means a permanent, roofed structure with not more than two (2)
enclosed sides, used or intended to be used for automobile shelter and storage.
Each dwelling unit shall have not less than one hundred eighty (180) cubic feet
of enclosed storage space within a carport or other acceptable structure. Such
storage space shall not encroach into required parking dimensions nor reduce
the utility of a parking space. (Ord. 1000 § 6.20, 1955)
18.08.160: CENTERLINE:
For "centerline", see definition of Street Centerline. (Ord. 1000 § 6.20, 1955)
18.08.165: CLUB, PRIVATE:
"Private club" means an association of persons (whether or not incorporated),
religious or otherwise, for a common purpose, but not including groups which
are organized primarily to render a service carried on as a business for
profit. (Ord. 1000 § 6.20, 1955)
18.08.168: COMMUNITY CARE FACILITY:
"Community care facility" has the same meaning as in California Health & Safety
Code section 1502. A community care facility for not more than six (6) persons
(excluding members of the resident family or persons employed as facility
staff) which may operate on a twenty four (24) hour-a-day basis within the
meaning of the Community Care Facilities Act is a "dwelling" in the individual
zone chapters. Whether or not unrelated persons are living together, a
residential care facility that serves six (6) or fewer persons (excluding
members of the resident family or persons employed as facility staff) shall be
considered a residential use of property for the purposes of these zoning
regulations (Calif. Health & Safety Code, section 1568.0831). A community care
facility is subject only to those restrictions that apply to other dwellings of
the same type within the same zone in the individual zone chapters. (Ord. 2985,
2025)
18.08.170: COURT:
"Court" means an open, unoccupied space, other than a yard, on the same lot
with a building and bounded on two (2) or more sides by such building. (Ord.
1000 § 6.20, 1955)
18.08.177: DAYCARE CENTER:
"Daycare center" means any child daycare facility other than a small or large
family daycare home, and includes infant centers, preschools and extended child
daycare facilities providing nonmedical care and supervision of clients in need
of supervision and assistance essential for sustaining the activities of daily
living and protection of the individual on less than a twenty four (24) hour
basis. (Ord. 2094 § 1, 1989)
18.08.180: DORMITORY:
"Dormitory" means a guestroom designed, intended or occupied as sleeping
quarters by more than two (2) persons. Every one hundred (100) square feet of
superficial floor area in a dormitory shall be considered as a separate
guestroom. (Ord. 1000 § 6.20, 1955)
18.08.185: DUMP:
"Dump" means a place used for the disposal, abandonment, discarding, dumping,
reduction, burial, incineration, or by any other means, of any garbage, sewage,
trash, refuse, waste material, offal or dead animals; provided, that this
definition shall not be deemed to include means of disposal of such substances
customarily incidental and accessory to dwellings, institutions, commercial,
industrial and agricultural uses, unless such disposal endangers the health and
safety. (Ord. 1000 § 6.20, 1955)
18.08.190: DUPLEX:
For "duplex", see definition of Dwelling, Two-Family. (Ord. 1000 § 6.20, 1955)
18.08.195: DWELLING:
"Dwelling" means a building, or portion thereof, designed and used exclusively
for residential occupancy, including one-family, two-family and multiple
dwellings, but not including hotels, boarding houses or lodging houses. (Ord.
1000 § 6.20, 1955)
18.08.200: DWELLING GROUP:
"Dwelling group" means two (2) or more dwellings located on a single lot. (Ord.
1000 § 6.20, 1955)
18.08.205: DWELLING, MULTIPLE:
"Multiple dwelling" means a detached building designed and used for occupancy
by two (2) or more families, all living independently of each other. (Ord. 1000
§ 6.20, 1955)
18.08.210: DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY:
"One-family dwelling" means a detached building designed exclusively for the
occupancy of one family. (Ord. 1000 § 6.20, 1955)
18.08.215: DWELLING, THREE-FAMILY OR FOUR-FAMILY:
"Three-family or four-family dwelling" means a building or portion thereof used
and/or designed as a residence, with separate dwelling units for occupancy by
three (3) or four (4) families living independently of each other. (Ord. 1000 §
6.20, 1955)
18.08.220: DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY:
"Two-family dwelling" means a building designed and/or used exclusively for the
occupancy of two (2) families living independently of each other. (Ord. 1000 §
6.20, 1955)
18.08.225: DWELLING UNITS:
"Dwelling units" means a group of two (2) or more habitable rooms, one of which
is a kitchen, designed for occupancy by one family for living and sleeping
purposes. (Ord. 1000 § 6.20, 1955)
18.08.230: EASEMENT:
"Easement" means a space on a lot or parcel of land, and so indicated on a
subdivision map or in a deed restriction, reserved for and/or used for public
utilities. No building may be built within the space so designated. (Ord. 1000
§ 6.20, 1955)
18.08.235: EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION:
"Educational institution" means a school, college or university, supported
wholly or in part by public funds, or giving general academic instruction
equivalent to the standards prescribed by the state board of education. (Ord.
1000 § 6.20, 1955)
18.08.238: EMPLOYEE HOUSING:
   A.   "Employee housing" means both of the following:
      1.   Qualified employee housing providing accommodations for six (6) or
fewer employees, pursuant to California Health and Safety Code section 17021.5
(b), shall be deemed a single-family dwelling and is allowed in residential
zones. Employee housing is subject to all Municipal Codes, regulations, and
other standards generally applicable to other residential dwellings of the same
type in the same zone.
      2.   Qualified employee housing providing accommodations for seven (7) or
more employees and consisting of no more than thirty six (36) beds in group
quarters or twelve (12) units or spaces designed for use by a single family or
household, pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 17021.6(b), shall be
deemed an agricultural land use and is allowed in such zones for agricultural
use or an equivalent agricultural district within a City approved Specific
Plan. Employee housing is subject to all Municipal Codes, regulations, and
other standards generally applicable to other agricultural activity in the same
zone.
   B.   Employee housing is not included within the definition of a boarding
house, rooming house, single room occupancy residence, hotel, dormitory, or
other similar term that implies that the employee housing is a business run for
profit or differs in any other way from a family dwelling.
   C.   Employee housing does not include housing that is provided by someone
other than an agricultural employer or an agent thereof if such housing is
offered and rented to nonagricultural employees on the same terms that it is
offered to agricultural employees, none of the occupants of the housing are
employed by the owner or property manager of the housing, none of the occupants
of the housing have rent deducted from their wages, negotiation of the terms of
occupancy of the housing is conducted between each occupant and the owner or
manager of the property, the occupants of the housing are not required to live
in the housing as a condition of employment, and the occupants of the housing
are not referred to live in the housing by the employer of the occupants or the
employer's agent, or an agricultural employer.
   D.   "Employee" as used in this section does not include a person engaged in
household domestic service or a person employed under circumstances in which
his or her wages are incidental to professional training or training for a
religious vocation and where the employer is exempt from taxation under the
California Constitution. In addition to the requirements of this section,
employee housing shall comply with the requirements of the Employee Housing Act
(Calif. Health & Safety Code, section 17000 et seq.). (Ord. 2985, 2025)
18.08.240: FAMILY:
"Family" means an individual or group of two (2) or more persons living
together in a dwelling unit, with common access to, and common use of all
living, kitchen, and eating areas within the dwelling unit on a continuous non-
transient basis. Each member of the family has access to all parts of the
dwelling; interact with each other; share meals; and/or share household
activities. If the dwelling unit is rented, all adult residents have chosen to
jointly occupy the entire premises of the dwelling unit, under a single written
lease with joint use and responsibility for the premises. Further, the makeup
of the household occupying the rental is determined by the residents of the
dwelling unit rather than the landlord, property manager, or agency. The term
"family" shall not include institutional group living situations such as
dormitories, fraternities, sororities, monasteries, convents, or similar group
living arrangements whose association is temporary or of limited duration
(i.e., school term, completion of a program, rehabilitation, etc.); nor does it
include group living arrangements such as boarding houses, single-room
occupancy residences, hotels, or motels. Indications that a household may not
be operating as a "family" may include but are not limited to: members of the
household have separate, private entrances; each member of the household has
locks or deadbolts on their bedroom door; members of the household have
separate food storage facilities; members have restricted access to certain
portions of the dwelling; and/or lease a specific room or portion of the
dwelling. (Ord. 2985, 2025: Ord. 1000 § 6.20, 1955)
18.08.245: FARM SITE:
"Farm site" means a lot or parcel of land two and one-half (21/2) acres in
area, or larger. (Ord. 1000 § 6.20, 1955)
18.08.250: FENCE:
"Fence" means any structural device forming a physical barrier which is so
constructed that not less than fifty percent (50%) of the vertical surface is
open to permit the transmission of light, air and vision through such surface
in a horizontal plane. This shall include wire mesh, steel mesh, chainlink,
louvered, stake, and other similar materials. planting shall be regulated to
maintain the required open areas in the fence structure. (Ord. 1000 § 6.20,
1955)
18.08.252: FLAG LOT:
"Flag lot" means a lot with a narrow strip of land (the staff) which extends
from the body of the lot to the right of way in order to meet minimum street
frontage requirements. (Ord. 2279 § 1, 1995)
18.08.253: FLAG LOT, BODY:
"Body of a flag lot" means the main area of a lot which would be landlocked
without the staff extension to the right of way. The body portion of any lot
begins at the point the lot meets the minimum width of the respective zone.
(Ord. 2279 § 1, 1995)
18.08.254: FLAG LOT, STAFF:
"Staff of a flag lot" means the portion of the lot extending from the right of
way to the point where the lot meets the minimum width of the respective zone.
(Ord. 2279 § 1, 1995)
18.08.255: FRONT WALL:
"Front wall" means the wall of a building or structure nearest the street upon
which the building fronts, but excluding certain architectural features such as
cornices, canopies, eaves or embellishments. (Ord. 1000 § 6.20, 1955)
18.08.260: FRONTAGE:
"Frontage" means all property fronting on one side of a street between a street
and right of way, waterway, or between intersecting or intercepting streets,
the end of a dead-end street or city boundary, measured along a street line. An
intercepting street shall determine only the boundary of the frontage on the
side of the street that it intercepts. (Ord. 1000 § 6.20, 1955)
18.08.265: GARAGE, PRIVATE:
"Private garage" means a detached accessory building or a portion of a main
building on the same lot as the dwelling for the housing of vehicles of the
occupants of the dwelling, including carports. (Ord. 1000 § 6.20, 1955)
18.08.270: GARAGE, PUBLIC:
"Public garage" means any garage other than a private garage. (Ord. 1000 §
6.20, 1955)
18.08.275: GARAGE, STORAGE:
"Storage garage" means any premises used exclusively for the storage of
vehicles. (Ord. 1000 § 6.20, 1955)
18.08.280: GRADE:
"Grade" means the average of the finished ground level at the center of all of
the exterior walls of a building. In case the front wall is parallel to and
within five feet (5') of a sidewalk, the grade shall be measured at the
sidewalk at the centerline of the front of the lot. (Ord. 1000 § 6.20, 1955)
18.08.285: GUEST:
"Guest" means any transient person who occupies a room for sleeping purposes.
(Ord. 1000 § 6.20, 1955)
18.08.290: GUESTHOUSE (ACCESSORY LIVING QUARTERS):
"Guesthouse (accessory living quarters)" means living quarters within a
detached accessory building located on the same premises with the main
building, for use by temporary guests of the occupant of the premises, such
quarters having no kitchen facilities and not rented or otherwise used as a
separate dwelling unit. (Ord. 1000 § 6.20, 1955)
18.08.295: GUESTROOM:
"Guestroom" means a room which is designed to be occupied by one or more guests
for sleeping purposes, but not including dormitories. (Ord. 1000 § 6.20, 1955)
18.08.300: HALF STORY:
"Half story" means a story under a gable, hip or gambrel roof, plates of which
are not more than three feet (3') above the floor of such story. (Ord. 1000 §
6.20, 1955)
18.08.305: HEDGE:
"Hedge" means a plant or series of plants, shrubs or other landscape material,
so arranged as to form a physical barrier or enclosure. (Ord. 1000 § 6.20,
1955)
18.08.310: HEIGHT OF BUILDING:
For "height of building" see definition of Building, Height Of. (Ord. 1000 §
6.20, 1955)
18.08.315: HOME OCCUPATION:
"Home occupation" means any use customarily conducted entirely within a
dwelling and carried on by the inhabitants thereof, which use is clearly
incidental and secondary to the use of the structure for dwelling purposes, and
which use does not change the character thereof, or does not adversely affect
the uses permitted in the district of which it is a part, and wherein no
products are sold on the premises other than those produced thereon, no signs
are displayed except as permitted by this title, no persons are employed other
than domestic help, and no mechanical equipment is used other than that
necessary or convenient for domestic purposes. (Ord. 1000 § 6.20, 1955)
18.08.320: HOSPITAL:
"Hospital" means any building or portion thereof used for the in-patient
accommodation and licensed medical care of sick, injured, or infirm persons,
and includes sanitariums, alcoholic sanitariums, and commercial institutions
for the cure of chronic drug addicts and mental patients. (Ord. 2985, 2025:
Ord. 1000 § 6.20, 1955)
18.08.325: HOSPITAL, ANIMAL:
For "animal hospital", see definition of Animal Hospital. (Ord. 1000 § 6.20,
1955)
18.08.330: HOTEL:
"Hotel" means any building or portion thereof designed or used or containing
six (6) or more guestrooms or suites of rooms, or a combination of six (6) or
more guestrooms or suites of rooms, and not more than two (2) dwelling units,
but not including any institutions in which human beings are housed or detained
under legal restraint. (Ord. 1000 § 6.20, 1955)
18.08.340: INDUSTRY:
"Industry" means the manufacture, fabrication, processing, reduction or
destruction of any article, substance or commodity, or any other treatment
thereof in such a manner as to change the form, character or appearance
thereof, including, but not limited to, the following: animal hospitals,
bottling plants, building or contractors yards, cleaning and dyeing
establishments, creameries, dog pounds, junkyards, laundries, lumberyards, milk
bottling and distribution stations, automobile wrecking yards, stockyards,
storage elevators, truck storage yards, warehouses, wholesale storage, and
other similar types of enterprise. (Ord. 1000 § 6.20, 1955)
18.08.345: JUNKYARD:
"Junkyard" means any lot, or the use of any portion of a lot, for the
dismantling or wrecking of automobiles or other motor vehicles or machinery, or
for the storage or keeping for sale of parts and equipment resulting from such
dismantling or wrecking, or for the storage or keeping of junk, including scrap
metals or other scrap materials. (Ord. 1000 § 6.20, 1955)
18.08.350: KENNEL:
"Kennel" means any lot or premises on which more than three (3) or more dogs at
least four (4) months of age are kept, boarded or trained. (Ord. 1000 § 6.20,
1955)
18.08.355: KITCHEN:
"Kitchen" means any room designed to be used or maintained for the cooking and/
or preparation of food. (Ord. 1000 § 6.20, 1955)
18.08.360: LOADING SPACE:
"Loading space" means an off street space or berth on the same lot with a main
building, or contiguous to a group of buildings, for the temporary parking of
commercial vehicles while loading or unloading. It shall abut a street, alley
or other appropriate means of ingress or egress. (Ord. 1000 § 6.20, 1955)
18.08.365: LODGING HOUSE:
No meals served or prepared on the premises for compensation and/or for sale.
(Ord. 1000 § 6.20, 1955)
18.08.370: LOT:
"Lot" means a parcel of land, occupied or to be occupied by a use, building or
group of buildings and accessory buildings, together with such yards, open
spaces, lot width, depth and area as are required by this title, and fronting
upon a dedicated street or upon a private easement or street determined by the
commission as being adequate for purposes of access. (Ord. 1000 § 6.20, 1955)
18.08.375: LOT AREA:
"Lot area" means the total of the lot area, measured in a horizontal plane,
within the lot lines of a lot. (Ord. 1000 § 6.20, 1955)
18.08.380: LOT, CORNER:
"Corner lot" means a lot located at the intersection of two (2) or more
streets, or a street and an alley, having an angle of intersection of not more
than one hundred thirty five degrees (135°). (Ord. 1000 § 6.20, 1955)
18.08.385: LOT, CORNER, REVERSED:
"Reversed corner lot" means a corner lot, the side line of which is
substantially a continuation of the front lot lines of the lots to its rear,
whether across an alley or not. (Ord. 1000 § 6.20, 1955)
18.08.390: LOT DEPTH:
"Lot depth" means the horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines
measured in the mean direction of the side lot lines. (Ord. 1000 § 6.20, 1955)
18.08.395: LOT, INTERIOR:
"Interior lot" means a lot other than a corner lot. (Ord. 1000 § 6.20, 1955)
18.08.400: LOT, KEY:
"Key lot" means any lot where the side lot line abuts the rear lot line of
other lots. (Ord. 1000 § 6.20, 1955)
18.08.405: LOT LINE:
"Lot line" means any line bounding a lot, as defined in this chapter. (Ord.
1000 § 6.20, 1955)
18.08.410: LOT LINE, FRONT:
For "front lot line", see definition of Frontage. (Ord. 1000 § 6.20, 1955)
18.08.415: LOT OF RECORD:
"Lot of record" means a parcel of land, as shown on the records of the county
assessor at the time of the passage of the ordinance codified in this title.
(Ord. 1000 § 6.20, 1955)
18.08.420: LOT, THROUGH:
"Through lot" means a lot having frontage on two (2) parallel, or approximately
parallel, dedicated streets. The lot frontage in instances such as this shall
be determined by the planning commission. (Ord. 1000 § 6.20, 1955)
18.08.425: LOT WIDTH:
"Lot width" means the horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured
at right angles to the lot depth at the building setback line, as established
for each district in this title. See section
18.152.020 of this title for hilly areas. (Ord. 1000 § 6.20, 1955)
18.08.430: MARQUEE:
"Marquee" means a permanent roofed structure attached to and supported by the
building, and projecting over public property. (Ord. 1000 § 6.20, 1955)
18.08.435: MILE:
One "mile" means and is defined as a linear distance of not less than five
thousand two hundred eighty feet (5,280'), measured radially on a horizontal
plane between the closest boundaries of the properties under consideration.
(Ord. 1000 § 6.20, 1955)
18.08.437: MINIMUM FRONTAGE:
"Minimum frontage" means the required frontage of a lot which must be located
on dedicated right of way in order to obtain a building permit. The minimum
frontage on right of way in any zone is thirty feet (30'). (Ord. 2279 § 2,
1995)
18.08.438: MINIMUM LOT SIZE:
"Minimum lot size" means the minimum lot area square footage as required by the
respective zoning district. The staff portion of the lot is not included in the
calculation of the minimum lot size. (Ord. 2279 § 2, 1995)
18.08.440: MOTEL:
"Motel" means a group of dwellings used for commercial purposes, such as a
building or group of two (2) or more detached, semidetached or attached
buildings containing guestrooms or dwelling units, with automobile storage
space provided in connection therewith, which building or group is designed,
intended or used primarily for the accommodation of transient automobile
travelers, including groups designated as auto cabins, motor courts, motels and
similar designations. (Ord. 1000 § 6.20, 1955)
18.08.445: NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE:
"Nonconforming structure" means a building existing at the time of the adoption
of the ordinance codified in this title, which does not conform to the
regulations for the district in which it is located, as set forth in this
chapter. (Ord. 1000 § 6.20, 1955)
18.08.450: NONCONFORMING USE:
"Nonconforming use" means a use of a building or land existing at the time of
the adoption of the ordinance codified in this title, which does not conform to
the regulations for the district in which it is located, as set forth in this
title. (Ord. 1000 § 6.20, 1955)
18.08.455: ONE-HALF MILE:
"One-half mile" means a linear distance of not less than two thousand six
hundred forty feet (2,640'), measured radially on a horizontal plane between
the closest boundaries of the properties under consideration. (Ord. 1000 §
6.20, 1955)
18.08.460: PARKING AREA, PRIVATE:
"Private parking area" means an open area, other than a street, used for the
parking of automotive vehicles, and restricted from general public use. (Ord.
1000 § 6.20, 1955)
18.08.465: PARKING AREA, PUBLIC:
"Public parking area" means an area, other than a private parking area or
street, used for the parking of vehicles and available for public or quasi-
public use, either free or for remuneration. (Ord. 1000 § 6.20, 1955)
18.08.470: PARKING SPACE, AUTOMOBILE:
"Automobile parking space" means space exclusive of driveways, ramps, columns,
loading areas, office or work areas, for the parking of one automobile. Such
space shall be not less than eight feet (8') in width and eighteen feet (18')
in length, and shall be accessible. (Ord. 1000 § 6.20, 1955)
18.08.475: PERSON:
"Person" means an individual, firm, copartnership, joint adventure,
association, corporation, estate, trust, receiver, syndicate, the Federal or
State government, City, County, district, or any other group or combination
acting as an entity. (Ord. 1000 § 6.20, 1955)
18.08.477: PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL RECREATION COURT:
"Private residential recreation court" shall mean a privately-owned, non-
commercial recreation facility, with or without lighting, located upon a
single-family residential zoned property, built for the purpose of and upon
which any form of recreation or athletic activity is carried on or conducted,
including but not limited to, basketball, racquetball, tennis, and volleyball.
(Ord. 2881 §1, 2019: Ord. 2861, 2018)
18.08.480: REST HOME:
"Rest home" means premises used for the housing of and caring for the
ambulatory aged or infirm. There shall be only incidental convalescent care not
involving either trained nurse or physician residing on the premises. There
shall be no surgery, physical therapy or other similar activities. (Ord. 1000 §
6.20, 1955)
18.08.485: ROOM:
"Room" means an unsubdivided portion of the interior of a dwelling unit,
excluding bathroom, kitchen, closets, hallways and service porches. (Ord. 1000
§ 6.20, 1955)
18.08.490: ROOMING HOUSE:
For "rooming house", see "boarding house". (Ord. 1000 § 6.20, 1955)
18.08.495: SCHOOL:
For "school", see definition of educational institution. (Ord. 1000 § 6.20,
1955)
18.08.500: SIGN:
"Sign" means and includes all outdoor advertising on any card, cloth, paper,
plastic, metal, painted glass, wooden or stone materials, and any and all
devices, structural or otherwise, lighted or unlighted, painted or not painted,
attached to, made a part of or placed in the window of, in the front, rear,
sides or top of any structure on any land, or any tree, wall, bush, rock, post,
fence, building or structure, and visible from any public or private street,
way, thoroughfare, alley or walk, which device announces or directs attention
to the name or nature of a business, occupant of a structure, building or land,
or the nature or type of goods, services or products produced, sold, stored,
furnished or available at that location or at any other location, including
signs specifically for the sale of real property.
The term "placed", as used in this section, means and includes erected,
constructed, posted, painted, printed, tacked, glued, stuck, carved, or
otherwise fastened, fixed or made visible in any manner whatsoever. (Ord. 1000
§ 6.20, 1955)
18.08.505: STORY:
"Story" means a space in a building between the surface of any floor and the
surface of the floor next above, or, if there is no floor above, then the space
between such floor and the ceiling or roof above. (Ord. 1000 § 6.20, 1955)
18.08.510: STREET:
"Street" means a public thoroughfare or right of way dedicated, deeded or
condemned for use as such, other than an alley, which affords the principal
means of access to abutting property, including avenue, place, way, drive,
lane, boulevard, highway, road, and any other thoroughfare, except as excluded
in this title. (Ord. 1000 § 6.20, 1955)
18.08.515: STREET CENTERLINE:
"Street centerline" means the centerline of a street or right of way, as
established by official surveys. (Ord. 1000 § 6.20, 1955)
18.08.520: STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS:
"Structural alterations" means any change in the supporting members of a
building, such as in a bearing wall, column, beam or girder, floor or ceiling
joists, roof rafters, foundations, piles or retaining walls, or similar
components. (Ord. 1000 § 6.20, 1955)
18.08.525: STRUCTURE:
"Structure" means anything constructed or built, any edifice or building of any
kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts jointed
together in some definite manner, which requires location on the ground, or
which is attached to something having a location on the ground. (Ord. 1000 §
6.20, 1955)
18.08.527: SUPPORTIVE HOUSING:
"Supportive housing" means either:
   A.   Supportive housing occupied by the target population, as those terms
are defined in California Government Code section 65582; or
   B.   Supportive housing occupied by the target population, as those terms
are defined in California Government Code section 65650.
Supportive housing is a "dwelling" in the individual zone chapters. Supportive
housing occupied by the target population (as defined in Calif. Gov. Code
section 65582) is subject only to those restrictions that apply to other
dwellings of the same type within the same zone in the individual zone
chapters. Supportive housing occupied by the target population (as defined in
Calif. Gov. Code section 65650) is eligible for streamlined ministerial
approval under
Chapter 18.12, section
18.12.190 of this title, in zones where multifamily and mixed uses are
permitted if the proposed housing development satisfies the requirements of
California Government Code section 65651, subdivision (a). (Ord. 2985, 2025)
18.08.530: TOURIST HOME:
"Tourist home" means a home which has been converted into premises offering
rooms to transient guests for remuneration. (Ord. 1000 § 6.20, 1955)
18.08.535: TRAILER CAMP:
For "trailer camp" see definition of Auto And/Or Trailer Camp. (Ord. 1000 §
6.20, 1955)
18.08.540: TRANSIENT:
"Transient" means a person who requests accommodations for a price, with or
without meals, for a period of not more than one month. (Ord. 1000 § 6.20,
1955)
18.08.542: TRANSITIONAL HOUSING:
"Transitional housing" has the same meaning as in California Government Code
section 65582. Transitional housing is a "dwelling" in the individual zone
chapters. Transitional housing is subject only to those restrictions that apply
to other dwellings of the same type within the same zone in the individual zone
chapters. (Ord. 2985, 2025)
18.08.545: TRUCK AND TRAILER SALES LOT:
"Truck and trailer sales lot" means an open area where trucks and/or trailers
are sold, leased or rented, and where no repairs, repainting or remodeling is
done. (Ord. 1000 § 6.20, 1955)
18.08.550: URBAN AREA:
"Urban area" means any land within the city limits which is not in the A-
1 agricultural district. (Ord. 1000 § 6.20, 1955)
18.08.555: URBAN LOT:
"Urban lot" means a lot containing less than eight thousand (8,000) square feet
of area and served by such urban facilities as sanitary sewers, curbs, gutters,
sidewalks, etc. (Ord. 1000 § 6.20, 1955)
18.08.560: USE:
"Use" means the purpose for which land or a building is arranged, designed or
intended, or for which either land or building is or may be occupied or
maintained. (Ord. 1000 § 6.20, 1955)
18.08.565: VISUAL OBSTRUCTION:
"Visual obstruction" means any combination of fencing, hedges, trees, shrubs
and walls which limits the visibility of persons at intersecting or
intercepting streets and alleys at a point three feet (3') above the ground,
measured in a vertical plane in the sidewalk area. (Ord. 1000 § 6.20, 1955)
18.08.570: WALL:
"Wall" means any structure or device forming a physical barrier, which is so
constructed that fifty percent (50%) or more of the vertical surface is closed,
and prevents the passage of light, air and vision through such surface in a
horizontal plane. This shall include concrete, concrete block, wood, or other
materials that are solids and are so assembled as to form a solid barrier.
(Ord. 1000 § 6.20, 1955)
18.08.575: WALL, PERMANENT:
"Permanent wall" means any physical structure composed of materials that are of
a permanent nature and which requires no maintenance. This shall include solid
masonry, concrete slab, concrete block, and other materials acceptable to the
commission. (Ord. 1000 § 6.20, 1955)
18.08.580: YARD:
"Yard" means any open space, other than a court, on the same lot with a
building or a dwelling group, which open space is unoccupied and unobstructed
from the ground upward to the sky except for the projections and/or accessory
buildings permitted by this title. (Ord. 1000 § 6.20, 1955)
18.08.585: YARD, FRONT:
"Front yard" means a yard between the front line of a building and the front
boundary line of the lot on which the building is situated. A side yard
adjacent to a street shall be the same as a front yard. (Ord. 1000 § 6.20,
1955)
18.08.590: YARD, REAR:
"Rear yard" means a yard between the extreme rear line of a building and the
rear of the lot on which the building is situated. (Ord. 1000 § 6.20, 1955)
18.08.595: YARD, SIDE:
"Side yard" means a yard extending from the front yard, or from the front lot
line where no front yard is required by this title, to the rear yard, or rear
lot line, between the side lot line and the nearest wall of the main building,
or of an accessory building attached thereto. (Ord. 1000 § 6.20, 1955)
18.08.600: ZONE:
"Zone" means a zoning district, shown on the zone map, to which uniform
regulations apply. (Ord. 1000 § 6.20, 1955)
18.08.605: ZONE, CHANGE OF:
"Change of zone" means the legislative act of removing one or more parcels of
land from one zone and placing them in another zone on the official zoning map
of the city. (Ord. 1000 § 6.20, 1955)
18.08.610: ZONE MAP:
"Zone map" means the official zoning map of the city of Redlands, which is a
part of the comprehensive zoning ordinance of the city of Redlands. (Ord. 1000
§ 6.20, 1955)
18.08.615: ZONING ORDINANCE, LAND USE ORDINANCE OR ORDINANCE:
"Zoning ordinance", "land use ordinance" or "ordinance" means the comprehensive
zoning ordinance of the city of Redlands. (Ord. 1000 § 6.20, 1955)
CHAPTER 18.12
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS
SECTION:
18.12.010: Purpose Of Provisions
18.12.020: Similar Uses Permitted By Commission Determination; Applicability
18.12.030: Unlisted Uses; Application To City Required
18.12.040: Unlisted Uses; Conditions Of Permission
18.12.050: Unlisted Uses; Commission Recommendation
18.12.060: Unlisted Uses; Council Action
18.12.070: Proposed Developments Or Improvements
18.12.080: Site Plan Approval And Procedures
18.12.090: Signs And Miscellaneous Approval Procedures
18.12.100: Commission Approval Authority
18.12.110: Appeal Procedures
18.12.120: Approved Applications; Revisions
18.12.130: Site Plan Approval; Expiration
18.12.140: Architectural Review; Intent And Purpose
18.12.150: Architectural Review; Required When
18.12.160: Architectural Review; Scope And Procedures
18.12.170: Architectural Review; Criteria
18.12.180: Petitions And Applications; Form, Contents And Verification
18.12.190: Exceptions To Review Process
18.12.200: Development Of Non-Vacant Sites
18.12.210: Post-Entitlement Permit Application Appeals
18.12.010: PURPOSE OF PROVISIONS:
The purpose of the provisions of this chapter is to provide procedures for
commission consideration of matters related to the orderly development of the
community. (Ord. 1000 § 32.00, 1955)
18.12.020: SIMILAR USES PERMITTED BY COMMISSION DETERMINATION; APPLICABILITY:
   A.   It is recognized that in the development of a comprehensive zoning
ordinance:
      1.   Not all uses of land can be listed, nor can all future uses be
anticipated; or
      2.   A use may have been omitted from the list of those specified as
permissible in each of the various zones designated in this title; or
      3.   Ambiguity may arise concerning the appropriate classification of a
particular use within the meaning and intent of this title.
   B.   Hence, the subsection entitled "similar uses permitted by commission
determination" appears under the "permitted uses" section in each zone. (Ord.
1000 § 32.10(A), 1955)
18.12.030: UNLISTED USES; APPLICATION TO CITY REQUIRED:
Applications for approval of an unlisted use in a particular zone shall be made
on forms supplied by the planning department and accompanied by a fee as set by
the city council. (Ord. 1000 § 32.10(B), 1955)
18.12.040: UNLISTED USES; CONDITIONS OF PERMISSION:
In recommending the permitting or classifying of an unlisted use, the
commission shall first make a finding that all of the following conditions
exist:
   A.   The use is in conformity with the stated intent and purpose of the
zone;
   B.   Field investigations have disclosed that the subject use and its
operation are compatible with the uses permitted in the zone wherein it is
proposed to be located;
   C.   The subject use is similar to one or more uses permitted in the zone
within which it is proposed to be located; and
   D.   The subject use will not cause substantial injury to the use of
property in any abutting zone. (Ord. 1000 § 32.10(C), 1955)
18.12.050: UNLISTED USES; COMMISSION RECOMMENDATION:
The commission shall consider all pertinent facts concerning the requested use.
Upon completion of the investigation, the commission may, by resolution of
record, recommend to the city council the zone or zones in which the use may be
permitted, and any conditions that should apply to the use which are not
adequately set forth in the zone or zones. The recommendation shall be filed
with the council within thirty (30) days after commission action. (Ord. 1000 §
32.10(D), 1955)
18.12.060: UNLISTED USES; COUNCIL ACTION:
The city council, after receipt of the recommendation, may either approve,
modify, or reject the same. (Ord. 1000 § 32.10(E), 1955)
18.12.070: PROPOSED DEVELOPMENTS OR IMPROVEMENTS:
The purpose of the provisions of this section through section
18.12.130 of this chapter is to enable the commission to review a proposed
development or improvement, and establish conditions which will ensure
conformity with the intent and regulations of the particular district. (Ord.
1000 § 32.20(A), 1955)
18.12.080: SITE PLAN APPROVAL AND PROCEDURES:
   A.   Application: The applicant must be the property owner or an authorized
agent of the property owner. A completed application and payment of the
applicable fee, as established by resolution of the city council, shall be
submitted to the development services department accompanied by thirty (30)
copies of the site plan and elevations. The site plan shall be prepared to
scale, showing accurately, and with complete dimensioning, all buildings and
facilities proposed for the property. The data contained on the site plan shall
include information on the location of the buildings, structures, signs,
parking, landscaping, walls, or fences, and the points of ingress and egress.
In addition, all necessary information to clearly show the intended use of the
property and its relationship to adjacent properties shall be included.
   B.   Security: Prior to the issuance of any building permit, the applicant
shall furnish security to the city guaranteeing the faithful performance of the
public work, in the sum equal to the cost as estimated by the city engineer,
including a percentage for contingencies. Ninety percent (90%) of this security
shall be in the form of a bond furnished by a surety company satisfactory to
the city, and ten percent (10%) of the security amount shall be cash, an
irrevocable letter of credit, or other security satisfactory to the city. The
security may be used to pay the city's costs of maintaining barricades,
correcting street hazards, site cleanup, or repairing any street, irrigation
line or other utility causing a hazard, nuisance or inconvenience to the
public. In addition, the applicant shall furnish a labor and materials payment
bond to the city, furnished by a surety company satisfactory to the city, in
the amount of one hundred percent (100%) of the cost of the public work as
estimated by the city engineer.
   C.   Requirements For Dedications And Improvements:
      1.   Dedications, Easements: The city engineer may require dedications
and/or easements for streets, alleys, drainage, public utilities, bridle
trails, flood control, and such other rights of way as may be determined to
ensure the orderly development of the property and abutting properties.
      2.   Improvements: The city engineer may require improvements, including,
but not limited to, the following to ensure orderly development of the property
and abutting properties:
         a.   Grading, drainage and drainage structures necessary to protect
the public safety,
         b.   Curbs and gutters,
         c.   Sidewalks,
         d.   Street pavement,
         e.   Adequate domestic water service,
         f.   Sanitary sewer facilities and connections,
         g.   Services from public utilities, where provided,
         h.   Street trees,
         i.   Traffic signals, streetlights and street name signs,
         j.   All water lines are to be laid and fire hydrants installed
pursuant to plans and specifications of the municipal utilities and engineering
department of the city.
   D.   Findings And Conditions Of Approval: The city planning commission shall
have the authority to approve, conditionally approve, or deny an application
for site plan approval, except in instances when all application for a site
plan approval is processed concurrently with other land use entitlements
requiring action by the city council. In such instances, the planning
commission shall make a recommendation on the site plan approval to the city
council. In granting site plan approval, the planning commission or city
council, as applicable, shall find as follows:
      1.   The site for the intended use is adequate in size and shape to
accommodate the use, and all of the required yards, setbacks, walls or fences,
landscaping and other features will adjust the use to those existing or
permitted future uses of land in the neighborhood;
      2.   The site for the proposed use relates to streets and highways which
are properly designed and improved to carry the type and quantity of traffic
generated or to be generated by the proposed use;
      3.   The conditions set forth in the approval and those shown on the
approved site plan are deemed necessary to protect the public health, safety
and general welfare. Such conditions may include:
         a.   Special yards, spaces and buffers,
         b.   Fences and walls,
         c.   Surfacing of parking areas subject to city specifications,
         d.   Regulation of points of vehicular ingress and egress,
         e.   Regulation of signs,
         f.   Required landscaping and maintenance thereof,
         g.   Regulation of noise, vibration, odors and lights,
         h.   Regulation of time for certain activities, and
         i.   Such other conditions as will make possible the development of
the city in an orderly and efficient manner and in conformity with the intent
and purposes set forth in this title. (Ord. 2744, 2014)
18.12.090: SIGNS AND MISCELLANEOUS APPROVAL PROCEDURES:
   A.   General Criteria:
      1.   The applicant must be the property owner or authorized agent of the
owner.
      2.   Responsibility for compliance with city requirements rests with the
applicant.
   B.   Application Requirements:
      1.   A signed application shall be submitted to the planning department
accompanied by ten (10) copies of the map or drawing illustrating the request
to be considered.
      2.   Such map or drawing shall contain sufficient information for the
commission to clearly determine the nature of the request. In the case of
signs, information pertaining to design, dimensions, area and location on the
building and/or property shall be included. (Ord. 1000 § 32.20(C), 1955)
18.12.100: COMMISSION APPROVAL AUTHORITY:
The decision of the commission shall be final, unless an appeal therefrom is
taken to the council as provided for in section
18.12.110 of this chapter. (Ord. 1000 § 32.20(D), 1955)
18.12.110: APPEAL PROCEDURES:
   A.   Appeals may be taken to the council by the applicant, or any other
person aggrieved by the commission's decision.
   B.   Appeals shall be filed with the council within ten (10) days from the
date of the commission's decision, or at the next regular council meeting
following the planning commission meeting.
   C.   On the appeal, the council shall review the decision of the commission,
hear new evidence and testimony, if offered and, in deciding the appeal, may
either affirm, reverse or modify the decision of the commission.
   D.   The council may, on its own motion, cause any commission decision to be
appealed. (Ord. 1000 § 32.20(E), 1955)
18.12.120: APPROVED APPLICATIONS; REVISIONS:
Revisions to an approved application shall be made pursuant to the procedure
set forth in the initial application. (Ord. 1000 § 32.20(F), 1955)
18.12.130: SITE PLAN APPROVAL; EXPIRATION:
Unless otherwise specified by the planning commission or city council, a site
plan approval shall expire two (2) years from the date of its approval unless
the holder of the site plan approval obtains a building permit or, in those
instances where a building permit is not required, a certificate of occupancy
for the site plan approval, within such two (2) year period. The planning
commission may, upon written request for a time extension by the holder of the
site plan approval, prior to expiration of the approval, grant a one year
extension of time; provided, however, that the total number of extensions for a
site plan approval shall not exceed three (3). (Ord. 2985, 2025: Ord. 2390 § 1,
1999)
18.12.140: ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW; INTENT AND PURPOSE:
The city does find and declare the following:
   A.   The appearance of open spaces, landscaping, buildings and structures
visible from public streets has a material and substantial effect on the
desirability of the community, and consequently affects property values and the
taxable value of property in the city.
   B.   Many neighborhoods in other communities have deteriorated as a result
of poor planning, neglect of proper design standards, and the erection of
buildings and structures incompatible with the character of the neighborhood,
resulting in the reduction of property values and the impairment of the public
health, safety and welfare. The city wishes to avoid and prevent such
deterioration, to recognize the interdependence of land values and aesthetics,
and to provide appropriate guidelines to preserve and enhance the property
values, visual character of the community, and the public health, safety and
welfare of the city. (Ord. 1806 § 1, 1982: Ord. 1000 § 32.30(A), 1955)
18.12.150: ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW; REQUIRED WHEN:
Architectural approval shall be required for all applicable projects reviewed
by the planning commission. (Ord. 1806 § 1, 1982: Ord. 1000 § 32.30(B), 1955)
18.12.160: ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW; SCOPE AND PROCEDURES:
   A.   All applications for the construction, reconstruction, moving,
conversion, alteration or addition to any building or structure reviewed by the
planning commission shall include a preliminary site plan and drawing showing
the exterior elevation of all sides of a proposed building or structure, the
types of materials and colors to be used, the signs to be displayed, the
location of walls and fences (with height and construction materials
indicated), the landscaping plan (including plant names), the exterior lighting
standards and devices, and the plan for any grading.
   B.   The planning commission shall either approve, conditionally approve, or
deny the architectural plans.
   C.   The approval, with or without conditions, or denial by the planning
commission of an application for architectural approval shall be final unless,
within ten (10) days from the date of action by the planning commission, the
applicant or any other person shall appeal therefrom in writing to the city
council. Such appeal shall be filed in writing with the city clerk on a form
provided by the planning department, and shall indicate the grounds of the
appeal. The city clerk shall schedule the appeal for a city council agenda, and
the city council at its meeting shall uphold, modify or overrule the decision
of the planning commission. The decision of the city council shall be final.
(Ord. 1806 § 1, 1982: Ord. 1000 § 32.30(C), 1955)
18.12.170: ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW; CRITERIA:
   A.   The planning commission shall review the material submitted with the
application, and specific aspects of design shall be examined to determine
whether the proposed development is in conformity with the provisions of this
chapter, and whether approval of the plan is in the best interest of the public
health, safety and general welfare. It is intended that design submittals be
compatible with the character of adjacent and surrounding developments, and
that they be of comparable composition, materials, textures and colors.
   B.   Conformance will be evaluated based on consideration of the following:
      1.   Site layout, orientation, location of structures and relationship to
one another, as well as open spaces and topography;
      2.   Harmonious relationship of building with existing and proposed
adjoining developments;
      3.   Maximum height, area, setbacks and overall mass of buildings, as
well as other structures such as walls, screens, towers or signs, and effective
concealment of all mechanical equipment;
      4.   Harmony of construction materials and colors in relation to all
exterior elevations;
      5.   Location and type of planting, with due regard for the preservation
of specimen trees upon a site;
      6.   Design and appropriateness of signs in relation to the architectural
style of the building;
      7.   Glazing or image reflective surfaces (specular reflectance) shall be
limited to a maximum reflectance value of twenty five percent (25%). "Specular
reflectance" means any mirror like reflection, as contrasted to diffused
reflection from such surfaces as concrete or vegetation. (Ord. 1821 § 3, 1983:
Ord. 1806 § 1, 1982: Ord. 1000 § 32.30(D), 1955)
18.12.180: PETITIONS AND APPLICATIONS; FORM, CONTENTS AND VERIFICATION:
   A.   The commission shall, in its rules of procedure, prescribe the form and
scope of all petitions and applications provided for in this title, and of the
accompanying data to be furnished, so as to assure the fullest practicable
presentation of facts for proper consideration of the matter involved in each
case, and for a permanent record thereof.
   B.   Any petition, as provided for in this title, shall include a
verification by at least one of the petitioners, attested to before a notary
public, or before the city clerk. (Ord. 1000 § 53.00, 1955)
18.12.190: EXCEPTIONS TO REVIEW PROCESS:
The following projects may be administratively approved by the development
services director and, at the discretion of the development services director,
may not be required to be reviewed by the planning commission as otherwise
provided for in this chapter:
   A.   Residential construction of triplex and fourplex projects;
   B.   Housing developments that include a minimum of twenty percent (20%) of
units as housing affordable to lower-income households, on sites being used to
meet the current Regional Housing Needs Allocation (Sixth Cycle Housing
Element) that represent "reuse sites" previously identified in a prior Housing
Element and on sites that are being or have been rezoned to accommodate the
lower-income RHNA (pursuant to Calif. Gov. Code section 65583.2), shall be
reviewed and approved administratively by the Director;
   C.   Supportive housing that qualifies as a use by right in zones where
multifamily and mixed uses are permitted, including nonresidential zones
permitting multifamily uses, if the proposed supportive housing development
satisfies the requirements of California Government Code section 65651,
subdivision (a).
   D.   Office, commercial and industrial projects as follows:
      1.   New construction which is under five hundred (500) square feet in
area and does not exceed one story.
      2.   Additions to existing one-story developments, which are less than
five hundred (500) square feet in area, and do not exceed fifty percent (50%)
of the existing floor area.
      3.   Accessory public parking areas at public facilities in the A-
1 agricultural district containing a maximum area of ten thousand (10,000)
square feet or twenty (20) parking spaces, whichever is less, and provided that
such use conforms to the minimum standards set forth in section
18.164.315 of this title for parking and subsection
18.168.210F of this title for landscaping. Prior to approval of an accessory
parking lot by the development services director, a notice shall be sent to all
adjacent property owners of the proposed site at least ten (10) calendar days
in advance of a decision by the development services director. Any interested
party may request a public hearing in writing within ten (10) calendar days of
the date of the city's notice. If a public hearing is requested, the
development services director shall conduct a public hearing and approve,
conditionally approve, or deny the project. If no public hearing is requested,
the development services director shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny
the project. The decision of the development services director shall be final
unless appealed to the planning commission within ten (10) days.
   Upon appeal, the planning commission shall conduct a public hearing and
approve, conditionally approve, or deny the project. The decision of the
planning commission may be appealed to the city council. (Ord. 2985, 2025: Ord.
2835, 2016)
18.12.200: DEVELOPMENT OF NON-VACANT SITES:
For any development project proposed on a non-vacant site containing one or
more dwelling units that have been occupied at any time during the previous
thirty-six (36) months preceding the filing of an application for development,
the developer shall be required to prepare and submit a housing displacement
prevention plan. The displacement prevention plan shall be prepared by a
qualified consultant, for any proposed development on a non-vacant site shall
contain the following information: identifies the number, type(s), and income
levels of any existing dwelling units on the proposed project site; the number
of persons or residents affected; an interim plan and proposal to house any
persons that will be displaced during any phase of the proposed project;
requires the replacement of units affordable to the same or lower income level
as a condition of any residential development; and any additional data or
information required by the City. (Ord. 2985, 2025)
18.12.210: POST-ENTITLEMENT PERMIT APPLICATION APPEALS:
   A.   For a development that is intended to be at least two-thirds ()
residential, as defined in Government Code sections 65913.3(j) and 65589.5(h),
"post-entitlement phase permit" means and includes all nondiscretionary permits
and reviews filed after the entitlement process has been completed that are
required or issued by the local agency to begin construction of a housing
development project.
   B.   If a post-entitlement phase permit is determined to be incomplete or
denied or determined to be noncompliant with the applicable provisions of
Government Code section 65913.3, the applicant may appeal the decision to the
planning commission within ten (10) days of the director's decision. The appeal
shall be made on forms provided by the city, and upon payment of the fees
established by resolution of the city council.
   C.   The decision of the commission shall be final, unless an appeal
therefrom is taken to the city council as provided for in section
18.12.110 of this chapter. (Ord. 2985, 2025)
CHAPTER 18.16
DISTRICTS AND ZONING MAP
SECTION:
18.16.010: Division Of City Into Designated Districts
18.16.020: District Boundaries
18.16.030: Permitted Uses; Interpretation
18.16.040: Uses Prohibited When Not Designated As Permitted
18.16.050: Zoning For Annexed Areas
18.16.010: DIVISION OF CITY INTO DESIGNATED DISTRICTS:
For purposes related to the orderly development of the city, and to carry out
the provisions of this title, the city is divided into thirty two (32) land use
districts and three (3) overlay districts, known as the following:
Symbol Land Use District Name
Symbol   Land Use District Name
A-1      Agricultural district
A-1-20   Agricultural district
A-2      Estate agricultural district
R-R      Rural residential
R-R-A    Rural residential animals district
R-A      Residential estate district
R-A-A    Residential estate animals district
R-E      Residential estate district
R-S      Suburban residential
R-1      Single-family residential district
R-1-D    Single-family residential, deep lots
R-2      Multiple-family residential district
R-2-2000 Multiple-family residential district
R-3      Multiple-family residential district
A-P      Administrative and professional office district
MF       Medical facility district
T        Transitional district
E        Educational district
A-P-C    Administrative-professional-commercial district
C-1      Neighborhood stores district
C-2      Neighborhood convenience center district
C-3      General commercial district
C-4      Highway commercial district
C-M      Commercial industrial district
M-P      Planned industrial district
M-1      Light industrial district
I-P      Industrial district
M-2      General industrial district
P        Off street parking district
O        Open land district
A-D      Airport district
FP       Floodplain district
Symbol   Overlay District Name
C-D      Civic design district
AF       Airport flight zone
HD       Hillside development district
 
(Ord. 2333 § 5, 1997: Ord. 1000 § 7.00, 1955)
18.16.020: DISTRICT BOUNDARIES:
The districts listed in section
18.16.010 of this chapter, and the boundaries of such districts, are shown on
the land use zoning map attached to the ordinance codified in this title and
made an integral part of this title. All the notations, references and other
information shown on the map shall be as much a part of this title as if the
matters and information were fully described herein. (Ord. 1000 § 9.00, 1955)
18.16.030: PERMITTED USES; INTERPRETATION:
All districts established in this title shall be only for those uses prescribed
in the sections dealing with such districts, and for such other uses as the
commission may determine to be similar. (Ord. 1000 § 10.00, 1955)
18.16.040: USES PROHIBITED WHEN NOT DESIGNATED AS PERMITTED:
When a use is not specifically listed in the sections devoted to "permitted
uses", it shall be assumed that such uses are expressly prohibited, unless by
written decision of the commission it is determined that such use is similar to
and not more objectionable than uses listed. (Ord. 1000 § 8.00, 1955)
18.16.050: ZONING FOR ANNEXED AREAS:
Any area annexed to the city after the effective date hereof shall
automatically be placed in the A-1 (agricultural) district, and shall remain in
that district until the land use zoning plan for the area has been adopted by
the commission and council, unless the commission and council determine the
precise zoning as a part of the annexation procedure. The commission shall
recommend to the council appropriate districting of the land within ninety (90)
days after an application for change has been filed with the commission. (Ord.
1981 § 1, 1987: Ord. 1000 § 47.00, 1955)
CHAPTER 18.18
MARIJUANA
SECTION:
18.18.010: Purpose
18.18.020: Definitions
18.18.030: Prohibited Activities
18.18.040: Public Nuisance Declared
18.18.050: Penalty For Violation
18.18.010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to enact and enforce a ban on all marijuana
dispensaries and marijuana manufacturers, and the cultivation, and delivery of
marijuana located within the City limits. This chapter is declarative of
existing law. Nothing in this chapter shall preempt or make inapplicable any
provision of State or Federal law. (Ord. 2851, 2017)
18.18.020: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
   CULTIVATION: Means any activity involving the planting, growing, harvesting,
drying, curing, grading, or trimming of marijuana.
   DELIVERY: Means the transfer of marijuana or marijuana products, including
the use of any technology platform to arrange for or facilitate the transfer of
marijuana, whether or not carried on for profit, and includes origination or
termination within the City as well as a delivery business.
   INDOORS: Means space within a building, greenhouse, or other structure which
is fully enclosed, with a complete roof enclosure supported by connecting walls
extending from the ground to the roof, and is secured against unauthorized
entry, and accessible only through one or more locking doors, and is in all
respects compliant with this Code.
   MARIJUANA: Means all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa Linnaeus, Cannabis
indica, or Cannabis ruderalis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the
resin, whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of the plant; and
every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the
plant, its seeds, or resin. "Cannabis" also means the separated resin, whether
crude or purified, obtained from marijuana. "Cannabis" also means marijuana as
defined by section 11018 of the Health and Safety Code as enacted by chapter
1407 of the statutes of 1972.
   MARIJUANA DISPENSARY: Means a facility where cannabis, cannabis products, or
devices for the use of cannabis or cannabis products are offered, either
individually or in any combination, for wholesale or retail sale, including an
establishment that delivers cannabis and cannabis products either wholesale or
as part of a retail sale.
   MARIJUANA MANUFACTURER: Means a person that conducts the production,
preparation, propagation, or compounding of manufactured cannabis, or cannabis
products either directly or indirectly or by extraction methods, or
independently by means of chemical synthesis or by a combination of extraction
and chemical synthesis at a fixed location that packages or repackages medical
cannabis or cannabis products or labels or relabels its container.
   PRIVATE RESIDENCE: Means a house, an apartment unit, a mobile home, or
similar dwelling unit. (Ord. 2851, 2017)
18.18.030: PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES:
   A.   Commercial marijuana activity is hereby prohibited in the City. No
person shall engage in any commercial marijuana activity. No permit, license or
other authorization shall be issued for any commercial marijuana activity. This
prohibition does not apply to the carriage of marijuana on public roads in the
City to the extent required by sections 19338(b), 19340(f), 26080(b), and 26090
(c) of the California Business and Professions Code. Marijuana dispensaries,
cultivation, cannabis manufacturers, and delivery of cannabis, as defined
herein, shall be considered prohibited uses in all zoning districts, including
specific plans, of the City. No use permit, variance, building permit, or any
other entitlement or permit, whether administrative or discretionary, shall be
approved or issued for the establishment or operation of dispensaries, cannabis
cultivation, cannabis manufacturers, and delivery of cannabis as defined herein
in any zoning district or specific plan, and no person shall otherwise
establish such businesses or operations in any zoning district or specific
plan.
   B.   To the extent not already covered by subsection A of this section,
delivery of marijuana is prohibited. No person shall conduct delivery or
participate in the delivery of marijuana.
   C.   Cultivation of marijuana is prohibited, except indoors at a private
residence as authorized by section 11362.2(a) of the California Health and
Safety Code. Marijuana grown indoors shall be completely screened from view
from public places and neighboring properties. Nothing in this chapter is
intended to, nor shall this chapter be construed to, preclude any owner of real
property from limiting or prohibiting marijuana cultivation by such owner's
tenants.
   D.   No person shall smoke or ingest marijuana in any public place. (Ord.
2851, 2017)
18.18.040: PUBLIC NUISANCE DECLARED:
Marijuana cultivation, marijuana delivery, and the operation of any marijuana
business or marijuana dispensary in violation of the provisions of this Code
including, without limitation, this chapter, is hereby declared a public
nuisance and may be abated or enjoined pursuant to all remedies available to
the City. (Ord. 2851, 2017)
18.18.050: PENALTY FOR VIOLATION:
Violations of this chapter may be enforced by any applicable law; provided,
however, that a person who is in full compliance with the Compassionate Use Act
1  ("CUA") and the Medical Marijuana Program Act 2  ("MMPA") shall not be
subject to criminal penalties and nothing in this chapter is intended, nor
shall it be construed, to conflict with or burden any defense to criminal
prosecution under the CUA and the MMPA. Notwithstanding the foregoing and in
addition to the specific prohibitions set forth in this Code, this chapter is
intended to prohibit all activities for which a license from the State of
California is required and for which an exemption is granted under the Medical
Marijuana Regulation and Safety Act (stats. 2015, c. 689 (AB 266); stats. 2015,
c. 688 (AB 243); stats. 2015, c. 719 (SB 643)) ("MMRSA"). Accordingly, the City
shall not issue any permit, license, approval or other entitlement for any
activity for which a license from the State of California is required or for
which an exemption is granted under the MMRSA. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
nothing in this chapter is intended or shall be interpreted as limiting the
City's rights under all applicable laws, rules and regulations, including, but
not limited to, its police powers and applicable case law, to regulate the
storage, cultivation, selling, delivery or other distribution or dispensing of
marijuana or marijuana-related products. (Ord. 2851, 2017)
 
Notes
1 1. HSC § 11362.5.
2 2. HSC § 11362.7 et seq.
CHAPTER 18.20
A-1 AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
18.20.010: Purpose Of Provisions
18.20.020: Uses Generally
18.20.030: Permitted Uses
18.20.040: Accessory Uses
18.20.050: Conditional Uses
18.20.070: Property Development Standards
18.20.080: Lot Area
18.20.090: Lot Dimensions
18.20.100: Density Of Development
18.20.110: Maximum Coverage
18.20.120: Building Height
18.20.130: Front Yard
18.20.140: Side Yard
18.20.150: Rear Yard
18.20.160: Accessory Buildings
18.20.170: Off Street Parking
18.20.180: Fences, Landscaping And Walls
18.20.190: Signs
18.20.200: Agritourism Facilities And Activities
18.20.010: PURPOSE OF PROVISIONS:
The purpose of the A-1 agricultural zone is to provide for the proper
utilization of those lands best suited for agricultural purposes, and to
prevent the encroachment of incompatible uses. The regulations set out in this
chapter shall apply to all land in the A-1 agriculture district. (Ord. 1000 §
12.00, 1955)
18.20.020: USES GENERALLY:
In the A-1 zone, no building, structure or land shall be used, and no building
or structure shall be hereafter erected, structurally altered or enlarged,
except for the purposes set out in sections
18.20.030 through
18.20.050 of this chapter. (Ord. 1000 § 12.10, 1955)
18.20.030: PERMITTED USES:
Principal permitted uses in the A-1 district include:
   Accessory public parking areas which serve existing public facilities such
as parks, trails or linear parks, or similar public uses, pursuant to the
review procedures set forth in section
18.12.190 of this title for lots containing ten thousand (10,000) square feet
or less or twenty (20) spaces or fewer. In this instance, "accessory" shall
mean that the parking area is accessory to the existing land use of either
park, trail or linear park, or similar public use.
   Apiaries, provided that no hives or boxes housing bees are kept closer than
three hundred feet (300') from any dwelling other than that occupied by the
owner of the apiary.
   Community Care Facility, licensed or unlicensed, for up to six (6) persons.
   Employee housing for up to six (6) persons, as defined in
chapter 18.08 of this title.
   Farms or ranches for the grazing, breeding or raising of not more than two
(2) horses, cattle, goats or sheep per acre. Except for the keeping of up to
three (3) horses, as provided for in sections
18.44.020 through
18.44.050 of this title of the R-1 zone, no animal(s) shall be housed or
corralled closer than five hundred feet (500') from any existing residence in
the R-1, R-1-D, R-2, R-2-2000 or R-3 zone, or one hundred feet (100') from any
property line.
   Farmworker and agricultural worker housing, consisting of no more than
twelve (12) units or thirty six (36) beds, in accordance with Article XIV of
Chapter 18.156 of this title.
   Horse boarding.
   Orchards, groves, nurseries, the raising of field crops, tree crops, berry
crops, bush crops, truck gardening and commercial flower growing.
   Single-family residences; provided, however, that there shall be not more
than two (2) dwellings on each parcel of five (5) acres or more. Where parcels
of land are already subdivided into parcels less than five (5) acres in area,
there shall be permitted one dwelling for each lot, provided the lot contains
dimensions and an area equivalent to the closest single-family residential
zone.
   Supportive and transitional housing for up to six (6) persons intended to
serve the target population, as defined in
chapter 18.08 of this title.
   The sale of fruit, vegetables, produce, flowers and other similar products
grown on the property; provided, however, that roadside stands used for such
sales shall not exceed five hundred (500) square feet.
(Ord. 2985, 2025: Ord. 2967, 2024: Ord. 2961, 2024: Ord. 2835, 2016)
18.20.040: ACCESSORY USES:
In the A-1 zone, the following accessory uses that are secondary and
supplemental (not to exceed twenty five percent (25%) of the land area in
active agriculture/ranching) to the primary agricultural uses of the land, may
be permitted subject to approval of an Administrative Use Permit in accordance
with the provisions of
Chapter 18.193  of this title.
   A.   Retail self-pick or u-pick by customers of produce grown on-site
(between one hundred fifty (150) to three hundred (300) persons daily).
   B.   Tours, day classes, day camp, educational farm camp, or farm experience
excursions (between one hundred fifty (150) to three hundred (300) persons
daily).
   C.   Farm-stay facility, or general tent camping facilities (no motor
vehicles or trailers), with up to fifty (50) rooms.
   D.   Overnight camp for persons under eighteen (18) years of age, with up to
fifty (50) beds. (Ord. 2967, 2024: Ord. 1000 § 12.10(B), 1955)
18.20.050: CONDITIONAL USES:
Uses permitted by conditional use permit in the A-1 zone include:
   A.   Accessory public parking areas which serve existing public facilities
such as parks, trails or linear parks, or similar public uses, containing more
than ten thousand (10,000) square feet or twenty (20) spaces. In this instance,
"accessory" shall mean that the parking area is accessory to the existing land
use of either park, trail or linear park, or similar public use.
   B.   Aviaries and hatcheries.
   C.   Dairies, including the processing of milk.
   D.   Farms or ranches for commercial raising of poultry or rabbits. No more
than five hundred (500) poultry or rabbits for each twenty thousand (20,000)
square feet of lot area; provided, however, that such rabbits or fowl are kept
at least fifty feet (50') from any property line, and five hundred feet (500')
from any residential zone, church, school, park or hospital.
   E.   Grange halls and similar uses incidental to the promotion and
development of sound agriculture.
   F.   Related ancillary activities to agricultural or ranching operations,
including agritourism activities, that are secondary and supplemental to the
primary agricultural uses of the land (not to exceed twenty five percent (25%)
of the land area in active agriculture/ranching), including but not limited to
the following:
      1.   Bed and breakfast inn or facility.
      2.   Food processing operations, wholesale or retail (including canning,
food packaging, with or without ancillary on-site retail food sales).
      3.   Compost production and processing that exceeds a total of nine
hundred (900) tons per year for on-site use, with or without incidental sale of
compost for off-site use.
      4.   Overnight camp for persons under eighteen (18) years of age, with
more than fifty (50) beds.
      5.   Harvest festivals, seasonal or special events, or other periodic
assembly uses.
      6.   Retail self-pick or u-pick by customers of produce grown on-site
(with more than three hundred (300) persons daily).
      7.   Tours, day classes, day camp, educational farm camp, and farm
experience excursions (with more than three hundred (300) persons daily).
      8.   Farm-stay facility, or general tent camping facilities (no motor
vehicles or trailers), with more than fifty (50) rooms.
      9.   Sales of other food or beverage products, with a portion of the
ingredients sourced on-site.
      10.   Wineries, including the following related ancillary activities:
         a.   Wine tasting room;
         b.   Retail sale of vintner products, which must include some products
that are produced on-site; and
         c.   Hospitality activities limited to the education of growing
vineyards or the production of wine, provided that not more than forty percent
(40%) of the interior floor area is utilized for such activity.
   G.   Riding stables or academies; provided, that the minimum lot size for
such use shall be not less than five (5) acres, and that all such buildings for
the housing, feeding or rental of such animals shall be at least one hundred
feet (100') from any property line, and five hundred feet (500') from any R-
S or R-1 zone, church, school, park or hospital.
   H.   Wedding venue, indoors or outdoors, on non-prime agricultural land or
soils.
   I.   Water harvesting, no bottling on site. (Ord. 2967, 2024: Ord. 2961,
2024: Ord. 2835, 2016)
18.20.070: PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The following property development standards, set out in sections
18.20.080 through
18.20.190 of this chapter, shall apply to all land and buildings in the A-
1 zone. (Ord. 1000 § 12.20, 1955)
18.20.080: LOT AREA:
Each lot in the A-1 zone shall have a minimum area of five (5) acres. (Ord.
1000 § 12.20(A), 1955)
18.20.090: LOT DIMENSIONS:
In the A-1 zone:
   A.   Each lot shall have a minimum width of three hundred feet (300');
   B.   Each lot shall have a minimum depth of three hundred feet (300'). (Ord.
1000 § 12.20(B), 1955)
18.20.100: DENSITY OF DEVELOPMENT:
In the A-1 district, population density shall be one dwelling unit per two and
one-half (21/2) acres. For lots existing at the time of the adoption hereof,
not more than one dwelling unit shall be located on any lot containing less
than two and one-half (21/2) acres. (Ord. 1000 § 12.20(C), 1955)
18.20.110: MAXIMUM COVERAGE:
Maximum coverage by structures in the A-1 zone shall be ten percent (10%) of
the lot area; provided, legal, nonconforming lots of less than one hundred
fifty thousand (150,000) square feet in size are permitted to have the
following lot coverage:
   A.   Thirty percent (30%) of the first fourteen thousand (14,000) square
feet of lot area;
   B.   Twenty percent (20%) of the next additional twenty six thousand
(26,000) square feet;
   C.   Five percent (5%) of the next additional one hundred ten thousand
(110,000) square feet. (Ord. 2147 § 1, 1991: Ord. 1000 § 12.20(D), 1955)
18.20.120: BUILDING HEIGHT:
Buildings and structures in the A-1 zone shall have a height not greater than
two and one-half (21/2) stories or thirty five feet (35'). See section
18.152.030 of this title for exceptions. (Ord. 1000 § 12.20(E), 1955)
18.20.130: FRONT YARD:
In A-1 zones:
   A.   Each lot shall have a front yard of not less than twenty five feet
(25') extending across the full width of the lot.
   B.   See subsection
18.148.030B of this title for regulations applying to partly built up blocks.
   C.   See subsection
18.148.030D of this title for regulations applying to key lots. (Ord. 1000 §
12.20(F), 1955)
18.20.140: SIDE YARD:
In A-1 zones:
   A.   Each lot shall have a side yard on both sides of the main building, or
buildings, of not less than five feet (5').
   B.   See subsection
 18.148.030E of this title for regulations applying to side yards on corner
lots.
   C.   See subsection
18.148.030F of this title for regulations applying to side yards on reversed
corner lots. (Ord. 1000 § 12.20(G), 1955)
18.20.150: REAR YARD:
In the A-1 zone, each lot shall have a rear yard of not less than twenty five
feet (25'); provided, lots of less than forty thousand (40,000) square feet may
have projections into the rear yard in accordance with provisions for the R-
A zone in section
18.152.070 of this title. If a lot of forty thousand (40,000) square feet or
less has a width of more than one hundred twenty feet (120'), the permitted
projection may be forty feet (40') wide. (Ord. 2147 § 2, 1991: Ord. 1000 §
12.20(H), 1955)
18.20.160: ACCESSORY BUILDINGS:
   A.   Accessory buildings shall not occupy more than ten percent (10%) of the
rear yard, or may be in an interior side yard area of a parcel where there is
no buildable rear yard area. Accessory buildings shall not be placed forward of
the front façade of the main dwelling or a line extended parallel to the front
façade. Where there are multiple front façades on the main dwelling, the front
elevation with the greatest front setback dimension shall be utilized as the
required setback.
   B.   An accessory building shall not exceed a total floor area of one
thousand (1,000) square feet.
   C.   Accessory buildings must maintain the following minimum separation
distances from other buildings on the same site:
      1.   Accessory buildings shall be a minimum of ten feet (10') from the
main buildings; provided, however, that when more than five feet (5') of such
accessory building extends into the area to the rear of the main building,
which area is defined by the projection of planes parallel to the side lot
lines, which planes pass through the sides of the main building, in which case
the minimum space between buildings shall be twenty feet (20'). In cases where
vehicular entry to garage occurs in the space between buildings, the minimum
space between buildings shall be not less than twenty five feet (25').
      2.   Accessory buildings shall be a minimum of five feet (5') from any
other accessory structure.
   D.   Accessory buildings shall be located not closer to the side and rear
property lines than:
      1.   Five feet (5') for buildings up to ten feet (10') high;
      2.   Ten feet (10') for buildings more than ten feet (10') high.
   E.   When lots are served by an existing or proposed alley, no main building
shall be located within twenty five feet (25') of the rear property line, and
for accessory buildings, if perpendicular access to the accessory building is
from the alley, not less than twenty feet (20') from the rear property line.
Perpendicular access to a carport or an enclosed garage with an automatic
garage door opener may be reduced to a width of twenty five feet (25'),
measured from the opposite side of the alley. If access parallel to the alley
is provided to a garage or carport, the provisions of subsection C of this
section shall apply.
   F.   Accessory buildings shall not exceed a maximum height of fifteen feet
(15') as measured from the foundation at ground-level to the highest point of
the roof.
   G.   Accessory buildings shall not contain a kitchen or kitchenette.
   H.   Architectural Design:
      1.   Metal paneling, if any, shall be decorative such as stamped steel or
seam metal, and shall be painted on the exterior side. Corrugated metal is
prohibited. Reflective exterior metallic materials or untreated metal panels
are prohibited.
      2.   Exterior light fixtures shall be a design, or shall include
shielding, to contain glare within the subject property and prevent light
trespass onto adjacent properties exceeding 0.5 foot-candle as measured at the
property line.
      3.   HVAC condensers and heat pumps shall be ground-mounted.
      4.   Window and roof-mounted HVAC equipment shall not be visible from the
public right-of-way.
      5.   Exterior stairways to upper floors shall not be visible from public
right-of-way at the front or side of the property. (Ord. 2985, 2025: Ord. 2449
§ 1, 2000: Ord. 1000 § 12.20(I), 1955)
18.20.170: OFF STREET PARKING:
For off street parking in the A-1 zone, the provisions of chapter 18.164 of
this title shall apply. (Ord. 1000 § 12.20(J), 1955)
18.20.180: FENCES, LANDSCAPING AND WALLS:
For fences, landscaping and walls in the A-1 zone, the provisions of chapter
18.168 of this title shall apply. (Ord. 1000 § 12.20(K), 1955)
18.20.190: SIGNS:
For signs in the A-1 district, the applicable provisions of the Redlands sign
code shall apply. (Ord. 1000 § 12.20(L), 1955)
18.20.200: AGRITOURISM FACILITIES AND ACTIVITIES:
   A.   Definition Of Agritourism: Agritourism is the act of visiting a working
farm/ranch or agricultural operation for the purpose of enjoyment, education,
or active involvement in the activities of the farm/ranch or agricultural
operation that adds to the economic viability of the agricultural operation.
Agritourism activities are secondary and supplemental to the agricultural uses
of the land, and do not create conflicts with agricultural activities on said
lands and/or adjacent lands.
   B.   Purpose: Agritourism allows for enhanced economic viability of working
farms while maintaining the rural character of agricultural districts for the
continued operation and preservation of farming and ranching land uses. All
activities shall be consistent with The Right to Farm Act (Calif. Civil Code
§3482.5).
   C.   Definition Of Non-Prime Agricultural Land: Land that is not "prime
agricultural land" as defined by the California Department of Conservation is
the preferred location for agritourism activities and any structures or
improvements appurtenant thereto. Land that is defined as "prime agricultural
land" means those lands and soils as defined as prime agricultural lands by the
California Department of Conservation.
   D.   Compatibility With Agriculture: Agritourism rides and attractions shall
be limited to the following (as a permitted use or a conditionally permitted
use):
      1.   One (1) farm animal petting zoo on non-prime soils.
      2.   One (1) pony ride area located on non-prime soils.
      3.   One (1) food vendor, mobile or on-site (with County environmental
health permit if applicable) located on non-prime soils.
      4.   One (1) pre-packaged food/snack bar on non-prime soils.
      5.   One (1) haunted house/barn on non-prime soils.
      6.   One (1) hay maze on non-prime soils.
      7.   One (1) train and tracks located on non-prime soils.
      8.   Inflatable devices on non-prime soils, subject to case-by-case
review.
      9.   One (1) hayride on all soils.
      10.   Train rides on rubberized wheels throughout all soils, subject to
case-by-case review.
      11.   One (1) produce stand on all soils.
      12.   Other recreational/educational activities, subject to review and
approval of the Development Services Director or Planning Commission.
      13.   Days and hours of operation as per determination by the Development
Services Director or Planning Commission.
   E.   Development And Performance Standards For Agritourism: Agritourism uses
shall be consistent with the following operating and development standards,
including but not limited to:
      1.   Adequate on-site parking to accommodate the uses must be provided on
non-prime soils and designated on the site plan for review by Development
Services staff. The parking requirement shall be determined by the Development
Services Director (for permitted agritourism uses) or the Planning Commission
(for conditionally permitted uses). All required parking and motor vehicle
maneuvering areas shall be located on the same or contiguous parcel(s) of land
under the same ownership or leasehold as the use the parking is intended to
serve. Parking areas shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 18.164,
Article III (Property Development Standards), except Section
18.164.310 may be waived or modified by the Development Services Director or
Planning Commission.
      2.   Signs related to agritourism uses shall be subject to the applicable
provisions of the Redlands Sign Regulations (RMC Chapter 15.36, Section
15.36.390).
      3.   On parcels with a minimum of ten (10) contiguous acres or more in
size, all agritourism elements should be clustered and shall consume no more
than one (1) gross acre in aggregate per every ten contiguous acres of site
area (excludes hayrides or trains with rubberized wheels). Parking is excluded
from the acreage calculation.
      4.   On parcels less than ten (10) contiguous acres in size, all
agritourism elements should be clustered and shall consume no more than ten
percent (10%) in aggregate of the gross site acreage (excludes hayrides or
trains with rubberized wheels). Parking is excluded from the acreage
calculation.
      5.   All agritourism facilities, structures, uses and activities shall be
located and conducted at least three hundred feet (300') from any residential
zone, church, school, park or hospital, as measured to the nearest property
line of the adjacent use. Parking is excluded from the separation requirement.
      6.   If non-agricultural development is to occur, it shall minimize its
impacts on natural areas and on nearby farming and agricultural operations.
Natural land forms shall be preserved as much as practicable, and any grading
or cut/fill activity shall be minimized for roads, driveways, and site grading.
      7.   Development and new structures shall include high quality of
architectural design and site planning utilizing design themes that blend
structures into the rural open space character of the area. Natural exterior
treatment materials such as wood, stone, brick, and stucco are permitted. Roof
materials shall be fire-resistant and may include metal roofing. Structures
with predominantly metal siding, or other structures or objects not originally
designed as occupiable structures (such as utilizing corrugated metal or
shipping containers), are prohibited. These design standards shall not be
applicable to any structures utilized solely and exclusively for farm
operations, maintenance, farm-related equipment or vehicles.
      8.   Development and structures shall comply with all applicable
provisions of the California Building Code (including ADA accessibility by the
public), Redlands Municipal Code Title 15 (Buildings and Construction),
California Fire Code, City of Redlands Local Agency Management Program for
Onsite Wastewater Treatment Systems, and any applicable development regulations
of other agencies (e.g., Regional Water Quality Control Board).
      9.   Outdoor Lighting Standards For Agritourism Uses:
         a.   Lighting and glare overspill shall be contained on-site and shall
not exceed one-half (0.5) foot-candle as measured at the property line.
         b.   All outdoor fixtures shall be fully shielded, installed, and
maintained in such a manner that shielding does not permit excessive light
trespass.
         c.   All outdoor lighting shall be extinguished by eleven o'clock (11:
00) P.M., close of business, or when people are no longer present in exterior
areas, whichever is later, except for the following:
            (1)   Lighting used for entry or exit points of a structure,
parking areas, driveways, and driveway ingress/egress points; or
            (2)   Lighting activated by motion sensor that extinguishes no
later than five (5) minutes after activation.
         d.   Blinking, flashing, or high-intensity lighting that causes light
trespass are prohibited.
      10.   Noise control shall be subject to the Noise Ordinance (Redlands
Municipal Code
Chapter 8.06) and the exterior noise standards for residential uses.
      11.   Property owners and operators shall comply with all applicable
regulations and permitting requirements of other agencies (e.g., San Bernardino
County Health Department, South Coast Air Quality Management District,
California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control, Department of Agriculture,
etc.).
      12.   Additional conditions of approval that may be attached to a land
use approval to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare. (Ord.
2961, 2024)
CHAPTER 18.21
A-1-20 AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
18.21.010: Purpose Of Provisions
18.21.020: Uses Generally
18.21.030: Permitted Uses
18.21.040: Conditional Uses
18.21.050: Property Development Standards
18.21.060: Lot Area
18.21.070: Lot Dimensions
18.21.080: Density Of Development
18.21.090: Maximum Coverage
18.21.100: Building Height
18.21.110: Front Yard
18.21.120: Side Yard
18.21.130: Rear Yard
18.21.140: Accessory Buildings
18.21.150: Off Street Parking
18.21.160: Fences, Landscaping And Walls
18.21.170: Signs
18.21.010: PURPOSE OF PROVISIONS:
The purpose of the A-1-20 zone is to provide for the proper utilization of
those lands best suited for agriculture and composting recycling purposes, and
to prevent the encroachment of incompatible uses. The regulations set out in
this chapter shall apply to all land in the A-1-20 agriculture district. (Ord.
2286 § 1, 1995)
18.21.020: USES GENERALLY:
No building, structure or land shall be used, and no building or structure
shall be hereafter erected, structurally altered or enlarged, except for the
purposes described in this chapter. (Ord. 2286 § 1, 1995)
18.21.030: PERMITTED USES:
Permitted uses in the A-1-20 zone are:
   Apiaries, provided that no hives or boxes housing bees shall be kept closer
than three hundred feet (300') from any dwelling other than that occupied by
the owner of the apiary.
   Farms or ranches for the grazing, breeding or raising of not more than two
(2) horses, cattle, goats or sheep per acre. Except for the keeping of up to
three (3) horses, as provided for in sections
18.44.020 through
18.44.050 of this title, no animal(s) shall be housed or corralled closer than
five hundred feet (500') from any existing residence in the R-1, R-1-D, R-2, R-
2-2000 or R-3 zone, or one hundred feet (100') from any property line.
   Employee housing for up to six (6) persons, as defined in
chapter 18.08 of this title.
   Farmworker and agricultural worker housing, consisting of no more than
twelve (12) units or thirty six (36) beds, in accordance with Article XIV of
Chapter 18.156 of this title.
   Orchards, groves, nurseries, the raising of field crops, tree crops, berry
crops, bush crops, truck gardening and commercial flower growing.
   Single-family residences; provided, however, that there shall be not more
than two (2) dwellings on each parcel of twenty (20) acres or more. Where
parcels of land are already subdivided into parcels less than twenty (20) acres
in area, there shall be permitted one dwelling for each lot, provided the lot
contains dimensions and an area equivalent to the closest single-family
residential zone.
   Supportive and transitional housing for up to six (6) persons intended to
serve the target population, as defined in chapter 18.08 of this title. (Ord.
2985, 2025: Ord. 2286 § 1, 1995)
18.21.040: CONDITIONAL USES:
Uses permitted by conditional use permit in the A-1-20 zone are:
Aviaries and hatcheries.
Composting recycling operations which may include the use of sludge and other
composting materials and the sale of related landscaping items.
Dairies, including the processing of milk.
Farms or ranches for commercial raising of poultry or rabbits. No more than
five hundred (500) poultry or rabbits for each twenty thousand (20,000) square
feet of lot area; provided, however, that such rabbits or fowl are kept at
least fifty feet (50') from any property line, and five hundred feet (500')
from any residential zone, church, school, park or hospital.
Grange halls and similar uses incidental to the promotion and development of
sound agriculture.
Riding stables or academies; provided that the minimum lot size for such use
shall be not less than five (5) acres, and that all such buildings for the
housing, feeding or rental of such animals shall be at least one hundred feet
(100') from any property line, and five hundred feet (500') from any R-S or R-
1 zone, church, school, park or hospital. (Ord. 2286 § 1, 1995)
18.21.050: PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The following property development standards shall apply to all land and
buildings in the A-1-20 zone. (Ord. 2286 § 1, 1995)
18.21.060: LOT AREA:
Each lot shall have a minimum area of twenty (20) acres. (Ord. 2286 § 1, 1995)
18.21.070: LOT DIMENSIONS:
   A.   Each lot shall have a minimum width of six hundred sixty feet (660').
   B.   Each lot shall have a minimum depth of one thousand two hundred feet
(1,200'). (Ord. 2286 § 1, 1995)
18.21.080: DENSITY OF DEVELOPMENT:
Population density shall be one dwelling unit per twenty (20) acres. For lots
existing at the time of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter,
not more than one dwelling unit shall be located on any lot containing less
than twenty (20) acres. (Ord. 2286 § 1, 1995)
18.21.090: MAXIMUM COVERAGE:
Maximum coverage by structures shall be ten percent (10%) of the lot area.
(Ord. 2286 § 1, 1995)
18.21.100: BUILDING HEIGHT:
Except as provided in section
18.152.030 of this title, all buildings and structures shall have a height of
not greater than two and one-half (21/2) stories or thirty five feet (35').
(Ord. 2286 § 1, 1995)
18.21.110: FRONT YARD:
Each lot shall have a front yard of not less than twenty five feet (25')
extending across the full width of the lot. (Ord. 2286 § 1, 1995)
18.21.120: SIDE YARD:
   A.   Each lot shall have a side yard on both sides of the main building, or
buildings, of not less than five feet (5').
   B.   See subsection
18.148.030E of this title for regulations applying to side yards on corner
lots.
   C.   See subsection
18.148.030F of this title for regulations applying to side yards on reversed
comer lots. (Ord. 2286 § 1, 1995)
18.21.130: REAR YARD:
Each lot shall have a rear yard of not less than twenty five feet (25');
provided lots of less than forty thousand (40,000) square feet may have
projections into the rear yard in accordance with provisions for the R-A zone
in section
18.152.070 of this title. If a lot of forty thousand (40,000) square feet or
less has a width of more than one hundred twenty feet (120'), the permitted
projection may be forty feet (40') wide. (Ord. 2286 § 1, 1995)
18.21.140: ACCESSORY BUILDINGS:
   A.   Accessory buildings shall not occupy more than ten percent (10%) of the
rear yard, or may be in an interior side yard area of a parcel where there is
no buildable rear yard area. Accessory buildings shall not be placed forward of
the front façade of the main dwelling or a line extended parallel to the front
façade. Where there are multiple front façades on the main dwelling, the front
elevation with the greatest front setback dimension shall be utilized as the
required setback.
   B.   An accessory building shall not exceed a total floor area of one
thousand (1,000) square feet.
   C.   Accessory buildings must maintain the following minimum separation
distances from other buildings on the same site:
      1.   Accessory buildings shall be a minimum of ten feet (10') from the
main buildings; provided, however, that when more than five feet (5') of such
accessory building extends into the area to the rear of the main building,
which area is defined by the projection of planes parallel to the side lot
lines, which planes pass through the sides of the main building, in which case
the minimum space between buildings shall be twenty feet (20'). In cases where
vehicular entry to garage occurs in the space between buildings, the minimum
space between buildings shall be not less than twenty five feet (25').
      2.   Accessory buildings shall be a minimum of five feet (5') from any
other accessory structure.
   D.   Accessory buildings shall be located not closer to the side and rear
property lines than:
      1.   Five feet (5') for buildings up to ten feet (10') high;
      2.   Ten feet (10') for buildings more than ten feet (10') high.
   E.   When lots are served by an existing or proposed alley, no main building
shall be located within twenty five feet (25') of the rear property line, and
for accessory buildings, if perpendicular access to the accessory building is
from the alley, not less than twenty feet (20') from the rear property line.
Perpendicular access to a carport or an enclosed garage with an automatic
garage door opener may be reduced to a width of twenty five feet (25'),
measured from the opposite side of the alley. If access parallel to the alley
is provided to a garage or carport, the provisions of subsection C of this
section shall apply.
   F.   Accessory buildings shall not exceed a maximum height of fifteen feet
(15') as measured from the foundation at ground-level to the highest point of
the roof.
   G.   Accessory buildings shall not contain a kitchen or kitchenette.
   H.   Architectural Design:
      1.   Metal paneling, if any, shall be decorative such as stamped steel or
seam metal, and shall be painted on the exterior side. Corrugated metal is
prohibited. Reflective exterior metallic materials or untreated metal panels
are prohibited.
      2.   Exterior light fixtures shall be a design, or shall include
shielding, to contain glare within the subject property and prevent light
trespass onto adjacent properties exceeding 0.5 foot-candle as measured at the
property line.
      3.   HVAC condensers and heat pumps shall be ground-mounted.
      4.   Window and roof-mounted HVAC equipment shall not be visible from the
public right-of-way.
      5.   Exterior stairways to upper floors shall not be visible from public
right-of-way at the front or side of the property. (Ord. 2985, 2025: Ord. 2286
§ 1, 1995)
18.21.150: OFF STREET PARKING:
For off street parking, the provisions of chapter 18.164 of this title shall
apply. (Ord. 2286 § 1, 1995)
18.21.160: FENCES, LANDSCAPING AND WALLS:
For fences, landscaping and walls, the provisions of chapter 18.168 of this
title shall apply. (Ord. 2286 § 1, 1995)
18.21.170: SIGNS:
For signs, the applicable provisions of the Redlands sign code shall apply.
(Ord. 2286 § 1, 1995)
CHAPTER 18.24
A-2 ESTATE AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
18.24.010: Purpose Of Provisions
18.24.020: Uses Generally
18.24.030: Permitted Uses
18.24.040: Similar Uses Permitted By Commission Determination
18.24.060: Property Development Standards
18.24.070: Lot Area
18.24.080: Lot Dimensions
18.24.090: Density Of Development
18.24.100: Maximum Coverage
18.24.110: Building Height
18.24.120: Front Yard
18.24.130: Side Yard
18.24.140: Rear Yard
18.24.150: Accessory Buildings
18.24.160: Off Street Parking
18.24.170: Fences, Landscaping And Walls
18.24.180: Signs
18.24.010: PURPOSE OF PROVISIONS:
The purpose of the A-2 estate agricultural district is to provide for the
development of large residential lots that have the combined attributes of a
rural and urban environment. The following regulations set out in this chapter
shall apply to all land in the A-2 agricultural district. (Ord. 1000 § 13.00,
1955)
18.24.020: USES GENERALLY:
In the A-2 zone, no building or structure or land shall be used, and no
building or structure shall hereafter be erected, structurally altered or
enlarged, except for the purposes set out in sections
18.24.030 and
18.24.040 of this chapter. (Ord. 1000 § 13.10, 1955)
18.24.030: PERMITTED USES:
Principal permitted uses in the A-2 district include:
   Community Care Facility, licensed or unlicensed, for up to six (6) persons.
   Employee housing for up to six (6) persons, as defined in
chapter 18.08 of this title.
   Farmworker and agricultural worker housing, consisting of no more than
twelve (12) units or thirty six (36) beds, in accordance with Article XIV of
Chapter 18.156 of this title.
   Keeping of horses; provided, that stables and corrals for horses are kept
not less than forty feet (40') from dwellings on the property, and not less
than forty feet (40') from side property lines and streets, and not less than
one hundred feet (100') from all other structures used or intended for human
occupancy, and not less than one hundred feet (100') from a future residential
building site, and not less than one hundred feet (100') from a public park or
schools, and further:
      A.   Evergreen planting screens, or other protective devices, shall be
required on property lines when minimum distances are used,
      B.   No grazing shall be permitted in any required yard,
      C.   Lot area for one horse shall not be less than twenty five thousand
(25,000) square feet, with fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet additional lot
area for each additional horse,
      D.   No more than three (3) horses may be kept on any lot or parcel.
   Orchards, groves, nurseries, the raising of field crops, tree crops, berry
crops, bush crops, truck gardening, and commercial flower growing; provided,
however, that such uses are on a premises not less than five (5) acres in size.
   Single-family dwellings, not more than one dwelling for each lot.
   Supportive and transitional housing for up to six (6) persons intended to
serve the target population, as defined in
chapter 18.08 of this title.
   The sale of fruit, vegetables, produce, flowers and other similar products
grown on the property; provided, however, that roadside stands used for such
sales shall not exceed five hundred (500) square feet. (Ord. 2985, 2025: Ord.
2333 § 8, 1997: Ord. 1000 § 13.10(A), 1955)
18.24.040: SIMILAR USES PERMITTED BY COMMISSION DETERMINATION:
The commission may, by resolution of record, permit any other uses it may
determine to be similar to those listed above, in conformity with the intent
and purpose of the A-2 zone, and not more obnoxious or detrimental to the
public health, safety and welfare, or other uses permitted in this zone. (Ord.
1000 § 13.10(B), 1955)
18.24.060: PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The following property development standards set out in sections
18.24.070 through
18.24.180 of this chapter shall apply to all land and buildings in the A-
2 zone. (Ord. 1000 § 13.20, 1955)
18.24.070: LOT AREA:
Each lot in the A-2 zone shall have a minimum area of one and one-half (11/2)
acres. (Ord. 1000 § 13.20(A), 1955)
18.24.080: LOT DIMENSIONS:
In the A-2 zone:
   A.   Each lot shall have a minimum width of one hundred sixty feet (160').
   B.   Each lot shall have a minimum depth of one hundred sixty feet (160').
(Ord. 1000 § 13.20(B), 1955)
18.24.090: DENSITY OF DEVELOPMENT:
Population density in the A-2 zone is one dwelling unit per one and one-half
(11/2) acres. (Ord. 1000 § 13.20(C), 1955)
18.24.100: MAXIMUM COVERAGE:
Maximum coverage by structures in the A-2 zone is ten percent (10%) of the lot
area. (Ord. 1000 § 13.20(D), 1955)
18.24.110: BUILDING HEIGHT:
Buildings and structures in the A-2 zone shall have a height not greater than
two and one-half (21/2) stories or thirty five feet (35'). See section
18.152.030 of this title for exceptions. (Ord. 1000 § 13.20(E), 1955)
18.24.120: FRONT YARD:
In the A-2 zone:
   A.   Each lot shall have a front yard of not less than twenty five feet
(25') extending across the full width of the lot.
   B.   See subsection
18.148.030B of this title for regulations applying to partly built up blocks.
   C.   See subsection
18.148.030D of this title for regulations applying to key lots. (Ord. 1000 §
13.20(F), 1955)
18.24.130: SIDE YARD:
In the A-2 zone:
   A.   Each lot shall have a side yard on both sides of the main building, or
buildings, of not less than five feet (5').
   B.   See subsection
18.148.030E of this title for regulations applying to side yards on corner
lots.
   C.   See subsection
18.148.030F of this title for regulations applying to side yards on reversed
corner lots. (Ord. 1000 § 13.20(G), 1955)
18.24.140: REAR YARD:
In A-2 zones, each lot shall have a rear yard of not less than twenty five feet
(25'). (Ord. 1000 § 13.20(H), 1955)
18.24.150: ACCESSORY BUILDINGS:
For accessory buildings in the A-2 zone, the provisions of section
18.20.160 of this title shall apply. (Ord. 1000 § 13.20(I), 1955)
18.24.160: OFF STREET PARKING:
For off street parking in the A-2 zone, the provisions of chapter 18.164 of
this title shall apply. (Ord. 1000 § 13.20(J), 1955)
18.24.170: FENCES, LANDSCAPING AND WALLS:
For fences, landscaping and walls in the A-2 district, the provisions of
chapter 18.168 of this title shall apply. (Ord. 1000 § 13.20(K), 1955)
18.24.180: SIGNS:
For signs in the A-2 district, the applicable provisions of the Redlands sign
code shall apply. (Ord. 1000 § 13.20(L), 1955)
CHAPTER 18.28
R-R RURAL RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
18.28.010: Purpose Of Provisions
18.28.020: Uses Generally
18.28.030: Permitted Uses
18.28.035: Accessory Uses
18.28.040: Similar Uses Permitted By Commission Determination
18.28.050: Conditional Uses
18.28.070: Property Development Standards
18.28.080: Lot Area
18.28.090: Lot Dimensions
18.28.100: Density Of Development
18.28.110: Maximum Coverage
18.28.120: Building Height
18.28.130: Front Yard
18.28.140: Side Yard
18.28.150: Rear Yard
18.28.160: Accessory Buildings
18.28.170: Off Street Parking
18.28.180: Fences, Landscaping And Walls
18.28.190: Signs
18.28.200: Grading
18.28.010: PURPOSE OF PROVISIONS:
The purpose of the R-R Rural Residential District is to provide for the
development of large residential lots in a rural environment. The regulations
set out in this chapter shall apply to all land in the R-R Rural Residential
District. (Ord. 1908 § 1, 1986: Ord. 1000 § 13.50, 1955)
18.28.020: USES GENERALLY:
In the R-R District, no building or structure or land shall be used, and no
building or structure shall hereafter be erected, structurally altered or
enlarged, except for the following purposes, set out in sections
18.28.030 and
18.28.040 of this chapter. (Ord. 1908 § 1, 1986: Ord. 1000 § 13.60, 1955)
18.28.030: PERMITTED USES:
Principal permitted uses in R-R Districts include:
   Uses permitted in the A-2 Estate Agricultural District, provided the area of
the lot is not less than that required in the A-2 District.
   Community Care Facility, licensed or unlicensed, for up to six (6) persons.
   Employee housing for up to six (6) persons, as defined in
chapter 18.08 of this title.
   Home occupations, as defined in chapter 18.08 of this title, and subject to
the provisions of
chapter 18.160 of this title.
   Keeping of horses; provided, that stables and corrals for horses are kept
not less than forty feet (40') from dwellings on the property and not less than
forty feet (40') from side property lines and streets, and not less than one
hundred feet (100') from all other structures used or intended for human
occupancy, and not less than one hundred feet (100') from a future residential
building site, and not less than one hundred feet (100') from a public park or
schools, and compliance with the following:
      A.   Evergreen planting screens, or other protective devices, shall be
required on property lines when minimum distances are used;
      B.   No grazing shall be permitted in any required yard;
      C.   Lot area for one horse shall not be less than twenty five thousand
(25,000) square feet, with fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet additional lot
area for each additional horse.
   Single-family dwellings, not more than one dwelling for each lot.
   Supportive and transitional housing for up to six (6) persons intended to
serve the target population, as defined in
chapter 18.08 of this title. (Ord. 2985, 2025: Ord. 1908 § 1, 1986: Ord. 1000 §
13.60(A), 1955)
18.28.035: ACCESSORY USES:
Private residential recreation court, subject to approval of a permit in
accordance with
chapter 18.156 of this title. (Ord. 2881 §2, 2019: Ord. 2861, 2018)
18.28.040: SIMILAR USES PERMITTED BY COMMISSION DETERMINATION:
The commission may, by resolution of record, permit any other uses which it may
determine to be similar to those listed in section
18.28.030 of this chapter, in conformity with the intent and purpose of the R-
R Zone, and not more obnoxious or detrimental to the public health, safety and
welfare, or other uses permitted in this zone. (Ord. 1908 § 1, 1986: Ord. 1000
§ 13.60(B), 1955)
18.28.050: CONDITIONAL USES:
Uses permitted by conditional use permit in the R-R Zone include uses listed in
chapter 18.192 of this title, in accordance with the provisions of that
chapter. (Ord. 1908 § 1, 1986: Ord. 1000 § 13.70(B), 1955)
18.28.070: PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The following property standards, set out in section
18.28.080 through
18.28.200 of this chapter, shall apply to all land and buildings in the R-
R Zone. (Ord. 1908 § 1, 1986: Ord. 1000 § 13.80, 1955)
18.28.080: LOT AREA:
   A.   Minimum lot area in the R-R District is one acre.
   B.   Any land parcel with an average cross slope of fifteen percent (15%) or
greater is subject to slope density requirements of chapter 18.138, "HD
Hillside Development District", of this title. (Ord. 2050 § 1, 1988: Ord. 1908
§ 1, 1986: Ord. 1000 § 13.80(A), 1955)
18.28.090: LOT DIMENSIONS:
In the R-R Zone:
   A.   Each lot shall have a minimum width of one hundred twenty five feet
(125') for a one acre parcel, one hundred fifty feet (150') for a 1.5 acre
parcel, and two hundred feet (200') for a two (2) acre or larger parcel.
   B.   Each lot shall have a minimum depth of one hundred twenty five feet
(125'). (Ord. 1908 § 1, 1986: Ord. 1000 § 13.80(B), 1955)
18.28.100: DENSITY OF DEVELOPMENT:
Maximum population density in the R-R Zone is one dwelling unit per one acre.
(Ord. 1908 § 1, 1986: Ord. 1000 § 13.80(C), 1955)
18.28.110: MAXIMUM COVERAGE:
Maximum coverage by structures in the R-R Zone is ten percent (10%) of the lot
area; provided legal, nonconforming lots of less than one acre in size are
permitted to have the following lot coverage:
   A.   Thirty percent (30%) of the first fourteen thousand (14,000) square
feet of lot area;
   B.   Twenty percent (20%) of the next additional twenty six thousand
(26,000) square feet of lot area; and
   C.   Five percent (5%) of the next additional three thousand five hundred
sixty (3,560) square feet of lot area. (Ord. 2585 § 1, 2004: Ord. 1908 § 1,
1986: Ord. 1000 § 13.80(D), 1955)
18.28.120: BUILDING HEIGHT:
Buildings and structures in the R-R Zone shall have a height not greater than
two and one-half (21/2) stories, or thirty five feet (35'). See section
18.152.030 of this title for exceptions. (Ord. 1908 § 1, 1986: Ord. 1000 §
13.80(E), 1955)
18.28.130: FRONT YARD:
In the R-R Zone:
   A.   Each lot shall have a front yard of not less than twenty five feet
(25') extending across the full width of the lot.
   B.   See subsection
18.148.030B of this title for regulations applying to partly built up blocks.
   C.   See subsection
18.148.030D of this title for regulations applying to key lots. (Ord. 1908 § 1,
1986: Ord. 1000 § 13.80(F), 1955)
18.28.140: SIDE YARD:
In the R-R Zone:
   A.   Each lot shall have a side yard on both sides of the main building, or
accessory buildings, of not less than ten feet (10').
   B.   See subsection
18.148.030E of this title for regulations applying to side yards on corner
lots.
   C.   See subsection
18.148.030F of this title for regulations applying to side yards on reversed
corner lots. (Ord. 1908 § 1, 1986: Ord. 1000 § 13.80(G), 1955)
18.28.150: REAR YARD:
In the R-R Zone, each lot shall have a rear yard of not less than twenty five
feet (25'). (Ord. 1908 § 1, 1986: Ord. 1000 § 13.80(H), 1955)
18.28.160: ACCESSORY BUILDINGS:
For accessory buildings in R-R Zones, the provisions of section
18.20.160 of this title shall apply. (Ord. 1908 § 1, 1986: Ord. 1000 § 13.80
(I), 1955)
18.28.170: OFF STREET PARKING:
For off street parking in R-R Zones, the provisions of chapter 18.164 of this
title shall apply. (Ord. 1908 § 1, 1986: Ord. 1000 § 13.80(J), 1955)
18.28.180: FENCES, LANDSCAPING AND WALLS:
For fences, landscaping and walls in the R-R Zone, the provisions of chapter
18.168 of this title shall apply. (Ord. 1908 § 1, 1986: Ord. 1000 § 13.80(K),
1955)
18.28.190: SIGNS:
In R-R Zones, the applicable provisions of the Redlands Sign Code shall apply.
(Ord. 1908 § 1, 1986: Ord. 1000 § 13.80(L), 1955)
18.28.200: GRADING:
For grading in the R-R Zone, the provisions of the Redlands grading ordinance
shall apply, except that grading shall be the minimum necessary to provide for
a building site. (Ord. 1908 § 1, 1986: Ord. 1000 § 13.80(M), 1955)
CHAPTER 18.29
R-R-A RURAL RESIDENTIAL ANIMALS DISTRICT
SECTION:
18.29.010: Purpose Of Provisions
18.29.020: Uses Generally
18.29.025: Accessory Uses
18.29.030: Permitted Uses
18.29.040: Similar Uses Permitted By Commission Determination
18.29.050: Conditional Uses
18.29.060: Property Development Standards
18.29.070: Lot Area
18.29.080: Lot Dimensions
18.29.090: Density Of Development
18.29.100: Maximum Coverage
18.29.110: Building Height
18.29.120: Front Yard
18.29.130: Side Yard
18.29.140: Rear Yard
18.29.150: Accessory Buildings
18.29.160: Off Street Parking
18.29.170: Fences, Landscaping And Walls
18.29.180: Signs
18.29.190: Grading
18.29.010: PURPOSE OF PROVISIONS:
The purpose of the R-R-A Rural Residential Animals District is to provide for
the development of large residential lots in a rural environment with special
regulations pertaining to animals. The regulations set out in this chapter
shall apply to all land in the R-R-A Rural Residential Animals District. (Ord.
2190, 1992)
18.29.020: USES GENERALLY:
In the R-R-A District, no building or structure or land shall be used, and no
building or structure shall hereafter be erected, structurally altered or
enlarged except for the following purposes, set out in sections
18.29.030 and
18.29.040 of this chapter. (Ord. 2190, 1992)
18.29.025: ACCESSORY USES:
Private residential recreation court, subject to approval of a permit in
accordance with
chapter 18.156 of this title. (Ord. 2881 §3, 2019: Ord. 2861, 2018)
18.29.030: PERMITTED USES:
Principal permitted uses in R-R-A Districts include:
   Accessory animal raising associated with a primary single dwelling unit.
      A.   Regulations Established: This section establishes regulations to
allow animal raising as an accessory use to a primary single dwelling unit.
Table 18.29.030(c)(1) of this section identifies the types and numbers of
animals allowed. Combinations of the animal types are allowed, provided:
         1.   The total number in each category is not exceeded;
         2.   Where animal types are limited only by a maximum number per lot
or unit, these animals are allowed in addition to any other accessory animal
raising use. However, where animal types are limited by a ratio of animals per
lot area, these animals may not be reused to allow another animal type;
         3.   For the purpose of this section, lots with attached multiple
residential structures shall be limited to those animals allowed by
table 18.29.030(c)(1) a and b of this section for lots less than seven thousand
two hundred (7,200) square feet.
      B.   Public Health Laws: All animal raising land uses shall comply with
public health laws regarding proper care and maximum number of animals.
      C.   Structures: Each animal raising land use includes all structures
necessary to maintain and care for such animals (e.g., barn, corral, stable,
pens and coops). Such structures shall comply with all development standards
including those specified by the land use district and this section.
      D.   Distance From Human Habitation: All animals, other than cats, dogs,
canaries or birds of the psittacine family, shall be maintained at least
seventy feet (70'), measured in a straight line, from any structure or area
used for human habitation or public assembly (e.g., parks, churches, etc.) on
adjoining property and forty feet (40') for structures and area used for human
habitat or public assembly that is located on site. The area of human
habitation shall not include cabanas, patios (attached or detached), private
garages or storage buildings.
      E.   Distance From Property Lines: Such animals shall maintain a
clearance of at least five feet (5') from interior side and rear property
lines, and fifteen feet (15') from side street rights of way, excepting an
alley or bridle path, unless they comply with subsection F of this section.
      F.   Animal Enclosure: Animals may be maintained by a fence at least five
feet (5') high and made of either chain link, wood with horizontal members no
less than six inches (6") apart, solid masonry or other appropriate solid
screening and confining materials. Such a fence may be located on an interior
side or rear lot line and fifteen feet (15') from a side street right of way.
      G.   Distance From Water Well: All animals shall be kept no closer than
one hundred feet (100') from a domestic water well.
      H.   Conditional Use Permit: Accessory animal raising of densities
greater than or of animal types different from those specified by this section
shall be subject to a conditional use permit.
      I.   Newborn Animal Exception: Offspring of animals maintained in
accordance with applicable lands and regulations which are less than four (4)
months old or which have not been weaned, whichever is longer, of any animals
which are maintained in compliance with the provisions of this code and any
other applicable laws, ordinances and regulations shall not be subject to the
maximum density or number limitations established by this title. Offspring of
equestrian animals which are less than three (3) years old, for those bred on
the property, are permitted. Such animals shall not be included as part of the
number of allowable animals.
      J.   Confined Animals: Animals which are normally maintained in
aquariums, terrariums, vivariums, birdcages or similar devices each of which
does not exceed fifty (50) cubic feet and where such devices are maintained
within an enclosed building shall be allowed as an accessory animal raising
use. The maximum number or density limitations for these animal types shall
comply with public health regulations.
      K.   Types And Number Of Animals Allowed:
Table 18.29.030(c)(1) of this section identifies the types and number of
animals allowed as follows:
TABLE 18.29.030(c)(1)
Animal Type Minimum Lot Area Maximum Density Or Number
Animal Type                Minimum Lot Area           Maximum Density Or Number
a. Dogs/cats               Less than 7,200            2 per lot or unit
                           7,200 - 9,999              3 per lot or unit
                           10,000 - 19,999            4 per lot or unit
                           20,000+                    5 per lot or unit1
b. Chickens or similar
fowl (hens only) or        Less than 7,200            2 per lot
rabbits and other small
animals
                           7,201 - 9,999              3 per lot
                           10,000 - 20,000            4 per lot
                                                      1 per 2,000 square feet
                           20,000+                    (maximum of 9 per species
                                                      per lot)
                                                      Maximum of 9 per lot with
Male fowl                  1 acre                     no more than 2 of any
                                                      species
c. Sheep and/or goat       7,200 - 9,999              1 per lot
(female)
Sheep and/or goat (female) 10,000                     1 per 5,000 square feet
                                                      1 per lot (cumulative
Sheep and/or goat (male)   20,000+                    total of sheep and goats
                                                      is 9)
                                                      1 per 10,000 square feet
d. Cattle, buffalo, horses 20,000 square feet with 60 with a maximum of 9
and other large animals    foot frontage              (cumulative total cannot
                                                      exceed 9)
Note:
1. Requires conditional use permit for a kennel. For the purposes of this zone
a "kennel" is defined as 5 or more cats or dogs and supersedes the definition
of kennel as described in section 18.08.350 of this title.
 
      L.   Prohibited Animals: No person shall offer for sale, give away, or
bring into the R-R-A zone any lion, tiger, bear, wolf, cougar, or any other
wild undomesticated animal as defined in section
6.16.010 of this code. All such animals may be impounded subject to the
provisions of section
6.16.010 of this code.
   Community Care Facility, licensed or unlicensed, for up to six (6) persons.
   Employee housing for up to six (6) persons, as defined in
chapter 18.08 of this title.
   Home occupations, as defined in
chapter 18.08 of this title, and subject to the provisions of
chapter 18.160 of this title.
   Single-family dwellings, not more than one dwelling for each lot and uses
permitted in the A-2, agricultural district, provided the area of the lot is
not less than that required in the A-2 district.
   Supportive and transitional housing for up to six (6) persons intended to
serve the target population, as defined in
chapter 18.08 of this title. (Ord. 2985, 2025: Ord. 2190, 1992)
18.29.040: SIMILAR USES PERMITTED BY COMMISSION DETERMINATION:
The commission may review any other uses which it may determine to be similar
to those listed in section
18.29.030 of this chapter, in conformity with the intent and purpose of the R-
R-A zone, and not more obnoxious or detrimental to the public health, safety
and welfare, or other uses permitted in this zone. (Ord. 2190, 1992)
18.29.050: CONDITIONAL USES:
Uses permitted by conditional use permit in the R-R-A zone include uses listed
in chapter 18.192 of this title, in accordance with the provisions of that
chapter. (Ord. 2190, 1992)
18.29.060: PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The following property standards, set out in sections
18.29.070 through
18.29.190 of this chapter, shall apply to all land and buildings in the R-R-
A zone. (Ord. 2190, 1992)
18.29.070: LOT AREA:
   A.   Minimum lot area in the R-R-A district is one acre.
   B.   Any land parcel with an average cross slope of fifteen percent (15%) or
greater is subject to slope density requirements of chapter 18.138, "HD
Hillside Development District", of this title. (Ord. 2190, 1992)
18.29.080: LOT DIMENSIONS:
In the R-R-A zone:
   A.   Each lot shall have a minimum width of one hundred twenty five feet
(125') for a one acre parcel, one hundred fifty feet (150') for a 1.5 acre
parcel, and two hundred feet (200') for a two (2) acre or larger parcel.
   B.   Each lot shall have a minimum depth of one hundred twenty five feet
(125'). (Ord. 2190, 1992)
18.29.090: DENSITY OF DEVELOPMENT:
Maximum population density in the R-R-A zone is one dwelling unit per one acre.
(Ord. 2190, 1992)
18.29.100: MAXIMUM COVERAGE:
Maximum coverage by structures in the R-R-A zone is ten percent (10%) of the
lot area; provided legal, nonconforming lots of less than one acre in size are
permitted to have the following lot coverage:
   A.   Thirty percent (30%) of the first fourteen thousand (14,000) square
feet in area;
   B.   Twenty percent (20%) of the next additional twenty six thousand
(26,000) square feet; and
   C.   Five percent (5%) of the next additional three thousand five hundred
sixty (3,560) square feet. (Ord. 2190, 1992)
18.29.110: BUILDING HEIGHT:
Buildings and structures in the R-R-A zone shall have a height not greater than
two and one-half (21/2) stories, or thirty five feet (35'). See section
18.152.030 of this title for exceptions. (Ord. 2190, 1992)
18.29.120: FRONT YARD:
In the R-R-A zone:
   A.   Except as provided in this section each lot shall have a front yard of
not less than twenty five feet (25') extending across the full width of the
lot.
   B.   See subsection
18.148.030B of this title for regulations applying to partly built up blocks.
   C.   See subsection
18.148.030D of this title for regulations applying to key lots. (Ord. 2190,
1992)
18.29.130: SIDE YARD:
In the R-R-A zone:
   A.   Except as provided in this section each lot shall have a side yard on
both sides of the main building, or accessory buildings, of not less than ten
feet (10').
   B.   See subsection
18.148.030E of this title for regulations applying to side yards on corner
lots.
   C.   See subsection
18.148.030F of this title for regulations applying to side yards on reversed
corner lots. (Ord. 2190, 1992)
18.29.140: REAR YARD:
In the R-R-A zone, each lot shall have a rear yard of not less than twenty five
feet (25'). (Ord. 2190, 1992)
18.29.150: ACCESSORY BUILDINGS:
For accessory buildings in R-R-A zones, the provisions of section
18.20.160 of this title shall apply. (Ord. 2190, 1992)
18.29.160: OFF STREET PARKING:
For off street parking in R-R-A zones, the provisions of chapter 18.164 of this
title shall apply. (Ord. 2190, 1992)
18.29.170: FENCES, LANDSCAPING AND WALLS:
For fences, landscaping and walls in the R-R-A zone, the provisions of chapter
18.168 of this title shall apply. (Ord. 2190, 1992)
18.29.180: SIGNS:
In the R-R-A zones, the applicable provisions of the Redlands sign code shall
apply. (Ord. 2190, 1992)
18.29.190: GRADING:
For grading in the R-R-A zone, the provisions of the Redlands grading ordinance
shall apply, except that grading shall be the minimum necessary to provide for
a building site. (Ord. 2190, 1992)
CHAPTER 18.32
R-A RESIDENTIAL ESTATE DISTRICT
SECTION:
18.32.010: Applicability Of Provisions
18.32.020: Permitted Uses
18.32.025: Accessory Uses
18.32.030: Property Development Standards
18.32.040: Lot Area
18.32.050: Lot Dimensions
18.32.060: Density Of Development
18.32.070: Maximum Coverage
18.32.080: Building Height
18.32.090: Front Yard
18.32.100: Side Yard
18.32.110: Rear Yard
18.32.115: Accessory Buildings
18.32.120: Parking, Fences And Signs
18.32.010: APPLICABILITY OF PROVISIONS:
The regulations set out in this chapter shall apply in the R-A Residential
Estate Districts. (Ord. 1000 § 14.00, 1955)
18.32.020: PERMITTED USES:
   A.   In the R-A District, no building, structure or land shall be used, and
no building or structure shall be hereafter erected, structurally altered or
enlarged, except for the following purposes.
   B.   Permitted uses include:
      Uses permitted in the A-2 Agricultural District, provided the area of the
lot is not less than that required in the A-2 District.
      Churches, subject to a conditional use permit.
      Community Care Facility, licensed or unlicensed, for up to six (6)
persons.
      Employee housing for up to six (6) persons, as defined in
chapter 18.08 of this title.
      Home occupations, as defined in
chapter 18.08 of this title, and subject to the provisions of
chapter 18.160 of this title.
      Keeping of horses, provided that stables and corrals for horses are kept
not less than forty feet (40') from dwellings on the property and not less than
forty feet (40') from side property lines and streets, and not less than one
hundred feet (100') from all other structures used or intended for human
occupancy, and not less than one hundred feet (100') from a future residential
building site, and not less than one hundred feet (100') from a public park or
schools, and further:
         1.   Evergreen planting screens, or other protective devices, may be
required on property lines when minimum distances are used, and further
         2.   No grazing shall be permitted in any required yard, and further
         3.   Lot area for one horse shall not be less than twenty five
thousand (25,000) square feet, with fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet
additional lot area for each additional horse, and further
         4.   No more than three (3) horses may be kept on any lot or parcel,
subject to the housing provisions of this use.
      Private greenhouses or horticultural collections incidental to the
residential use of the premises.
      Public schools, parks and playgrounds, subject to review and approval by
the commission.
      Single-family residential use, not more than one dwelling unit per lot.
      Supportive and transitional housing for up to six (6) persons intended to
serve the target population, as defined in
chapter 18.08 of this title. (Ord. 2985, 2025: Ord. 1000 § 14.10, 1955)
18.32.025: ACCESSORY USES:
Private residential recreation court, subject to approval of a permit in
accordance with
chapter 18.156 of this title. (Ord. 2881 §4, 2019: Ord. 2861, 2018)
18.32.030: PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
Property development standards for the R-A District are set out in sections
18.32.040 through
18.32.120 of this chapter. (Ord. 1000 § 14.20, 1955)
18.32.040: LOT AREA:
   A.   Minimum lot area in the R-A District is twenty thousand (20,000) square
feet.
   B.   Any land parcel with an average cross slope of fifteen percent (15%) or
greater is subject to slope density requirements of chapter 18.138, "HD
Hillside Development District", of this title. (Ord. 2050 § 2, 1988: Ord. 1000
§ 14.20(A), 1955)
18.32.050: LOT DIMENSIONS:
Minimum lot dimensions in R-A Districts:
   A.   One hundred feet (100') in width;
   B.   One hundred twenty feet (120') in depth. (Ord. 1000 § 14.20(B), 1955)
18.32.060: DENSITY OF DEVELOPMENT:
Maximum population density in R-A Districts is one dwelling unit per lot. (Ord.
1000 § 14.20(C), 1955)
18.32.070: MAXIMUM COVERAGE:
Maximum coverage by structures in R-A Districts is twenty percent (20%) of the
lot area. (Ord. 1000 § 14.20(D), 1955)
18.32.080: BUILDING HEIGHT:
Maximum building height in R-A Districts is two and one-half (21/2) stories or
thirty five feet (35'). See section
18.152.030 of this title for exceptions. (Ord. 1000 § 14.20(E), 1955)
18.32.090: FRONT YARD:
In R-A Districts:
   A.   Each lot shall have a front yard extending for the full width of the
lot. The yard shall be not less than twenty five feet (25').
   B.   See subsection
18.148.030B of this title for regulations applying to partly built up blocks.
   C.   See subsection
18.148.030D of this title for regulations applying to key lots. (Ord. 1000 §
14.30, 1955)
18.32.100: SIDE YARD:
In the R-A Zone:
   A.   Each lot shall have a side yard on both sides of the main building, of
not less than ten feet (10'). Each lot shall have not less than a ten foot
(10') level side yard on the garage side. A corner lot shall have the garage
adjacent to the interior lot line, with not less than a ten foot (10') level
side yard.
   B.   See subsection
18.148.030E of this title for regulations applying to side yards on corner
lots.
   C.   See subsection
18.148.030F of this title for regulations applying to side yards on reversed
corner lots.
   D.   See chapter 18.148 of this title for regulations applying to
computation of yards. (Ord. 1960 § 1, 1986: Ord. 1000 § 14.40, 1955)
18.32.110: REAR YARD:
For rear yards in the R-A Zone, see section
18.20.150 of this title. (Ord. 1000 § 14.50, 1955)
18.32.115: ACCESSORY BUILDINGS:
For accessory buildings in R-A districts, the provisions of section
18.20.160 of this title shall apply. (Ord. 2985, 2025)
18.32.120: PARKING, FENCES AND SIGNS:
In the R-A District:
   A.   Off street parking: See chapter 18.164 of this title.
   B.   Fences, hedges and walls: See chapter 18.168 of this title.
   C.   Signs: See the Redlands Sign Code. (Ord. 1000 § 14.60, 1955)
CHAPTER 18.33
R-A-A RESIDENTIAL ESTATE ANIMALS DISTRICT
SECTION:
18.33.010: Applicability Of Provisions
18.33.020: Uses Generally
18.33.030: Permitted Uses
18.33.035: Accessory Uses
18.33.040: Property Development Standards
18.33.050: Lot Area
18.33.060: Lot Dimensions
18.33.070: Density Of Development
18.33.080: Maximum Coverage
18.33.090: Building Height
18.33.100: Front Yard
18.33.110: Side Yard
18.33.120: Rear Yard
18.33.125: Accessory Buildings
18.33.130: Parking, Fences And Signs
18.33.140: Grading
18.33.010: APPLICABILITY OF PROVISIONS:
The regulations set out in this chapter shall apply in the R-A-A Residential
Estate Animals Districts. (Ord. 2190, 1992)
18.33.020: USES GENERALLY:
In the R-A-A District, no building or structure or land shall be used, and no
building or structure shall hereafter be erected, structurally altered or
enlarged except for the following purposes, set out in section
 18.33.030 of this chapter. (Ord. 2190, 1992)
18.33.030: PERMITTED USES:
Principal permitted uses in the R-A-A Districts include:
   Uses permitted in the A-2, Agricultural District, provided area of the lot
is not less than that required in the A-2 District.
   Accessory animal raising associated with a primary single dwelling unit.
Animal raising as permitted in subsection
18.29.030(C) of this title.
   Churches, subject to a conditional use permit.
   Community Care Facility, licensed or unlicensed, for up to six (6) persons.
   Employee housing for up to six (6) persons, as defined in
chapter 18.08 of this title.
   Home occupations, as defined in
chapter 18.08 of this title, and subject to the provisions of
chapter 18.160 of this title.
   Private greenhouses or horticultural collections incidental to the
residential use of the premises.
   Public schools, parks and playgrounds, subject to review and approval by the
commission.
   Single-family residential use, not more than one dwelling unit per lot.
   Supportive and transitional housing for up to six (6) persons intended to
serve the target population, as defined in
chapter 18.08 of this title. (Ord. 2985, 2025: Ord. 2190, 1992)
18.33.035: ACCESSORY USES:
Private residential recreation court, subject to approval of a permit in
accordance with
chapter 18.156 of this title. (Ord. 2881 §5, 2019: Ord. 2861, 2018)
18.33.040: PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
Property development standards for the R-A-A District are set out in sections
18.33.050 through
18.33.140 of this chapter. (Ord. 2190, 1992)
18.33.050: LOT AREA:
   A.   Minimum lot area in the R-A-A District is twenty thousand (20,000)
square feet.
   B.   Any land parcel with an average cross slope of fifteen percent (15%) or
greater is subject to slope-density requirements of chapter 18.138, "HD
Hillside Development District", of this title. (Ord. 2190, 1992)
18.33.060: LOT DIMENSIONS:
Minimum lot dimensions in R-A-A Districts:
   A.   One hundred feet (100') in width;
   B.   One hundred twenty feet (120') in depth. (Ord. 2190, 1992)
18.33.070: DENSITY OF DEVELOPMENT:
Maximum population density in R-A-A Districts is one dwelling unit per lot.
(Ord. 2190, 1992)
18.33.080: MAXIMUM COVERAGE:
Maximum coverage by structures in R-A-A Districts is twenty percent (20%) of
the lot area; provided legal, nonconforming lots of less than twenty thousand
(20,000) square feet in size are permitted to have thirty percent (30%) or the
first fourteen thousand (14,000) square feet in area. (Ord. 2190, 1992)
18.33.090: BUILDING HEIGHT:
Maximum building height in R-A-A Districts is two and one-half (21/2) stories
or thirty five feet (35'). See section
18.152.030 of this title for exceptions. (Ord. 2190, 1992)
18.33.100: FRONT YARD:
In R-A-A Districts:
   A.   Except as provided in this section each lot shall have a front yard
extending for the full width of the lot. The yard shall be not less than twenty
five feet (25').
   B.   See subsection
18.148.030B of this title for regulations applying to partly built up blocks.
   C.   See subsection
18.148.030D of this title for regulations applying to key lots. (Ord. 2190,
1992)
18.33.110: SIDE YARD:
In the R-A-A Zone:
   A.   Except as provided in this section each lot shall have a side yard on
both sides of the main building, of not less than ten feet (10'). Each lot
shall have not less than a ten foot (10') level side yard on the garage side. A
corner lot shall have the garage adjacent to the interior lot line, with not
less than a ten foot (10') level side yard.
   B.   See subsection
18.148.030E of this title for regulations applying to side yards on corner
lots.
   C.   See subsection
18.148.030F of this title for regulations applying to side yards on reversed
corner lots.
   D.   See chapter 18.148 of this title for regulations applying to
computation of yards. (Ord. 2190, 1992)
18.33.120: REAR YARD:
For rear yards in the R-A-A Zone, see sections
18.20.150 through
18.20.160 of this title. (Ord. 2190, 1992)
18.33.125: ACCESSORY BUILDINGS:
The provisions of section
18.20.160 of this title shall apply for accessory buildings in R-A-A districts,
except that accessory buildings may occupy not more than fifteen percent (15%)
of the rear yard area. (Ord. 2985, 2025)
18.33.130: PARKING, FENCES AND SIGNS:
In the R-A-A District:
   A.   Off street parking: See chapter 18.164 of this title.
   B.   Fences, hedges and walls: See chapter 18.168 of this title.
   C.   Signs: See title 15, chapter 15.36 of this Code. (Ord. 2190, 1992)
18.33.140: GRADING:
For grading in the R-A-A Zone, the provisions of the Redlands grading ordinance
shall apply, except that grading shall be the minimum necessary to provide for
a building site. (Ord. 2190, 1992)
CHAPTER 18.36
R-E RESIDENTIAL ESTATE DISTRICT
SECTION:
18.36.010: Applicability Of Provisions
18.36.020: Permitted Uses
18.36.025: Accessory Uses
18.36.030: Property Development Standards
18.36.040: Lot Area
18.36.050: Lot Dimensions
18.36.060: Density Of Development
18.36.070: Maximum Coverage
18.36.080: Building Height
18.36.090: Front Yard
18.36.100: Side Yard
18.36.110: Rear Yard
18.36.120: Accessory Buildings
18.36.130: Parking, Fences, Walls And Signs
18.36.010: APPLICABILITY OF PROVISIONS:
The following regulations, set out in this chapter, shall apply in the R-
E Residential Estate District. (Ord. 1000 § 15.00, 1955)
18.36.020: PERMITTED USES:
No building, structure or land shall be used, and no building or structure
shall be hereafter erected, structurally altered or enlarged, except for the
following purposes:
   Uses permitted in the R-A District, subject to the property development
standards of the R-A District.
   Single-family residential uses, not more than one dwelling unit per lot.
   Community Care Facility, licensed or unlicensed, for up to six (6) persons.
   Employee housing for up to six (6) persons, as defined in
chapter 18.08 of this title.
   Home occupations, as defined in
chapter 18.08 of this title, and subject to the provisions of
chapter 18.160 of this title.
   Supportive and transitional housing for up to six (6) persons intended to
serve the target population, as defined in
chapter 18.08 of this title. (Ord. 2985, 2025: Ord. 1000 § 15.10, 1955)
18.36.025: ACCESSORY USES:
Private residential recreation court, subject to approval of a permit in
accordance with
 chapter 18.156 of this title. (Ord. 2881 §6, 2019: Ord. 2861, 2018)
18.36.030: PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
Property development standards for the R-E District shall be as set out in
sections
18.36.040 through
18.36.130 of this chapter. (Ord. 1000 § 15.20, 1955)
18.36.040: LOT AREA:
   A.   Minimum lot area in the R-E District is fourteen thousand (14,000)
square feet.
   B.   Any land parcel with an average cross slope of fifteen percent (15%) or
greater is subject to slope density requirements of chapter 18.138, "HD
Hillside Development District", of this title. (Ord. 2050 § 3, 1988: Ord. 1000
§ 15.20(A), 1955)
18.36.050: LOT DIMENSIONS:
Minimum lot dimension in the R-E District:
   A.   One hundred feet (100') in width;
   B.   One hundred twenty feet (120') in depth. (Ord. 1000 § 15.20(B), 1955)
18.36.060: DENSITY OF DEVELOPMENT:
Maximum population density in the R-E District is one dwelling per lot. (Ord.
1000 § 15.20(C), 1955)
18.36.070: MAXIMUM COVERAGE:
Maximum coverage by structures in the R-E District is twenty five percent (25%)
of the lot area. (Ord. 1000 § 15.20(C), 1955)
18.36.080: BUILDING HEIGHT:
Maximum building height in the R-E District is two and one-half (21/2) stories,
or thirty five feet (35'). See section
18.152.030 of this title for exceptions. (Ord. 1000 § 15.20(D), 1955)
18.36.090: FRONT YARD:
In R-E Districts:
   A.   Each lot shall have a front yard extending for the full width of the
lot. The yard shall be not less than twenty five feet (25').
   B.   See subsection
18.148.030B of this title for partly built up blocks.
   C.   See subsection
18.148.030D of this title for key lots. (Ord. 1000 § 15.30, 1955)
18.36.100: SIDE YARD:
In R-E Districts:
   A.   Each lot shall have a side yard on both sides of the main building of
not less than ten feet (10'). Each lot shall have not less than a ten foot
(10'), level side yard on the garage side. A corner lot shall have the garage
adjacent to the interior lot line, with not less than a ten foot (10'), level
side yard.
   B.   See subsection
18.148.030E of this title for side yards on corner lots.
   C.   See subsection
18.148.030F of this title for side yards on reversed corner lots.
   D.   See sections
18.148.040 through
18.148.060 of this title for regulations applying to computation of yards.
(Ord. 1000 § 15.40, 1955)
18.36.110: REAR YARD:
In the R-E District, each lot shall have a rear yard of not less than twenty
five feet (25'). (Ord. 1000 § 15.50, 1955)
18.36.120: ACCESSORY BUILDINGS:
The provisions of section
18.20.160 of this title shall apply for accessory buildings in R-E Districts,
except that accessory buildings may occupy not more than fifteen percent (15%)
of the rear yard area. (Ord. 1000 § 15.55, 1955)
18.36.130: PARKING, FENCES, WALLS AND SIGNS:
In the R-E District:
   A.   Off street parking: See chapter 18.164 of this title.
   B.   Fences, hedges and walls: See chapter 18.168 of this title.
   C.   Signs: See the Redlands Sign Code. (Ord. 1000 § 15.60, 1955)
CHAPTER 18.40
R-S SUBURBAN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
18.40.010: Purpose Of Provisions
18.40.020: Uses Generally
18.40.030: Permitted Uses
18.40.040: Accessory Uses
18.40.050: Conditional Uses
18.40.060: Property Development Standards
18.40.070: Lot Area
18.40.080: Lot Dimensions
18.40.090: Density Of Development
18.40.100: Maximum Coverage
18.40.110: Building Height
18.40.120: Front Yard
18.40.130: Side Yard
18.40.140: Rear Yard
18.40.150: Accessory Buildings
18.40.160: Off Street Parking
18.40.170: Fences, Landscaping And Walls
18.40.180: Signs
18.40.010: PURPOSE OF PROVISIONS:
The purpose of the R-S Suburban Residential District is to provide an
environment conducive to the development of low density single-family homes,
with no mixing of incompatible uses. The following regulations, set out in this
chapter, shall apply to all land in the R-S Suburban Residential District.
(Ord. 1000 § 16.00, 1955)
18.40.020: USES GENERALLY:
In the R-S District, no building, structure or land shall be used, and no
building or structure shall be hereafter erected, structurally altered or
enlarged, except for the purposes set out in sections
18.40.030 through
18.40.050 of this chapter. (Ord. 1000 § 16.10, 1955)
18.40.030: PERMITTED USES:
Principal permitted uses in the R-S District include:
   Uses permitted in the A-2 Estate Agricultural District, provided the area of
the lot shall be not less than that required in the A-2 District.
   Accessory structures for the purpose of maintaining agricultural uses of
less than five (5) acres with no expansion of the agricultural use.
   Community Care Facility, licensed or unlicensed, for up to six (6) persons.
   Employee housing for up to six (6) persons, as defined in
chapter 18.08 of this title.
   Home occupations, as defined in
chapter 18.08 of this title, and subject to the provisions of
chapter 18.160 of this title.
   Keeping of horses; provided that stables and corrals for horses are located
not less than forty feet (40') from any dwelling on the property and not less
than fifty feet (50') from any property lines, and not less than one hundred
feet (100') from any existing or future dwelling on adjacent properties, and
not less than one hundred feet (100') from a public park or school; and
further:
      A.   The evergreen planting screens, or other protective devices, shall
be provided along property lines or surrounding the corral and stable areas,
      B.   No grazing shall be permitted in any required yard,
      C.   Lot area for each horse shall be not less than one acre,
      D.   Not more than three (3) horses may be kept on any lot or parcel.
   Single-family residential use, not more than one dwelling unit per lot.
   Supportive and transitional housing for up to six (6) persons intended to
serve the target population, as defined in
chapter 18.08 of this title. (Ord. 2985, 2025: Ord. 2788, 2013)
18.40.040: ACCESSORY USES:
Accessory uses in the R-S District include:
Accessory building, such as bathhouse, cabana and storage shed.
Garage or carport.
Guesthouse.
"Home occupation", as defined in chapter 18.08 of this title, and subject to
the provisions of chapter 18.160 of this title.
Private greenhouse or horticultural collection incidental to the residential
use of the premises.
Private residential sports and recreation court, subject to approval of a
permit in accordance with chapter 18.156, article X of this title.
Private swimming pool.
The keeping of not more than three (3) adult dogs and three (3) adult cats, and
their litters up to the age of ten (10) weeks. (Ord. 2881 §7, 2019: Ord. 2861,
2018)
18.40.050: CONDITIONAL USES:
In the R-S District, uses permitted by conditional use permit include uses
listed in chapter 18.192 of this title, in accordance with the provisions of
that chapter. (Ord. 1000 § 16.10(C), 1955)
18.40.060: PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The property development standards set out in sections
18.40.070 through
18.40.180 of this chapter shall apply to all buildings in the R-S Zone. (Ord.
2333 § 11, 1997: Ord. 1000 § 16.20, 1955)
18.40.070: LOT AREA:
In the R-S Zone, each lot shall have a minimum area of ten thousand (10,000)
square feet. (Ord. 2333 § 11, 1997: Ord. 1000 § 16.20(A), 1955)
18.40.080: LOT DIMENSIONS:
In the R-S District:
   A.   Each lot shall have a minimum width of eighty five feet (85'). Cul-de-
sac lots shall have a minimum width of fifty feet (50').
   B.   Each lot shall have a minimum depth of one hundred feet (100'). (Ord.
2333 § 11, 1997: Ord. 1000 § 16.20(B), 1955)
18.40.090: DENSITY OF DEVELOPMENT:
Population density in R-S Zones is one dwelling unit per lot. (Ord. 2333 § 11,
1997: Ord. 1000 § 16.20(C), 1955)
18.40.100: MAXIMUM COVERAGE:
Maximum coverage by structures in the R-S Zone is thirty percent (30%) of the
lot area. (Ord. 2333 § 11, 1997: Ord. 1000 § 16.20(D), 1955)
18.40.110: BUILDING HEIGHT:
In R-S Zones, buildings and structures shall have a height not greater than two
and one-half (21/2) stories or thirty five feet (35'). See section
 18.152.030 of this title for exceptions. (Ord. 2333 § 11, 1997: Ord. 1000 §
16.20(E), 1955)
18.40.120: FRONT YARD:
In R-S Zones:
   A.   Each lot shall have a front yard extending for the full width of the
lot. The yard shall be not less than twenty five feet (25') nor more than forty
feet (40') in depth.
   B.   See subsection
18.148.030B of this title for regulations applying to partly built up blocks.
   C.   See subsection
18.148.030D of this title for regulations applying to key lots. (Ord. 2333 §
11, 1997: Ord. 1000 § 16.20(F), 1955)
18.40.130: SIDE YARD:
In R-S Zones:
   A.   Each lot shall have a side yard on both sides of the main building of
not less than ten feet (10'). Each lot shall have not less than a ten foot
(10') level side yard on the garage side. A corner lot shall have the garage
adjacent to the interior lot line, with not less than a ten foot (10') level
side yard.
   B.   For lots containing less than the required minimum frontage, the
aggregate side yard dimensions shall be not less than twenty percent (20%) of
the width of the lot; provided, however, the minimum side yard on one side
shall be not less than five feet (5') and not less than ten feet (10') on the
garage side.
   C.   See subsection
18.148.030E of this title for side yards on corner lots.
   D.   See subsection
18.148.030F of this title for side yards on reversed corner lots.
   E.   See chapter 18.148 of this title for regulations applying to
computation of yards. (Ord. 2333 § 11, 1997: Ord. 1960 § 1, 1986: Ord. 1000 §
16.20(G), 1955)
18.40.140: REAR YARD:
Each lot in R-S Zones shall have a rear yard of not less than twenty five feet
(25'). See section
18.152.070 of this title for permitted exceptions. (Ord. 2333 § 11, 1997: Ord.
1000 § 16.20(H), 1955)
18.40.150: ACCESSORY BUILDINGS:
   A.   Accessory buildings shall not occupy more than twenty percent (20%) of
the rear yard, or may be in an interior side yard area of a parcel where there
is no buildable rear yard area. Accessory buildings shall not be placed forward
of the front façade of the main dwelling or a line extended parallel to the
front façade. Where there are multiple front façades on the main dwelling, the
front elevation with the greatest front setback dimension shall be utilized as
the required setback.
   B.   An accessory building shall not exceed a total floor area of one
thousand (1,000) square feet.
   C.   Accessory buildings must maintain the following minimum separation
distances from other buildings on the same site:
      1.   Accessory buildings shall be a minimum of ten feet (10') from the
main buildings; provided, however, that when more than five feet (5') of such
accessory building extends into the area to the rear of the main building,
which area is defined by the projection of planes parallel to the side lot
lines, which planes pass through the sides of the main building, in which case
the minimum space between buildings shall be twenty feet (20'). In cases where
vehicular entry to garage occurs in the space between buildings, the minimum
space between buildings shall be not less than twenty five feet (25').
      2.   Accessory buildings shall be a minimum of five feet (5') from any
other accessory structure.
   D.   Accessory buildings shall be located not closer to the side and rear
property lines than:
      1.   Five feet (5') for buildings up to ten feet (10')high;
      2.   Ten feet (10') for buildings more than ten feet (10') high.
   E.   When lots are served by an existing or proposed alley, no main building
shall be located within twenty five feet (25') of the rear property line, and
for accessory buildings, if perpendicular access to the accessory building is
from the alley, not less than twenty feet (20') from the rear property line.
Perpendicular access to a carport or an enclosed garage with an automatic
garage door opener may be reduced to a width of twenty five feet (25'),
measured from the opposite side of the alley. If access parallel to the alley
is provided to a garage or carport, the provisions of subsection D of this
section shall apply.
   F.   Accessory buildings shall not exceed a maximum height of fifteen feet
(15') as measured from the foundation at ground-level to the highest point of
the roof.
   G.   Accessory buildings shall not contain a kitchen or kitchenette.
   H.   Architectural Design:
      1.   Accessory buildings that are five hundred (500) square feet or more
shall not contain more than ten percent (10%) metal paneling as a primary
exterior material, excluding the roof material.
      2.   Metal paneling, if any, shall be decorative such as stamped steel or
seam metal, and shall be painted on the exterior side. Corrugated metal is
prohibited. Reflective exterior metallic materials or untreated metal panels
are prohibited.
      3.   Use of shipping containers or its parts are prohibited.
      4.   Exterior architectural treatment shall be similar to, or matching,
the main residence on the subject property (including exterior materials,
siding, and color).
      5.   Exterior light fixtures shall include shielding to contain glare
within the subject property and prevent light trespass onto adjacent properties
exceeding 0.5 foot-candle as measured at the property line.
      6.   HVAC condensers and heat pumps shall be ground-mounted.
      7.   Window and roof-mounted HVAC equipment shall not be visible from the
public right-of-way.
      8.   Exterior stairways to upper floors shall not be visible from public
right-of-way at the front or side of the property. (Ord. 2985, 2025: Ord. 2333
§ 11, 1997: Ord. 1000 § 16.20(I), 1955)
18.40.160: OFF STREET PARKING:
For off street parking in R-S Zones, the provisions of chapter 18.164 of this
title shall apply. (Ord. 2333 § 11, 1997: Ord. 1000 § 16.20(J), 1955)
18.40.170: FENCES, LANDSCAPING AND WALLS:
For landscaping, fences and walls in R-S Zones, the provisions of chapter
18.168 of this title shall apply. (Ord. 2333 § 11, 1997: Ord. 1000 § 16.20(K),
1955)
18.40.180: SIGNS:
For signs in R-S Zones, the provisions of the applicable regulations of the
Redlands Sign Code shall apply. (Ord. 2333 § 11, 1997: Ord. 1000 § 16.20(L),
1955)
CHAPTER 18.44
R-1 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
18.44.010: Purpose Of Provisions
18.44.020: Uses Generally
18.44.030: Permitted Uses
18.44.040: Accessory Uses
18.44.050: Conditional Uses
18.44.070: Property Development Standards
18.44.080: Lot Area
18.44.090: Lot Dimensions
18.44.100: Density Of Development
18.44.110: Maximum Coverage
18.44.120: Building Height
18.44.130: Front Yard
18.44.140: Side Yard
18.44.150: Rear Yard
18.44.160: Accessory Buildings
18.44.170: Off Street Parking
18.44.180: Fences, Landscaping And Walls
18.44.190: Signs
18.44.010: PURPOSE OF PROVISIONS:
The purpose of the R-1 Single-Family Residential District is to provide an
environment conducive to the development of low density single-family homes,
with no mixing of incompatible uses. The following regulations, set out in this
chapter, shall apply to all land in the R-1 Single-Family Residential District.
(Ord. 1000 § 17.00, 1955)
18.44.020: USES GENERALLY:
In the R-1 District, no building, structure or land shall be used, and no
building or structure shall be hereafter erected, structurally altered or
enlarged except for the following purposes set out in sections
18.44.030 through
18.44.050 of this chapter. (Ord. 1000 § 17.10, 1955)
18.44.030: PERMITTED USES:
Principal permitted uses in the R-1 Zone include:
   Uses permitted in the A-2 Residential Estate District, provided the area of
the lot shall be not less than that required in the A-2 District.
   Community Care Facility, licensed or unlicensed, for up to six (6) persons.
   Employee housing for up to six (6) persons, as defined in
chapter 18.08 of this title.
   Home occupations, as defined in
chapter 18.08 of this title, and subject to the provisions of
chapter 18.160 of this title.
   Keeping of horses, subject to the provisions of section
18.40.030 of this title.
   Single-family residential use, not more than one dwelling unit per lot.
   Supportive and transitional housing for up to six (6) persons intended to
serve the target population, as defined in
chapter 18.08 of this title. (Ord. 2985, 2025: Ord. 1000 § 17.10(A), 1955)
18.44.040: ACCESSORY USES:
Private residential recreation court, subject to approval of a permit in
accordance with
chapter 18.156 of this title.
In R-1 Zones, the accessory uses listed in section
18.40.040 of this title are permitted. (Ord. 2881 §8, 2019: Ord. 2861, 2018)
18.44.050: CONDITIONAL USES:
Uses permitted by conditional use permit in the R-1 District include:
Uses listed in
chapter 18.192 of this title, in accordance with the provisions of that
chapter.
Children's nurseries.
Convalescent hospitals. (Ord. 1000 § 17.10(C), 1955)
18.44.070: PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The following property development standards, set out in sections
18.44.080 through
18.44.190 of this chapter, shall apply to all land and buildings in the R-
1 Zone. (Ord. 1000 § 17.20, 1955)
18.44.080: LOT AREA:
Each lot in the R-1 Zone shall have a minimum area of seven thousand two
hundred (7,200) square feet. (Ord. 1000 § 17.20(A), 1955)
18.44.090: LOT DIMENSIONS:
In the R-1 Zone:
   A.   Each lot shall have a minimum width of sixty feet (60'). Cul- de-sac
lots shall have a minimum width of forty feet (40').
   B.   Each lot shall have a minimum depth of one hundred feet (100'). (Ord.
1000 § 17.20(B), 1955)
18.44.100: DENSITY OF DEVELOPMENT:
Population density in R-1 Zones shall be one dwelling unit per lot. (Ord. 1000
§ 17.20(C), 1955)
18.44.110: MAXIMUM COVERAGE:
Maximum coverage of structures in the R-1 Zone is thirty percent (30%) of the
lot area. (Ord. 1000 § 17.20(D), 1955)
18.44.120: BUILDING HEIGHT:
In the R-1 Zone, buildings and structures shall have a height not greater than
two and one-half (21/2) stories or thirty five feet (35'). See section
18.152.030 of this title for exceptions. (Ord. 1000 § 17.20(E), 1955)
18.44.130: FRONT YARD:
In R-1 Zones:
   A.   Each lot shall have a front yard extending for the full width of the
lot. The yard shall be not less than twenty five feet (25') nor more than forty
feet (40') in depth.
   B.   See subsection
18.148.030B of this title for regulations applying to partly built up blocks.
   C.   See subsection
18.148.030D of this title for regulations applying to key lots. (Ord. 1000 §
17.20(F), 1955)
18.44.140: SIDE YARD:
In R-1 Zones:
   A.   Each lot shall have a side yard of not less than five feet (5') on one
side and not less than ten feet (10') on the opposite side; provided, however,
an interior lot shall have not less than a ten foot (10'), level side yard on
the garage side. A corner lot shall have the garage adjacent to the interior
lot line, with not less than a ten foot (10') level side yard.
   B.   For lots containing less than the required minimum frontage, the
aggregate side yard dimensions shall be not less than twenty percent (20%) of
the width of the lot; provided, however, the minimum side yard on either side
shall be not less than five feet (5').
   C.   See subsection
 18.148.030E of this title for regulations applying to side yards on corner
lots.
   D.   See subsection
18.148.030F of this title for regulations applying to side yards on reversed
corner lots.
   E.   See sections
18.148.040 through
18.148.060 of this title for regulations applying to computation of yards.
(Ord. 1000 § 17.20(G), 1955)
18.44.150: REAR YARD:
Each lot in the R-1 Zone shall have a rear yard of not less than twenty five
feet (25'). See section
18.152.070 of this title for permitted exceptions. (Ord. 1000 § 17.20(H), 1955)
18.44.160: ACCESSORY BUILDINGS:
For accessory buildings in the R-1 Zone, the provisions of section
18.40.150 of this title shall apply, except that accessory buildings may occupy
not more than thirty percent (30%) of the rear yard area. (Ord. 2985, 2025:
Ord. 1000 § 17.20(I), 1955)
18.44.170: OFF STREET PARKING:
For off street parking in R-1 Zones, the provisions of chapter 18.164 of this
title shall apply. (Ord. 1000 § 17.20(J), 1955)
18.44.180: FENCES, LANDSCAPING AND WALLS:
For landscaping, fences and walls in R-1 Zones, the provisions of chapter
18.168 of this title shall apply. (Ord. 1000 § 17.20(K), 1955)
18.44.190: SIGNS:
For signs in R-1 Zones, the provisions of the applicable regulations of the
Redlands Sign Code shall apply. (Ord. 1000 § 17.20(L), 1955)
CHAPTER 18.48
R-1-D SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
18.48.010: Purpose Of Provisions
18.48.020: Uses Generally
18.48.030: Permitted Uses
18.48.040: Accessory Uses
18.48.050: Conditional Uses
18.48.070: Property Development Standards
18.48.080: Lot Area
18.48.090: Lot Dimensions
18.48.100: Density Of Development
18.48.110: Maximum Coverage
18.48.120: Building Height
18.48.130: Additional Development Standards
18.48.140: Front Yard
18.48.150: Side Yard
18.48.160: Rear Yard
18.48.170: Front And Rear Yard Combinations
18.48.180: Accessory Buildings
18.48.190: Off Street Parking
18.48.200: Fences, Landscaping And Walls
18.48.210: Signs
18.48.010: PURPOSE OF PROVISIONS:
The purpose of the R-1-D Single-Family Residential District is to provide for
the development of two (2) single-family homes on a limited number of existing
deep lots. The following regulations establish provisions for medium density
residential development with a single-family environment, and shall apply to
all land in the R-1-D Single-Family Residential District. (Ord. 1000 § 18.00,
1955)
18.48.020: USES GENERALLY:
In R-1-D Districts, no building, structure or land shall be used, and no
building or structure shall be hereafter erected, structurally altered or
enlarged, except for the purposes set out in sections
18.48.030 through 18.48.050 of this chapter. (Ord. 1000 § 18.10, 1955)
18.48.030: PERMITTED USES:
Principal permitted uses in R-1-D Districts include:
   Community Care Facility, licensed or unlicensed, for up to six (6) persons.
   Employee housing for up to six (6) persons, as defined in
chapter 18.08 of this title.
   Home occupations, as defined in
chapter 18.08 of this title, and subject to the provisions of
chapter 18.160 of this title.
   On existing deep lots greater than one hundred sixty feet (160') in depth,
not more than two (2) single-family dwellings may be constructed in accordance
with the provisions of sections
18.48.070 through
18.48.210 of this chapter.
   Single-family residential uses, not more than one dwelling per lot.
   Supportive and transitional housing for up to six (6) persons intended to
serve the target population, as defined in
chapter 18.08 of this title. (Ord. 2985, 2025: Ord. 1000 § 18.20(A), 1955)
18.48.040: ACCESSORY USES:
In R-1-D Districts, the accessory uses listed in section
18.40.040 of this title are permitted.
Private residential recreation court, subject to approval of a permit in
accordance with
chapter 18.156 of this title. (Ord. 2881 §9, 2019: Ord. 2861, 2018)
18.48.050: CONDITIONAL USES:
Uses permitted by conditional use permit in R-1-D Districts include:
Uses listed in
chapter 18.192 of this title, in accordance with the provisions of that
chapter.
Children's nurseries.
Convalescent hospitals. (Ord. 1000 § 18.11(C), 1955)
18.48.070: PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The property development standards set out in sections
18.48.080 through
 18.48.210 of this chapter shall apply to all land and buildings in the R-1-
D Zone. (Ord. 1000 § 18.20, 1955)
18.48.080: LOT AREA:
Each lot in the R-1-D Zone shall have a minimum area of eight thousand one
hundred (8,100) square feet. (Ord. 1000 § 18.20(A), 1955)
18.48.090: LOT DIMENSIONS:
In the R-1-D Zone:
   A.   Each lot shall have a minimum width of fifty feet (50').
   B.   Each lot shall have a minimum depth of one hundred sixty feet (160').
(Ord. 1000 § 18.20(B), 1955)
18.48.100: DENSITY OF DEVELOPMENT:
Population density in the R-1-D Zone shall be four thousand (4,000) square feet
of lot area per dwelling. (Ord. 1000 § 18.20(B), 1955)
18.48.110: MAXIMUM COVERAGE:
Maximum coverage by structures in R-1-D Zones is thirty five percent (35%) of
the lot area. (Ord. 1000 § 18.20(D), 1955)
18.48.120: BUILDING HEIGHT:
In the R-1-D Zone, buildings and structures shall have a height not greater
than two and one-half (21/2) stories or thirty five feet (35'). See section
18.152.030 of this title for exceptions. (Ord. 1000 § 18.20(E), 1955)
18.48.130: ADDITIONAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
In the R-1-D Zone:
   A.   Prior to issuance of a building permit for a second dwelling, the
existing dwelling shall be improved for minimum Building Code standards.
   B.   There shall be no overlapping or reduction in existing yards related to
existing structures.
   C.   No lot or parcel of land held under separate ownership at the time the
ordinance codified in this title became effective shall be separated in
ownership or reduced in size below the minimum standards provided for lots in
the R-1 District. (Ord. 1000 § 18.20(F), 1955)
18.48.140: FRONT YARD:
In the R-1-D Zone:
   A.   Each lot shall have a front yard extending for the full width of the
lot. The yard shall be not less than twenty five feet (25') nor more than forty
feet (40') in depth.
   B.   See subsection
18.148.030B of this title for regulations applying to partly built up blocks.
   C.   See subsection
18.148.030D of this title for regulations applying to key lots. (Ord. 1000 §
18.20(I), 1955)
18.48.150: SIDE YARD:
In the R-1-D Zone:
   A.   Lots shall have a side yard on each side of the main building of not
less than five feet (5').
   B.   See subsection
18.148.030E of this title for regulations applying to side yards on corner
lots.
   C.   See subsection
18.148.030F of this title for regulations applying to side yards on reversed
corner lots. (Ord. 1000 § 18.20(H), 1955)
18.48.160: REAR YARD:
Each lot in the R-1-D Zone shall have a rear yard of not less than twenty five
feet (25'); no exceptions for main buildings on interior lots. (Ord. 1000 §
18.20(I), 1955)
18.48.170: FRONT AND REAR YARD COMBINATIONS:
In the R-1-D Zone:
   A.   Space between main buildings on the same lot shall be not less than
forty feet (40'), such space to provide a front yard for the rear dwelling and
a rear yard for the front dwelling.
   B.   Vehicular access shall be provided to the rear building, either from a
dedicated and improved alley, or by way of a paved access not less than twelve
feet (12') wide.
   C.   If vehicular access is provided from an alley, there shall be a paved
pedestrian access not less than three feet (3') in width from the front lot
line to the rear dwelling. (Ord. 1000 § 18.20(J), 1955)
18.48.180: ACCESSORY BUILDINGS:
In the R-1-D Zone:
   A.   The provisions of section
18.40.150 of this title shall apply, except that accessory buildings may occupy
not more than thirty five percent (35%) of the rear yard area.
   B.   Accessory buildings may be located in a required rear yard and a front
and rear yard combination, provided such accessory buildings are not closer
than ten feet (10') from the front main building and twenty feet (20') from the
front of the rear main building. (Ord. 2985, 2025: Ord. 1000 § 18.20(K), 1955)
18.48.190: OFF STREET PARKING:
For off street parking in R-1-D Zones, the provisions of section 18.164 of this
title shall apply. (Ord. 1000 § 18.20(L), 1955)
18.48.200: FENCES, LANDSCAPING AND WALLS:
For landscaping, fences and walls in R-1-D Zones, the provisions of chapter
18.168 of this title shall apply. (Ord. 1000 § 18.20(M), 1955)
18.48.210: SIGNS:
For signs in R-1-D Zones, the provisions of the applicable regulations of the
Redlands Sign Code shall apply. (Ord. 1000 § 18.20(N), 1955)
CHAPTER 18.52
R-2 MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
18.52.010: Purpose Of Provisions
18.52.020: Uses Generally
18.52.030: Permitted Uses
18.52.040: Accessory Uses
18.52.050: Conditional Uses
18.52.070: Property Development Standards
18.52.080: Lot Area
18.52.090: Lot Dimensions
18.52.100: Density Of Development
18.52.110: Maximum Coverage
18.52.120: Building Height
18.52.130: Front Yard
18.52.140: Side Yard
18.52.150: Rear Yard
18.52.160: Interior Yards And Courts For Grouped Dwellings
18.52.170: Outdoor Living Space
18.52.180: Trash Storage Area
18.52.190: Accessory Buildings
18.52.200: Off Street Parking; General Requirements
18.52.210: Off Street Parking; Screening
18.52.220: Fences, Landscaping And Walls
18.52.230: Mechanical Equipment
18.52.240: Signs
18.52.250: Site Plan Review
18.52.010: PURPOSE OF PROVISIONS:
The purpose of the R-2 Multiple-Family Residential District is to provide for
the development of medium density multiple-family housing and the community
services appurtenant thereto, with no mixing of incompatible uses. The
following regulations, set out in this chapter, shall apply to all land in the
R-2 Multiple- Family Residential District. (Ord. 1000 § 19.00, 1955)
18.52.020: USES GENERALLY:
In the R-2 Zone, no building, structure or land shall be used, and no building
or structure shall be hereafter erected, structurally altered or enlarged,
except for the purposes set out in sections
18.52.030 through
18.52.050 of this chapter. (Ord. 1000 § 19.10, 1955)
18.52.030: PERMITTED USES:
Principal permitted uses in R-2 Districts include:
   Community Care Facility, licensed or unlicensed.
   Employee housing, as defined in
chapter 18.08 of this title.
   Home occupations, as defined in
chapter 18.08 of this title, and subject to the provisions of
chapter 18.160 of this title.
   Multiple-family dwellings either in one structure or a group of structures.
   Single-family dwellings, including re-use or conversion of an existing
single-family dwelling to a multifamily dwelling.
   Two-family dwellings, either in one structure or in two (2) detached
structures.
   Single Room Occupancy facilities, subject to the provisions of
chapter 18.156, Article XV, of this title.
   Supportive and transitional housing intended to serve the target population,
as defined in
chapter 18.08 of this title. (Ord. 2985, 2025: Ord. 1000 § 19.10(A), 1955)
18.52.040: ACCESSORY USES:
Accessory uses in R-2 Districts include:
Accessory building such as bathhouse, cabana and storage shed.
Garage or carport.
Home occupation, as defined in
chapter 18.08 of this title, and subject to the provisions of
chapter 18.160 of this title.
Private greenhouse or horticultural collection incidental to the residential
use of the premises.
Private residential recreation court, subject to approval of a permit in
accordance with
chapter 18.156 of this title.
Private swimming pool. (Ord. 2881 §9, 2019: Ord. 2861, 2018)
18.52.050: CONDITIONAL USES:
Uses permitted by conditional use permit in R-2 Districts include:
Uses listed in
chapter 18.192 of this title, in accordance with the provisions of that chapter
of this title.
Uses permitted in the R-2-2000 District, in accordance with the regulations of
that district.
Boarding houses.
Children's nurseries.
Convalescent hospitals, nursing homes and rest homes. (Ord. 1000 § 19.10(C),
1955)
18.52.070: PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The property development standards set out in sections
18.52.080 through
18.52.250 of this chapter shall apply to all lands and buildings in the R-
2 zone. (Ord. 1000 § 19.20, 1955)
18.52.080: LOT AREA:
Each lot in the R-2 zone shall have a minimum area of eight thousand (8,000)
square feet. (Ord. 1000 § 19.20(A), 1955)
18.52.090: LOT DIMENSIONS:
In the R-2 zone:
   A.   Each lot shall have a minimum width of eighty feet (80').
   B.   Each lot shall have a minimum depth of one hundred feet (100'). (Ord.
1000 § 19.20(B), 1955)
18.52.100: DENSITY OF DEVELOPMENT:
The maximum density in R-2 zones is two thousand nine hundred (2,900) square
feet of lot area per dwelling unit. The minimum density in the R-2 zone is four
thousand one hundred fifty (4,150) square feet of lot area per dwelling unit,
provided all other applicable development standards are satisfied including
required yards, landscape, outdoor living space, and on-site parking. (Ord.
2985, 2025: Ord. 1000 § 19.20(C), 1955)
18.52.110: MAXIMUM COVERAGE:
In R-2 zones, maximum coverage by structures is forty five percent (45%) of the
lot area. (Ord. 1000 § 19.20(D), 1955)
18.52.120: BUILDING HEIGHT:
In the R-2 zone, buildings and structures shall have a height not greater than
two and one-half (21/2) stories or thirty five feet (35'). See section
18.152.030 of this title for exceptions. (Ord. 1000 § 19.20(E), 1955)
18.52.130: FRONT YARD:
In the R-2 zone:
   A.   Each lot shall have a front yard extending for the full width of the
lot. The yard shall be not less than twenty five feet (25') nor more than forty
feet (40') in depth. The front setback area shall be landscaped and maintained.
   B.   See subsection
18.148.030B of this title for regulations applying to partly built up blocks.
   C.   See subsection
 18.148.030D of this title for regulations applying to key lots. (Ord. 1000 §
19.20(F), 1955)
18.52.140: SIDE YARD:
In the R-2 zone:
   A.   Lots shall have a side yard on each side of the main building of not
less than five feet (5') for a one-story building, and not less than ten feet
(10') for a two-story building.
   B.   See subsection
18.148.030E of this title for regulations applying to side yards on corner
lots.
   C.   See subsection
18.148.030F of this title for regulations applying to side yards for reversed
corner lots. (Ord. 1000 § 19.20(G), 1955)
18.52.150: REAR YARD:
Each lot in the R-2 zone shall have a rear yard of not less than twenty five
feet (25'). (Ord. 1000 § 19.20(H), 1955)
18.52.160: INTERIOR YARDS AND COURTS FOR GROUPED DWELLINGS:
For the purposes of this section, the front of a building shall be considered
the side containing the main entryway. (This provision may result in buildings
with multiple front yards.)
   A.   Single-Family Dwellings:
      1.   Where two (2) or more single-family detached dwellings are located
on a lot, there shall be not less than twenty feet (20') between dwellings
arranged side to side; not less than forty feet (40') between dwellings
arranged front to rear; and not less than thirty feet (30') between dwellings
arranged rear to side. Front yards facing a side property line shall be not
less than fifteen feet (15'); side yards facing a rear property line shall be
not less than fifteen feet (15'); rear yards facing a side property line may be
five feet (5').
      2.   Where a driveway is included in the space between buildings, the
total space between buildings or required yards shall be increased by the width
of the driveway.
      3.   Main buildings and/or accessory buildings shall in no instance be
closer than ten feet (10').
   B.   Multiple-Family Dwellings Containing More Than Two Units:
      1.   a. Where there is more than one main building on a lot or building
site, or where a building is constructed about a court, each building or wing
shall have the following yards:
 
                        Front Side Rear
For one-story buildings 25'   15'  20'
For two-story buildings 30'   15'  20'
 
         b.   For buildings having offset surfaces, each yard standard may be
reduced up to five feet (5'), provided the average required space between
buildings is maintained.
         c.   For buildings placed at an angle with each other, each yard
standard may be reduced up to ten feet (10'), provided that the average
required space between buildings is maintained, except that main buildings
shall be no closer than twenty feet (20') at the closest point, and main
buildings and accessory buildings shall be no closer than fifteen feet (15') at
the closest point.
         d.   The yard standards of this subsection may be modified by the
planning commission where it can clearly be demonstrated that the modification
(s) will improve the project in terms of more usable open space, aesthetic
appearance and living environment, except that no main buildings or main
building and accessory building shall be closer than twenty feet (20').
      2.   Where a driveway is included in the space between buildings, the
total distance between buildings shall be increased by the width of the
driveway, except as follows:
         a.   Where a driveway is included in the space between buildings
arranged rear to rear that have garages incorporated into the dwelling units,
the total distance between buildings shall be not less than thirty feet (30'),
and the side of the building opposite the driveway shall be considered the
front of the building;
         b.   Where a driveway is included in the space between buildings
arranged rear to side that have garages incorporated into the dwelling units,
the total distance between buildings shall be not less than the width of the
driveway plus the required side yard, and the side of the building opposite the
driveway shall be considered the front of the building.
      3.   The distance between buildings or wings shall not be less than the
sum of the yard requirements for each building or wing, as set forth herein.
Main buildings and accessory buildings shall in no instance be closer than
fifteen feet (15'), except that the front yard of any main building facing a
garage or carport shall be a minimum of forty feet (40'). (Ord. 2744, 2014:
Ord. 1960 § 1, 1986: Ord. 1000 § 19.20(I), 1955)
18.52.170: OUTDOOR LIVING SPACE:
Outdoor living space for relaxation, recreation and visual pleasure shall be
provided for each dwelling unit at a standard of one square foot of outdoor
living area for each three (3) square feet of gross floor area within each
dwelling unit.
   A.   The outdoor living space may be provided in the form of common open
space areas, private open space areas, or a combination thereof, except that
there shall be at least two hundred (200) square feet of common open space for
each dwelling unit. Such spaces shall be provided in accordance with the
following specifications:
      1.   Common Outdoor Living Space: Each common outdoor living space shall
contain a minimum area of two thousand (2,000) square feet, and have a minimum
dimension of twenty feet (20').
         a.   Pools, putting greens, shuffleboard courts and similar open type
recreational facilities may be located in the common outdoor living space.
         b.   Recreation buildings may be located within the common outdoor
living space; provided, however, that not more than ten percent (10%) of such
space may be utilized for recreational building purposes. The space between
buildings shall be increased by the dimensions of the recreational building(s).
         c.   A minimum of thirty percent (30%) of the common open space area
shall be landscaped and maintained.
      2.   Private Outdoor Living Space:
         a.   Private outdoor living space for dwelling units located on the
ground floor shall contain a minimum area of one hundred fifty (150) square
feet, with a minimum dimension of ten feet (10'). Such space shall be
contiguous to the unit served.
         b.   Private outdoor living space for dwelling units located above the
first floor may be provided in the form of balconies or recessed areas open on
at least two (2) sides. Such space shall contain a minimum area of one hundred
fifty (150) square feet, with a minimum dimension of seven feet (7'), and be
contiguous to the unit served.
         c.   All patios, balconies and recessed areas adjacent to a public
right of way shall be enclosed at a height of at least three feet (3') on all
sides viewable from the public right of way. No patio enclosure over three feet
(3') in height may extend into the required front yard.
   B.   Outdoor living spaces may be located in the required rear yards, side
yards and interior yards, provided they comply with the minimum dimensions
specified for each type of outdoor living space. The required front setback
area may not be included in the calculations.
   C.   No portion of off street parking spaces, driveways, covered pedestrian
accessways, or utility areas such as drying yards or trash areas, shall be
included in the outdoor living space calculations.
   D.   All required outdoor living spaces shall be accessible to the occupants
of the dwelling units. (Ord. 1000 § 19.20(J), 1955)
18.52.180: TRASH STORAGE AREA:
In the R-2 zone, a trash storage and pick up area of adequate size shall be
provided to the rear of the required front yard. Such area shall be completely
enclosed and screened from view by solid masonry walls. (Ord. 1000 § 19.20(K),
1955)
18.52.190: ACCESSORY BUILDINGS:
For accessory buildings in the R-2 zone, the provisions of section
18.40.150 of this title shall apply, except that accessory buildings may occupy
not more than eighty percent (80%) of the rear yard area. (Ord. 2985, 2025:
Ord. 1000 § 19.20(L), 1955)
18.52.200: OFF STREET PARKING; GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
For off street parking in the R-2 zone:
   A.   The provisions of chapter 18.164 of this title shall apply. In
addition, there shall be not more than one driveway to off street parking and
covered parking areas for each one hundred feet (100') of lot width;
   B.   Whenever a driveway or open parking spaces are located within a side
yard or rear yard, a planting area with not less than a three foot (3') wide
interior diameter shall be provided adjacent to the interior property line(s).
(Ord. 1000 § 19.20(M), 1955)
18.52.210: OFF STREET PARKING; SCREENING:
In the R-2 zone:
   A.   All open parking spaces, when adjacent to a public right of way, shall
be screened from public view by three foot (3') high decorative masonry walls.
   B.   All covered parking spaces shall have solid walls, extending from the
ground to roof along the end adjacent to a public right of way, and shall be
fully enclosed on all sides with walls and doors for at least the first seventy
five feet (75') of lot depth. In addition, the entryways to covered parking
spaces that are viewable from a public right of way shall be enclosed by doors.
   C.   Structures having roofs and exterior walls comprised of sheet metal
shall not be located closer than one hundred feet (100') from any dedicated
street, and shall not be viewable from any public right of way. (Ord. 1000 §
19.20(N), 1955)
18.52.220: FENCES, LANDSCAPING AND WALLS:
For fences, landscaping and walls in R-2 zones, the provisions of chapter
18.168 of this title shall apply. (Ord. 1000 § 19.20(O), 1955)
18.52.230: MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT:
In the R-2 zone:
   A.   All heating, ventilating and air conditioning equipment, including
ducts, meters, plumbing lines and tanks, shall be architecturally screened from
public view.
   B.   Mechanical and plumbing equipment shall be screened from view as
follows:
      1.   By masonry walls when mounted at grade;
      2.   By parapet walls on flat roofs;
      3.   By parapet walls or in roof wells on pitched roofs.
   C.   Plumbing vent pipes, all heater flues, and all roof penetrations shall
be gathered and concealed from view as required in subsections B2 and B3 of
this section. (Ord. 1000 § 19.20(P), 1955)
18.52.240: SIGNS:
For signs in R-2 zones, the provisions of the applicable regulations of the
Redlands sign code shall apply. (Ord. 1000 § 19.20(Q), 1955)
18.52.250: SITE PLAN REVIEW:
In the R-2 zone, site plans and elevations shall be submitted to the commission
for review and approval whenever three (3) or more dwelling units are proposed
for any building site. In addition, apartment subdivisions shall be subject to
the site development provisions of the Redlands subdivision ordinance
regulating tracts. (Ord. 1000 § 19.20(R), 1955)
CHAPTER 18.56
R-2-2000 MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
18.56.010: Purpose Of Provisions
18.56.020: Applications Generally
18.56.030: Conditional Use Permits
18.56.040: Changes Of Zone
18.56.050: Uses Generally
18.56.060: Permitted Uses
18.56.070: Accessory Uses
18.56.080: Conditional Uses
18.56.100: Property Development Standards
18.56.110: Lot Area
18.56.120: Lot Dimensions
18.56.130: Density Of Development
18.56.140: Maximum Coverage
18.56.150: Building Height
18.56.160: Front Yard
18.56.170: Side Yard
18.56.180: Rear Yard
18.56.190: Interior Yards And Courts For Grouped Dwellings
18.56.200: Outdoor Living Space
18.56.210: Trash Storage Area
18.56.220: Accessory Buildings
18.56.230: Off Street Parking; General Requirements
18.56.240: Off Street Parking; Screening
18.56.250: Mechanical Equipment
18.56.260: Fences, Landscaping And Walls
18.56.270: Signs
18.56.280: Site Plan Review
18.56.290: Existing Structures
18.56.010: PURPOSE OF PROVISIONS:
The purpose of the R-2-2000 multiple-family residential district is to provide
for the development of quality type apartments on large lots, and further to
encourage the combining of small lots in the R-2 district that individually do
not meet the property development standards required for R-2-2000 district
uses, in order to provide for the redevelopment of such areas. The following
regulations, set out in this chapter, shall apply to all land in the R-2-2000
multiple-family residential district. (Ord. 1000 § 19.80, 1955)
18.56.020: APPLICATIONS GENERALLY:
Applications may be made by either of the procedures set out in section
18.56.030 or
 18.56.040 of this chapter. (Ord. 1000 § 19.81, 1955)
18.56.030: CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS:
In the R-2-2000 district:
   A.   The applicant may request and the commission may recommend a
conditional use permit for the uses permitted herein, subject to the
regulations set forth in chapter 18.192 of this title.
   B.   The applicant must be the property owner or an authorized agent of the
owner.
   C.   A conditional use permit is granted to the applicant only, and is not
transferable with the land.
   D.   Responsibility for the posting of bonds, and fulfilling of city
requirements for both on site and off site improvements rests with the
applicant. (Ord. 1000 § 19.81(A), 1955)
18.56.040: CHANGES OF ZONE:
In the R-2-2000 district:
   A.   The applicant may request and the commission may recommend a change of
zone for the uses permitted herein subject to the requirements of this chapter
and the regulations of section
18.180.010 of this title. The commission may recommend and the council may
grant a conditional use permit in lieu of a change of zone when this procedure
is determined to be more appropriate.
   B.   All conditions fixed by the city council in the amendment to the
ordinance creating the district shall run with the land, and shall be binding
upon the applicant for the amendment, his heirs, successors and assigns. (Ord.
1000 § 19.81(B), 1955)
18.56.050: USES GENERALLY:
In the R-2-2000 District, no building, structure or land shall be used, and no
building or structure shall be hereafter erected, structurally altered or
enlarged, except for the purposes set out in sections
18.56.060 through
18.56.080 of this chapter. (Ord. 1000 § 19.82, 1955)
18.56.060: PERMITTED USES:
Principal permitted uses in the R-2-2000 District include:
   Community Care Facility, licensed or unlicensed.
   Employee housing, as defined in
chapter 18.08 of this title.
   Existing single-family dwelling (one on each lot), including re-use or
conversion of an existing single-family dwelling to a multifamily dwelling.
   Home occupations, as defined in
chapter 18.08 of this title, and subject to the provisions of
chapter 18.160 of this title.
   Multiple-family dwellings, either in one structure or a group of structures.
No groups of single-family detached dwelling units may be placed on any lot or
parcel of land.
   Single Room Occupancy facilities, subject to the provisions of
chapter 18.156, Article XV, of this title.
   Supportive and transitional housing intended to serve the target population,
as defined in
chapter 18.08 of this title. (Ord. 2985, 2025: Ord. 1000 § 19.82(A), 1955)
18.56.070: ACCESSORY USES:
Accessory uses in the R-2-2000 District include:
   Accessory building, such as bathhouse, cabana and storage shed.
   Garage or carport.
   Private residential recreation court, subject to approval of a permit in
accordance with
chapter 18.156 of this title.
   Private swimming pool. (Ord. 2881 §11, 2019: Ord. 2861, 2018)
18.56.080: CONDITIONAL USES:
Uses permitted by conditional use permit in the R-2-2000 District include:
   Uses listed in
chapter 18.192 of this title, in accordance with the provisions of that
chapter. (Ord. 1000 § 19.82(C), 1955)
18.56.100: PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The property development standards set out in sections
18.56.110 through
18.56.290 of this chapter shall apply to all lands and buildings in the R-2-
2000 Zone. (Ord. 1000 § 19.84, 1955)
18.56.110: LOT AREA:
In the R-2-2000 Zone, each lot shall have a minimum area of twelve thousand
(12,000) square feet. (Ord. 1829 § 1, 1983: Ord. 1000 § 19.84(A), 1955)
18.56.120: LOT DIMENSIONS:
In the R-2-2000 Zone:
   A.   Each lot shall have a minimum width of one hundred feet (100');
   B.   Each lot shall have a minimum depth of one hundred twenty feet (120').
(Ord. 1829 § 1, 1983: Ord. 1000 § 19.84(B), 1955)
18.56.130: DENSITY OF DEVELOPMENT:
Population density in the R-2-2000 District shall be as follows:
   A.   For one- and two-story projects, the maximum density shall be two
thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet of lot area per dwelling unit. The
minimum density is three thousand five hundred fifty (3,550) square feet of lot
area per dwelling unit, provided all other applicable development standards are
satisfied including required yards, landscape, outdoor living space, and on-
site parking. The requirements of this section may be modified by the City
Council in a density bonus agreement entered into pursuant to California
Government Code section 65915 et seq.
   B.   For three-story or more projects, the maximum density shall be two
thousand (2,000) square feet of lot area per dwelling unit. The minimum density
is two thousand eight hundred fifty (2,850) square feet of lot area per
dwelling unit, provided all other applicable development standards are
satisfied including required yards, landscape, open space, and on-site parking.
(Ord. 2985, 2025: Ord. 1829 § 1, 1983: Ord. 1000 § 19.84(C), 1955)
18.56.140: MAXIMUM COVERAGE:
Maximum coverage by structures in the R-2-2000 District is forty five percent
(45%) of the lot area. (Ord. 1000 § 19.84(D), 1955)
18.56.150: BUILDING HEIGHT:
In the R-2-2000 District, buildings and structures shall have a height not
greater than three (3) stories. See section
18.152.030 of this title for exceptions. (Ord. 1960 § 1, 1986: Ord. 1000 §
19.84(E), 1955)
18.56.160: FRONT YARD:
In the R-2-2000 Zone:
   A.   Each lot shall have a front yard extending for the full width of the
lot. For one- and two-story buildings, the yard shall be not less than twenty
five feet (25') nor more than forty feet (40') in depth. For three-story or
more buildings, the yard shall be not less than thirty five feet (35') nor more
than fifty feet (50') in depth. The front setback area shall be landscaped and
maintained.
   B.   See subsection
18.148.030B of this title for regulations applying to partly built up blocks.
   C.   See subsection
18.148.030D of this title for regulations applying to key lots. (Ord. 1000 §
19.84(F), 1955)
18.56.170: SIDE YARD:
In the R-2-2000 zone:
   A.   Lots shall have a side yard on each side of the main building of not
less than ten feet (10'), such yard to be increased five feet (5') in width for
every story above the first story.
   B.   See subsection
18.148.030E of this title for regulations applying to side yards on corner
lots.
   C.   See subsection
18.148.030F of this title for regulations applying to side yards for reversed
corner lots. (Ord. 1000 § 19.84(G), 1955)
18.56.180: REAR YARD:
Each lot in the R-2-2000 zone shall have a rear yard of not less than twenty
five feet (25'). (Ord. 1000 § 19.84(H), 1955)
18.56.190: INTERIOR YARDS AND COURTS FOR GROUPED DWELLINGS:
For the purposes of this chapter, in the R-2-2000 zone the front of a building
shall be considered the side containing the main entryway. (This provision may
result in buildings with multiple front yards.)
   A.   1. Where there is more than one main building on a lot or building
site, or where a building is constructed about a court, each building or wing
shall have the following yards:
 
                        Front Side Rear
For one-story buildings 25'   15'  20'
For two-story buildings 30'   15'  20'
 
      2.   For buildings having more than two (2) stories, each front, side and
rear yard shall be increased five feet (5') for each story above the second
story.
      3.   For buildings having offset surfaces, each yard standard may be
reduced up to five feet (5'), provided the average required space between
buildings is maintained.
      4.   The requirements of this subsection may be modified by the city
council in a density bonus agreement entered into pursuant to California
Government Code section 65915 et seq.
   B.   Where a driveway is included in the space between buildings, the total
distance between buildings shall be increased by the width of the driveway,
except as follows:
      1.   Where a driveway is included in the space between buildings arranged
rear to rear that have garages incorporated into the dwelling units, the total
distance between buildings shall be not less than thirty feet (30'), and the
side of the building opposite the driveway shall be considered the front of the
building.
      2.   Where a driveway is included in the space between buildings arranged
rear to side that have garages incorporated into the dwelling units, the total
distance between buildings shall be not less than the width of the driveway
plus the required side yard, and the side of the building opposite the driveway
shall be considered the front of the building.
      3.   The distance between buildings or wings shall not be less than the
sum of the yard requirements for each building, as set forth herein. Main
buildings and accessory buildings shall in no instance be closer than twenty
feet (20'), except that the front yard of any main building facing a garage or
carport shall be a minimum of forty feet (40'). (Ord. 2744, 2014: Ord. 1829 §
1, 1983: Ord. 1000 § 19.84(I), 1955)
18.56.200: OUTDOOR LIVING SPACE:
In the R-2-2000 zone, outdoor living space for relaxation, recreation and
visual pleasure shall be provided for each dwelling unit at a standard of one
square foot of outdoor living area for each three (3) square feet of gross
floor area within each dwelling unit.
   A.   The outdoor living space may be provided in the form of common open
space areas, private open space areas, or a combination thereof, except that
there shall be at least two hundred (200) square feet of common open space for
each dwelling unit. Such spaces shall be provided in accordance with the
following specifications:
      1.   Common Outdoor Living Space: Each common outdoor living space shall
contain a minimum area of two thousand (2,000) square feet, and have a minimum
dimension of twenty feet (20'):
         a.   Pools, putting greens, shuffleboard courts and similar open type
recreational facilities may be located in the common outdoor living space;
         b.   Recreation buildings may be located within the common outdoor
living space; provided, however, that not more than ten percent (10%) of such
space may be utilized for recreational building purposes. The space between
buildings shall be increased by the dimensions of the recreational building(s);
         c.   A minimum thirty percent (30%) of the common open space area
shall be landscaped and maintained.
      2.   Private Outdoor Living Space:
         a.   Private outdoor living space for dwelling units located on the
ground floor shall contain a minimum area of one hundred fifty (150) square
feet, with a minimum dimension of ten feet (10'). Such space shall be
contiguous to the unit served.
         b.   Private outdoor living space for dwelling units located above the
first floor may be provided in the form of balconies or recessed areas open on
at least two (2) sides. Such space shall contain a minimum area of one hundred
fifty (150) square feet, with a minimum dimension of seven feet (7'), and be
contiguous to the unit served;
         c.   All patios, balconies and recessed areas adjacent to a public
right of way shall be enclosed at a height of at least three feet (3') on all
sides viewable from the public right of way. No patio enclosure over three feet
(3') in height may extend into the required front yard.
   B.   Outdoor living spaces may be located in the required rear yards, side
yards and interior yards, provided they comply with the minimum dimensions
specified for each type of outdoor living space. The required front setback
area may not be included in the calculation.
   C.   No portion of off street parking spaces, driveways, covered pedestrian
accessways, or utility areas such as drying yards or trash areas, shall be
included in the outdoor living space calculation.
   D.   All required outdoor living spaces shall be accessible to the occupants
of the dwelling units. (Ord. 1000 § 19.84(J), 1955)
18.56.210: TRASH STORAGE AREA:
In the R-2-2000 zone, a trash storage and pick up area of adequate size shall
be provided to the rear of the required front yard. Such area shall be
completely enclosed and screened from view by solid masonry walls. (Ord. 1000 §
19.84(K), 1955)
18.56.220: ACCESSORY BUILDINGS:
In the R-2-2000 zone, the provisions of section
18.40.150 of this title shall apply, except that accessory buildings may occupy
not more than eighty percent (80%) of the rear yard area. (Ord. 2985, 2025:
Ord. 1000 § 19.84(L), 1955)
18.56.230: OFF STREET PARKING; GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
In the R-2-2000 zone:
   A.   The provisions of chapter 18.164 of this title shall apply. In
addition, there shall be not more than one driveway to off street parking and
covered parking areas for each one hundred feet (100') of lot width.
   B.   Whenever a driveway or open parking spaces are located within a side
yard or rear yard, a planting area with not less than a three foot (3') wide
interior diameter shall be provided adjacent to the interior property line(s).
(Ord. 1000 § 19.84(M), 1955)
18.56.240: OFF STREET PARKING; SCREENING:
In the R-2-2000 zone:
   A.   All open parking spaces, when adjacent to a public right of way, shall
be screened from public view by three foot (3') high decorative masonry walls.
   B.   All covered parking spaces shall have solid walls, extending from the
ground to roof along the end adjacent to a public right of way, and shall be
fully enclosed on all sides with walls and doors for at least the first seventy
five feet (75') of lot depth. In addition, entryways to covered parking spaces
that are viewable from a public right of way shall be enclosed by doors.
   C.   Structures having roofs and exterior walls comprised of sheet metal
shall not be located closer than one hundred feet (100') from any dedicated
street, and shall not be viewable from any public right of way. (Ord. 1000 §
19.84(N), 1955)
18.56.250: MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT:
In the R-2-2000 zone:
   A.   All heating, ventilating and air conditioning equipment, including
ducts, meters, plumbing lines and tanks, shall be architecturally screened from
public view.
   B.   Mechanical and plumbing equipment shall be screened from view as
follows:
      1.   By masonry walls when mounted at grade;
      2.   By parapet walls on flat roofs;
      3.   By parapet walls or in roof wells on pitched roofs.
   C.   Plumbing vent pipes, all heater flues, and all roof penetrations shall
be gathered and concealed from view as required in subsections B2 and B3 of
this section. (Ord. 1000 § 19.84(O), 1955)
18.56.260: FENCES, LANDSCAPING AND WALLS:
For fences, landscaping and walls in the R-2-2000 zone, the provisions of
chapter 18.168 of this title shall apply. (Ord. 1000 § 19.84(P), 1955)
18.56.270: SIGNS:
For signs in the R-2-2000 zone, the provisions of the applicable regulations of
the Redlands sign code shall apply. (Ord. 1000 § 19.84(Q), 1955)
18.56.280: SITE PLAN REVIEW:
In the R-2-2000 zone, site plans and elevations shall be submitted to the
commission for review and approval. (Ord. 1000 § 19.84(R), 1955)
18.56.290: EXISTING STRUCTURES:
In the R-2-2000 zone, before a building permit may be issued, all existing
single-family buildings and related structures shall be removed from the
property. (Ord. 1000 § 19.84(S), 1955)
CHAPTER 18.60
R-3 MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
18.60.010: Purpose Of Provisions
18.60.020: Uses Generally
18.60.030: Permitted Uses
18.60.040: Accessory Uses
18.60.050: Conditional Uses
18.60.070: Property Development Standards
18.60.080: Lot Area
18.60.090: Lot Dimensions
18.60.100: Density Of Development
18.60.110: Maximum Coverage
18.60.120: Building Height
18.60.130: Front Yard
18.60.140: Side Yard
18.60.150: Rear Yard
18.60.160: Interior Yards And Courts
18.60.170: Outdoor Living Space
18.60.180: Trash Storage Area
18.60.190: Accessory Buildings
18.60.200: Off Street Parking; General Requirements
18.60.210: Off Street Parking; Screening
18.60.220: Mechanical Equipment
18.60.230: Fences, Landscaping And Walls
18.60.240: Signs
18.60.250: Site Plan Review
18.60.010: PURPOSE OF PROVISIONS:
The purpose of the R-3 Multiple-Family Residential District is to provide for
the development of high density apartments. The following regulations, set out
in this chapter, shall apply to all land in the R-3 Multiple-Family Residential
District. (Ord. 1000 § 20.00, 1955)
18.60.020: USES GENERALLY:
In the R-3 District, no building, structure or land shall be used, and no
building or structure shall be hereafter erected, structurally altered or
enlarged, except for the purposes set out in sections
18.60.030 through
18.60.050 of this chapter. (Ord. 1000 § 20.10, 1955)
18.60.030: PERMITTED USES:
Principal permitted uses in the R-3 District include:
   Apartment dwellings, either in one structure or a group of structures. Each
structure shall contain three (3) or more dwelling units.
   Community Care Facility, licensed or unlicensed.
   Employee housing, as defined in
chapter 18.08 of this title.
   Home occupations, as defined in
chapter 18.08 of this title, and subject to the provisions of
chapter 18.160 of this title.
   One single-family dwelling on each lot, including re-use or conversion of an
existing single-family dwelling to a multifamily dwelling.
   Single Room Occupancy facilities, subject to the provisions of
chapter 18.156, Article XV, of this title.
   Supportive and transitional housing intended to serve the target population,
as defined in
chapter 18.08 of this title.
   Two-family dwellings, either in one structure or in two (2) detached
structures. (Ord. 2985, 2025: Ord. 2522 § 1, 2003: Ord. 1000 § 20.10(A), 1955)
18.60.040: ACCESSORY USES:
Accessory uses in the R-3 Zone include:
Accessory building, such as bathhouse, cabana and storage shed.
Garage or carport.
Home occupation, as defined in
chapter 18.08 of this title, and subject to the provisions of
chapter 18.160 of this title.
Private residential recreation court, subject to approval of a permit in
accordance with
chapter 18.156 of this title.
Private swimming pool. (Ord. 2881 §12, 2019: Ord. 2861, 2018)
18.60.050: CONDITIONAL USES:
Uses permitted by conditional use permit in the R-3 Zone include:
Uses listed in
chapter 18.192 of this title, in accordance with the provisions of that chapter
of this title.
Convalescent hospitals, nursing homes, and rest homes. (Ord. 2333 § 36, 1997:
Ord. 1000 § 20.10(C), 1955)
18.60.070: PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The property development standards set out in sections
18.60.080 through
18.60.250 of this chapter shall apply to all land and buildings in the R-
3 Zone. (Ord. 1000 § 20.20, 1955)
18.60.080: LOT AREA:
In the R-3 zone, each lot shall have a minimum area of ten thousand (10,000)
square feet. (Ord. 1000 § 20.20(A), 1955)
18.60.090: LOT DIMENSIONS:
In the R-3 zone:
   A.   Each lot shall have a minimum width of eighty feet (80');
   B.   Each lot shall have a minimum depth of one hundred twenty feet (120').
(Ord. 1000 § 20.20(B), 1955)
18.60.100: DENSITY OF DEVELOPMENT:
The maximum density in the R-3 zone is one thousand four hundred fifty (1,450)
square feet of lot area per dwelling unit. The minimum density in the R-3 zone
is two thousand and seventy-five (2,075) square feet of lot area per dwelling
unit, provided all other applicable development standards are satisfied
including required yards, landscape, outdoor living space, and on-site parking.
(Ord. 2985, 2025: Ord. 2739, 2010)
18.60.110: MAXIMUM COVERAGE:
Maximum coverage by structures in the R-3 zone is sixty percent (60%) of the
lot area. (Ord. 1000 § 20.20(D), 1955)
18.60.120: BUILDING HEIGHT:
In the R-3 zone, buildings and structures shall have a height not greater than
four (4) stories. See section
18.152.030 of this title for exceptions. (Ord. 1000 § 20.20(E), 1955)
18.60.130: FRONT YARD:
In the R-3 zone:
   A.   Each lot shall have a front yard extending for the full width of the
lot. The front setback area shall be landscaped and maintained. With the
exception of those properties which are subject to the setback provisions of a
separate setback ordinance or specific street plan, the minimum front setback
shall be as follows:
      1.   For one- and two-story buildings, the yard shall be not less than
fifteen feet (15') in depth;
      2.   For three-story buildings, the yard shall be not less than twenty
feet (20') in depth;
      3.   For four-story buildings, the yard shall be not less than twenty
five feet (25') in depth.
   B.   The maximum front setback for all building heights shall be forty feet
(40').
   C.   See subsection
18.148.030B of this title for regulations applying to partly built up blocks.
   D.   See subsection
18.148.030D of this title for regulations applying to key lots. (Ord. 1000 §
20.20(F), 1955)
18.60.140: SIDE YARD:
In the R-3 zone, lots shall have a side yard on each side of the main building
of not less than five feet (5') for a one-story building. The side yard shall
be increased two and one-half feet (21/2') for every story above the first
story. (Ord. 1000 § 20.20(G), 1955)
18.60.150: REAR YARD:
In the R-3 zone each lot shall have a rear yard of not less than twenty feet
(20'), except that the rear yard of an apartment building may be reduced to the
same dimension as the required side yard if a common open space which is equal
to or greater in area than the reduction in the required rear yard is provided.
Such common open space shall be provided in addition to the required space
between buildings. (Ord. 1000 § 20.20(H), 1955)
18.60.160: INTERIOR YARDS AND COURTS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the front of a building shall be considered
the side containing the main entryway. (This provision may result in buildings
with multiple front yards.)
   A.   1. Where there is more than one main building on a lot or building
site, or where a building is constructed about a court, each building or wing
shall have the following yards:
 
                          Front Side  Rear
For one-story buildings   15'   5'    15'
For two-story buildings   20'   71/2' 15'
For three-story buildings 25'   10'   20'
For four-story buildings  30'   15'   25'
 
      2.   For buildings having offset surfaces, each yard standard may be
reduced up to five feet (5'), provided the average required space between
buildings is maintained.
      3.   For buildings placed at an angle with each other, each yard standard
may be reduced up to ten feet (10'), provided that the average required space
between buildings is maintained, except that main buildings shall be no closer
than twenty feet (20') at the closest point, and main buildings and accessory
buildings shall be no closer than fifteen feet (15') at the closest point.
      4.   The yard standards of this section may be modified by the planning
commission where it can clearly be demonstrated that the modification(s) will
improve the project in terms of more usable open space, aesthetic appearance,
and living environment, except that no main buildings or main building and
accessory building shall be closer than twenty feet (20').
   B.   Where a driveway is included in the space between buildings, the total
distance between buildings shall be increased by the width of the driveway,
except as follows:
      1.   Where a driveway is included in the space between buildings arranged
rear to rear that have garages incorporated into the dwelling units, the total
distance between buildings shall be not less than thirty feet (30'), and the
side of the building opposite the driveway shall be considered the front of the
building;
      2.   Where a driveway is included in the space between buildings arranged
rear to side that have garages incorporated into the dwelling units, the total
distance between buildings shall be not less than the width of the driveway
plus the required side yard, and the side of the building opposite the driveway
shall be considered the front of the building.
   C.   The distance between buildings or wings shall not be less than the sum
of the yard requirements for each building or wing, as set forth herein. Main
buildings shall in no instance be closer than ten feet (10'). Main buildings
and accessory buildings shall in no instance be closer than fifteen feet (15'),
except that the front yard of any main building facing a garage or carport
shall be a minimum of forty feet (40'). (Ord. 2744, 2014: Ord. 1960 § 1, 1986:
Ord. 1000 § 20.20(I), 1955)
18.60.170: OUTDOOR LIVING SPACE:
In the R-3 zone, outdoor living space for relaxation, recreation and visual
pleasure shall be provided for each dwelling unit at a standard of one-fourth
(1/4) square foot of outdoor living area for each one square foot of gross
floor area within each dwelling unit.
   A.   The outdoor living space may be provided in the form of common open
space areas, private open space areas, or a combination thereof, except that
there shall be at least one hundred (100) square feet of common open space for
each dwelling unit. Such spaces shall be provided in accordance with the
following specifications:
      1.   Common Outdoor Living Space: Each common outdoor living space shall
contain a minimum area of one thousand (1,000) square feet, and have a minimum
dimension of twenty feet (20').
         a.   Pools, putting greens, shuffleboard courts and similar open type
recreational facilities may be located in the common outdoor living space.
         b.   Recreation buildings may be located within the common outdoor
living space; provided, however, that not more than ten percent (10%) of the
space may be utilized for recreational building purposes. The space between
buildings shall be increased by the dimensions of the recreational building(s).
         c.   A minimum of thirty percent (30%) of the common open space area
shall be landscaped and maintained.
      2.   Private Outdoor Living Space:
         a.   Private outdoor living space for dwelling units located on the
ground floor shall contain a minimum area of one hundred (100) square feet,
with a minimum dimension of eight feet (8'). Such space shall be contiguous to
the unit served.
         b.   Private outdoor living space for dwelling units located above the
first floor may be provided in the form of balconies or recessed areas open on
at least two (2) sides. Such space shall contain a minimum area of seventy five
(75) square feet, with a minimum dimension of seven feet (7'), and be
contiguous to the unit served.
   B.   Outdoor living spaces may be located in the required rear yards, side
yards and interior yards, provided they comply with the minimum dimensions
specified for each type of outdoor living space. The required front setback
area may not be included in the calculation.
   C.   No portion of off street parking spaces, driveways, covered pedestrian
accessways, or utility areas such as drying yards or trash areas, shall be
included in the outdoor living space calculations.
   D.   All required outdoor living spaces shall be accessible to the occupants
of the dwelling units. (Ord. 1000 § 20.20(J), 1955)
18.60.180: TRASH STORAGE AREA:
In the R-3 zone, a trash storage and pick up area of adequate size shall be
provided to the rear of the required front yard. The area shall be completely
enclosed and screened from view by solid masonry walls. (Ord. 1000 § 20.20(K),
1955)
18.60.190: ACCESSORY BUILDINGS:
For accessory buildings in the R-3 zone, the provisions of section
18.40.150 of this title shall apply, except that accessory buildings may occupy
not more than eighty percent (80%) of the rear yard area. (Ord. 2985, 2025:
Ord. 1000 § 20.20(L), 1955)
18.60.200: OFF STREET PARKING; GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
In the R-3 zone:
   A.   The provisions of chapter 18.164 of this title shall apply. In
addition, there shall be not more than one driveway to off street parking and
covered parking areas for each one hundred feet (100') of lot width;
   B.   Whenever a driveway or open parking spaces are located within a side
yard or rear yard, a planting area with not less than a three foot (3') wide
interior diameter shall be provided adjacent to the interior property line(s).
(Ord. 1000 § 20.20(M), 1955)
18.60.210: OFF STREET PARKING; SCREENING:
In the R-3 zone:
   A.   All open parking spaces, when adjacent to a public right of way, shall
be screened from public view by three foot (3') high decorative masonry walls.
   B.   All covered parking spaces shall have solid walls, extending from the
ground to roof along the end adjacent to a public right of way, and shall be
fully enclosed on all sides with walls and doors for at least the first seventy
five feet (75') of lot depth. In addition, entryways to covered parking spaces
that are viewable from a public right of way shall be enclosed by doors.
   C.   Structures having roofs and exterior walls comprised of sheet metal
shall not be located closer than one hundred feet (100') from any dedicated
street, and shall not be viewable from any public right of way. (Ord. 1000 §
20.20(N), 1955)
18.60.220: MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT:
In the R-3 zone:
   A.   All heating, ventilating and air conditioning equipment, including
ducts, meters, plumbing lines and tanks, shall be architecturally screened from
public view.
   B.   Mechanical and plumbing equipment shall be screened from view as
follows:
      1.   By masonry walls when mounted at grade;
      2.   By parapet walls on flat roofs;
      3.   By parapet walls or in roof wells on pitched roofs.
   C.   Plumbing vent pipes, all heater flues, and all roof penetrations shall
be gathered and concealed from view as required in subsections B2 and B3 of
this section. (Ord. 1000 § 20.20(O), 1955)
18.60.230: FENCES, LANDSCAPING AND WALLS:
For fences, landscaping and walls in R-3 zones, the provisions of chapter
18.168 of this title shall apply. (Ord. 1000 § 20.20(P), 1955)
18.60.240: SIGNS:
For signs in the R-3 zone, the provisions of the applicable regulations of the
Redlands sign code shall apply. (Ord. 1000 § 20.20(Q), 1955)
18.60.250: SITE PLAN REVIEW:
In the R-3 zone, site plans and elevations shall be submitted to the commission
for review and approval whenever three (3) or more dwelling units are proposed
for any lot or building site. In addition, apartment subdivisions shall be
subject to the site development provisions of the Redlands subdivision
ordinance regulating tracts. (Ord. 1000 § 20.20(R), 1955)
CHAPTER 18.64
A-P ADMINISTRATIVE AND PROFESSIONAL OFFICE DISTRICT
SECTION:
18.64.010: Purpose Of Provisions
18.64.020: Uses Generally
18.64.030: Permitted Uses And Conditional Uses
18.64.050: Property Development Standards
18.64.060: Lot Area
18.64.070: Lot Dimensions
18.64.080: Building Height
18.64.090: Yards
18.64.100: Fences, Landscaping And Walls
18.64.110: Access To Street
18.64.120: Maximum Coverage
18.64.130: Off Street Parking
18.64.140: Signs
18.64.150: Storage And Trash Areas
18.64.160: Site Plan Review
18.64.010: PURPOSE OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   The purpose of the A-P administrative and professional office district
zone is to provide for the development of business and professional offices
which, by nature of their operation and normal business hours, are compatible
with residential uses within and adjacent to the district.
   B.   The regulations set forth in the A-P zone are intended to encourage a
high standard of development which will improve the overall quality of the
community.
   C.   The following regulations, set out in this chapter, shall apply to all
uses in the A-P administrative professional district. (Ord. 1000 § 21.00, 1955)
18.64.020: USES GENERALLY:
In the A-P zone:
   A.   A structure originally designed as a residence, or as an accessory to a
residence, may be used for a business or professional use under the conditions
as provided for in chapter 18.156, article VI of this title.
   B.   No business or professional building shall be erected, constructed or
established on the same lot together with a building originally designed as a
residence.
   C.   All uses, except parking and loading, shall be conducted within a
completely enclosed building.
   D.   Alleys may be required by the commission. (Ord. 1000 § 21.10, 1955)
18.64.030: PERMITTED USES AND CONDITIONAL USES:
In the A-P zone, no building, structure or land shall be used, and no building
shall hereafter be erected, structurally altered or enlarged, except for the
following purposes:
   A.   Residential uses:
      1.   Uses permitted in the R-3 zone, subject to the regulations of the R-
3 zone.
      2.   Low-Barrier Navigation Center (defined in Gov. Code Section 65660),
subject to the provisions of
chapter 18.156, Article XIII, of this title.
      3.   Supportive and transitional housing intended to serve the target
population, as defined in
chapter 18.08 of this title.
   B.   Business and professional offices:
      Accounting, auditing and bookkeeping services.
      Administrative headquarters.
      Architectural and engineering services.
      Business and management consulting services.
      Business associations.
      Federal, state, county and local government offices.
      Insurance offices.
      Law offices.
      Photographic studios.
      Professional membership associations.
      Real estate offices.
      Secretarial and clerical services.
      Travel agencies.
   C.   Medical and health services:
      Chiropractors.
      Day spas.
      Dentists and oral surgeons.
      Medical, dental and biological laboratories and therapeutic clinics.
      Medical massage therapy, provided:
         1.   A minimum of eighty percent (80%) of the establishment's clients
are from referrals by state licensed healthcare providers,
         2.   The establishment's records are kept on the premises and made
accessible to the city upon request for compliance with item 1 of this use.
      Optometrists.
      Physicians and surgeons.
   D.   Uses permitted by conditional use permit:
      Charitable organizations.
      Libraries.
      Mixed residential and nonresidential uses; provided the following items
are to be included in the submittal of:
         1.   A statement or plan setting forth the maximum number of
employees. The number of employees may not be increased unless the applicant
applies for a revised conditional use permit.
         2.   A parking plan or layout indicating that:
            a.   Parking for the residential unit(s) shall be provided on site
in addition to that required for the office use(s) or by evidence of an
agreement for off site parking acceptable to the city.
            b.   On site parking is prohibited in the front setback area.
         3.   Proposed signage.
      Mortuaries.
      Museums and art galleries.
      Places of worship.
      Prescription and pharmacy services.
      Social and fraternal organizations. (Ord. 2985, 2025: Ord. 2788, 2013)
18.64.050: PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The provisions of the R-3 district shall apply for all residential uses in the
A-P zone. The following property development standards set out in sections
18.64.060 through
18.64.160 of this chapter shall apply to all uses of land and buildings other
than residential in the A-P zone. (Ord. 1000 § 21.40, 1955)
18.64.060: LOT AREA:
Each lot in the A-P zone shall have a minimum area of ten thousand (10,000)
square feet. (Ord. 1000 § 21.40(A), 1955)
18.64.070: LOT DIMENSIONS:
In the A-P zone, each lot shall have a minimum width of eighty feet (80') and a
minimum depth of one hundred twenty feet (120'). (Ord. 1000 § 21.40(B), 1955)
18.64.080: BUILDING HEIGHT:
There is no maximum building height in the A-P zone. (Ord. 1000 § 21.40(C),
1955)
18.64.090: YARDS:
For yards in the A-P zone, the provisions of the R-3 district shall apply,
except, when an entirely new building is constructed for administrative
professional office uses only, the rear yard may be reduced to not less than
five feet (5'). The rear yard shall be increased two and one-half feet (21/2')
in depth for every story above the second story. (Ord. 1000 § 21.40(D), 1955)
18.64.100: FENCES, LANDSCAPING AND WALLS:
For walls, fences and landscaping in the A-P zone, the provisions of chapter
18.168 of this title shall apply. (Ord. 1000 § 21.40(E), 1955)
18.64.110: ACCESS TO STREET:
In the A-P zone, each lot shall have a minimum of fifty feet (50') of access on
a dedicated and improved street. (Ord. 1000 § 21.40(F), 1955)
18.64.120: MAXIMUM COVERAGE:
Maximum coverage in the A-P zone shall be sixty percent (60%) of the total lot
area for one- and two-story structures. For three- story structures, maximum
coverage shall be fifty percent (50%) of the total lot area. For structures
over three (3) stories in height, the maximum coverage shall be forty percent
(40%) of the total lot area. (Ord. 1000 § 21.40(G), 1955)
18.64.130: OFF STREET PARKING:
For off street parking in the A-P zone, the provisions of sections
18.164.140 through 18.164.320 of this title shall apply. (Ord. 1000 § 21.40(H),
1955)
18.64.140: SIGNS:
For signs in the A-P zone, the provisions of the Redlands sign code shall
apply. (Ord. 1000 § 21.40(H), 1955)
18.64.150: STORAGE AND TRASH AREAS:
All storage and trash areas in the A-P zone shall be located within enclosed
areas completely screened from public view. (Ord. 1000 § 21.40(J), 1955)
18.64.160: SITE PLAN REVIEW:
In the A-P zone, site plans and elevations for all new construction and/or
additions, except single-family residential, shall be submitted to the
commission for review and approval. (Ord. 1000 § 21.40(K), 1955)
CHAPTER 18.68
MF MEDICAL FACILITY DISTRICT
SECTION:
18.68.010: Purpose Of Provisions
18.68.020: Uses Generally
18.68.030: Permitted Uses, Conditional Uses, And Similar Uses Permitted By
Commission Determination
18.68.050: Property Development Standards
18.68.060: Lot Area
18.68.070: Lot Dimensions
18.68.080: Building Height
18.68.090: Front Yard
18.68.100: Side Yard
18.68.110: Rear Yard
18.68.120: Walls And Landscaping
18.68.130: Maximum Coverage
18.68.140: Off Street Parking
18.68.150: Signs
18.68.160: Trash Storage Areas
18.68.170: Lighting Facilities
18.68.180: Noise Producing Equipment
18.68.190: Site Plan Review
18.68.010: PURPOSE OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   The purpose of the MF zone is to provide for the development of
medically related facilities in the vicinity of the Redlands Community
Hospital.
   B.   The regulations set forth in the MF zone are intended to achieve a high
standard of development which will assure compatibility with the hospital
facility and surrounding neighborhood, in accordance with the principles and
objectives contained in the Redlands general plan text.
   C.   The following regulations set out in this chapter shall apply to all
uses in the MF zone. (Ord. 1851 § 1, 1984: Ord. 1000 § 21.50, 1955)
18.68.020: USES GENERALLY:
In the MF zone:
   A.   A structure originally designed as a residence, or as an accessory to a
residence, may be used for medically related purposes under the conditions as
provided for in chapter 18.156, article VI of this title.
   B.   All uses except parking and loading shall be conducted within a
completely enclosed building.
   C.   All new construction and/or additions shall be subject to commission
review and approval. (Ord. 1851 § 1, 1984: Ord. 1000 § 21.51, 1955)
18.68.030: PERMITTED USES, CONDITIONAL USES, AND SIMILAR USES PERMITTED BY
COMMISSION DETERMINATION:
In the MF zone, no building, structure or land shall be used, and no building
shall hereafter be erected, structurally altered or enlarged, except for the
following purposes:
   A.   Residential:
Residential uses, subject to the requirements and property development
standards of the nearest residential zone.
   B.   Medical And Health Services:
Board and care homes.
Chiropractors.
Convalescent homes.
Dentists and oral surgeons.
Hospitals.
Hotel providing medical services.
Medical, dental and biological laboratories.
Medical, dental and therapeutic clinics.
Optometrists.
Osteopathic physicians.
Physicians and surgeons.
Psychologists and psychiatrists.
Sanatoriums, except mental institutions.
Service of wine, at no charge, with doctor approval, in patient rooms.
   C.   Uses Permitted By Conditional Use Permit: The following uses may be
permitted as a convenience, subject to approval of a conditional use permit:
Eating establishments compatible with a permitted medical use or operated in
conjunction with an established bed and breakfast inn, as permitted by chapter
18.156, article III of this title.
Medically related uses in a residential building.
Prescription pharmacy services in conjunction with a permitted medical use.
   D.   Similar Uses Permitted By Commission Determination: The commission may,
by resolution of record, permit any other use which it may determine to be
similar to those permitted, and in conformity with the intent and purpose of
this zone. (Ord. 2788, 2013)
18.68.050: PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The property development standards set out in sections
18.68.060 through
18.68.190 of this chapter shall apply to all uses of land and buildings in the
MF zone. (Ord. 1851 § 1, 1984: Ord. 1000 § 21.54, 1955)
18.68.060: LOT AREA:
Each lot in the MF zone shall have a minimum area of ten thousand (10,000)
square feet. (Ord. 1851 § 1, 1984: Ord. 1000 § 21.54(A), 1955)
18.68.070: LOT DIMENSIONS:
Each lot in the MF zone shall have a minimum width of one hundred feet (100')
and a minimum depth of one hundred feet (100'). (Ord. 1851 § 1, 1984: Ord. 1000
§ 21.54(B), 1955)
18.68.080: BUILDING HEIGHT:
In the MF zone, buildings and structures shall have a height not greater than
two and one-half (21/2) stories, or thirty five feet (35'). There is no height
limit for a primary care hospital except that the front setback shall be not
less than the height of the building. Parking is permitted in the front yard
area to within twenty five feet (25') of the front property line. See section
18.152.030 of this title for other exceptions. (Ord. 1851 § 1, 1984: Ord. 1000
§ 21.54(C), 1955)
18.68.090: FRONT YARD:
Each lot in the MF zone shall have a front yard extending for the full width of
the lot. The yard shall be not less than twenty five feet (25') in depth. The
front setback area shall be landscaped and maintained. (Ord. 1851 § 1, 1984:
Ord. 1000 § 21.54(D), 1955)
18.68.100: SIDE YARD:
Each lot in the MF zone shall have a side yard on each side of the main
building of not less than ten feet (10') for a one-story building, and not less
than fifteen feet (15') for a two-story building. (Ord. 1851 § 1, 1984: Ord.
1000 § 21.54(E), 1955)
18.68.110: REAR YARD:
Each lot in the MF zone shall have a rear yard of not less than twenty five
feet (25'). (Ord. 1851 § 1, 1984: Ord. 1000 § 21.54(F), 1955)
18.68.120: WALLS AND LANDSCAPING:
For walls and landscaping in the MF zone, the provisions of chapter 18.168 of
this title shall apply. (Ord. 1851 § 1, 1984: Ord. 1000 § 21.54(G), 1955)
18.68.130: MAXIMUM COVERAGE:
Maximum coverage by structures in the MF zone is forty percent (40%) of the lot
area. (Ord. 1851 § 1, 1984: Ord. 1000 § 21.54(H), 1955)
18.68.140: OFF STREET PARKING:
For off street parking in the MF zone, the provisions of sections
18.164.140 through
18.164.320 of this title shall apply. (Ord. 1851 § 1, 1984: Ord. 1000 § 21.54
(I), 1955)
18.68.150: SIGNS:
The sign provisions of the A-P administrative professional zone, as contained
in the Redlands sign code, shall apply in the MF zone. (Ord. 1851 § 1, 1984:
Ord. 1000 § 21.54(J), 1955)
18.68.160: TRASH STORAGE AREAS:
All trash storage areas in the MF zone shall be located within enclosed areas
completely screened from public view. (Ord. 1851 § 1, 1984: Ord. 1000 § 21.54
(K), 1955)
18.68.170: LIGHTING FACILITIES:
Lighting facilities in the MF zone shall be arranged in a manner which will
protect the streets and neighboring properties from direct glare or hazardous
interference of any kind. (Ord. 1851 § 1, 1984: Ord. 1000 § 21.54(L), 1955)
18.68.180: NOISE PRODUCING EQUIPMENT:
In the MF zone, all noise producing equipment, including, but not limited to,
compressors and heating and air conditioning units, shall be installed or
enclosed so that the noise from such equipment does not exceed zone A, clearly
compatible community noise equivalent levels identified in table 9.1 of the
Redlands general plan for all land use categories. The noise levels shall be
met as measured at the property lines for properties in any zone including, but
not limited to, residential zones, adjacent to the MF zone. (Ord. 2342 § 1,
1997: Ord. 1851 § 1, 1984: Ord. 1000 § 21.54(M), 1955)
18.68.190: SITE PLAN REVIEW:
In the MF zone, site plans and elevations for all new construction and
additions shall be submitted to the commission for review and approval. The
commission may, at its discretion, require a public hearing. (Ord. 1851 § 1,
1984: Ord. 1000 § 21.54(N), 1955)
CHAPTER 18.72
T TRANSITIONAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
18.72.010: Purpose Of Provisions
18.72.020: Permitted Uses And Conditional Uses
18.72.040: Property Development Standards
18.72.050: Lot Area
18.72.060: Lot Dimensions
18.72.070: Density Of Development
18.72.080: Maximum Coverage
18.72.090: Front Yard
18.72.100: Side Yard
18.72.110: Rear Yard
18.72.120: Landscaping
18.72.130: Walls
18.72.140: Signs
18.72.150: Parking Area Improvements
18.72.160: Lighting Facilities
18.72.170: Site Plan Review
18.72.010: PURPOSE OF PROVISIONS:
The purpose of the T transitional district is to provide for the orderly and
compatible development of off street parking facilities between residential and
nonresidential districts. The following regulations, set out in this chapter,
shall apply to all land in the T transitional district. (Ord. 1000 § 22.00,
1955)
18.72.020: PERMITTED USES AND CONDITIONAL USES:
In the T district, no building, structure or land shall be used, and no
building or structure shall be hereafter erected, structurally altered or
enlarged, except for the following purposes:
   A.   Principal Permitted Uses:
      1.   Residential uses permitted in the residential district abutting,
facing on or backing up to the lots in the T district, subject to the
requirements and property development standards for the particular residential
district;
      2.   Off street parking facilities related to an adjacent district
requiring such parking. Lots shall not be used jointly for residential and off
street parking purposes related to the requirements of the adjacent commercial,
industrial or administrative professional districts. All residential structures
shall be removed from the premises as a condition to the use of the land in the
T district for off street parking.
   B.   Uses Permitted By Conditional Use Permit:
      1.   Uses listed in chapter 18.192 of this title, in accordance with the
provisions of that chapter. (Ord. 2333 § 20, 1997: Ord. 1000 § 22.10, 1955)
18.72.040: PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
When land in the T district is used for residential purposes, the property
development standards for the abutting residential district shall apply. When
the land is utilized for off street parking purposes, the property development
standards set out in sections
18.72.050 through
18.72.170 of this chapter shall apply. (Ord. 1000 § 22.20, 1955)
18.72.050: LOT AREA:
Each lot in the T district shall have a minimum area of five thousand (5,000)
square feet. (Ord. 1000 § 22.20(A), 1955)
18.72.060: LOT DIMENSIONS:
In the T district:
   A.   Each lot shall have a minimum width of fifty feet (50').
   B.   Each lot shall have a minimum depth of one hundred feet (100'). (Ord.
1000 § 22.20(B), 1955)
18.72.070: DENSITY OF DEVELOPMENT:
Population density in the T district: None permitted. (Ord. 1000 § 22.20(C),
1955)
18.72.080: MAXIMUM COVERAGE:
Maximum coverage by structures in the T district: No structures permitted.
(Ord. 1000 § 22.20(D), 1955)
18.72.090: FRONT YARD:
In the T district, each lot shall have a front yard extending for the full
width of the lot. The yard shall be not less than ten feet (10') in depth,
except that any T lot which immediately abuts a residential zone shall have a
front setback of not less than that required for the residential zone. (Ord.
1000 § 22.20(E), 1955)
18.72.100: SIDE YARD:
In the T district, a side yard adjacent to any street shall be not less than
ten feet (10'). No side yard setback is required adjacent to any interior
property line; however, protection for the adjacent property in the form of
wheel stops and/or solid masonry walls shall be provided. (Ord. 1000 § 22.20
(F), 1955)
18.72.110: REAR YARD:
No rear yard setback is required in the T district; however, protection for the
adjacent property in the form of wheel stops and/or solid masonry walls shall
be provided. (Ord. 1000 § 22.20(G), 1955)
18.72.120: LANDSCAPING:
In the T district, all required yard areas, and not less than five percent (5%)
of surface area of the parking lot, shall be landscaped and maintained in
accordance with the landscaping provisions of chapter 18.168 of this title.
(Ord. 1000 § 22.20(H), 1955)
18.72.130: WALLS:
In the T district:
   A.   A solid masonry wall not less than five feet (5') nor more than six
feet (6') in height shall be located along all interior property lines adjacent
to a residential use or zone, such wall to be reduced to three feet (3') in
height at the front setback line of the adjacent residential use or zone;
   B.   There shall be a three foot (3') high solid masonry wall located along
the required front setback line. (Ord. 1000 § 22.20(I), 1955)
18.72.140: SIGNS:
For signs in the T district, the provisions of the Redlands sign code shall
apply. (Ord. 1000 § 22.20(J), 1955)
18.72.150: PARKING AREA IMPROVEMENTS:
All parking areas in the T district shall be paved and maintained in accordance
with the provisions of sections
18.164.140 through
18.164.320 of this title. (Ord. 1000 § 22.20(K), 1955)
18.72.160: LIGHTING FACILITIES:
Lighting facilities in the T district shall be arranged in a manner which will
protect neighboring properties and streets from direct glare or hazardous
interference of any kind. (Ord. 1000 § 22.20(L), 1955)
18.72.170: SITE PLAN REVIEW:
For the T district, a completely dimensioned site plan showing parking lot
layout, paved areas, accessways, landscaping, sprinkling system, required
walls, signs and lighting shall be submitted to the planning department for
approval, or reference to the planning commission for approval, when determined
necessary by the planning director. (Ord. 1000 § 22.20(M), 1955)
CHAPTER 18.76
E EDUCATIONAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
18.76.010: Purpose Of Provisions
18.76.020: Permitted Uses And Conditional Uses
18.76.030: Property Development Standards
18.76.040: Lot Area
18.76.050: Lot Dimensions
18.76.060: Building Height
18.76.070: Yards
18.76.080: Fences, Landscaping And Walls
18.76.090: Maximum Coverage
18.76.100: Off Street Parking
18.76.110: Access To Street
18.76.120: Signs
18.76.130: Storage And Trash Areas
18.76.140: Lighting Facilities
18.76.150: Site Plan Review
18.76.010: PURPOSE OF PROVISIONS:
The purpose of the E educational district is to provide for the orderly
development of public and private educational institutions wherein all directly
related types of uses may be located, and to set forth those development
standards necessary to ensure that such uses will be compatible with
surrounding land uses. The following regulations, set out in this chapter,
shall apply to all uses in the E educational district. (Ord. 1000 § 22.50,
1955)
18.76.020: PERMITTED USES AND CONDITIONAL USES:
The following uses shall be permitted in the E educational district. No
building, structure or land shall be used, and no building or structure shall
be designed, erected, structurally altered or enlarged, except for the
following purposes:
   A.   Principal Permitted Uses:
Educational institutions, together with normal and necessary buildings, uses
and functions, so long as these activities are under the auspices of an
educational institution. Uses specifically provided for in other sections of
this title are not excluded from this district as long as they are operated by
and for the benefit of educational institutions, and provided that such
operations are a part of and necessary to the educational program of such
institutions.
Existing permanent residential uses and structures.
Nonresidential uses permitted in this district shall be located in entirely new
buildings, designed and constructed for such uses.
   B.   Uses Permitted By Conditional Use Permit: The following uses, when
proposed for location within one hundred feet (100') of any residential zone,
shall require approval of a conditional use permit:
Buildings over thirty five feet (35') in height.
Bus and truck storage areas.
Maintenance buildings and yard facilities.
Stadia.
Tennis courts. (Ord. 1000 § 22.51, 1955)
18.76.030: PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The property development standards set out in sections
18.76.040 through
 18.76.150 of this chapter shall apply to all land and structures in the E
educational district. (Ord. 1000 § 22.52, 1955)
18.76.040: LOT AREA:
Lot area in the E district: No specific minimum. (Ord. 1000 § 22.52(A), 1955)
18.76.050: LOT DIMENSIONS:
Lot dimensions in the E district: No specific minimums. (Ord. 1000 § 22.52(B),
1955)
18.76.060: BUILDING HEIGHT:
In the E district, there is no maximum building height, except as set forth in
subsection
18.76.020B5 of this chapter. (Ord. 1000 § 22.52(C), 1955)
18.76.070: YARDS:
Each site in the E district shall have a front, side and rear yard of not less
than twenty five feet (25'). Yards for buildings greater than two (2) stories
in height shall be increased ten feet (10') for each story above the second
story. Yards between buildings shall be not less than twenty feet (20'). (Ord.
1000 § 22.52(D), 1955)
18.76.080: FENCES, LANDSCAPING AND WALLS:
For landscaping, fences and walls in E districts, the provisions of chapter
18.168 of this title shall apply. (Ord. 1000 § 22.52(E), 1955)
18.76.090: MAXIMUM COVERAGE:
In the E district, maximum coverage by enclosed buildings shall be fifty
percent (50%) of the total site area. (Ord. 1000 § 22.52(F), 1955)
18.76.100: OFF STREET PARKING:
For off street parking in the E district, the provisions of sections
18.164.140 through
18.164.320 of this title shall apply. (Ord. 1000 § 22.52(G), 1955)
18.76.110: ACCESS TO STREET:
Each site in the E district shall have access on a dedicated and improved
street. (Ord. 1000 § 22.52(H), 1955)
18.76.120: SIGNS:
For signs in the E district, the provisions of the Redlands sign ordinance
shall apply. (Ord. 1000 § 22.52(I), 1955)
18.76.130: STORAGE AND TRASH AREAS:
All storage and trash areas in the E district shall be located within enclosed
areas completely screened from public view. (Ord. 1000 § 22.52(J), 1955)
18.76.140: LIGHTING FACILITIES:
Lighting facilities in the E district shall be arranged in a manner which will
protect neighboring properties and streets from direct glare or hazardous
interference of any kind. (Ord. 1000 § 22.52(K), 1955)
18.76.150: SITE PLAN REVIEW:
In the E district, site plans and elevations for all new buildings and
structures shall be submitted to the commission for review and approval. (Ord.
1000 § 22.52(L), 1955)
CHAPTER 18.80
C-D CIVIC DESIGN DISTRICT
SECTION:
18.80.010: Purpose Of Provisions
18.80.020: District Superimposed On Other Districts
18.80.030: Permitted, Accessory And Conditional Uses
18.80.040: Development Plan Approval; Required For Certain Uses
18.80.050: Development Plan Approval; Criteria For Commission Consideration
18.80.060: Architectural Consultation
18.80.070: Proposed Buildings Or Structures; Disapproval Or Conditions
Authorized When
18.80.080: Changes Or Alterations; Consultation With Developers
18.80.090: Undergrounding Of Utilities
18.80.010: PURPOSE OF PROVISIONS:
The purpose of the C-D civic design district shall be to promote the orderly,
harmonious development of areas of the community adjacent to the civic center,
parks, or other buildings or areas of special interest to the public, and to
ensure that the appearance of the areas surrounding such facilities shall be
maintained at a high standard. (Ord. 1000 § 22.61, 1955)
18.80.020: DISTRICT SUPERIMPOSED ON OTHER DISTRICTS:
   A.   The civic design district shall be in the nature of a superimposed
zone. Land classified in the civic design district shall also be classified in
one or more other basic zones.
   B.   Property so classified shall be delineated on the zoning map by a
combination of the zone symbols (for example, C-3, C-D).
   C.   The regulations set forth in this chapter on the civic design district
shall be in addition to the regulations set forth in the underlying zone. In
the event of a conflict between the provisions of the civic design district and
the provisions of an underlying zone, the provisions of the civic design
district shall control. (Ord. 1000 § 22.62, 1955)
18.80.030: PERMITTED, ACCESSORY AND CONDITIONAL USES:
In the C-D district, the principal permitted uses, accessory uses and
conditional uses shall be the same as those set forth in the basic underlying
zone. (Ord. 1000 § 22.63, 1955)
18.80.040: DEVELOPMENT PLAN APPROVAL; REQUIRED FOR CERTAIN USES:
Development plan approval by the planning commission shall be required in the
civic design district for any of the following:
   A.   Erection of a structure other than residential;
   B.   The moving of a structure onto the property or within the property;
   C.   A structural alteration which would substantially change the exterior
appearance of a structure;
   D.   Erection or substantial alteration of a sign, wall or fence;
   E.   The installation or alteration of outdoor lighting equipment which
would substantially change the exterior appearance of the use or structure;
   F.   Wherever an outdoor use is established, enlarged, or changed to another
use. (Ord. 1000 § 22.64, 1955)
18.80.050: DEVELOPMENT PLAN APPROVAL; CRITERIA FOR COMMISSION CONSIDERATION:
In addition to other considerations in regard to development plan approval, the
planning commission shall take into consideration the following criteria in
studying the plans and elevations of proposed buildings and uses in the civic
design district:
   A.   The general exterior appearance of the buildings, including height,
bulk, size and shape;
   B.   The color and texture of surface materials;
   C.   The relationship to existing buildings and structures in the area;
   D.   Consideration should also be given to probable future uses and
structures in the area, based on the general plan, precise plans, or
redevelopment plans for the area;
   E.   The setbacks and landscaping of yard areas;
   F.   The design, size, type and location of all signs, walls, fences and
outdoor storage;
   G.   The illumination of buildings, grounds, parking areas and signs;
   H.   Any other feature or item having a direct relationship to the general
appearance of the buildings and premises. (Ord. 1000 § 22.65, 1955)
18.80.060: ARCHITECTURAL CONSULTATION:
If the commission desires, it may request the advice and consultation of a
committee of qualified architects appointed by the council. (Ord. 1000 § 22.66,
1955)
18.80.070: PROPOSED BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES; DISAPPROVAL OR CONDITIONS
AUTHORIZED WHEN:
The commission shall have the authority to disapprove any proposed building or
structure, or any change in an existing building or structure which, in its
opinion, would have detrimental effect on the appearance of the area under
consideration. The commission may require changes in the architectural
treatment of buildings or structures, and may require additional landscaping
and development improvements as are necessary in its judgment to carry out the
intent and purpose of the civic design district. (Ord. 1000 § 22.67, 1955)
18.80.080: CHANGES OR ALTERATIONS; CONSULTATION WITH DEVELOPERS:
In the event that the planning commission determines that changes or
alterations are needed, the commission or its designated representative shall
confer with the developer in an endeavor to have the plans changed so that the
structures and uses of the premises will be harmonious and attractive in
appearance, and at the same time fulfill the needs of the developer. (Ord. 1000
§ 22.68, 1955)
18.80.090: UNDERGROUNDING OF UTILITIES:
All utilities and utility installations shall be underground in the C-
D district. However, the planning commission may waive this requirement when it
is found that the requirement would be unreasonable or impractical. (Ord. 1000
§ 22.69, 1955)
CHAPTER 18.82
A-P-C ADMINISTRATIVE-PROFESSIONAL-COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
18.82.010: Purpose Of Provisions
18.82.020: Uses Generally
18.82.030: Permitted Uses
18.82.040: Similar Uses Permitted By Commission Determination
18.82.050: Conditional Uses
18.82.070: Property Development Standards
18.82.080: Lot Area
18.82.090: Lot Dimensions
18.82.100: Building Height
18.82.110: Front Building Setback
18.82.120: Front Yard
18.82.130: Side Yard
18.82.140: Rear Yard
18.82.150: Walls, Fences And Landscaping
18.82.160: Access
18.82.170: Coverage
18.82.180: Off Street Parking
18.82.190: Signs
18.82.200: Storage
18.82.010: PURPOSE OF PROVISIONS:
The purpose of the A-P-C district is to provide for the development of
commercial businesses and professional offices that are consistent with
existing residential uses and compatible with the commercial general plan
designation.
The regulations set forth in the A-P-C district are intended to encourage a
high standard of development which will improve the overall quality of the
community.
The regulations set out in this chapter shall apply to all uses in the A-P-C
(administrative-professional-commercial) district. (Ord. 2056 § 1, 1988)
18.82.020: USES GENERALLY:
In the A-P-C district:
   A.   A structure originally designed as a residence, or as an accessory to a
residence, may be used for a business or professional use under the conditions
as provided in chapter 18.156, article IX of this title.
   B.   All uses except parking and loading shall be conducted within a
completely enclosed building.
   C.   Site plans and elevations for all new construction and/or additions
shall be submitted to the commission for review and approval. (Ord. 2056 § 1,
1988)
18.82.030: PERMITTED USES:
In the A-P-C district no building, structure or land shall be used, and no
building shall hereafter be erected, structurally altered or enlarged except
for the following purposes:
Business and professional offices that are similar to, but not limited to, and
include the following:
Accounting, auditing and bookkeeping services.
Administrative headquarters.
Architectural and engineering services.
Business and management consulting services.
Business associations.
Employment agencies.
Federal, state, county and local government offices.
Insurance offices.
Law offices and legal services.
Professional membership associations.
Real estate offices.
Secretarial and clerical services.
Medical and health services that are similar to, but not limited to, and
including the following:
Chiropractors.
Dentists and oral surgeons.
Medical, dental and biological laboratories.
Medical, dental and therapeutic clinics.
Medical massage as defined by and in accordance with title 5, chapter 5.28 of
this code.
Optometrists.
Osteopathic physicians.
Physicians and surgeons.
Residential and nonresidential uses combined. Residential uses may be combined
with nonresidential uses with a conditional use permit and as provided by
section
18.82.050 of this chapter.
Residential uses. Uses permitted in the R-3 district, subject to the
regulations of the R-3 district.
Retail stores that are similar to, but not limited to, and include the
following:
Antique or curio shops.
Art shops/galleries.
Interior decorators' studios.
Locksmith shops.
Mail order.
Stationery.
Service establishments that are similar to, but not limited to, and include the
following:
Barbershops.
Beauty shops.
Employment agencies.
Photographers.
Tailors. (Ord. 2824, 2015)
18.82.040: SIMILAR USES PERMITTED BY COMMISSION DETERMINATION:
The commission may, by resolution of record, recommend to the city council any
other uses which it may determine to be similar to those listed in section
18.82.030 of this chapter, in conformity with the intent and purpose of this A-
P-C district, and not more obnoxious or detrimental to the public health,
safety and welfare, or other uses permitted in this district. (Ord. 2056 § 1,
1988)
18.82.050: CONDITIONAL USES:
The following are uses that may be permitted subject to approval of a
conditional use permit. These uses may be similar to, but not limited to, and
include the following:
Art schools or studios.
Beauty and barber colleges.
Business schools.
Charitable organizations.
Churches.
Dance and drama schools or studios.
Daycare centers.
Eating establishments.
Language schools.
Libraries.
Music schools or studios.
Prescription pharmacy services in conjunction with medical offices.
Residential and nonresidential uses combined. The following items are to be
included in the submittal of:
A.   A statement or plan setting forth the maximum number of employees. The
number of employees may not be increased unless the applicant applies for a
revised conditional use permit,
B.   A parking plan or layout indicating that:
      1.   Parking for a residential unit(s) shall be provided on site in
addition to that required for the A-P-C use(s) or by evidence of an agreement
for off site office parking acceptable to the city,
      2.   On site parking is prohibited in the front setback area,
C.   Proposed signage.
Social organizations.
Swimming pools. (Ord. 2056 § 1, 1988)
18.82.070: PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
Property development standards set out in sections
18.82.080 through
18.82.200 of this chapter shall apply to all uses of land and buildings in the
A-P-C district. (Ord. 2056 § 1, 1988)
18.82.080: LOT AREA:
Each lot shall have a minimum area of ten thousand (10,000) square feet. (Ord.
2056 § 1, 1988)
18.82.090: LOT DIMENSIONS:
Each lot shall have a minimum width of eighty feet (80') and a minimum depth of
one hundred twenty feet (120'). (Ord. 2056 § 1, 1988)
18.82.100: BUILDING HEIGHT:
Maximum building height is two (2) stories. Properties adjacent to a freeway
may build up to four (4) stories subject to approval of a conditional use
permit. See section
18.152.020 of this title for exceptions. (Ord. 2056 § 1, 1988)
18.82.110: FRONT BUILDING SETBACK:
All buildings, three (3) stories and above, are to have a stair stepped front
building setback of fifteen feet (15') per story above two (2) stories. (Ord.
2056 § 1, 1988)
18.82.120: FRONT YARD:
   A.   Each lot shall have a front yard extending for the full width of the
lot. The front setback area shall be fully landscaped and maintained. With the
exception of those properties which are subject to the setback provisions of a
separate setback ordinance or specific street plan, the minimum front setback
shall be as follows:
      1.   For one- and two-story buildings: Front yard shall be not less than
fifteen feet (15') in depth;
      2.   For three-story buildings: Front yard shall be not less than twenty
feet (20') in depth;
      3.   For four-story buildings: Front yard shall be not less than twenty
five feet (25') in depth.
   B.   The maximum front setback for all building heights shall be forty feet
(40'). (Ord. 2056 § 1, 1988)
18.82.130: SIDE YARD:
Lot shall have a side yard on each side of the main building of not less than
five feet (5') for a one-story building. The side yard shall be increased two
and one-half feet (21/2') for every story above the first story. (Ord. 2056 §
1, 1988)
18.82.140: REAR YARD:
Each lot shall have a rear yard of not less than five feet (5'). For those
properties adjacent to a freeway the provisions of section
18.168.220 of this title shall apply. (Ord. 2056 § 1, 1988)
18.82.150: WALLS, FENCES AND LANDSCAPING:
The provisions of chapter 18.168 of this title shall apply. (Ord. 2056 § 1,
1988)
18.82.160: ACCESS:
Each lot shall have a minimum of fifty feet (50') of access on a dedicated and
improved street. (Ord. 2056 § 1, 1988)
18.82.170: COVERAGE:
Maximum coverage shall be sixty percent (60%) of the total lot area for one-
and two-story structures. Structures three (3) stories and over are subject to
approval of a conditional use permit. (Ord. 2056 § 1, 1988)
18.82.180: OFF STREET PARKING:
   A.   To maintain a high quality professional character, all off street
parking is to be located to the side and/or rear of the building.
   B.   The provisions of chapter 18.164, articles II through IV of this title
shall apply. (Ord. 2056 § 1, 1988)
18.82.190: SIGNS:
The provisions of the Redlands sign code for the C-3 district may be permitted
subject to planning commission approval. All signs are to be submitted at time
of project approval. (Ord. 2821, 2015)
18.82.200: STORAGE:
All storage and trash areas shall be located within enclosed areas completely
screened from public view. (Ord. 2056 § 1, 1988)
CHAPTER 18.84
C-1 NEIGHBORHOOD STORES DISTRICT
SECTION:
18.84.010: Purpose Of Provisions
18.84.020: Review; Prerequisites
18.84.030: Review; Procedure Generally
18.84.040: Permitted Uses, Conditionally Permitted Uses, And Similar Uses
Permitted By Commission Determination
18.84.060: Property Development Standards
18.84.070: Lot Area
18.84.080: Lot Dimensions
18.84.090: Building Height
18.84.100: Maximum Coverage
18.84.110: Floor Space Index
18.84.120: Landscaping
18.84.130: Yards
18.84.140: Off Street Parking And Loading
18.84.150: Fences, Landscaping And Walls
18.84.160: Signs
18.84.170: Accessways
18.84.180: Gross Leasable Area
18.84.190: Storage, Lighting Facilities, Hours And Noise Control
18.84.200: Unified Control
18.84.210: Substandard Lots Of Record
18.84.010: PURPOSE OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   The purpose of establishing C-1 neighborhood stores district is to
encourage the logical and timely development of land for commercial purposes,
in accordance with the objectives, policies and proposals of the general plan,
provided such uses are determined by the commission and council to be essential
or desirable to the public convenience and welfare in the location proposed.
   B.   The C-1 district is intended to serve the neighborhood needs of
approximately one thousand (1,000) families, for convenience goods only. The
stores are intended to fit into the residential pattern of development and not
create either architectural or traffic conflicts.
   C.   The following regulations, set out in this chapter, are intended to
protect the residential environment, and shall apply to all uses in the C-
1 neighborhood stores district. (Ord. 1000 § 23.00, 1955)
18.84.020: REVIEW; PREREQUISITES:
Prerequisites to review in C-1 districts include:
   A.   Ownership And Integrated Design: A neighborhood stores center may be
established only upon land held in single ownership or unified control. The
plan for the proposed development must present an integrated and organized
arrangement of buildings and service facilities, which shall have a functional
relationship to the overall planned development.
   B.   General Plan: The location and type of development shall be consistent
with the comprehensive general plan upon which the ordinance codified in this
title is based.
   C.   Frequency Of Districts: No neighborhood stores district shall be closer
than one mile from any other shopping center district or neighborhood stores
district. (Ord. 1000 § 23.10, 1955)
18.84.030: REVIEW; PROCEDURE GENERALLY:
The provisions of sections
18.88.030 through
18.88.090 of this title shall apply. (Ord. 1000 § 23.11, 1955)
18.84.040: PERMITTED USES, CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES, AND SIMILAR USES
PERMITTED BY COMMISSION DETERMINATION:
In the C-1 district, no building, structure or land shall be used, and no
building or structure shall be hereafter erected, structurally altered or
enlarged, except for the following purposes:
   A.   Principal Permitted Uses:
Bakery with lunch counter.
Convenience goods:
Candy.
Delicatessen.
Drugs.
Florist.
Grocery; no alcohol beverage sales.
Meat.
Pizza, takeout and delivery.
Variety, five-and-ten cents store.
Pet shop.
Services:
Administrative office.
Barber.
Beautician.
Cleaner, laundry; pick up service.
Figure salon.
Laundromat.
Real estate office.
Shoe repair.
   B.   Conditionally Permitted Uses:
Uses listed in chapter 18.192 of this title.
Business and professional office.
Grocery; with alcohol beverage sales.
   C.   Similar Uses Permitted By Commission Determination: The commission may,
by resolution of record, recommend to the city council the permitting of any
other uses which it may determine to be similar to those listed above, in
conformity with the intent and purpose of this zone, and not more obnoxious or
detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare, or other uses permitted
in this zone. (Ord. 2791, 2015)
18.84.060: PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The property development standards set forth in sections
18.84.070 through
 18.84.210 of this chapter shall apply to all land and buildings in the C-
1 zone. (Ord. 1000 § 23.30, 1955)
18.84.070: LOT AREA:
Lot area in C-1 zones:
   A.   Minimum area: Twenty two thousand five hundred (22,500) square feet;
   B.   Maximum area: Four (4) acres. (Ord. 1000 § 23.30(A), 1955)
18.84.080: LOT DIMENSIONS:
Lot dimensions in C-1 zones:
   A.   Minimum width: One hundred fifty feet (150');
   B.   Minimum depth: One hundred fifty feet (150'). (Ord. 1000 § 23.30(B),
1955)
18.84.090: BUILDING HEIGHT:
The maximum building height in a C-1 zone shall be not more than one story or
twenty feet (20'). (Ord. 1000 § 23.30(C), 1955)
18.84.100: MAXIMUM COVERAGE:
In C-1 zones, the maximum coverage of the lot by buildings or structures shall
not exceed twenty five percent (25%) of the total lot area. (Ord. 1000 § 23.30
(D), 1955)
18.84.110: FLOOR SPACE INDEX:
In C-1 zones, the relationship between floor space and ground area shall not
exceed one-fourth (1/4) (1 square foot of gross floor space for each 4 square
feet of total lot area). (Ord. 1000 § 23.30(E), 1955)
18.84.120: LANDSCAPING:
For C-1 zone landscaping, see sections
18.88.120 through 18.88.280 of this title. (Ord. 1000 § 23.30(F), 1955)
18.84.130: YARDS:
For yards in C-1 districts:
   A.   All buildings and structures, except required walls, shall be set back
not less than forty feet (40') from all property lines abutting a public
street, and not less than twenty five feet (25') from all other property lines.
   B.   Yard setbacks for existing substandard C-1 lots shall be the same as
the abutting residential district. (Ord. 1000 § 23.30(G), 1955)
18.84.140: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING:
For off street parking and loading in the C-1 district, the provisions of
sections
 18.164.140 through
18.164.320 and
18.164.330 through
18.164.340 of this title shall apply. (Ord. 1000 § 23.30(H), 1955)
18.84.150: FENCES, LANDSCAPING AND WALLS:
For fences, landscaping and walls in the C-1 district, the provisions of
chapter 18.168 of this title shall apply. (Ord. 1000 § 23.30(I), 1955)
18.84.160: SIGNS:
For C-1 district signs, the provisions of the Redlands sign code shall apply.
In addition, no signs are permitted within landscaped areas. (Ord. 1000 § 23.30
(J), 1955)
18.84.170: ACCESSWAYS:
In the C-1 district, all accessways to a public street shall be located not
less than seventy five feet (75') from the intersection of any street lines,
and shall be designed in a manner conducive to safe ingress and egress. Where
practical, exits shall be located on a minor street. Frequency of accessways
shall be at intervals of not less than one hundred feet (100'). (Ord. 1000 §
23.30(K), 1955)
18.84.180: GROSS LEASABLE AREA:
In C-1 districts, the gross leasable area ("GLA") shall not exceed thirty seven
thousand five hundred (37,500) square feet. For a definition of GLA, see
section
 18.88.240 of this title. (Ord. 1000 § 23.30(L), 1955)
18.84.190: STORAGE, LIGHTING FACILITIES, HOURS AND NOISE CONTROL:
For storage, lighting, hours and noise in the C-1 district, the provisions of
sections
18.88.120 through
18.88.290 of this title shall apply. (Ord. 1000 § 23.30(M), 1955)
18.84.200: UNIFIED CONTROL:
For unified control in the C-1 district, the provisions of section
18.88.290 of this title shall apply. (Ord. 1000 § 23.40, 1955)
18.84.210: SUBSTANDARD LOTS OF RECORD:
   A.   Plans for the development of substandard C-1 lots of record shall be
submitted to the commission for review and approval. Property development
standards which cannot be logically applied may be modified to establish
reasonable compliance with the intent and purpose of the district. The
commission shall encourage the gathering of such lots to provide more usable
dimensions and area.
   B.   Off street parking shall be provided on the basis of use, as defined in
sections 18.152.140 through 18.152.320 of this title. (Ord. 1000 § 23.50, 1955)
CHAPTER 18.88
C-2 NEIGHBORHOOD CONVENIENCE CENTER DISTRICT
SECTION:
18.88.010: Purpose Of Provisions
18.88.020: Establishment Conditions; Design And Location
18.88.030: Review; Requirements Generally
18.88.040: Review; Application Information
18.88.050: Review; Site Plan Preparation
18.88.060: Review; Market Analysis Requirements
18.88.070: Review; Time Schedule For Construction
18.88.080: Review; Traffic And Streets
18.88.090: Review; Financial Report
18.88.100: Permitted Uses And Similar Uses Permitted By Commission
Determination
18.88.110: Conditionally Permitted Uses
18.88.120: Property Development Standards
18.88.130: Lot Area
18.88.140: Lot Dimensions
18.88.150: Building Height
18.88.160: Maximum Coverage
18.88.170: Floor Space Index
18.88.180: Landscaping
18.88.190: Yards
18.88.200: Off Street Parking And Loading
18.88.210: Fences, Landscaping And Walls
18.88.220: Signs
18.88.230: Accessways
18.88.240: Gross Leasable Area
18.88.250: Trash Storage Area
18.88.260: Lighting Facilities
18.88.270: Hours For Certain Activities
18.88.280: Noise Producing Equipment
18.88.290: Unified Control
18.88.010: PURPOSE OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   The purpose of establishing C-2 neighborhood convenience center
district is to encourage the logical and timely development of land for
commercial purposes in accordance with the objectives, policies and proposals
of the general plan, provided such uses are determined by the commission and
council to be essential or desirable to the public convenience and welfare in
the location proposed. The size of the center is to be directly related to the
quantity of purchasing power available within the trading area for the support
of those uses that are classified for this district.
   B.   The following regulations, set out in this chapter, are intended to
protect the residential environment, and shall apply to all uses in the C-
2 neighborhood convenience center district. (Ord. 1000 § 24.00, 1955)
18.88.020: ESTABLISHMENT CONDITIONS; DESIGN AND LOCATION:
   A.   Ownership And Integrated Design: A C-2 neighborhood convenience center
may be established only upon land held in single ownership or unified control.
The plan for the proposed development must present an integrated and organized
arrangement of buildings and service facilities, which shall have a functional
relationship to the overall planned development.
   B.   General Plan: The location and type of development shall be consistent
with the comprehensive general plan upon which the provisions codified in this
title are based.
   C.   Frequency Of Districts: No neighborhood convenience center shall be
closer than two (2) miles from any other neighborhood convenience center
district, or closer than one mile from any neighborhood stores district. (Ord.
1000 § 24.10, 1955)
18.88.030: REVIEW; REQUIREMENTS GENERALLY:
For C-2 districts, the following information and material, set out in sections
18.88.040 through
18.88.140 of this chapter, shall be submitted to the commission. (Ord. 1000 §
24.11, 1955)
18.88.040: REVIEW; APPLICATION INFORMATION:
   A.   Conditional Use Permit:
      1.   The applicant may request and the commission may recommend a
conditional use permit for the uses permitted herein, subject to the
regulations set forth in chapter 18.192 of this title.
      2.   The applicant must be the property owner or an authorized agent of
the owner.
      3.   Responsibility for the posting of bonds, and fulfilling of city
requirements for both on site and off site improvements rests with the
applicant.
   B.   Change Of Zone:
      1.   The applicant may request and the commission may recommend a change
of zone for the uses permitted in this chapter, subject to the requirements of
sections
18.88.030 through 18.88.140 of this chapter, and the regulations of section
18.180.010 of this title. The commission may recommend and the council may
grant a conditional use permit in lieu of a change of zone when this procedure
is determined to be more appropriate.
      2.   All conditions fixed by the city council in the amendment to the
ordinance creating the district shall run with the land, and shall be binding
upon the applicant for the amendment, his heirs, successors and assigns. (Ord.
2333 § 37, 1997: Ord. 1000 § 24.11(A), 1955)
18.88.050: REVIEW; SITE PLAN PREPARATION:
   A.   Preliminary Site Plan: The site plan shall be prepared to scale,
showing accurately and with complete dimensioning all buildings, structures,
signs, parking, landscaping, walls or fences, and the points of ingress and
egress. In addition, all necessary information to clearly define intended use
of the property shall be included.
   B.   Changes: Changes in the approved plan of any item listed under
subsection D of this section shall be submitted to the commission for review
and approval. This includes changes in parking, landscaping, circulation,
signs, lighting, grading, and location of structures.
   C.   Stage Development: If the development is to be carried out in
progressive stages, each stage shall be so planned that the requirements and
the intent of this title shall be fully complied with at the completion of any
stage. Initial construction shall include a food store.
   D.   Final Plans: Final plans are required if the following information is
not included on the preliminary plan. Prior to the issuance of a building
permit, a final site plan shall be submitted to the commission for review and
approval, with the following information:
      1.   Location, arrangement and dimensions of main and accessory
buildings;
      2.   Location, arrangement and dimensions of automobile parking space,
width of aisles, width of bays, angle of parking;
      3.   Location, arrangement and dimensions of truck loading and unloading
spaces and docks, including trash storage areas;
      4.   Location and dimensions of vehicular entrances, exits and drives;
      5.   Location and dimensions of pedestrian entrances, exits, walks and
walkways;
      6.   General drainage system;
      7.   Location and materials of walls and fences;
      8.   Landscaping and final grading plan;
      9.   The elevations of main and accessory buildings;
      10.   The location, size, height and orientation of all signs and lights;
      11.   Location and shielding of air conditioners, heating and ventilating
equipment. (Ord. 1000 § 24.11(B), 1955)
18.88.060: REVIEW; MARKET ANALYSIS REQUIREMENTS:
The petitioner shall submit to the planning department (and the department
shall submit its findings on the market analysis to the commission), a market
analysis, acceptable to the city, which indicates the need for a shopping
center in the location requested. For these purposes, the market analysis shall
contain the following determination:
   A.   Determination of trade area of the proposed shopping center;
   B.   Determination of trade area population, present and future;
   C.   Determination of effective buying power in the trade area;
   D.   Determination of net potential customer buying power for stores in the
proposed shopping center; and
   E.   Such other data as may be necessary in order to support the
application. (Ord. 1000 § 24.11(C), 1955)
18.88.070: REVIEW; TIME SCHEDULE FOR CONSTRUCTION:
The time limit for start of construction of one or more of the main buildings
shown on the approved site plan shall be one year. Such construction shall be
pursued diligently to completion. This time limit may be extended for a period
not to exceed one year by submitting a request to the commission for review and
approval prior to the expiration date of the initial time limit.
   A.   Conditional Use Permit: Failure to obtain final approval of the
conditional use permit and subsequently start construction within the specified
time limits shall terminate the right to develop subject property as a shopping
center.
   B.   Change Of Zone: In the event that construction has not started within
the specified time limits, the planning commission shall review the progress
which has occurred and, if determined necessary, initiate proceedings to rezone
property to the zone classification applicable prior to the approval of the
commercial zoning.
   C.   Time Limit For Application: In the event that the application for a
conditional use permit or zone change is denied, or the time limit for
development has expired, no new application will be considered for a period of
one year. (Ord. 1000 § 24.11(D), 1955)
18.88.080: REVIEW; TRAFFIC AND STREETS:
   A.   Traffic Study: A C-2 neighborhood shopping center shall be located on
property which abuts and has access to an established major or secondary
highway. The commission must be satisfied as to the adequacy of surrounding
streets and traffic control facilities to carry the additional traffic
generated by the development, and may require that a traffic study be
submitted.
   B.   Dedications And Improvements: The applicant shall dedicate and improve
all necessary streets in conformity with the general plan and any precise plan
affecting subject property. (Ord. 1000 § 24.11(E), 1955)
18.88.090: REVIEW; FINANCIAL REPORT:
A statement of financial responsibility, including the posting of bonds, cash
or certificate of credit with the city to assure the installation of
improvements is required as a condition to development of a C-2 district. (Ord.
1000 § 24.11(F), 1955)
18.88.100: PERMITTED USES AND SIMILAR USES PERMITTED BY COMMISSION
DETERMINATION:
In C-2 districts, no building, structure or land shall be used, and no building
or structure shall be hereafter erected, structurally altered or enlarged,
except for the following purposes:
   A.   Principal Permitted Uses:
Convenience goods:
Bakery, retail.
Books.
Camera.
Candy.
Delicatessen.
Drugs.
Florist.
Gifts.
Grocery; no alcohol beverage sales.
Hardware.
Hobbies.
Luggage.
Meat.
Nurseries; no outdoor display of merchandise other than plants.
Paint.
Toys.
Services:
Automobile club insurance office.
Automobile parts, sales.
Automobile service station; minor repairs only, with no outdoor display of
merchandise.
Barber.
Beautician.
Branch bank.
Cleaner/laundry.
Day spa.
Laundromat.
Martial arts studio.
Pet shop.
Real estate office.
Restaurant.
Shoe repair.
Shopper's goods:
Apparel.
Dry goods.
Jewelry.
Knitting.
Linens.
Portable appliances.
Shoes.
Variety.
   B.   Similar Uses Permitted By Commission Determination: The commission may,
by resolution of record, recommend to the city council the permitting of any
other uses which it may determine to be similar to those listed above, in
conformity with the intent and purpose of the C-2 zone, and not more obnoxious
or detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare, or other uses
permitted in this zone. (Ord. 2791, 2015)
18.88.110: CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES:
   A.   The following uses may be permitted within the C-2 zone subject to the
city's approval of a conditional use permit:
Uses listed in chapter 18.192 of this title.
Business and professional office.
Drive-through facilities which are ancillary to a use permitted as a matter of
right within the C-2 zone.
Family recreation centers consisting of amusement machine arcades, billiard
rooms or other similar entertainment.
Grocery; with alcohol beverage sales. (Ord. 2791, 2015)
18.88.120: PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The following property development standards, set out in sections
18.88.130 through
18.88.280 of this chapter, shall apply to all land and buildings in the C-
2 zone. (Ord. 1000 § 24.30, 1955)
18.88.130: LOT AREA:
Lot area in C-2 zones:
   A.   Minimum area: Four (4) acres;
   B.   Maximum area: Eight (8) acres. (Ord. 1000 § 24.30(A), 1955)
18.88.140: LOT DIMENSIONS:
Lot dimensions in C-2 zones:
   A.   Minimum width: Two hundred fifty feet (250');
   B.   Minimum depth: Three hundred feet (300'). (Ord. 1000 § 24.30(B), 1955)
18.88.150: BUILDING HEIGHT:
The maximum building height in C-2 zones shall be not more than two (2) stories
or forty feet (40'). (Ord. 1000 § 24.30(C), 1955)
18.88.160: MAXIMUM COVERAGE:
The maximum coverage of the lot by buildings or structures in C-2 zones shall
not exceed twenty five percent (25%) of the total lot area. (Ord. 1000 § 24.30
(D), 1955)
18.88.170: FLOOR SPACE INDEX:
In C-2 zones, the relationship between floor space and ground area shall not
exceed one-fourth (1/4); one square foot of gross floor area for each four (4)
square feet of net lot area. (Ord. 2333 § 38, 1997: Ord. 1000 § 24.30(E), 1955)
18.88.180: LANDSCAPING:
In C-2 zones:
   A.   All front yard areas of the property, including parkways, shall be
landscaped and maintained. Such landscaped yards shall extend the full width of
the lot and be not less in depth than the minimum required front yard for the
abutting residential zone.
   B.   There shall be a landscaped buffer area of screen type planting not
less than ten feet (10') in width along all property lines which abut
residential districts, such landscaping to be located between required walls
and interior of the property. (Ord. 1000 § 24.30(F), 1955)
18.88.190: YARDS:
Except for walls, all buildings and structures located on parcels within the C-
2 zone shall be set back at least fifty feet (50') from all property lines;
provided, however, for building pads in existence on the effective date of the
ordinance codified in this section that abut street intersections and are
located in a neighborhood convenience center, the setback shall be at least
twenty five feet (25'). (Ord. 2492 § 2, 2002: Ord. 1000 § 24.30(G), 1955)
18.88.200: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING:
For off street parking and loading in C-2 zones, the provisions of sections
18.164.140 through
18.164.320 and 18.164.330 and
18.164.340 of this title shall apply. (Ord. 1000 § 24.30(H), 1955)
18.88.210: FENCES, LANDSCAPING AND WALLS:
For fences, landscaping and walls in C-2 zones, the provisions of chapter
18.168 of this title shall apply. (Ord. 1000 § 24.30(I), 1955)
18.88.220: SIGNS:
For signs in C-2 zones, the provisions of the Redlands sign code shall apply.
In addition, no signs are permitted within landscaped areas. (Ord. 1000 § 24.30
(J), 1955)
18.88.230: ACCESSWAYS:
In C-2 zones, all accessways to a public street shall be located not less than
one hundred fifty feet (150') from the intersection of any street lines, and
shall be designed in a manner conducive to safe ingress and egress. Where
practical, exits shall be located on a minor street. Frequency of accessways
shall be at intervals of not less than two hundred fifty feet (250'). (Ord.
1000 § 24.30(K), 1955)
18.88.240: GROSS LEASABLE AREA:
In C-2 zones:
   A.   The gross leasable area ("GLA") shall not exceed seventy five thousand
(75,000) square feet. In addition, not less than twenty five percent (25%) of
the gross leasable area shall be directly related to food items.
   B.   For the purposes of this section, "GLA" is defined as and means all
that area utilized for sales, service and warehousing purposes, and excludes
public restrooms, enclosed trash storage areas, equipment room areas, parking
areas, loading areas, and all open or enclosed walkways, malls and open spaces
used in common by the various stores within the center. (Ord. 1000 § 24.30(L),
1955)
18.88.250: TRASH STORAGE AREA:
In C-2 Zones, rubbish shall be confined in closed containers and completely
screened from view. All merchandise must be stored within enclosed rooms. (Ord.
1000 § 24.30(M), 1955)
18.88.260: LIGHTING FACILITIES:
In C-2 Zones, lighting facilities shall be arranged in a manner which will
protect the highway and neighboring properties from direct glare or hazardous
interference of any kind. (Ord. 1000 § 24.30(N), 1955)
18.88.270: HOURS FOR CERTAIN ACTIVITIES:
   A.   In C-2 Zones, no commercial activity is permitted between the hours of
ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M., unless an administrative
use permit has been approved for hours extending between ten o'clock (10:00)
P.M. and twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight in accordance with chapter 18.193 of
this title, or a conditional use permit has been approved for hours extending
between twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. in
accordance with chapter 18.192 of this title, to ensure compatibility with
residential zones adjacent to the district.
   B.   In C-2 Zones, no loading activity is permitted between the hours of ten
o'clock (10:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. (Ord. 2865, 2018)
18.88.280: NOISE PRODUCING EQUIPMENT:
In C-2 Zones, all noise producing equipment, such as compressors, heating and
air conditioning units, etc., shall be insulated or enclosed so as to be
inaudible at the property lines. (Ord. 1000 § 24.30(P), 1955)
18.88.290: UNIFIED CONTROL:
In C-2 Zones, property shall be recorded as one parcel and under unified
control as a condition for development. Any division of property after the
completion of development shall be in conformity with the regulations of the
Redlands subdivision ordinance and the provisions of the Redlands zoning
ordinance codified in this title. (Ord. 1000 § 24.40, 1955)
CHAPTER 18.92
C-3 GENERAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
18.92.010: Purpose Of Provisions
18.92.020: General Provisions And Restrictions
18.92.030: Uses Generally
18.92.040: Permitted Uses
18.92.050: Residential And Nonresidential Uses Combined (Rep. by Ord. 2642 § 1,
2006)
18.92.060: Accessory Uses
18.92.070: Similar Uses Permitted By Commission Determination (Rep. by Ord.
2571 § 3, 2004)
18.92.080: Conditional Uses
18.92.100: Property Development Standards
18.92.110: Lot Area
18.92.120: Lot Dimensions
18.92.130: Building Height
18.92.140: Yards
18.92.150: Walls And Landscaping
18.92.160: Access To Street
18.92.170: Maximum Coverage
18.92.180: Off Street Parking
18.92.190: Off Street Loading
18.92.200: Signs
18.92.210: Outdoor Storage, Uses And Waste Disposal
18.92.220: Lighting Facilities
18.92.230: Noise Control
18.92.010: PURPOSE OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   The purpose of the C-3 zone is to provide a central location,
accessible from all areas of the city and surrounding areas, for the purchase
of primary shoppers goods. The regulations and development standards set forth
in the C-3 zone are those deemed necessary and desirable in order to provide an
environment which is conducive to the maintenance of an efficient and
economically sound central business district.
   B.   The following regulations shall apply to all uses in the C-3 general
commercial district. (Ord. 1000 § 25.00, 1955)
18.92.020: GENERAL PROVISIONS AND RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   A structure originally designed as a residence, or as an accessory to a
residence, may be used for a commercial purpose under the conditions as
provided for in chapter 18.156, article VI of this title.
   B.   No commercial building shall be constructed or established on the same
lot together with an existing residential building.
   C.   All uses shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building,
except as follows:
      1.   Off street parking and loading areas;
      2.   Automobile service stations;
      3.   The open storage of materials, products and equipment when such
storage is enclosed by a fence, wall, buildings or other means adequate to
conceal such storage from view from adjoining property or the public street.
However, this requirement shall not apply to the display of products or
equipment offered for sale or rental, providing the display is maintained in a
neat and orderly manner.
   D.   Site plans and elevations for all new construction and/or additions
shall be submitted to the commission for review and approval. (Ord. 1000 §
25.10, 1955)
18.92.030: USES GENERALLY:
In the C-3 zone, no building, structure or land shall be used, and no building
or structure shall be hereafter erected, structurally altered or enlarged
except for the purposes set out in sections
18.92.040 through
18.92.080 of this chapter. (Ord. 1000 § 25.20, 1955)
18.92.040: PERMITTED USES:
Permitted uses in the C-3 zone are:
   Uses permitted in the C-1 and C-2 zones.
   Auto sales and service establishments, providing all operations, including
sales, display, storage and repair work are conducted within completely
enclosed buildings, including:
      Auto parts and accessory stores.
      New auto sales.
      Used auto sales.
   Clubs, schools and studios, including:
      Art schools or studios.
      Beauty and barber colleges.
      Business schools.
      Clubs, lodges and similar organizations.
      Dance and drama schools or studios.
      Gymnasiums and health studios.
      Language schools.
      Music schools or studios.
      Swimming schools.
      Weight loss and diet centers, nonmedical.
   Entertainment establishments, including:
      Social halls, no alcohol sales.
      Theaters.
      Financial establishments, including:
      Banks.
      Finance offices.
      Savings and loan associations.
      Stockbrokers.
      Trust companies.
      Hotels.
   Retail stores, including:
      Antique or curio shops.
      Art shops.
      Department stores.
      Drapery.
      Floor covering.
      Furniture and appliances.
      Furrier.
      Garden and farm supplies, but not including open air sales or storage.
      Grocery; without alcohol beverage sales.
      Interior decorators' studios.
      Locksmith shops.
      Mail order.
      Music and records.
      Office equipment and stationery.
      Pet and pet supply uses. Ancillary pet boarding services are permitted in
conjunction with pet and pet supply, subject to the following criteria:
         A.   The gross floor area of the pet business shall not exceed five
thousand (5,000) square feet;
         B.   The ancillary pet boarding service area shall be limited to
twenty five percent (25%) of the gross floor area of the business but in no
event shall exceed one thousand (1,000) square feet;
         C.   Each animal shall be provided a primary enclosure that provides
adequate space, as required by California Health And Safety Code section 122350
(a);
         D.   Noise produced by the proposed use shall not exceed the limits
set in title 8,
chapter 8.06 of this code. Sufficient soundproofing shall be provided to
prevent noise and vibrations from penetrating into adjacent properties;
         E.   Emergency after hour contact information shall be provided to the
city's police department and posted in a publicly visible location within the
facility;
         F.   Waste disposal facilities shall be adequate to ensure sanitary
conditions; and
         G.   A separate and isolated ventilation system shall be provided for
the pet boarding area.
      Sporting goods.
   Service establishments and offices, including:
      Blueprinting, duplicating, photocopying and addressing.
      Business and professional offices, as listed in subsections
18.64.030 B and C of this title.
      Catering.
      Dry cleaning establishments, using nonflammable fluids and having not
more than two (2) cleaning machines with a rated capacity not over forty (40)
pounds each.
      Employment agencies.
      Furniture upholstery.
      Governmental agencies.
      Libraries.
      Low-Barrier Navigation Center, subject to the provisions of
chapter 18.156, Article XIII, of this title.
      Photographers.
      Restaurants; with or without alcohol sales.
      Specialty food markets, no alcohol sales.
      Tailors.
      Tanning salons.
      Service stations, no alcohol beverage sales; all merchandise must be
displayed within the building. (Ord. 2985, 2025: Ord. 2791, 2015)
18.92.050: RESIDENTIAL AND NONRESIDENTIAL USES COMBINED:
(Rep. by Ord. 2642 § 1, 2006)
18.92.060: ACCESSORY USES:
The following accessory uses are permitted in the C-3 zone:
Those accessory uses and structures customarily appurtenant to a permitted use,
such as incidental storage facilities. (Ord. 1898 § 1, 1985: Ord. 1000 § 25.20
(C), 1955)
18.92.070: SIMILAR USES PERMITTED BY COMMISSION DETERMINATION:
(Rep. by Ord. 2571 § 3, 2004)
18.92.080: CONDITIONAL USES:
   A.   In the C-3 zone, the following uses may be permitted subject to
approval of a conditional use permit:
      Uses listed in
chapter 18.192 of this title.
      Audio and film production studios and schools.
      Auto repair establishments; no open service bays shall face a public
street, or they shall be screened.
      Automobile parking garages and lots, public or private.
      Beer and wine stores.
      Bus terminals and similar transit facilities.
      Commercial amusement establishments, such as skating rinks, bowling
lanes, amusement machine arcades, pool halls, dance halls, nightclubs, cocktail
lounges, taverns and beer and wine bars.
      Drive-in stores, such as cleaner, liquor, milk and food.
      Drive-through sales and/or service.
      Frozen food locker.
      Grocery; with alcohol beverage sales.
      Hospitals and sanatoriums.
      Mechanical or self-service auto wash.
      Mortuaries or funeral homes.
      Motels.
      Open air sales, display and storage, including:
         Miniature golf and similar commercial amusement establishments.
         New or used auto, motorcycle and boat sales.
      Swimming pools, commercial.
      Tool and equipment sales or rental.
      Service stations with alcohol beverage sales; all merchandise must be
displayed within the building.
      Social halls, with alcohol beverage sales.
      Specialty food markets with alcohol beverage sales.
   B.   Residential uses are permitted subject to approval of a conditional use
permit and (i) may be combined with nonresidential uses as a mixed use
development, or (ii) be developed as a multifamily-attached residential
project, in an existing building or an entirely new building provided:
      1.   The residential density permitted shall be that allowed by the R-
3 district; provided, however, that for projects deemed exempt from the
"Principles of Managed Development" (section 4.2A) of the City's General Plan,
pursuant to section 4.2B, for the reason that the project is determined to be
development directly related to a proposed rail station, the floor area ratio
shall govern the density/intensity of the project; and
      2.   For mixed use and multifamily attached residential projects on a
property, all or part of which is within a one-half (½) mile radius of a train
station, required parking for the residential units shall be provided on site
in accordance with subsection (a) below, in addition to that required for the
commercial uses in accordance with subsection (b) below. Residential guest
spaces and commercial spaces may be shared.
         a.   Residential attached units (apartments, condominiums, townhomes):
            (1)   Units Up To 999 Square Feet: 1.0 space per unit.
            (2)   Units 1,000 To 1,499 Square Feet: 1.5 space per unit.
            (3)   Units 1,500 Square Feet Or More: 2.0 space per unit.
            (4)   Guests: 0.25 space per unit.
            (5)   Live/Work Units Up To 1,499 Square Feet: 1.0 space per unit.
            (6)   Live/Work Units 1,500 Square Feet Or More: see Commercial.
         b.   Commercial uses (retail, restaurant, office, personal services,
and neighborhood-serving uses) within mixed use multi-tenant buildings:
            (1)   Ground Floor: 1 space per 300 square feet of gross ground
floor building area.
            (2)   Upper Floors: 1 space per 350 square feet of gross upper
floor building area.
      3.   For mixed use projects on a property not within a one-half (½) mile
radius from a train station, required parking for the residential units shall
be provided on site, in addition to that required for the commercial uses, in
accordance with
Chapter 18.164 of this Title 18, except that up to fifty percent (50%) of the
required guest parking spaces for the residential units may jointly use the
required parking spaces for the commercial uses.
      4.   Single room occupancy facilities may be conditionally permitted,
subject to the provisions of
chapter 18.156, Article XV, of this title. (Ord. 2985, 2025: Ord. 2791, 2015;
amd. Ord. 2930, 2-1-2022)
18.92.100: PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The following property development standards, set out in sections
18.92.110 through
18.92.230 of this chapter shall apply to all land and buildings in the C-
3 zone. (Ord. 1000 § 25.30, 1955)
18.92.110: LOT AREA:
No requirements. (Ord. 1000 § 25.30(A), 1955)
18.92.120: LOT DIMENSIONS:
No requirements. (Ord. 1000 § 25.30(B), 1955)
18.92.130: BUILDING HEIGHT:
In the C-3 zone, there is no height limit, except that the relationship between
building floor area and lot area shall not exceed four (4) square feet of total
floor area for each one square foot of total lot area. The floor area of
parking garages and related structures located at or above ground level shall
be included in the calculation ratio. (Ord. 1000 § 25.30(C), 1955)
18.92.140: YARDS:
In the C-3 zone:
   A.   Front Yard: No requirements;
   B.   Side Yard: No side yard requirements, except where the C-3 zone adjoins
or is across the street from a residential zone, in which case there shall be a
side yard of not less than ten feet (10') on the side or sides adjoining the
street or residential zone. The yard shall be landscaped and maintained;
   C.   Rear Yard: No requirements. (Ord. 1000 § 25.30(D), 1955)
18.92.150: WALLS AND LANDSCAPING:
For walls and landscaping in the C-3 zone, the provisions of chapter 18.168 of
this title shall apply. (Ord. 1000 § 25.30(E), 1955)
18.92.160: ACCESS TO STREET:
All lots in C-3 zones shall have access on a dedicated and improved street.
(Ord. 1000 § 25.30(F), 1955)
18.92.170: MAXIMUM COVERAGE:
No requirements. (Ord. 1000 § 25.30(G), 1955)
18.92.180: OFF STREET PARKING:
For off street parking in C-3 zones, the provisions of sections
18.164.140 through
18.164.325 of this title shall apply. (Ord. 1000 § 25.30(H), 1955)
18.92.190: OFF STREET LOADING:
For off street loading in C-3 zones, the provisions of sections
18.164.330 and
18.164.340 of this title shall apply. (Ord. 1000 § 25.30(I), 1955)
18.92.200: SIGNS:
For signs in the C-3 zone, the provisions of the Redlands sign code shall
apply. In addition, the maximum area of any sign facing a residential zone
shall be seventy five feet (75'). (Ord. 1000 § 25.30(J), 1955)
18.92.210: OUTDOOR STORAGE, USES AND WASTE DISPOSAL:
In the C-3 zone:
   A.   Outdoor storage and activities associated with permitted uses shall be
entirely enclosed by building walls or by a solid masonry wall not less than
six feet (6') in height, located on the front setback line.
   B.   All waste materials shall be stored in an enclosed area and shall be
accessible to service vehicles. Wastes which might cause fumes or dust, or
which constitute a fire hazard, or which may be edible by or otherwise be
attractive to rodents or insects, shall be stored only in enclosed containers
in required enclosures. (Ord. 1000 § 25.30(K), 1955)
18.92.220: LIGHTING FACILITIES:
C-3 zone lighting facilities shall be arranged in a manner which will protect
the highway and neighboring properties from direct glare or hazardous
interference of any kind. (Ord. 1000 § 25.30(L), 1955)
18.92.230: NOISE CONTROL:
When the C-3 zone use adjoins a residential district, all noise producing
equipment, such as compressors, heating and air conditioning units, etc., shall
be insulated or enclosed so as to be inaudible at the property lines. (Ord.
1000 § 25.30(M), 1955)
CHAPTER 18.96
C-4 HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
18.96.010: Purpose Of Provisions
18.96.020: General Provisions And Restrictions
18.96.030: Uses Generally
18.96.040: Permitted Uses
18.96.050: Accessory Uses
18.96.060: Similar Uses Permitted By Commission Determination (Rep. by Ord.
2571 § 6, 2004)
18.96.070: Conditional Uses
18.96.090: Property Development Standards
18.96.100: Lot Area
18.96.110: Lot Dimensions
18.96.120: Building Height
18.96.130: Yards
18.96.140: Walls And Landscaping
18.96.150: Access To Street
18.96.160: Maximum Coverage
18.96.170: Off Street Parking
18.96.180: Off Street Loading
18.96.190: Signs
18.96.200: Outdoor Storage, Uses And Waste Disposal
18.96.210: Lighting Facilities
18.96.220: Noise Control
18.96.010: PURPOSE OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   The purpose of the C-4 zone is to provide for the development of
commercial enterprises adjacent to the major thoroughfares of the community.
   B.   The regulations set forth in the C-4 zone are intended to maintain
efficient traffic circulation with commercial development. High property
development standards will enhance the visual qualities of the major
thoroughfares, thus improving the general appearance of the community.
   C.   The following regulations, set out in this chapter, shall apply to all
uses in the C-4 highway commercial district. (Ord. 1000 § 26.00, 1955)
18.96.020: GENERAL PROVISIONS AND RESTRICTIONS:
In the C-4 zone:
   A.   All lots in this district, in order to be used for the purposes set
forth in this section, must have their main buildings facing on the highway
upon which the zoning district is established.
   B.   All buildings erected, constructed or established shall be entirely new
and complete structures designed for commercial purposes only, except as
provided for in subsection E of this section.
   C.   Site plans and elevations for all new construction and/or additions
shall be submitted to the planning commission for review and approval.
   D.   Alleys may be required by the planning commission.
   E.   A structure originally designed as a residence, or as an accessory to a
residence, may be used for a retail business or professional use under the
conditions provided for in chapter 18.156, article VI of this title.
   F.   No business or professional building shall be erected, constructed or
established on the same lot together with a building originally designed as a
residence, or as an accessory to a residence, except as provided in subsection
E of this section.
   G.   All uses shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building,
except as follows:
      1.   Off street parking and loading areas;
      2.   Automobile service stations;
      3.   The open storage of materials, products, and equipment, when such
storage is enclosed by a fence, wall, buildings, or other means adequate to
conceal such storage from view from adjoining property or the public street.
However, this requirement shall not apply to the display of products or
equipment offered for sale or rental, providing the display is maintained in a
neat and orderly manner. (Ord. 2280 § 1, 1995: Ord. 1000 § 26.10, 1955)
18.96.030: USES GENERALLY:
In C-4 zones, no building, structure or land shall be used, and no building or
structure shall be hereafter erected, structurally altered or enlarged, except
for the purposes set out in sections
18.96.040 through
18.96.070 of this chapter. (Ord. 1000 § 26.20, 1955)
18.96.040: PERMITTED USES:
Principal permitted uses in C-4 zones are:
Uses permitted in the C-1, C-2 and C-3 zones.
Motels.
Retail stores:
Automobile sales and service establishments of new or used vehicles, where
sales, display, storage and repair work are conducted within completely
enclosed buildings.
Commercial greenhouses.
Drive-in stores, such as cleaner, liquor, milk and food.
Electrical apparatus and equipment.
Pest control.
Public scales.
Taxidermy.
Wedding chapels.
Service stations; all merchandise must be displayed within the building or
under canopy cover. (Ord. 2824, 2015)
18.96.050: ACCESSORY USES:
The following accessory uses are permitted in the C-4 zone:
Those accessory uses and structures customarily appurtenant to a permitted use,
such as incidental storage facilities. (Ord. 1000 § 26.10(B), 1955)
18.96.060: SIMILAR USES PERMITTED BY COMMISSION DETERMINATION:
(Rep. by Ord. 2571 § 6, 2004)
18.96.070: CONDITIONAL USES:
The following uses may be permitted in the C-4 zone subject to approval of a
conditional use permit:
Uses permitted with a conditional use permit in the C-3 zone.
Uses listed in
chapter 18.192 of this title.
Ambulance service.
Animal hospitals.
Drive-in stores, such as milk and food, with alcohol beverage sales.
Massage establishment in accordance with title 5,
chapter 5.28 of this code.
Personal services in accordance with title 5,
chapter 5.28 of this code.
Self-storage or mini-storage facilities on a project site with a minimum size
of five (5) acres.
Service stations with alcohol beverage sales; all merchandise must be displayed
within the building or under canopy cover.
Tire recapping in conjunction with sales (not more than 3 molds). (Ord. 2951,
2022: Ord. 2824, 2015)
18.96.090: PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The following property development standards, set out in sections
18.96.100 through
18.96.220 of this chapter shall apply to all land and buildings in the C-
4 zone. (Ord. 1000 § 26.30, 1955)
18.96.100: LOT AREA:
No requirements. (Ord. 1000 § 26.30(A), 1955)
18.96.110: LOT DIMENSIONS:
No requirements. (Ord. 1000 § 26.30(B), 1955)
18.96.120: BUILDING HEIGHT:
There is no height limit in the C-4 zone, except that the relationship between
building floor area and lot area shall not exceed four (4) square feet of total
floor area for each one square foot of total lot area. The floor area of
parking garages and related structures located at or above ground level shall
be included in the calculation ratio. (Ord. 1000 § 26.30(C), 1955)
18.96.130: YARDS:
For C-4 zones, the yard provisions of the C-3 district shall apply. (Ord. 1000
§ 26.30(D), 1955)
18.96.140: WALLS AND LANDSCAPING:
For walls and landscaping in C-4 zones, the provisions of chapter 18.168 of
this title shall apply. (Ord. 1000 § 26.30(E), 1955)
18.96.150: ACCESS TO STREET:
All lots in the C-4 zone shall have access on a dedicated and improved street.
(Ord. 1000 § 26.30(F), 1955)
18.96.160: MAXIMUM COVERAGE:
In C-4 zones, the area covered by buildings or structures shall not exceed
fifty percent (50%) of the total lot area. Exceptions may be granted by the
commission where underground, multilevel or covered parking is provided. (Ord.
1000 § 26.30(G), 1955)
18.96.170: OFF STREET PARKING:
For off street parking in the C-4 zone, the provisions of sections
18.164.140 through
18.164.320 of this title shall apply. (Ord. 1000 § 26.30(H), 1955)
18.96.180: OFF STREET LOADING:
For off street loading in the C-4 zone, the provisions of sections
18.164.330 and
18.164.340 of this title shall apply. (Ord. 1000 § 26.30(I), 1955)
18.96.190: SIGNS:
For signs in the C-4 zone, the provisions of the Redlands sign code shall
apply. In addition, the maximum area of any sign facing a residential zone
shall be seventy five (75) square feet. (Ord. 1000 § 26.30(J), 1955)
18.96.200: OUTDOOR STORAGE, USES AND WASTE DISPOSAL:
For outdoor storage, uses and waste disposal in the C-4 zone, the provisions of
the C-3 district shall apply. (Ord. 1000 § 26.30(K), 1955)
18.96.210: LIGHTING FACILITIES:
Lighting facilities in the C-4 zone shall be arranged in a manner which will
protect the highway and neighboring properties from direct glare or hazardous
interference of any kind. (Ord. 1000 § 26.30(L), 1955)
18.96.220: NOISE CONTROL:
When the C-4 zone use adjoins a residential district, all noise producing
equipment, such as compressors, heating and air conditioning units, etc., shall
be insulated or enclosed so as to be inaudible at the property lines. (Ord.
1000 § 26.30(M), 1955)
CHAPTER 18.100
C-M COMMERCIAL INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
18.100.010: Purpose Of Provisions
18.100.020: General Provisions And Restrictions
18.100.030: Uses Generally
18.100.040: Permitted Uses
18.100.050: Accessory Uses
18.100.060: Similar Uses Permitted By Commission Determination
18.100.070: Conditional Uses
18.100.090: Property Development Standards
18.100.100: Lot Area
18.100.110: Lot Dimensions
18.100.120: Building Height
18.100.130: Yards
18.100.140: Walls, Fences And Landscaping
18.100.150: Access To Street
18.100.160: Maximum Coverage
18.100.170: Off Street Parking
18.100.180: Off Street Loading
18.100.190: Signs
18.100.200: Outdoor Storage And Waste Disposal
18.100.210: Metal Buildings
18.100.220: Performance Standards
18.100.010: PURPOSE OF PROVISIONS:
The purpose of the C-M commercial industrial zone is to provide for urban
services in those areas of the city where certain types of manufacturing and
commercial operations may be located in a compatible relationship. The
regulations of uses and standards of development set forth for the C-M zone are
those deemed necessary to provide the proper environment for the efficient and
desirable use of lands so zoned. (Ord. 1000 § 27.00, 1955)
18.100.020: GENERAL PROVISIONS AND RESTRICTIONS:
In the C-M zone:
   A.   Any structure originally designed as a residence, or as an accessory to
a residence, shall not be used for any industrial purposes. Such a structure
may be used for commercial or professional uses, either as provided for in
chapter 18.156, article IX of this title or by any nonprofit social service
agency subject to the approval of a conditional use permit as provided for in
chapter 18.192 of this title.
   B.   A commercial or industrial building shall not be constructed or
established on the same lot together with an existing residential building.
   C.   All buildings erected, constructed or established shall be entirely new
and complete structures designed for commercial or industrial purposes only.
   D.   Site plans and elevations for all new construction and/or additions
shall be submitted to the commission for review and approval.
   E.   Alleys may be required by the commission.
   F.   All uses shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building
except as follows:
      1.   Off street parking and loading areas;
      2.   Automobile service stations; all merchandise must be displayed
within the building or under canopy covers;
      3.   The open storage of materials, products and equipment, when such
storage is enclosed by a fence, wall, buildings or other means adequate to
conceal such storage from view from adjoining property or the public street;
however, this requirement shall not apply to the display of products or
equipment offered for sale or rental, providing such display is maintained in a
neat and orderly manner. (Ord. 2155 § 1, 1991: Ord. 1000 § 27.10, 1955)
18.100.030: USES GENERALLY:
No building, structure or land shall be used, and no building or structure
shall be hereafter erected, structurally altered or enlarged, except for the
purposes set out in sections
18.164.340 through
18.100.070 of this chapter. (Ord. 1000 § 27.20, 1955)
18.100.040: PERMITTED USES:
Principal permitted uses in the C-M zone include:
   A.   Auto services: No open service bays shall face a public street, or they
shall be screened:
      Brake relining.
      Glass installation.
      Muffler installation.
      Painting.
      Repair.
      Upholstery.
   B.   Commercial sales and service:
      Agricultural supplies and equipment.
      Automobile equipment.
      Automobile, new and used.
      Bicycle, boat and motorcycle.
      Building material and hardware.
      Cabinet shop.
      Camper and mobilehome.
      Drive-in stores, such as milk and food, no alcohol beverage sales.
      Electrical apparatus and equipment.
      Furniture, appliances and carpeting.
      Garden and farm supplies.
      Interior decorator studios.
      Machinery, equipment and supplies.
      Nurseries; no outdoor display of merchandise other than plants.
      Office equipment.
      Paint.
      Pet and pet supply.
      Plumbing, heating, air conditioning and refrigeration equipment and
supplies.
      Radio, television and musical instruments.
   C.   Industrial:
      Uses permitted in the M-P planned industrial district.
      Recreation and entertainment: The following uses are subject to approval
of a conditional use permit if within three hundred feet (300') of a
residential area:
      Bowling lanes, skating rinks, and sports arenas, no alcohol beverage
sales.
      Drive-in theaters.
   D.   Services:
      Auction houses.
      Auto rental.
      Bus terminals and similar transit facilities.
      Cleaning and dyeing plants, laundries, linen and towel service.
      Furniture upholstery.
      Governmental agencies.
      Ice manufacture, cold storage, and frozen food lockers.
      Mail order houses.
      Motels and hotels.
      Parcel delivery.
      Pest control.
      Public scales.
      Radio and television broadcasting studios.
      Restaurants.
      Retreading of tires.
      Sign painters.
   E.   Other uses:
      Agricultural uses permitted in the M-P district.
      Business, technical, trade or professional schools.
      Clubs, lodges, and similar organizations.
      Electric distribution substations, public utility buildings and service
yards.
      Van and storage.
      Warehousing, ancillary to another primary use (see RMC
Chapter 18.156, Article XII).
      Warehousing, in buildings with less than 50,000 square-feet in gross
floor area, and not more than five truck docks or dock high loading doors.
      Wholesalers. (Ord. 2955, 2023: Ord. 2791, 2015)
18.100.050: ACCESSORY USES:
The following accessory uses are permitted in the C-M district:
Those accessory uses and structures customarily appurtenant to a permitted use.
(Ord. 1000 § 27.20(B), 1955)
18.100.060: SIMILAR USES PERMITTED BY COMMISSION DETERMINATION:
In the C-M district, the commission may, by resolution of record, recommend to
the city council the permitting of any other uses which it may determine to be
similar to those listed above, in conformity with the intent and purpose of
this zone, and not more obnoxious or detrimental to the public health, safety
and welfare, or other uses permitted in this zone. (Ord. 1000 § 27.20(C), 1955)
18.100.070: CONDITIONAL USES:
The following uses may be permitted in the C-M zone subject to approval of a
conditional use permit:
Uses listed in chapter 18.192 of this title.
Ambulance service.
Animal hospitals.
Bowling lanes, skating rinks, and sports arenas, with alcohol beverage sales.
Cocktail lounges and bars.
Drive-in stores, such as milk and food, with alcohol beverage sales.
Equipment rental.
Radio and television transmitter towers higher than fifty feet (50') above
ground level.
Regional shopping center containing at least one department store and a minimum
gross land area of thirty five (35) acres; uses permitted shall be limited to
those contained in the C-3 zone.
Retail store containing a minimum gross leasable area of seventy five thousand
(75,000) square feet, subject to the parking requirements for neighborhood
commercial districts.
Service stations.
Warehouses and logistics distribution centers, in accordance with chapter
18.156 of this title. (Ord. 2955, 2023: Ord. 2791, 2015)
18.100.090: PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The following property development standards, set out in sections
18.100.100 through
18.100.210 of this chapter, shall apply to all land and buildings in the C-
M zone. (Ord. 1000 § 27.40, 1955)
18.100.100: LOT AREA:
Each lot in the C-M zone shall have a minimum area of twenty thousand (20,000)
square feet. (Ord. 1000 § 27.40(A), 1955)
18.100.110: LOT DIMENSIONS:
In the C-M zone:
   A.   Each lot shall have a minimum width of one hundred feet (100');
   B.   Each lot shall have a minimum depth of one hundred fifty feet (150').
(Ord. 1000 § 27.40(B), 1955)
18.100.120: BUILDING HEIGHT:
There is no height limit in the C-M zone except that the relationship between
building floor area and lot area shall not exceed two (2) square feet of total
floor area for each one square foot of total lot area. (Ord. 1000 § 27.40(C),
1955)
18.100.130: YARDS:
For the C-M zone, the yard provisions of the M-1 zone shall apply. (Ord. 1000 §
27.40(D), 1955)
18.100.140: WALLS, FENCES AND LANDSCAPING:
For walls, fences and landscaping in the C-M zone, the provisions of the M-
1 zone shall apply; however, a landscaped strip not less than ten feet (10') in
width shall be provided and maintained along all street frontages. (Ord. 1000 §
27.40(E), 1955)
18.100.150: ACCESS TO STREET:
All lots in the C-M zone shall have a minimum of fifty feet (50') of access on
a dedicated and improved street. (Ord. 1000 § 27.40(F), 1955)
18.100.160: MAXIMUM COVERAGE:
In the C-M zone, lot area coverage by buildings or structures shall not exceed
fifty percent (50%) of the total lot area. (Ord. 1000 § 27.40(G), 1955)
18.100.170: OFF STREET PARKING:
For off street parking in the C-M zone, the provisions of sections
18.164.140 through
18.164.320 of this title shall apply. (Ord. 1000 § 27.40(H), 1955)
18.100.180: OFF STREET LOADING:
For off street loading in the C-M zone, the provisions of sections
 18.164.330 through
18.164.340 of this title shall apply. (Ord. 1000 § 27.40(I), 1955)
18.100.190: SIGNS:
For signs in C-M zones, the provisions of the Redlands sign ordinance shall
apply. In addition, the maximum area of any sign facing a residential zone
shall be seventy five (75) square feet. (Ord. 1000 § 27.40(J), 1955)
18.100.200: OUTDOOR STORAGE AND WASTE DISPOSAL:
For outdoor storage and waste disposal in the C-M zone, the provisions of the
M-1 zone shall apply. (Ord. 1000 § 27.40(K), 1955)
18.100.210: METAL BUILDINGS:
In the C-M zone, buildings or structures having exterior walls of sheet metal
shall not be located closer than one hundred fifty feet (150') from the
property line along any freeway, major or secondary highway, or closer than one
hundred feet (100') from the property line along any other dedicated street,
except that such buildings or structures may be located closer to the street if
any of the following conditions prevail:
   A.   The sheet metal comprises less than twenty five percent (25%) of the
exterior wall area of the building or structure;
   B.   The sheet metal consists of panels with stainless steel, baked enamel
or similar finish; or
   C.   The building or structure is concealed from view from the public street
by walls, fences, landscaping or other buildings or structures. (Ord. 1000 §
27.40(L), 1955)
18.100.220: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
All uses in the C-M zone shall comply with the performance standards of the M-
1 zone. (Ord. 1000 § 27.45, 1955)
CHAPTER 18.104
M-P PLANNED INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
18.104.010: Purpose Of Provisions
18.104.020: Uses Generally
18.104.030: Permitted Uses
18.104.040: Similar Uses Permitted By Commission Determination
18.104.050: Conditional Uses
18.104.070: Property Development Standards
18.104.080: Lot Area
18.104.090: Lot Dimensions
18.104.100: Building Height
18.104.110: Yards
18.104.120: Walls, Fences And Landscaping
18.104.130: Access To Street
18.104.140: Maximum Coverage
18.104.150: Off Street Parking
18.104.160: Off Street Loading
18.104.170: Signs
18.104.180: Outdoor Storage And Waste Disposal
18.104.190: Minimum Size Of Zone
18.104.200: Performance Standards Generally
18.104.210: Fire And Explosion Hazards
18.104.220: Radio Interference Or Electrical Disturbances
18.104.230: Noise Control
18.104.240: Vibration
18.104.250: Smoke Emission
18.104.260: Dust, Heat And Glare Restrictions
18.104.270: Odor And Gas Emission Restrictions
18.104.010: PURPOSE OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   The M-P planned industrial zone is intended to provide for and
encourage planned industrial districts compatible with surrounding uses or
abutting zones. Uses are to be confined to those administrative, wholesaling
and manufacturing activities that can be carried on in an unobtrusive manner,
and to certain accessory commercial facilities that are necessary to serve the
employees of the zone.
   B.   No industrial use shall be permitted which, by the nature of its
development or operation would in any way adversely affect the environment of
the M-P district and surrounding districts. (Ord. 1000 § 27.50, 1955)
18.104.020: USES GENERALLY:
In the M-P district:
   A.   Site plans and elevations for all new construction and/or additions
shall be submitted to the commission for review and approval.
   B.   Buildings, structures and land shall be used, and buildings and
structures shall hereafter be erected, altered or enlarged, only for the uses
set out in sections
18.104.030 through
 18.104.050 of this chapter. (Ord. 1000 § 27.51(A), 1955)
18.104.030: PERMITTED USES:
Permitted uses in the M-P district include:
Agricultural uses: Subject to the property development standards of the A-
1 district.
Field crops (tree, berry, bush).
Orchards and groves.
Plant nurseries and commercial flower growing.
Truck gardening.
Manufacturing:
Electronics:
Electrical and related parts.
Electrical appliances.
Electrical devices.
Motors.
Radio, television and phonograph.
Instruments:
Cameras.
Electronic.
Medical and dental tools.
Precision.
Timing and measuring.
Watches and clocks.
Laboratories:
Chemical.
Dental.
Electrical.
Mechanical.
Medical.
Optical.
Scientific, research and experimental.
Manufacturing, compounding, assembly or fabrication of articles from the
following previously prepared materials:
Canvas.
Cellophane.
Cloth.
Cork.
Felt.
Fiber.
Fur.
Glass.
Leather, excluding any etching or burning operations.
Paper (no milling).
Plastics.
Precious or semiprecious stones or metals.
Rubber.
Shells.
Tobacco.
Yarns.
Office and related machinery:
Audio-visual machinery.
Computers, electrical/manual.
Pharmaceuticals:
Cosmetics.
Drugs.
Perfumes.
Toiletries.
Services:
Blueprinting, photocopying and film processing.
Business and research offices related to the administration and operation of
the permitted industrial uses.
Newspaper publishing.
Off street parking.
Offices, business and professional.
Printing, lithographing, publishing.
Public buildings.
Public utility offices.
Radio and television broadcasting.
Restaurants operated for employees on the premises.
Trade union halls. (Ord. 1000 § 27.51(A), 1955)
18.104.040: SIMILAR USES PERMITTED BY COMMISSION DETERMINATION:
The commission may, by resolution, permit any other uses which it may determine
to be similar to those listed above in this chapter, in conformity with the
intent and purpose of the M-P zone, and not more obnoxious or detrimental to
the public health, safety and welfare, or to other uses permitted in this zone.
(Ord. 1000 § 27.51(B), 1955)
18.104.050: CONDITIONAL USES:
The following uses may be permitted in the M-P zone subject to approval of a
conditional use permit:
Automobile service station.
Hospitals, clinics and sanitariums.
Public utility service yards.
Restaurants, cafes or cafeterias. (Ord. 1000 § 27.51(C), 1955)
18.104.070: PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The following property development standards, set out in sections
18.104.080 through
18.104.270 of this chapter, shall apply to all land and buildings in the M-
P zone. (Ord. 1000 § 27.53, 1955)
18.104.080: LOT AREA:
Each lot in the M-P zone shall have a minimum area of twenty thousand (20,000)
square feet. (Ord. 1000 § 27.53, 1955)
18.104.090: LOT DIMENSIONS:
In the M-P zone:
   A.   Each lot shall have a minimum width of one hundred feet (100');
   B.   Each lot shall have a minimum depth of one hundred fifty feet (150').
(Ord. 1000 § 27.53(A), 1955)
18.104.100: BUILDING HEIGHT:
Buildings and structures in the M-P zone shall have a height not greater than
fifty feet (50'). (Ord. 1000 § 27.53(C), 1955)
18.104.110: YARDS:
In the M-P zone:
   A.   For general yard provisions, see sections
18.148.040 through 18.148.060 of this title.
   B.   Where the M-P zone fronts, sides or rears on a street which is a
boundary with a residential zone, there shall be a yard abutting such street of
not less than fifty feet (50'). The twenty five feet (25') nearest the street
shall be landscaped and maintained. The remainder may be used for parking.
   C.   Where the M-P zone fronts, sides or rears on a street which is not a
boundary with a residential zone, there shall be a yard abutting such street of
not less than twenty five feet (25'). The ten feet (10') nearest the street
shall be landscaped and maintained. The remainder may be used for parking.
   D.   Where the M-P zone sides or rears directly on property in a residential
zone, there shall be a yard of not less than fifty feet (50'). Such yard may be
used for parking. A solid masonry wall six feet (6') in height shall be
installed along the property line abutting the residential zone.
   E.   Where the M-P zone sides or rears on an alley which is a boundary with
a residential zone, there shall be a yard of not less than fifty feet (50').
The yard may be used for parking. A solid masonry wall six feet (6') in height
shall be installed along the property line abutting the residential zone. (Ord.
1000 § 27.53(D), 1955)
18.104.120: WALLS, FENCES AND LANDSCAPING:
In the M-P zone:
   A.   Required walls, fences and landscaping shall be installed as required
in section
18.104.110 of this chapter. In addition, the applicable provisions of chapter
18.168 of this title shall apply.
   B.   For permitted fences, hedges and walls, the provisions of section
18.168.020 of this title shall apply.
   C.   For hazardous areas, corner cutback areas, and security fencing, the
provisions of sections
 18.168.010 and
18.168.020 through
18.168.100 of this title shall apply. (Ord. 1000 § 27.53(E), 1955)
18.104.130: ACCESS TO STREET:
All lots in the M-P zone shall have a minimum of fifty feet (50') of access on
a dedicated and improved street. (Ord. 1000 § 27.53(F), 1955)
18.104.140: MAXIMUM COVERAGE:
Lot area coverage by buildings and structures in the M-P zone shall not exceed
fifty percent (50%) of the total lot area. (Ord. 1000 § 27.53(G), 1955)
18.104.150: OFF STREET PARKING:
For off street parking in the M-P zone, the provisions of section
18.164.240 of this title shall apply. (Ord. 1000 § 27.53(H), 1955)
18.104.160: OFF STREET LOADING:
For off street loading in the M-P zone, the provisions of sections
18.164.330 through
18.164.340 of this title shall apply. (Ord. 1000 § 27.53(I), 1955)
18.104.170: SIGNS:
For signs in M-P zones, the provisions of the Redlands sign code shall apply.
In addition, the maximum area of any sign facing a residential zone shall be
seventy five (75) square feet. (Ord. 1000 § 27.53(J), 1955)
18.104.180: OUTDOOR STORAGE AND WASTE DISPOSAL:
In the M-P zone:
   A.   Outdoor storage and activities associated with permitted uses shall be
entirely enclosed by building walls or by a solid masonry wall on the front
setback line, such wall to be not less than six feet (6') in height. On all
other property lines, such uses shall be enclosed by a six foot (6') wall or by
screen landscaping not less than eight feet (8') in height plus a fence not
less than six feet (6') in height, of chainlink or other similar material, to
screen stockpiles from external boundaries of property. Items shall not be
stacked or stored higher than six feet (6').
   B.   The storage of combustible materials shall be not less than twenty feet
(20') from any interior lot lines, and a roadway shall be provided, graded,
surfaced and maintained from the street to the rear of the property to permit
free access of fire trucks at any time.
   C.   No materials or wastes shall be deposited upon a subject lot in such
form or manner that they may be transferred off the lot by natural causes or
forces. All waste materials shall be stored in an enclosed area, and shall be
accessible to service vehicles.
   D.   Wastes which might cause fumes or dust, or which constitute a fire
hazard or which may be edible by or otherwise be attractive to rodents or
insects shall be stored only in closed containers in required enclosures. (Ord.
1000 § 27.53(K), 1955)
18.104.190: MINIMUM SIZE OF ZONE:
No parcel of land containing less than twenty (20) acres shall be zoned M-
P unless property is contiguous to an existing M-P zone and has a shape and
dimension adaptable for such purposes. (Ord. 1000 § 27.53(L), 1955)
18.104.200: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS GENERALLY:
All M-P zone uses shall comply with the limitations or performance standards
set out in sections
 18.104.210 through
18.104.270 of this chapter. (Ord. 1000 § 27.54, 1955)
18.104.210: FIRE AND EXPLOSION HAZARDS:
In M-P zones, all storage activities involving flammable and explosive
materials shall be provided with adequate safety devices against the hazard of
fire and explosion, and adequate firefighting and fire suppression equipment
and devices standard in industry. All incineration is prohibited. (Ord. 1000 §
27.54(A), 1955)
18.104.220: RADIO INTERFERENCE OR ELECTRICAL DISTURBANCES:
In M-P zones, devices which radiate radio frequency energy shall be so operated
as not to cause interference with any activity carried on beyond the boundary
line of the property on which the device is located. "Radio frequency energy"
means electromagnetic energy at any frequency in the radio spectrum between ten
(10) kilocycles and three million (3,000,000) megacycles. (Ord. 1000 § 27.54
(B), 1955)
18.104.230: NOISE CONTROL:
   A.   The maximum sound pressure level radiated by any use or facility in an
M-P zone, when measured at the boundary line of the property on which sound is
generated, shall not exceed the values shown in the following table:
Octave Band Range In Cycles Per Second Sound Pressure Level In Decibels 0.0002
                                       dyne/cm2
Octave Band Range In Cycles Per Second Sound Pressure Level In Decibels 0.0002
                                       dyne/cm2
Below 75                               72
75–150                               67
151–300                              59
301–600                              52
601–1,200                            46
1,201–2,400                          40
2,401–4,800                          34
Above 4,800                            32
 
   B.   If the noise is not smooth and continuous, or is not present between
the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M., one or
more of the following corrections shall be applied to the above octave band
levels:
 
                                                        Correction In Decibels
Daytime operation only                                      +5
Noise source operates less than 20 percent of any 1 hour    +5
period
Noise source operates less than 5 percent of any 1 hour     +10
period
Noise of impulsive character, such as hammering             -5
Noise of periodic character, such as humming or             -5
screeching
 
   C.   The sound pressure level shall be measured with a sound level meter and
associated octave band analyzer conforming to standards prescribed by the
American Standards Association, as set forth in a pamphlet published by the
association entitled, "American Standard Sound Level Meters For Measurement Of
Noise And Other Sounds No. 224.3", published in 1944 and in another pamphlet
published by the same association, entitled, "American Standard Specification
For An Octave-Band Filter Set For The Analysis Of Noise And Other Sounds No.
224.10", published in 1953. (Ord. 1000 § 27.54(C), 1955)
18.104.240: VIBRATION:
In the M-P zone, every use shall be so operated that the ground vibration
inherently and recurrently generated is not perceptible, without instruments,
at any point on any boundary line of the lot on which the use is located. (Ord.
1000 § 27.54(D), 1955)
18.104.250: SMOKE EMISSION:
In the M-P zone, smoke emission shall be controlled in accordance with
standards and regulations established by the air pollution control board. (Ord.
1000 § 27.54(E), 1955)
18.104.260: DUST, HEAT AND GLARE RESTRICTIONS:
In the M-P zone:
   A.   Every use shall be so operated that it does not emit dust, heat or
glare in such quantities or degree as to be readily detectable on any boundary
line of the lot on which the use is located.
   B.   Glare from arc welding, acetylene torch cutting or similar processes
shall be performed so as not to be seen from any point beyond the outside of
the property. (Ord. 1000 § 27.54(F), 1955)
18.104.270: ODOR AND GAS EMISSION RESTRICTIONS:
In the M-P zone:
   A.   Odor: The emission of obnoxious odors of any kind shall not be
permitted.
   B.   Gas: No gas shall be emitted which is deleterious to the public health,
safety or general welfare. (Ord. 1000 § 27.54(G), 1955)
CHAPTER 18.108
M-1 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
18.108.010: Purpose Of Provisions
18.108.020: Uses Generally
18.108.030: Permitted And Accessory Uses
18.108.040: Similar Uses Permitted By Commission Determination
18.108.050: Conditional Uses
18.108.070: Property Development Standards
18.108.080: Lot Area
18.108.090: Lot Dimensions
18.108.100: Building Height
18.108.110: Yards
18.108.120: Walls And Landscaping
18.108.130: Access To Street
18.108.140: Maximum Coverage
18.108.150: Off Street Parking
18.108.160: Off Street Loading
18.108.170: Signs
18.108.180: Outdoor Storage, Uses And Waste Disposal
18.108.190: Metal Buildings
18.108.200: Performance Standards Generally
18.108.210: Fire And Explosion Hazards
18.108.220: Radio Interference Or Electrical Disturbances
18.108.230: Noise Control
18.108.240: Vibration
18.108.250: Smoke Emission
18.108.260: Dust, Heat And Glare Restrictions
18.108.270: Odor And Gas Emission Restrictions
18.108.010: PURPOSE OF PROVISIONS:
The purpose of the M-1 light industrial zone is to provide appropriately
located areas for the establishment of light industrial plants and related
activities, and to promote the concentration of such uses in a manner which
will foster mutually beneficial relationships with each other, as well as with
the areas of the city zoned for heavy industrial development. The regulation of
uses and standards of development set forth for the M-1 zone are those deemed
necessary to provide the proper environment for the efficient and desirable use
of light industrial land, and to provide the proper safeguards to protect
nearby residential, commercial and public uses. (Ord. 1000 § 28.00, 1955)
18.108.020: USES GENERALLY:
In the M-1 zone:
   A.   Site plans and elevations for all new construction and/or additions
shall be submitted to the commission for review and approval.
   B.   Buildings, structures and land shall be used, and buildings and
structures shall hereafter be erected, altered or enlarged only for the
following uses, set out in sections
18.108.030 through
18.108.050 of this chapter. (Ord. 1000 § 28.10, 1955)
18.108.030: PERMITTED AND ACCESSORY USES:
In the M-1 zone, principal permitted uses shall be as follows:
   A.   Uses permitted in the M-P, planned industrial district.
   B.   Accessory uses:
      Commercial sales and service incidental to a principal permitted use.
      Employee recreational facilities and play areas.
      Storage buildings incidental to a permitted use.
      Superintendent or caretaker dwelling. One dwelling unit on the same
parcel of land as a permitted use needing continual supervision, to be occupied
exclusively by a superintendent or a caretaker and his family.
      Other accessory uses and buildings customarily appurtenant to a permitted
use.
   C.   Manufacturing:
      Manufacture and assembly of electrical equipment and supplies, such as
coils, condensers, lamps, switches, wire and cable assembly.
      Manufacture of ceramic products, such as pottery, figurines and small
glazed tile, utilizing only previously pulverized clay, and provided that kilns
are fired only by electricity or gas.
      Manufacture of cutlery, hardware, hand tools and kitchen utensils.
      Manufacture, processing or treatment of products other than those which
may be obnoxious or offensive by reason of emission of odor, dust, smoke, gas,
noise, vibration or hazard.
      Manufacturing, assembling, compounding, packaging and processing of
articles or products from the following previously prepared materials:
asbestos, bristles, bone, feathers, hair, horns, leather, metal, paints
(excluding any boiling process), paper, textiles.
      Manufacturing, compounding, processing, canning or packaging of products
such as bakery goods, candy and soft drinks, dairy products, food products
(excluding fish and meat products, sauerkraut, vinegar, yeast, and the
rendering or refining of fats and oils).
      Mattress manufacture, repair, rebuildings and recovering.
   D.   Other uses:
      Agricultural supplies and equipment, sales and service.
      Agricultural uses, but excluding dairies, stockyards, slaughter of
animals, and manufacture of fertilizer.
      Automobile accessory and parts sales.
      Automobile repair services; no open service bays shall face a public
street, or they shall be screened.
      Automobile sales, new and used.
      Barbershops.
      Boat, mobilehome and camper sales and services.
      Building material and hardware sales.
      Catering services.
      Cleaning and dyeing plants, laundries, linen and towel service.
      Creameries.
      Electric distribution substations, electric transmission substations, and
public utility buildings and service yards.
      Furniture upholstery.
      Ice manufacture and storage, frozen food lockers, and cold storage
plants.
      Lumberyards (no planing mills).
   E.   Machine shops and such uses as the following:
      Anodizing shops.
      Blacksmith shops.
      Cabinet or carpenter shops.
      Die and pattern making shops.
      Electroplating shops.
      Grinding shops.
      Metal engraving shops.
      Metal finishing and plating shops.
      Polishing shops.
      Sheet metal shops.
      Tinsmith shops.
      Welding shops.
      Parking lots, commercial.
      Petroleum bulk plants.
      Plumbing, heating or electrical shops.
      Real estate, business and professional offices.
      Repair and fix-it shops.
      Repair garages, body and fender works and auto painting, providing all
work is conducted within a completely enclosed structure.
      Retreading and recapping of tires.
      Service stations.
      Sign painters.
      Taxidermy shops.
      Tree surgeons.
      Volume sales outlets, such as furniture, appliances and carpeting.
      Warehousing, ancillary to another primary use (see RMC
Chapter 18.156, Article XII).
      Warehousing, in buildings with less than 50,000 square-feet in gross
floor area, and not more than five truck docks or dock high loading doors.
      Wholesaling. (Ord. 2955, 2023: Ord. 2333 § 39, 1997: Ord. 1000 § 28.10
(A), 1955)
18.108.040: SIMILAR USES PERMITTED BY COMMISSION DETERMINATION:
The commission may, by resolution of record, permit any other uses which it may
determine to be similar to those listed above in this chapter, in conformity
with the intent and purpose of the M-1 zone, and not more obnoxious or
detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare, or to other uses
permitted in this zone. (Ord. 1000 § 28.10(B), 1955)
18.108.050: CONDITIONAL USES:
The following uses may be permitted in the M-1 zone subject to approval of a
conditional use permit:
Animal and pet hospitals, kennels and animal pounds.
Automobile wash, mechanical or self-service.
Building materials storage yards.
Business, technical, trade or professional schools.
Commercial recreation such as bowling lanes and skating rinks.
Contractors' storage yards.
Equipment rentals.
Feed and fuel yards.
Motels.
Outdoor vehicle storage and holding lot, with no dismantling or wrecking
permitted.
Restaurants.
Warehouses and logistics distribution centers, in accordance with
chapter 18.156 of this title. (Ord. 2955, 2023: Ord. 1000 § 28.10(C), 1955)
18.108.070: PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The following property development standards, set out in sections
18.108.080 through
18.108.190 of this chapter shall apply to all land and buildings in the M-
1 zone. (Ord. 1000 § 28.20, 1955)
18.108.080: LOT AREA:
Each lot in the M-1 zone shall have a minimum area of five thousand (5,000)
square feet. (Ord. 1000 § 28.20(A), 1955)
18.108.090: LOT DIMENSIONS:
In the M-1 zone:
   A.   Each lot shall have a minimum width of fifty feet (50'), except that
where adjacent to a residential zone, school or park, the width shall be not
less than seventy feet (70').
   B.   Each lot shall have a minimum depth of one hundred feet (100'). (Ord.
1000 § 28.20(B), 1955)
18.108.100: BUILDING HEIGHT:
Buildings and structures in the M-1 zone shall not exceed fifty feet (50') in
height; provided, however, that nonnuclear electric generating stations shall
not exceed one hundred feet (100') in height, and appurtenant cooling towers
and emission stacks for nonnuclear electric generating stations shall not
exceed two hundred twenty five feet (225') in height. (Ord. 2436 § 1, 2000:
Ord. 1000 § 28.20(C), 1955)
18.108.110: YARDS:
In the M-1 zone:
   A.   Front Yard: Each lot shall have a front yard of not less than ten feet
(10'), extending across the full width of the lot, except where adjacent to a
major or secondary highway, and except where adjacent or across the street from
a residential zone, school or park, in which case the front yard shall be not
less than twenty five feet (25'). Such yards may be used for parking in
accordance with the provisions of sections
18.164.140 through 18.164.320 of this title.
   B.   Side And Rear Yards: None required, except where adjoining a
residential district, the side yard shall be ten feet (10') and the rear yard
shall be a minimum of twenty five feet (25'). Said yard may be used for
parking, loading and accessways. (Ord. 1000 § 28.20(D), 1955)
18.108.120: WALLS AND LANDSCAPING:
In the M-1 zone:
   A.   Required Walls: On those sides of property in the M-1 zone which abut a
residential zone, school or park, a solid masonry wall not less than six feet
(6') in height shall be built and maintained along the property lines adjoining
such residential zone, school or park, except that the wall shall be three feet
(3') in height where it adjoins the front yard setback area, such wall to be
installed at the time the property is used for M-1 purposes.
   B.   Required Landscaping: A minimum of ten feet (10') of the front yard
area adjacent to the street shall be landscaped when the front yard area
adjoins a residential district, a major or secondary highway, or a freeway
frontage road. Landscaping shall be provided and maintained in accordance with
the standards established in sections
18.168.110 through
18.168.190 of this title. (Ord. 1000 § 28.20(E), 1955)
18.108.130: ACCESS TO STREET:
All lots in the M-1 zone shall have a minimum of fifty feet (50') of access on
a dedicated and improved street. (Ord. 1000 § 28.20(F), 1955)
18.108.140: MAXIMUM COVERAGE:
Lot area coverage by buildings or structures in the M-1 zone shall not exceed
fifty percent (50%) of the total lot area. (Ord. 1000 § 28.20(G), 1955)
18.108.150: OFF STREET PARKING:
For off street parking in the M-1 zone, the provisions of section
18.164.240 of this title shall apply. (Ord. 1000 § 28.20(H), 1955)
18.108.160: OFF STREET LOADING:
For off street loading in the M-1 zone, the provisions of sections
18.164.330 and
18.164.340 of this title shall apply. (Ord. 1000 § 28.20(I), 1955)
18.108.170: SIGNS:
For signs in the M-1 zone, the provisions of the Redlands sign code shall
apply. In addition, the maximum area of any sign facing a residential zone
shall be seventy five (75) square feet. (Ord. 1000 § 28.20(J), 1955)
18.108.180: OUTDOOR STORAGE, USES AND WASTE DISPOSAL:
In the M-1 zone:
   A.   Outdoor storage and activities associated with permitted uses shall be
enclosed by building walls, a solid masonry wall, solid fencing, or uniformly
compact evergreen hedge, all continuously maintained and not less than six feet
(6') in height, located no closer to any street than the front setback line.
Side and rear property lines shall be similarly treated when the subject areas
are viewable from any street.
   B.   Items stored within one hundred feet (100') of a dedicated street or
residential zone shall not be stacked higher than six feet (6').
   C.   The storage of combustible materials shall be not less than twenty feet
(20') from any interior lot line, and a roadway shall be provided, graded,
surfaced and maintained from the street to the rear of the property to permit
free access of firetrucks at any time.
   D.   No materials or wastes shall be deposited upon a subject lot in such
form or manner that they may be transferred off the lot by natural causes or
forces. All waste materials shall be stored in an enclosed area and shall be
accessible to service vehicles.
   E.   Wastes which might cause fumes or dust, or which constitute a fire
hazard, or which may be edible by or otherwise be attractive to rodents or
insects shall be stored only in closed containers in required enclosures. (Ord.
1000 § 28.20(K), 1955)
18.108.190: METAL BUILDINGS:
In the M-1 zone, buildings or structures having exterior walls of sheet metal
shall not be located closer than one hundred fifty feet (150') from the
property line along any freeway, major or secondary highway, or closer than one
hundred feet (100') from the property line along any other dedicated street,
except that such buildings or structures may be located closer to the street if
any of the following conditions prevail:
   A.   The sheet metal comprises less than twenty five percent (25%) of the
exterior wall area of the building or structure; or
   B.   The sheet metal consists of panels with stainless steel, baked enamel
or similar finish; or
   C.   The building or structure is concealed from view from the public street
by walls, fences, landscaping or other buildings or structures. (Ord. 1000 §
28.20(L), 1955)
18.108.200: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS GENERALLY:
All uses in the M-1 zone shall comply with the following limitations or
performance standards set out in sections
18.108.210 through
18.108.270 of this chapter. (Ord. 1000 § 28.30, 1955)
18.108.210: FIRE AND EXPLOSION HAZARDS:
In the M-1 zone, all storage activities involving flammable and explosive
materials shall be provided with adequate safety devices against the hazard of
fire and explosion, and adequate firefighting and fire suppression equipment
and devices standard in industry. All incineration is prohibited. (Ord. 1000 §
28.30(A), 1955)
18.108.220: RADIO INTERFERENCE OR ELECTRICAL DISTURBANCES:
In the M-1 zone, devices which radiate radio frequency energy shall be so
operated as not to cause interference with any activity carried on beyond the
boundary line of the property on which the device is located. "Radio frequency
energy" means electromagnetic energy at any frequency in the radio spectrum
between ten (10) kilocycles and three million (3,000,000) megacycles. (Ord.
1000 § 28.30(B), 1955)
18.108.230: NOISE CONTROL:
In the M-1 zone, the maximum sound pressure level radiated by any use or
facility, when measured at an abutting residential, commercial or more
restricted industrial zone boundary line, shall not exceed the value listed in
section
18.104.230 of this title. (Ord. 1000 § 28.30(C), 1955)
18.108.240: VIBRATION:
Every use in the M-1 zone shall be so operated that the ground vibration
inherently and recurrently generated is not perceptible, without instruments,
at any point on any boundary line of the lot on which the use is located. (Ord.
1000 § 28.30(D), 1955)
18.108.250: SMOKE EMISSION:
In the M-1 zone, smoke emission shall be controlled in accordance with
standards and regulations established by the air pollution control board. (Ord.
1000 § 28.30(E), 1955)
18.108.260: DUST, HEAT AND GLARE RESTRICTIONS:
In the M-1 zone:
   A.   Every use shall be so operated that it does not emit dust, heat or
glare in such quantities or degree as to be readily detectable on any boundary
line of the lot on which the use is located.
   B.   Glare from arc welding, acetylene torch cutting or similar processes
shall be performed so as not to be seen from any point beyond the outside of
the property. (Ord. 1000 § 28.30(F), 1955)
18.108.270: ODOR AND GAS EMISSION RESTRICTIONS:
In the M-1 zone:
   A.   Odor: The emission of obnoxious odors of any kind shall not be
permitted.
   B.   Gas: No gas shall be emitted which is deleterious to the public health,
safety or general welfare. (Ord. 1000 § 28.30(G), 1955)
CHAPTER 18.112
I-P INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
18.112.010: Purpose Of Provisions
18.112.020: Uses Generally
18.112.030: Permitted And Accessory Uses
18.112.040: Similar Uses Permitted By Commission Determination
18.112.050: Conditional Uses
18.112.070: Property Development Standards
18.112.080: Lot Area
18.112.090: Lot Dimensions
18.112.100: Building Height
18.112.110: Yards
18.112.120: Walls And Landscaping
18.112.130: Access To Street
18.112.140: Maximum Coverage
18.112.150: Off Street Parking
18.112.160: Off Street Loading
18.112.170: Signs
18.112.180: Outdoor Storage And Waste Disposal
18.112.190: Metal Buildings
18.112.200: Performance Standards Generally
18.112.210: Fire And Explosion Hazards
18.112.220: Radio Interference Or Electrical Disturbances
18.112.230: Noise Control
18.112.240: Vibration
18.112.250: Smoke Emission
18.112.260: Dust, Heat And Glare Restrictions
18.112.270: Odor And Gas Emission Restrictions
18.112.010: PURPOSE OF PROVISIONS:
The purpose of the I-P industrial zone is to provide for and encourage the
development of land for industrial purposes, to protect these lands from
intrusion by inharmonious nonindustrial uses, to promote uniform and orderly
industrial development, to protect property values, to foster an efficient and
aesthetically pleasant industrial district, to attract and encourage the
location of desirable industrial plants, to provide an industrial environment
which will be conducive to good employee relations and pride on the part of all
citizens of the community, and to provide proper safeguards and appropriate
transition for surrounding land uses. (Ord. 1000 § 28.50, 1955)
18.112.020: USES GENERALLY:
   A.   In the I-P zone, site plans and elevations for all new construction
and/or additions shall be submitted to the commission for review and approval.
   B.   Buildings, structures and land shall be used, and buildings and
structures shall hereafter be erected, altered or enlarged only for the
following uses. (Ord. 1000 § 28.51(A), 1955)
18.112.030: PERMITTED AND ACCESSORY USES:
Principal permitted uses in the I-P zone include:
   A.   Accessory uses:
      Commercial sales and service incidental to a principal permitted use.
      Employee recreational facilities and play areas.
      One dwelling unit on the same parcel of land as a permitted use needing
continual supervision, to be occupied exclusively by a superintendent or a
caretaker and his family.
      Storage buildings incidental to a permitted use.
      Other accessory uses and buildings customarily appurtenant to a permitted
use.
   B.   Manufacturing:
      Machine tool manufacture, including metal lathes, presses and stamping
machines, and woodworking machines.
      Machinery manufacture, including electrical, agricultural, construction,
mining, air conditioning equipment, dishwashers, dryers, furnaces, heaters,
stoves and washing machines.
      Manufacture of chemicals and chemical products, except those requiring a
conditional use permit.
      Manufacture of food products, including such processes as cooking,
roasting, refining and extraction involved in the preparation of such products
as cereal, chocolate, cider, coffee, glucose, rice, flour, feed and grain,
vegetable oils and yeast; but not including fish or meat products.
      Manufacturing and processing of the following, conducted in an enclosed
building, except that any outdoor manufacturing or processing operation in this
group of uses shall be subject to approval of a conditional use permit:
         Abrasives.
         Aircraft and aircraft accessories.
         Aluminum products.
         Asbestos.
         Automobiles, trucks and trailers.
         Automotive accessories and parts.
         Boats.
         Candles.
         Canvas.
         Carpets and rugs.
         Cellophane.
         Cloth.
         Composition wallboard.
         Cork.
         Felt.
         Fiber.
         Fur.
         Glass, but excluding blast furnaces.
         Glazed tile.
         Hemp products.
         Ink.
         Jute products.
         Leather.
         Linter.
         Metal foil.
         Metal products.
         Missiles and missile components, excluding explosive fuels.
         Motors and generators.
         Paper.
         Plastics.
         Porcelain products.
         Pulp goods.
         Putty.
         Railroad equipment.
         Rubber products.
         Sisal products.
         Starch and dextrine.
         Structural steel products.
         Textiles.
         Tile.
         Wire and wire products.
         Yarns.
      Metal fabricating, heat treating, pickling and stamping.
      Transit and transportation terminals, repair and storage facilities.
   C.   Services:
      Blueprinting, photocopying and film processing.
      Business and research offices related to the administration and operation
of the permitted industrial uses.
      Electrical distribution substations, electrical transmission substations,
public utility service yards and steam electric generating stations.
      Laboratories.
      Lumberyards.
      Newspaper publishing.
      Off street parking.
      Offices, business and professional.
      Petroleum bulk plants.
      Printing, lithographing, publishing.
      Public buildings.
      Public utility offices.
      Radio and television broadcasting.
      Restaurants operated for employees on the premises.
      Trade union halls.
      Warehousing, ancillary to another primary use (see RMC
Chapter 18.156, Article XII).
      Warehousing, in buildings with less than 50,000 square-feet in gross
floor area, and not more than five truck docks or dock high loading doors.
      Wholesaling. (Ord. 2955, 2023: Ord. 1000 § 28.51(A), 1955)
18.112.040: SIMILAR USES PERMITTED BY COMMISSION DETERMINATION:
The commission may, by resolution, permit any other use which it may determine
to be similar to those listed above, in conformity with the intent and purpose
of the I-P zone, and not more obnoxious or detrimental to the public health,
safety and welfare, or to other uses permitted in this zone. (Ord. 1000 § 28.51
(B), 1955)
18.112.050: CONDITIONAL USES:
The following uses may be permitted subject to approval of a conditional use
permit:
   A.   Heliports.
   B.   Manufacturing of:
      Acetylene.
      Ammonia.
      Aniline dyes.
      Bleaching powder.
      Breweries, distilleries and wineries.
      Bronze, babbitt metal and similar alloys.
      Carbide.
      Carbolic, hydrochloric, picric and sulfuric acid.
      Caustic soda.
      Cellulose and celluloid.
      Chlorine.
      Coal, coke or coal tar products.
      Exterminating agents.
      Film.
      Gas.
      Lacquer, shellac, turpentine, varnish or calcimine (Kalsomine).
      Linoleum or oilcloth.
      Matches.
      Nitrating of cotton and other materials.
      Phenol.
      Potash.
      Pyroxylin.
      Rubber (natural or synthetic).
      Soap, tallow, grease and lard.
      Radio transmitter towers higher than fifty feet (50') above ground level.
   C.   Storage of:
      Oil or gas in amounts of two thousand five hundred (2,500) barrels or
more.
      Oil or gas within three hundred feet (300') of any residential zone,
school or park.
      Recreational vehicles and boats.
   D.   Warehouses and logistics distribution centers, in accordance with
chapter 18.156 of this title. (Ord. 2955, 2023: Ord. 2759, 2011)
18.112.070: PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The following property development standards, set out in sections
18.112.080 through
18.112.190 of this chapter shall apply to all land and buildings in the I-
P zone. (Ord. 1000 § 28.53, 1955)
18.112.080: LOT AREA:
Each lot in the I-P zone shall have a minimum area of twenty thousand (20,000)
square feet. (Ord. 1000 § 28.53(A), 1955)
18.112.090: LOT DIMENSIONS:
In the I-P zone:
   A.   Each lot shall have a minimum width of one hundred feet (100').
   B.   Each lot shall have a minimum depth of one hundred fifty feet (150').
(Ord. 1000 § 28.53(B), 1955)
18.112.100: BUILDING HEIGHT:
There is no maximum building height in the I-P zone. (Ord. 1000 § 28.53(C),
1955)
18.112.110: YARDS:
In the I-P zone:
   A.   Front Yard: Each lot shall have a front yard of not less than twenty
five feet (25'), extending across the full width of the lot, except where
adjacent to a major or secondary highway, and except where adjacent to or
across the street from a residential zone, school or park, in which case the
front yard shall be not less than fifty feet (50'). The ten feet (10') nearest
the street shall be landscaped and maintained. The remainder may be used for
parking.
   B.   Side And Rear Yards: None required, except where adjoining a
residential district, the side yard shall be twenty five feet (25') and the
rear yard shall be a minimum of fifty feet (50'). The yard may be used for
parking, loading and accessways. (Ord. 1000 § 28.53(D), 1955)
18.112.120: WALLS AND LANDSCAPING:
In the I-P zone:
   A.   Required Walls: On those sides of property in the I-P zone which abut a
residential zone, school or park, a solid masonry wall not less than six feet
(6') in height shall be built and maintained along the property lines adjoining
the residential zone, school or park, except that the wall shall be three feet
(3') in height where it adjoins the front yard setback area, such wall to be
installed at the time the property is used for I-P purposes.
   B.   Required Landscaping: A minimum of ten feet (10') of the front yard
area adjacent to the street shall be landscaped. Landscaping shall be provided
and maintained in accordance with the standards established in chapter 18.168
of this title. (Ord. 1000 § 28.53(E), 1955)
18.112.130: ACCESS TO STREET:
All lots in the I-P zone shall have a minimum of fifty feet (50') of access on
a dedicated and improved street. (Ord. 1000 § 28.53(F), 1955)
18.112.140: MAXIMUM COVERAGE:
Lot area coverage by buildings and structures in the I-P zone shall not exceed
fifty percent (50%) of the total lot area. (Ord. 1000 § 28.53(G), 1955)
18.112.150: OFF STREET PARKING:
For off street parking in the I-P zone, the provisions of sections
18.164.140 through
18.164.320 of this title shall apply. (Ord. 1000 § 28.53(H), 1955)
18.112.160: OFF STREET LOADING:
For off street loading in the I-P zone, the provisions of sections
18.164.330 and
18.164.340 of this title shall apply. (Ord. 1000 § 28.53(I), 1955)
18.112.170: SIGNS:
For signs in the I-P zone, the provisions of the Redlands sign code shall
apply. (Ord. 1000 § 28.53(J), 1955)
18.112.180: OUTDOOR STORAGE AND WASTE DISPOSAL:
In the I-P zone:
   A.   Outdoor storage and activities associated with permitted uses shall be
screened from the street by building walls, screen walls or screen fencing.
Such screening shall be constructed of solid masonry or rust resistant metal
fences not less than six feet (6') in height and with the capacity to support
vine growth of sufficient density to screen the storage activities from public
view. These walls or fences shall be located on or behind the front setback
line.
   B.   The storage of combustible materials shall be not less than twenty feet
(20') from any interior lot line, and a roadway shall be provided, graded,
surfaced and maintained from the street to the rear of the property to permit
free access of firetrucks at any time.
   C.   No materials or wastes shall be deposited upon a subject lot in such
form or manner that they may be transferred off the lot by natural causes or
forces. All waste materials shall be stored in an enclosed area and shall be
accessible to service vehicles.
   D.   Wastes which might cause fumes or dust, or which constitute a fire
hazard, or which may be edible by or otherwise be attractive to rodents or
insects, shall be stored only in closed containers in required enclosures.
(Ord. 2759, 2011)
18.112.190: METAL BUILDINGS:
In the I-P zone, buildings or structures having exterior walls of sheet metal
shall not be located closer than one hundred fifty feet (150') from the
property line along any freeway, major or secondary highway, or closer than one
hundred feet (100') from the property line along any other dedicated street,
except that such buildings or structures may be located closer to the street if
any of the following conditions prevail:
   A.   The sheet metal comprises less than twenty five percent (25%) of the
exterior wall area of the building or structure; or
   B.   The sheet metal consists of panels with stainless steel, baked enamel,
or similar finish;
   C.   The building or structure is concealed from view from the public street
by walls, fences, landscaping or other buildings or structures. (Ord. 1000 §
28.53(L), 1955)
18.112.200: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS GENERALLY:
All uses in the I-P zone shall comply with the following limitations or
performance standards set out in sections
18.112.210 through
 18.112.270 of this chapter. (Ord. 1000 § 28.54, 1955)
18.112.210: FIRE AND EXPLOSION HAZARDS:
All storage activities involving flammable and explosive materials shall be
provided with adequate safety devices against the hazard of fire and explosion,
and adequate firefighting and fire suppression equipment and devices standard
in industry. All incineration is prohibited. (Ord. 1000 § 28.54(A), 1955)
18.112.220: RADIO INTERFERENCE OR ELECTRICAL DISTURBANCES:
Devices which radiate radio frequency energy shall be so operated as not to
cause interference with any activity carried on beyond the boundary line of the
property on which the device is located. "Radio frequency energy" means
electromagnetic energy at any frequency in the radio spectrum between ten (10)
kilocycles and three million (3,000,000) megacycles. (Ord. 1000 § 28.54(B),
1955)
18.112.230: NOISE CONTROL:
In the I-P district:
   A.   The maximum sound pressure level radiated by any use or facility, when
measured at the boundary line of the subject property, shall not exceed the
values shown in the following table:
Octave Band Range In Cycles Per Second Sound Pressure Level In Decibels 0.0002
                                       dyne/cm2
Octave Band Range In Cycles Per Second Sound Pressure Level In Decibels 0.0002
                                       dyne/cm2
Below 75                               72
75 – 150                             67
151 – 300                            59
301 – 600                            52
601 – 1,200                          46
1,201 – 2,400                        40
2,401 – 4,800                        34
Above 4,800                            32
 
   B.   If the noise is not smooth and continuous, or is not present between
the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M., one or
more of the following corrections shall be applied to the above octave band
levels:
 
                                                        Correction In Decibels
Daytime operation only                                   +5
Noise source operates less than 20 percent of any 1 hour +5
period
Noise source operates less than 5 percent of any 1 hour  +10
period
Noise of impulsive character, such as hammering          -5
Noise of periodic character, such as humming or          -5
screeching
 
   C.   The sound pressure level shall be measured with a sound level meter and
associated octave band analyzer conforming to standards prescribed by the
American Standards Association, as set forth in a pamphlet published by the
association, entitled, "American Standard Sound Level Meters For Measurement Of
Noise And Other Sounds No. 224.10", published in 1953. (Ord. 1000 § 28.54(C),
1955)
18.112.240: VIBRATION:
Every use in the I-P zone shall be so operated that the ground vibration
inherently and recurrently generated is not perceptible, without instruments,
at any point on a boundary line of the subject property. (Ord. 1000 § 28.54(D),
1955)
18.112.250: SMOKE EMISSION:
In the I-P zone, smoke emission shall be controlled in accordance with
standards and regulations established by the San Bernardino County air
pollution control board. (Ord. 1000 § 28.54(E), 1955)
18.112.260: DUST, HEAT AND GLARE RESTRICTIONS:
In the I-P zone:
   A.   Every use shall be so operated that it does not emit dust, heat or
glare in such quantities or degree so as to be readily detectable on any
boundary line of the lot on which the use is located.
   B.   Glare from arc welding, acetylene torch cutting or similar processes
shall be shielded from adjacent properties. (Ord. 1000 § 28.54(F), 1955)
18.112.270: ODOR AND GAS EMISSION RESTRICTIONS:
In the I-P district, any process which involves the creation or emission of any
odors, gases or other odorous matter shall at all times comply with the
standards set by the San Bernardino County air pollution control board. In no
event shall odors, gases or other odorous matter be emitted in such quantities
as to be readily detectable when diluted in a ratio of one volume of odorous
air to four (4) volumes of clear air. The point of measurements shall be at the
lot line or at the point of greatest concentration, if further than the lot
line. (Ord. 1000 § 28.54(G), 1955)
CHAPTER 18.116
M-2 GENERAL INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
18.116.010: Purpose Of Provisions
18.116.020: Uses Generally
18.116.030: Permitted Uses
18.116.040: Similar Uses Permitted By Commission Determination
18.116.050: Conditional Uses
18.116.070: Property Development Standards
18.116.080: Performance Standards Generally
18.116.090: Fire And Explosion Hazards
18.116.100: Radio Interference Or Electrical Disturbances
18.116.110: Noise Control
18.116.120: Vibration
18.116.130: Smoke Emission
18.116.140: Dust, Heat And Glare Restrictions
18.116.150: Odor And Gas Emission Restrictions
18.116.010: PURPOSE OF PROVISIONS:
The purpose of the M-2 general industrial zone is to preserve the lands of the
city appropriate for heavy industrial uses, to protect these lands from
intrusion by dwellings and inharmonious commercial uses, to promote uniform and
orderly industrial development, to protect property values, to foster an
efficient and aesthetically pleasant industrial district, to attract and
encourage the location of desirable industrial plants, to provide an industrial
environment which will be conducive to good employee relations and pride on the
part of all citizens of the community, and to provide proper safeguards and
appropriate transition for surrounding land uses. (Ord. 1000 § 29.00, 1955)
18.116.020: USES GENERALLY:
In the M-2 zone:
   A.   Site plans and elevations for all new construction and/or additions
shall be submitted to the commission for review and approval.
   B.   Buildings, structures and land shall hereafter be erected, altered or
enlarged only for the uses set out in sections
18.116.030 through
18.116.050 of this chapter. (Ord. 1000 § 29.10, 1955)
18.116.030: PERMITTED USES:
Principal permitted uses in the M-2 zone include:
   A.   Uses permitted in the M-1 industrial zone.
   B.   Contractors' yards and shops, including building, masonry, painting,
concrete, electrical, plumbing, refrigeration, roofing, heating and air
conditioning.
   C.   Electrical distribution substations, electrical transmission
substations, nonnuclear electric generating stations, and public utility
buildings, office, and service yards, and steam electric generating stations.
   D.   Food products manufacture, including such processes as cooking,
roasting, refining and extraction involved in the preparation of such products
as cereal, chocolate, cider, coffee, glucose, rice, flour, feed and grain,
vegetable oils and yeast; but not including fish or meat products.
   E.   Lumberyards, lumber processing and woodworking, including planing
mills, plywood, veneering, wood preserving and laminating.
   F.   Machine tool manufacture, including metal lathes, presses and stamping
machines, and woodworking machines.
   G.   Machinery manufacture, including electrical, agricultural,
construction, mining, air conditioning equipment, dishwashers, dryers,
furnaces, heaters, stoves and washing machines.
   H.   Manufacture of chemicals and chemical products, except those requiring
a conditional use permit.
   I.   Manufacture, storage, reconditioning and exchange of such items as
cans, containers, boxes, barrels, bottles and bags.
   J.   Manufacturing and processing of the following, conducted in an enclosed
building, except that any outdoor manufacturing or processing operation in this
group of uses shall be subject to approval of a conditional use permit:
      Abrasives.
      Aircraft and aircraft accessories.
      Aluminum products.
      Asbestos.
      Automobiles, trucks and trailers.
      Automotive accessories and parts.
      Boats.
      Bricks.
      Burial vaults and caskets.
      Candles.
      Canvas.
      Carpets and rugs.
      Cement products.
      Chalk.
      Clay pipe and clay products.
      Composition wallboard.
      Glass, but excluding blast furnaces.
      Glazed tile.
      Graphite and graphite products.
      Hemp products.
      Ink.
      Jute products.
      Linter.
      Metal foil.
      Metal products.
      Missiles and missile components, excluding explosive fuels.
      Motors and generators.
      Paraffin products.
      Plastics.
      Porcelain products.
      Pulp goods.
      Pumice.
      Putty.
      Railroad equipment.
      Rubber products.
      Sand and lime products.
      Sisal products.
      Starch and dextrine.
      Steel products.
      Stone products.
      Structural steel products.
      Tile.
      Wire and wire products.
   K.   Metal fabricating, heat treating, pickling and stamping.
   L.   Storage facilities, except those requiring a conditional use permit.
   M.   Warehousing, ancillary to another primary use (see RMC
Chapter 18.156, Article XII).
   N.   Warehousing, in buildings with less than 50,000 square-feet in gross
floor area, and not more than five truck docks or dock high loading doors.
(Ord. 2955, 2023: Ord. 2436 § 3, 2000: Ord. 1000 § 29.10(A), 1955)
18.116.040: SIMILAR USES PERMITTED BY COMMISSION DETERMINATION:
The commission may, by resolution of record, permit any other uses which it may
determine to be similar to those listed above, in conformity with the intent
and purpose of the M-2 zone, and not more obnoxious or detrimental to the
public health, safety and welfare, or to other uses permitted in this zone.
(Ord. 1000 § 29.10(B), 1955)
18.116.050: CONDITIONAL USES:
In the M-2 zone, the following uses may be permitted subject to approval of a
conditional use permit:
   A.   Airports, heliports and landing strips.
   B.   Animal, food or beverage processing of the following kinds:
      Breweries, distilleries and wineries.
      Meat or fish products packing, canning or processing.
      Vinegar, yeast and sauerkraut.
   C.   Asphalt, concrete and earth products activities of the following kinds:
      Asphalt batching plants.
      Concrete mixing and batching plants.
      Rock crushing plants and aggregate dryers.
      Sandblasting plants.
      Butane service and filling stations.
   D.   Commercial and service type uses which the commission, after study and
deliberation, finds are needed to serve the M-2 district, and which will not
interfere with the orderly development of the industrial area, and which will
be compatible with industrial uses.
   E.   Distilling of:
      Alcohol.
      Bones.
      Coal.
      Coal tar.
      Coke.
      Wood.
      Heavy metal works of the following kinds:
      Blast furnaces.
      Boiler works.
      Drop forge industries.
      Drop hammers.
      Forges, foundries and forging works.
      Metal and metal ore reduction or smelting.
      Rolling mills.
   F.   Manufacturing of:
      Acetylene.
      Ammonia.
      Aniline dyes.
      Asphalt or asphalt products.
      Bleaching powder.
      Bronze, babbitt metal and similar alloys.
      Carbide.
      Carbolic, hydrochloric, picric and sulfuric acid.
      Caustic soda.
      Cellophane.
      Cellulose and celluloid.
      Cement, lime, gypsum or plaster of Paris.
      Charcoal, lampblack or fuel briquettes.
      Chlorine.
      Coal, coke or coal tar products.
      Creosote.
      Exterminating agents.
      Fertilizer.
      Film.
      Gas.
      Lacquer, shellac, turpentine, varnish or calcimine (kalsomine).
      Linoleum or oilcloth.
      Matches.
      Nitrating of cotton and other materials.
      Phenol.
      Potash.
      Pyroxylin.
      Rubber (natural or synthetic).
      Soap, tallow, grease and lard.
      Radio transmitter towers, higher than fifty feet (50') above ground
level.
   G.   Refining of:
      Fats and oils.
      Metals and metal ores.
      Petroleum and petroleum products.
      Sugar.
      Salvage, wrecking and disposal activities of the following kind:
      Automobile wrecking and salvage.
      Building wrecking and salvage.
      Dumps, including garbage and trash disposal.
      Industrial waste material salvage, waste metal, rag, clothing, glass and
paper salvage operations.
      Sewer farm or sewage disposal plants.
   H.   Storage of:
      Automobiles and other vehicles purchased for wrecking operations.
      Fertilizer or manure.
      House movers' equipment and buildings moved from other locations.
      Oil or gas in amounts of two thousand five hundred (2,500) barrels or
more.
      Oil or gas within three hundred feet (300') of any residential zone,
school or park.
      Sand, gravel, rock or decomposed granite in amounts of two thousand
(2,000) tons or more.
      Used building materials or secondhand buildings.
I.   Warehouses and logistics distribution centers, in accordance with chapter
18.156 of this title. (Ord. 2955, 2023: Ord. 1000 § 29.10(C), 1955)
   18.116.070: PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The property development standards of the M-1 zone (chapter 18.108 of this
title) shall apply to all property in the M-2 zone. (Ord. 1000 § 29.20, 1955)
18.116.080: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS GENERALLY:
All uses in the M-2 zone shall comply with the following limitations or
performance standards, set out in sections
18.116.090 through
18.116.150 of this chapter. (Ord. 1000 § 29.30, 1955)
18.116.090: FIRE AND EXPLOSION HAZARDS:
In the M-2 zone, all storage activities involving flammable and explosive
materials shall be provided with adequate safety devices against the hazard of
fire and explosion and adequate firefighting and fire suppression equipment and
devices standard in industry. All incineration is prohibited. (Ord. 1000 §
29.30(A), 1955)
18.116.100: RADIO INTERFERENCE OR ELECTRICAL DISTURBANCES:
In the M-2 zone, all devices which radiate radio frequency energy shall be so
operated as not to cause interference with any activity carried on beyond the
boundary line of the property on which the device is located. "Radio frequency
energy" is electromagnetic energy at any frequency in the radio spectrum
between ten (10) kilocycles and three million (3,000,000) megacycles. (Ord.
1000 § 29.30(B), 1955)
18.116.110: NOISE CONTROL:
In the M-2 zone, no use shall be conducted in a manner which produces noise
exceeding sixty (60) CNEL (community noise equivalent level) when measured at
the property line of any property used for residential, hospital, school or
park use. (Ord. 2436 § 2, 2000: Ord. 1000 § 29.30(C), 1955)
18.116.120: VIBRATION:
Every use in the M-2 zone shall be so operated that the ground vibration
inherently and recurrently generated is not perceptible, without instruments,
at any point on any boundary line of the lot which abuts a residential,
commercial or more restricted industrial zone. (Ord. 1000 § 29.30(D), 1955)
18.116.130: SMOKE EMISSION:
In the M-2 zone, smoke emission shall be controlled in accordance with
standards and regulations established by the air pollution control board. (Ord.
1000 § 29.30(E), 1955)
18.116.140: DUST, HEAT AND GLARE RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Every use in the M-2 zone shall be so operated that it does not emit
dust, heat or glare in such quantities or degrees as to be readily detectable
on any boundary line of the lot on which the use is located.
   B.   Glare from arc welding, acetylene torch cutting or similar processes
shall be performed so as not to be seen from any point beyond the outside of
the property. (Ord. 1000 § 29.30(F), 1955)
18.116.150: ODOR AND GAS EMISSION RESTRICTIONS:
In M-2 zones:
   A.   Odor: The emission of obnoxious odors of any kind shall not be
permitted.
   B.   Gas: No gas shall be emitted which is deleterious to the public health,
safety or general welfare. (Ord. 1000 § 29.30(G), 1955)
CHAPTER 18.120
P OFF STREET PARKING DISTRICT
SECTION:
18.120.010: Placement Of Land In P District; Criteria
18.120.020: Permitted Uses
18.120.030: Property Development Standards
18.120.040: Yards
18.120.050: Parking, Fences, Signs And Loading Area
18.120.010: PLACEMENT OF LAND IN P DISTRICT; CRITERIA:
   A.   The following regulations, set out in this chapter, shall apply in the
P off street parking district.
   B.   Land may be placed in the P district under the following conditions:
      1.   Parking lots and parking buildings owned by the city or by a public
or quasi-public agency;
      2.   Parking lots or parking buildings, where such lots are part of a
large scale development and where the owners agree to having the subject
property placed in this district;
      3.   Lots in the T transition district, when such lots are used for off
street parking purposes. (Ord. 1000 § 30.00, 1955)
18.120.020: PERMITTED USES:
In P districts, no building, structure or land shall be used, and no building
or structure shall be hereafter erected, structurally altered or enlarged,
except for the following purposes:
   A.   Off street parking lots;
   B.   Parking buildings; incidental commercial uses may be approved by the
commission when such uses are entirely within the building and are incidental
to the use of the building for parking purposes;
   C.   Buildings incidental to the operation of a parking lot, not over one
hundred (100) square feet in area, to be used only for purposes of maintaining
the lot and to contain no provisions for residential or commercial uses. (Ord.
1000 § 30.10, 1955)
18.120.030: PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
Property development standards for P districts are as follows:
   A.   Minimum lot area: None;
   B.   Minimum lot dimensions: None;
   C.   Coverage by structures: No structures permitted other than those listed
in subsections
18.120.010A and B and subsections
18.120.020 B and C of this chapter;
   D.   Building height: Four (4) stories or sixty feet (60') maximum. (Ord.
1000 § 30.20, 1955)
18.120.040: YARDS:
Yards in P districts shall be:
   A.   Front: Ten feet (10') minimum;
   B.   Side: Same as for the C-1 district;
   C.   Rear: Same as for the C-4 district. (Ord. 1000 § 30.30, 1955)
18.120.050: PARKING, FENCES, SIGNS AND LOADING AREA:
In the P district:
   A.   Off street parking: None required;
   B.   Fences, hedges and walls: See chapter 18.168 of this title;
   C.   Signs: See the Redlands sign code;
   D.   Loading area: None required. (Ord. 1000 § 30.40, 1955)
CHAPTER 18.124
O OPEN LAND DISTRICT
SECTION:
18.124.010: Purpose Of District
18.124.020: Placement Of Land In O District; Criteria
18.124.030: Permitted And Conditional Uses
18.124.050: Property Development Standards
18.124.060: Lot Area
18.124.070: Lot Dimensions
18.124.080: Density Of Development
18.124.090: Maximum Coverage
18.124.100: Building Height
18.124.110: Yards
18.124.120: Fences, Landscaping And Walls
18.124.130: Off Street Parking
18.124.140: Off Street Loading
18.124.150: Signs
18.124.160: Access To Street
18.124.170: Outdoor Storage, Uses And Waste Disposal
18.124.180: Performance Standards
18.124.010: PURPOSE OF DISTRICT:
The purpose of the O open land district is to provide for limited development
of those areas of the city that are not suited for permanent occupancy or
residence due to some specific characteristic of the land. Such lands may be
subject to periodic flooding, erosion or fire hazard. Publicly owned land and
uses of a predominantly open nature are included in this district. The
following regulations, set out in this chapter, shall apply to all land in the
O open land district. (Ord. 1000 § 31.00, 1955)
18.124.020: PLACEMENT OF LAND IN O DISTRICT; CRITERIA:
Land may be placed in the O district under the following conditions:
   A.   When land is in public ownership:
      1.   Public parks, playgrounds, wildlife preserves, and other public
uses,
      2.   Drainage or flood control channels, creeks, rivers, zanjas and other
watercourses,
      3.   Freeways, parkways and park drives;
   B.   Privately owned land, when the use of the land would endanger the
public health, safety and general welfare:
      1.   Areas where topography is too steep to build upon or where grading
of the land may cause a public hazard due to erosion or flooding,
      2.   Areas subject to flooding or inundation from storm water,
      3.   Areas beyond fire servicing, where development might endanger life,
property or the watershed;
   C.   Buffer areas:
      1.   Areas separating industrial and commercial districts from
residential districts. (Ord. 1000 § 31.10, 1955)
18.124.030: PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL USES:
In O districts, no building, structure or land shall be used, and no building
or structure shall be hereafter erected, structurally altered or enlarged,
except for the following purposes:
   A.   Principal Permitted Uses:
Agricultural and open uses of land.
Bridle trails.
Flood control structures.
Off street parking.
Public facilities and utilities.
Recreational uses.
   B.   Uses Permitted By Conditional Use Permit: The following uses may be
permitted subject to approval of a conditional use permit:
Aggregate processing plants.
All principal permitted uses, whether public or private, involving the use of a
building or structure, flood control structures excepted.
Asphalt batch plants.
Excavation and removing of rock, sand and gravel, including related equipment
and apparatus therefor, and including accessory manufacturing uses which
utilize the materials being excavated from the site as the primary component of
the product. The site plan showing the location of all buildings, structures
and storage areas shall be submitted to the county flood control district for
its recommendations. In addition to compliance with the provisions of chapter
18.192 of this title, the commission shall establish any other conditions
deemed necessary to adequately protect surrounding properties.
Ready mix concrete batch plants. (Ord. 2144 § 1, 1991: Ord. 1000 § 31.20, 1955)
18.124.050: PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The following property development standards, set out in sections
18.124.060 through
18.124.170 of this chapter, shall apply to all lands and buildings in the O
zone. (Ord. 1000 § 31.40, 1955)
18.124.060: LOT AREA:
No minimum. (Ord. 1000 § 31.40(A), 1955)
18.124.070: LOT DIMENSIONS:
No minimums. (Ord. 1000 § 31.40(B), 1955)
18.124.080: DENSITY OF DEVELOPMENT:
Population in O districts shall be: None permitted, excepting caretaker and
security personnel quarters. (Ord. 1000 § 31.40(C), 1955)
18.124.090: MAXIMUM COVERAGE:
Permitted buildings and structures in O districts shall not exceed five percent
(5%) of the lot area, public facilities excepted. (Ord. 1000 § 31.40(D), 1955)
18.124.100: BUILDING HEIGHT:
In the open land zoning district, the height of buildings and structures shall
not exceed fifty five feet (55'), and the height of light poles and flagpoles
shall not exceed eighty feet (80'). (Ord. 2542 § 1, 2003: Ord. 1000 § 31.40(E),
1955)
18.124.110: YARDS:
For O districts, the yard provisions of the A-1 district shall apply. (Ord.
1000 § 31.40(F), 1955)
18.124.120: FENCES, LANDSCAPING AND WALLS:
For fences, landscaping and walls in O districts, the provisions of the M-
1 district shall apply. (Ord. 1000 § 31.40(G), 1955)
18.124.130: OFF STREET PARKING:
For off street parking in the O district, the provisions of sections
18.164.140 through
18.164.320 of this title shall apply. (Ord. 1000 § 31.40(H), 1955)
18.124.140: OFF STREET LOADING:
None required. (Ord. 1000 § 31.40(I), 1955)
18.124.150: SIGNS:
In O districts, signs related to a public use or purpose are permitted. Private
signs showing the name of the occupant and/or the use of the premises are
permitted, subject to commission review and approval. (Ord. 1000 § 31.40(J),
1955)
18.124.160: ACCESS TO STREET:
In O districts, there shall be vehicular access to all property from a
dedicated and improved street. (Ord. 1000 § 31.40(K), 1955)
18.124.170: OUTDOOR STORAGE, USES AND WASTE DISPOSAL:
For outdoor storage, uses and waste disposal in O districts, the provisions of
the M-1 district shall apply. (Ord. 1000 § 31.40(L), 1955)
18.124.180: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
For O districts, the performance standards of the M-2 district shall apply.
(Ord. 1000 § 31.40(M), 1955)
CHAPTER 18.128
A-D AIRPORT DISTRICT
SECTION:
18.128.010: Purpose Of Provisions
18.128.020: Permitted Uses
18.128.030: Similar Uses Permitted By Commission Determination
18.128.040: Uses Subject To Commission Review And Approval
18.128.050: Conditional Uses
18.128.070: Property Development Standards
18.128.080: Lot Area
18.128.090: Lot Dimensions
18.128.100: Building Height
18.128.110: Yards
18.128.120: Walls, Fences And Landscaping
18.128.130: Maximum Coverage
18.128.140: Off Street Parking
18.128.150: Off Street Loading
18.128.160: Signs
18.128.170: Outdoor Storage And Waste Disposal
18.128.180: Performance Standards Generally
18.128.190: Fire And Explosion Hazards
18.128.200: Radio Interference Or Electrical Disturbances
18.128.210: Smoke Emission
18.128.220: Dust, Heat And Glare Emissions
18.128.230: Odors And Gases
18.128.010: PURPOSE OF PROVISIONS:
The following regulations set out in this chapter shall apply in the A-
D airport district, which zone is established to provide an area for the
exclusive use of airports and related facilities. No building or structure of
any type shall be used, erected, structurally altered, enlarged or maintained,
and no land shall be used in the airport district, except for the uses and in
accordance with the height and area requirements and other regulations
hereinafter provided. The regulations and limitations provided herein do not
supersede or replace any regulations or limitations governing airports or
airfields which have been enacted by state or federal agencies, but are in
addition to any such regulations and limitations. (Ord. 1000 § 31.50, 1955)
18.128.020: PERMITTED USES:
In the A-D district, site plans for new buildings shall be submitted to the
commission for review and approval. Buildings, structures and land shall be
used, and buildings and structures shall hereafter be erected, altered or
enlarged only for the following uses:
Aircraft associated activities:
Aerial crop dusting and spraying enterprises.
Aerial firefighting enterprises.
Aerial photo and surveying enterprises.
Air freight warehouse.
Aircraft sales enterprises.
Flying school and/or flying club administrative and classroom facilities.
Packaging and packing of perishable products for air transportation.
Preparation of chemical fire retardants and insecticides, as required for
aerial firefighting and crop dusting enterprises.
Aircraft maintenance activities:
Aircraft communication equipment and instrument repair.
Aircraft electrical systems repair.
Aircraft engine repair.
Aircraft hydraulic systems repair.
Aircraft modification and repair.
Aircraft manufacturing and assembly, including the manufacture of aircraft
component parts.
Airports, airfields, helicopter fields or ports, landing or takeoff strips or
runways, and similar facilities used as fields or ports for airplanes,
helicopters, dirigibles, balloons or other airborne machines and equipment.
Buildings, improvements and activities primarily related to the operation of
the airport facility, such as hangars, air terminal buildings, and operations
towers. (Ord. 1000 § 31.51(A), 1955)
18.128.030: SIMILAR USES PERMITTED BY COMMISSION DETERMINATION:
In A-D districts, the commission may, by resolution, permit any other uses
which it may determine to be similar to those listed in section
18.128.020 of this chapter, in conformity with the intent and purpose of this
zone, and not more obnoxious or detrimental to the public health, safety and
welfare, or to other uses permitted in this zone. (Ord. 1000 § 31.51(B), 1955)
18.128.040: USES SUBJECT TO COMMISSION REVIEW AND APPROVAL:
Uses permitted subject to commission review and approval in the A-D zone
include:
Air ambulance hospital facility.
Auto rental agencies.
Motel.
Public transportation terminals and facilities.
Restaurant. (Ord. 1000 § 31.51(C), 1955)
18.128.050: CONDITIONAL USES:
The following uses may be permitted in the A-D zone subject to approval of a
conditional use permit, as provided in chapter 18.192 of this title:
Automobile gasoline service station. (Ord. 1000 § 31.51(D), 1955)
18.128.070: PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
Property development standards for the A-D zone shall be as set forth in
sections
 18.128.080 through
18.128.170 of this chapter. (Ord. 1000 § 31.53, 1955)
18.128.080: LOT AREA:
Each lot in the A-D zone shall have a minimum area of five thousand (5,000)
square feet. (Ord. 1000 § 31.53(A), 1955)
18.128.090: LOT DIMENSIONS:
In the A-D zone:
   A.   Each lot shall have a minimum width of fifty feet (50');
   B.   Each lot shall have a minimum depth of one hundred feet (100'). (Ord.
1000 § 31.53(B), 1955)
18.128.100: BUILDING HEIGHT:
In A-D zones, buildings and structures shall be no higher than forty five feet
(45'), provided that no structure shall be constructed to any height determined
to be an obstruction to air navigation by the regulations of the United States
of America federal aviation agency. (Ord. 1000 § 31.53(C), 1955)
18.128.110: YARDS:
Yards in the A-D zone shall be as follows:
   A.   Front: Ten feet (10') minimum;
   B.   Side: None;
   C.   Rear: None;
   D.   Exception: All setbacks shall be a minimum of twenty five feet (25')
from any property line adjacent to, or across the street from any residential
zone. (Ord. 1000 § 31.53(D), 1955)
18.128.120: WALLS, FENCES AND LANDSCAPING:
For walls, fences and landscaping in the A-D zone, the provisions of chapter
18.168 of this title shall apply. (Ord. 1000 § 31.53(E), 1955)
18.128.130: MAXIMUM COVERAGE:
Lot area coverage by buildings or structures in the A-D zone shall not exceed
fifty percent (50%) of the total lot area. (Ord. 1000 § 31.53(F), 1955)
18.128.140: OFF STREET PARKING:
For off street parking in the A-D zone, the provisions of sections
18.164.140 through
18.164.320 of this title shall apply. (Ord. 1000 § 31.53(G), 1955)
18.128.150: OFF STREET LOADING:
For off street loading in the A-D zone, the provisions of sections
18.164.330 through
18.164.340 of this title shall apply. (Ord. 1000 § 31.53(H), 1955)
18.128.160: SIGNS:
   A.   The applicable provisions of the Redlands sign code shall apply in the
A-D zone. In addition, no flashing, rotating or moving signs are permitted. No
lighted sign shall have such an intensity, color or shape as may interfere with
or endanger flight operations by causing confusion with official lighting, as
determined in the discretion of the airport commission.
   B.   The following signs shall be permitted:
      1.   Signs indicating the name and nature of the occupancy. Such signs
shall be attached to the building parallel to the face of the building in which
the occupancy is located. Such signs shall not exceed one hundred fifty (150)
square feet in area, with a maximum of one sign per individual use;
      2.   "For rent", "for lease", and "for sale" signs posted on the building
or premises being sold, rented or leased. Such signs shall not exceed six (6)
square feet in area;
      3.   Directional signs related to the location of buildings or activities
on the airport. Such directional signs shall not exceed six (6) square feet in
area;
      4.   One freestanding directory sign with a maximum total area of one
hundred (100) square feet. Such a sign shall indicate thereon only the name of
the airport and the names of the buildings, occupants or activities located on
the airport, together with their locations;
      5.   Signs erected or painted upon the runway, taxiways and parking
aprons, in accordance with FAA regulations, for the specific uses of air
navigation and ground traffic flow. (Ord. 1000 § 31.53(I), 1955)
18.128.170: OUTDOOR STORAGE AND WASTE DISPOSAL:
   A.   Outdoor storage and activities associated with permitted uses shall be
entirely enclosed on the front setback line by building walls, or by a solid
masonry wall not less than six feet (6') in height. On all other property
lines, such uses shall be enclosed by a six foot (6') wall or by screen
landscaping not less than eight feet (8') in height, in addition to a fence not
less than six feet (6') in height, of chainlink or other similar material, to
screen stockpiles from external boundaries of the property. Items shall not be
stacked or stored higher than six feet (6').
   B.   The storage of combustible materials shall be not less than twenty feet
(20') from any interior lot line, and a roadway shall be provided, graded,
surfaced and maintained from the street to the rear of the property to permit
free access of firetrucks at any time.
   C.   No materials or wastes shall be deposited upon a lot in such form or
manner as may result in removal from the lot by natural causes or forces. All
waste materials shall be stored in an enclosed area and shall be accessible to
service vehicles.
   D.   Wastes which might cause fumes or dust or which constitute a fire
hazard or which may be edible by or otherwise be attractive to rodents or
insects shall be stored only in closed containers in required enclosures. (Ord.
1000 § 31.53(J), 1955)
18.128.180: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS GENERALLY:
All uses in the A-D zone shall comply with the limitations or performance
standards set forth in sections
18.128.190 through
18.128.230 of this chapter. (Ord. 1000 § 31.54, 1955)
18.128.190: FIRE AND EXPLOSION HAZARDS:
In A-D zones, all storage activities involving flammable and explosive
materials shall be provided with adequate safety devices against the hazard of
fire and explosion, and adequate firefighting and fire suppression equipment
and devices standard in industry. All incineration is prohibited. (Ord. 1000 §
31.54(A), 1955)
18.128.200: RADIO INTERFERENCE OR ELECTRICAL DISTURBANCES:
In the A-D zone, devices which radiate radio frequency energy shall be so
operated as not to cause interference with aircraft, electronic navigation and
communication equipment, or any activity carried on beyond the boundary line of
the property on which the device is located. "Radio frequency energy" is
electromagnetic energy at any frequency in the radio spectrum between ten (10)
kilocycles and three million (3,000,000) megacycles. (Ord. 1000 § 31.54(B),
1955)
18.128.210: SMOKE EMISSION:
In the A-D zone, smoke emission shall be controlled in accordance with
standards and regulations established by the air pollution control board. (Ord.
1000 § 31.54(C), 1955)
18.128.220: DUST, HEAT AND GLARE EMISSIONS:
In the A-D zone:
   A.   Every use shall be so operated that it does not emit dust, heat or
glare in such quantities or degree as to be readily detectable on any boundary
line of the lot on which the use is located;
   B.   Glare from arc welding, acetylene torch cutting or similar processes
shall be performed so as not to be seen from any point beyond the outside of
the property. (Ord. 1000 § 31.54(D), 1955)
18.128.230: ODORS AND GASES:
In the A-D zone:
   A.   Odor: The emission of obnoxious odors of any kind shall not be
permitted.
   B.   Gas: No gas shall be emitted which is deleterious to the public health,
safety or general welfare. (Ord. 1000 § 31.54(E), 1955)
CHAPTER 18.132
AIRPORT FLIGHT ZONES
SECTION:
18.132.010: Applicability Of Provisions
18.132.020: Building Height; Nonconforming Buildings
18.132.010: APPLICABILITY OF PROVISIONS:
The regulations set out in this chapter shall apply to land lying outside the
boundaries of all airports in the city, or located contiguous thereto, where
the takeoff or landing patterns involve flight over land within the city. (Ord.
1000 § 44, 1955)
18.132.020: BUILDING HEIGHT; NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS:
   A.   No building or structure may be erected, structurally altered or
enlarged within lines which define the flight zone for landing strips or
aircraft runways unless the height of such building shall be below a line
defined as the angle of glide.
   B.   The "angle of glide" means and is defined as beginning at the end of
the takeoff or landing strip and having an angle described by a one foot (1')
vertical rise for every forty feet (40') of horizontal run. All existing
buildings lying within this area which do not comply with this provision are
hereby declared to be nonconforming, and are subject to such action as may be
prescribed by law.
   C.   No building shall be more than one story or twenty feet (20') in height
within one thousand feet (1,000') of the exterior boundaries of any airport.
   D.   The provisions of the Redlands municipal airport airspace zoning
ordinance regulating and restricting the height of structures, object of
natural growth, and otherwise regulating the use of airspaces, shall apply to
land lying outside the boundaries of the Redlands municipal airport. (Ord. 1000
§ 44.00(a)–(c), 1955)
CHAPTER 18.136
FP FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT
SECTION:
18.136.010: Purpose Of Provisions
18.136.020: Objectives Of Floodplain District
18.136.030: Definitions
18.136.040: Uses Generally
18.136.050: Permitted Uses
18.136.060: Similar Uses Permitted By Commission Determination
18.136.070: Conditional Uses
18.136.090: Nonconforming Structures
18.136.100: Nonconforming Uses Of Land
18.136.010: PURPOSE OF PROVISIONS:
The purpose of the FP floodplain district is to provide for the protection of
the public health, safety and general welfare in those areas of the city which,
under present conditions, are subject to periodic flooding and accompanying
hazards. (Ord. 1000 § 31.60, 1955)
18.136.020: OBJECTIVES OF FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT:
The objectives of the floodplain district shall be:
   A.   To prohibit occupancy or the encroachment of any structure, improvement
or development that would obstruct the natural flow of floodwaters within a
designated floodway on the floodplain;
   B.   To keep developments in the remainder of the floodplain above the
design flood flow elevation;
   C.   To prevent economic loss caused by excessive flooding, and to prevent
loss of life or property. (Ord. 1000 § 31.61, 1955)
18.136.030: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
   DESIGN FLOOD: The selected flood against which protection is provided, or
eventually will be provided, by means of flood protective or control works.
When a federal survey has been authorized, the design flood will be determined
by the appropriate federal agency, and in all other cases it will be determined
by the San Bernardino County flood control district. It is the basis for design
and operation of a particular project after full consideration of flood
characteristics, frequencies and potentials, and economic and other practical
considerations.
   FLOOD: Any temporary rise in stream flow or water surface level that results
in significant adverse effects in the floodplain. "Adverse effects of floods"
may include damages from overflow of land areas, effects of temporary backwater
on sewers and local drainage channels, bank erosion or channel shifts,
unsanitary conditions, or other unfavorable conditions resulting from
deposition of materials in stream channels during flood recessions, rise of
ground water coincident with increased stream flow, and interruption of traffic
at bridge crossings.
   FLOODPLAIN: The relatively flat area or lowlands adjoining the channel of a
stream or watercourse, and subject to overflow by floodwaters.
   FLOODPLAIN ZONING: The floodplain of the design flood shall be divided into
two (2) zones for regulation purposes:
   A.   Zone FP-1, Designated Floodway: The channel of a stream and that
portion of the adjoining floodplain required to reasonably provide for the
construction of a project for passage of the design flood, including the lands
necessary for construction of project levees;
   B.   Zone FP-2, Restrictive Zone: The portion of the natural floodway
between the limits of the designated floodway and the limits of the floodplain,
as determined by the selected flood, where inundation may occur but where
depths and velocities are generally low. (Ord. 1000 § 31.62, 1955)
18.136.040: USES GENERALLY:
No building, structure or land shall be used, and no building or structure
shall be hereafter erected, structurally altered or enlarged, except for the
purposes set out in sections
18.136.050 through
18.136.070 of this chapter. (Ord. 1000 § 31.63, 1955)
18.136.050: PERMITTED USES:
Principal permitted uses include:
   A.   FP-1 district:
Flood control channels, levees and spreading grounds, and basins, roads,
bridges and diversion drains, where plans are approved by the San Bernardino
County flood control district.
Grazing, field crops, truck gardening, berry and bush crops, flower gardening,
wildlife preserves, forest preserve, and similar open or agricultural uses.
   B.   FP-2 district:
All uses permitted in the FP-1 district.
Orchards, tree crops, nurseries for producing trees, vines and other
horticultural stock, and similar open or agricultural uses. (Ord. 1000 § 31.63
(A), 1955)
18.136.060: SIMILAR USES PERMITTED BY COMMISSION DETERMINATION:
The commission may, by resolution of record, permit any other uses which it may
determine to be similar to those listed in section
18.136.050 of this chapter, in conformity with the intent and purpose of the FP
zone, and not more obnoxious or detrimental to the public health, safety and
welfare, or other uses permitted in this zone. (Ord. 1000 § 31.63(B), 1955)
18.136.070: CONDITIONAL USES:
The following uses are permitted by conditional use permit:
   A.   FP-1 district:
None.
   B.   FP-2 district:
Excavation and removal of rock, sand and gravel.
Recreation areas, parks, playgrounds, fishing lakes, golf courses, polo fields,
baseball and football fields, parking lots, and similar uses involving the open
use of land without structures or improvements, where it can be shown that the
natural flow of floodwaters or storm waters would not be obstructed. (Ord. 1000
§ 31.63(C), 1955)
18.136.090: NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES:
Structures existing at the effective date of any application of the FP zone
which are inconsistent with the provisions thereof, will be allowed to remain
under the conditions set forth in chapter 18.184 of this title, except that:
   A.   If the useful life of a structure has not expired by a date fifteen
(15) years after the effective date of the application of the FP zone, the life
of the structure shall be considered to have expired automatically, and the
structure shall be removed;
   B.   Any existing structure damaged in excess of seventy five percent (75%)
of its reasonable value, by fire, explosion, floods, acts of God or the enemy,
shall be removed;
   C.   The enlargement, expansion, extension or change in use of any structure
is not permitted. (Ord. 1000 § 31.65, 1955)
18.136.100: NONCONFORMING USES OF LAND:
For nonconforming uses of land in the FP zones, the provisions of section
18.184.030 of this title shall apply. (Ord. 1000 § 31.66, 1955)
CHAPTER 18.138
HD HILLSIDE DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
SECTION:
18.138.010: Purpose
18.138.020: Objectives Of Hillside Development District
18.138.030: Scope
18.138.040: Definitions
18.138.050: Slope Density Requirements
18.138.060: Development Standards
18.138.070: Development Plan Requirements
18.138.080: Exception
18.138.010: PURPOSE:
The purpose for establishing the hillside ("HD") development district is to
protect the public health, safety and general welfare in hillside areas of the
city, preserve ridgelines and scenic vistas and implement the provisions of the
city's general plan. (Ord. 2687 § 1, 2008)
18.138.020: OBJECTIVES OF HILLSIDE DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT:
The objectives of the HD district shall be to:
   A.   Minimize flood hazards, water runoff and soil erosion problems incurred
in development alteration of the land;
   B.   Maximize retention of natural topographic features such as skyline
profiles, ridgelines, ridgecrests, hilltops, hillsides, slopes, arroyos,
ravines, canyons, prominent trees and rock outcrops, view corridors and scenic
vistas;
   C.   Ensure that development on or near topographic features relates to the
surrounding topography and will not be conspicuous and obtrusive because of
design or location;
   D.   Provide safe vehicular circulation to and within hillside areas and
minimize scarring effects of hillside street construction;
   E.   Minimize exposure of human life and property to wildland fire;
   F.   Minimize potential for deterioration of ground water quality;
   G.   Ensure efficient expenditure of public service funds. (Ord. 2687 § 1,
2008)
18.138.030: SCOPE:
   A.   The HD district shall apply to any land parcel with an average cross
slope of fifteen percent (15%) or greater, and to land parcels with any slopes
of fifteen percent (15%) or greater including, but not limited to, major slope
areas as generally depicted on the map labeled city of Redlands slope
identification contained in and made part of this section; and all other areas
in the Live Oak Canyon (southeast area) general plan amendment 38.
   B.   Fractions of numbers shall be rounded off to the nearest tenth. When
0.05 or higher is computed, the number shall be rounded off to the next tenth.
   C.   All calculations shall apply to parcel boundaries or parcels of record
as of the effective date hereof, except those individual parcels less than the
minimum size that would allow construction may be increased through property
aggregation to meet minimum building requirements for a dwelling unit. (Ord.
2687 § 1, 2008)
18.138.040: DEFINITIONS:
Certain terms used in this chapter shall be defined for purposes of this
chapter only, as follows:
   AVERAGE CROSS SLOPE: The method of determining natural cross slope of land
by using the following equation:
 
I x L x 0.0023
A
Where:
I      = Contour interval in feet.
L      = Combined length in feet of contour lines measured on the project site.
0.0023 = A constant which converts square feet into acres and expresses slope
         in percent.
A      = Project site area in acres.
 
   BUILDING ENVELOPE: The area to be occupied by any structure and associated
development.
   BUILDING SITE SLOPE: The average natural slope of the area designated as the
building envelope measured at right angles to the natural contours along a line
passing through the center of the building envelope; such line shall terminate
at the opposite edges of the proposed building, or at the opposite edges of the
proposed cut or fill, whichever distance is greater.
   DEVELOPMENT: Any alteration of the natural or existing configuration of the
earth's surface or vegetative cover creating residential and accessory
facilities, including any and all utility services and circulation areas, such
as streets, private roads, parking areas or driveways. An alteration of or any
addition to a structure or circulation area which existed prior to December 11,
1987, and does not exceed either one thousand (1,000) square feet or twenty
five percent (25%) of the area covered by the existing structure, whichever is
greater, shall not be considered "development".
   DIVIDE: To separate into two (2) or more land parcels.
   EXPOSED SLOPE: All the face of a cut or fill, from the toe to the top,
whether the surface is retaining walls, riprap, natural vegetation or other
materials.
   LAND PARCEL: An area of land with boundaries recorded in the San Bernardino
County recorder's office.
   PROJECT SITE: An area consisting of one or more land parcels that is
planned, reviewed and developed as a unified project.
   SLOPE PLAN: A plan for development, clearly depicting all proposed grading
including the location, extent and treatment of all exposed slopes. (Ord. 2687
§ 1, 2008)
18.138.050: SLOPE DENSITY REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Maximum dwelling unit density on portions of land parcels with a cross
slope of fifteen (15) to thirty percent (30%) shall not exceed one dwelling
unit per two and one-half (21/2) acres. Note: In the A-1 zone these densities
shall be used for the purpose of combining under subsection D of this section,
however, the total number of lots shall not exceed the number permitted by the
A-1 zoning standards.
   B.   Maximum dwelling unit density on portions of land parcels with a cross
slope exceeding thirty percent (30%) shall not exceed one dwelling unit per ten
(10) acres unless the following conditions are met:
      1.   The building envelope is not located within the Saugus sandy loam
soil series as mapped by the soil conservation service, or by site specific
studies reviewed by the U.S. soil conservation service.
      2.   The maximum dwelling unit density does not exceed standards of the
following table:
Average Cross Slope Minimum Area Per Dwelling Unit
(Percent)           (Acres)
Average Cross Slope Minimum Area Per Dwelling Unit
(Percent)           (Acres)
Greater than 30     5.0
32                  5.5
33                  6.0
34                  6.5
35                  7.0
36                  7.5
37                  8.0
38                  8.5
39                  9.0
40 and greater      10.0
 
   C.   Maximum dwelling unit density on portions of land parcels with a cross
slope of less than fifteen percent (15%) shall be as determined by the general
plan and zoning standards. In the A-1 zone, a density of one dwelling unit per
two and one-half (21/2) acres shall apply. Note: In the A-1 zone these
densities shall be used for the purpose of combining under subsection D of this
section; however, the total number of lots shall not exceed the number
permitted by the A-1 zoning standards.
   D.   Permitted densities may be combined within any land parcel, so long as
the number of dwelling units to be placed on a parcel does not exceed the sum
of the units permitted in each slope category area of the parcel. Units may be
transferred from greater slope categories to lesser slope categories. However,
when a proposed subdivision results in a density transfer within a site, the
entire parcel shall be subject to review as a planned residential development;
minor subdivisions may substitute a conservation easement to protect open space
and the natural environment over the portions of the parcel that have slopes
greater than thirty percent (30%) and integral contiguous areas. Such
conservation easement shall preclude these areas from contributing toward
density transfers for any future subdivisions.
   E.   Fractions of units in different slope categories shall be dropped and
may not be added together in order to obtain additional whole units. Exception:
One additional lot may be obtained in minor subdivisions (4 lots or less) by
adding fractions of units calculated in various slope categories. When this
exception is used, the resulting subdivision shall provide accessible homesites
on the flatter portion of the property with a minimum amount of grading. (Ord.
2687 § 1, 2008)
18.138.060: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
   A.   Slope Analysis; Slope Plan: A building site slope analysis and a slope
plan certified by a registered civil engineer shall be submitted to the
community development department for review and approval of conformance with
this chapter prior to any clearing, grading or the issuance of a building
permit or grading permit.
   B.   Cut And Fill Requirements:
      1.   No cut or fill shall encroach upon any federal emergency management
agency (FEMA) floodplain except in conformance with city and FEMA regulations.
      2.   Cut or fill material in excess of that approved for use shall be
disposed of in a manner approved by the city engineer or his designated
representative.
      3.   Cut or fill materials that are added to or taken away from the site
shall be transported according to a haul route approved by the city engineer or
his designated alternative.
   C.   Erosion And Sediment Control: Erosion and sediment control shall be
accomplished according to best management practices defined in Redlands
southeast general plan amendment final environmental impact report sch.
#87070606, appendix 5.
   D.   Slope Landforming:
      1.   Landforming shall be accomplished by the use of variable slope
ratios, undulating tops and toes, hiding of terraces and downdrains, and
constantly varying surface features and landscaping.
      2.   All slopes greater than one hundred feet (100') in length or ten
feet (10') and greater in height shall be landformed.
      3.   Slopes constructed adjacent to roadways shall be designed to reduce
their visual impacts, by the use of variable slope ratios, meandering tops and
toes, and integrated landscaping with right of way areas. (Ord. 2687 § 1, 2008)
18.138.070: DEVELOPMENT PLAN REQUIREMENTS:
In addition to the requirements of title 17, "Subdivisions", of this code
tentative maps and development plans shall include:
   A.   A topographic map of the existing terrain utilizing a scale no smaller
than one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100'), and five foot (5') contour
intervals depicting the following cross slope categories: zero to fifteen
percent (15%), fifteen (15) to thirty percent (30%) and greater than thirty
percent (30%). The topographic map shall be prepared by the city or by private
consultants pursuant to contract with the city. The person or entity proposing
to carry out the project shall bear all costs incurred by the city in preparing
the topographic map. Exception: Depiction of cross slope categories is not
required when all of the proposed lots have ten (10) or more acres.
   B.   A soils map showing all soil series as determined by the soil
conservation service.
   C.   The average cross slope and individual cross slope categories of the
project site analysis shall be certified by a registered civil engineer.
   D.   A building site slope analysis and a slope plan, similarly certified.
   E.   For project sites with an average cross slope of less than fifteen
percent (15%), but with portions that are fifteen percent (15%) or greater, the
following shall be noted on the development plan:
Lots (list which lots), may be subject to the HD District as determined by
review of a building site slope analysis by the Department of Community
Development and any development to be placed thereon shall be shown to conform
to the requirements of the HD District prior to the issuance of any building
permits.
   F.   For project sites with an average cross slope of fifteen percent (15%)
or greater, the following shall be noted on the development plan:
This project is subject to the Hillside Development District and any
development to be placed thereon shall be shown to conform to the requirements
of the HD District prior to the issuance of any building permits.
   G.   The final map shall indicate for each lot affected by this chapter a
building envelope, dimensioned in a surveyable manner. Each building envelope
shall be consistent with the approved slope plan for the development. (Ord.
2687 § 1, 2008)
18.138.080: EXCEPTION:
A lot line adjustment between two (2) or more existing adjacent parcels where
the land taken from one parcel is added to an adjacent parcel, and where a
greater number of parcels or allowance for dwelling units than originally
existed is not thereby created is exempt from the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 2687 § 1, 2008)
CHAPTER 18.140
MOBILEHOME PARKS
SECTION:
18.140.010: Purpose Of Provisions
18.140.020: Mobilehome Park Defined
18.140.030: Establishment Criteria And Requirements
18.140.040: Design Criteria
18.140.050: Application; Review Criteria
18.140.060: Conditional Use Permit; Requirements
18.140.070: Development Plan; Requirements Generally
18.140.080: Development Plan; Special Conditions
18.140.090: Park Approval Conditions
18.140.100: Construction; Starting Time
18.140.110: Construction; Completion Guarantee
18.140.120: Boundaries Shown On Zoning Map
18.140.130: Mobilehome Subdivisions
18.140.140: Permitted Uses And Accessory Uses
18.140.160: Property Development Standards; Generally
18.140.170: Park Area
18.140.180: Highway Frontage
18.140.190: Zone Density Specifications
18.140.200: Maximum Coverage
18.140.210: Building Height
18.140.220: Yards
18.140.230: Wall Requirements
18.140.240: Signs
18.140.250: Landscaping; General Requirement
18.140.260: Property Development Standards; Within Parks
18.140.270: Mobilehome Space; Size
18.140.280: Setbacks And Spaces Between Structures
18.140.290: Accessory Buildings
18.140.300: Off Street Parking
18.140.310: Pads For Mobilehomes
18.140.320: Patios
18.140.330: Storage Lockers For Tenants
18.140.340: Access Roads
18.140.350: Pedestrian Access
18.140.360: Open Space Recreation Area
18.140.370: Landscaping; Within Parks
18.140.380: Trees
18.140.390: Lighting System
18.140.400: Mobilehome Space; Permanent Site Marking
18.140.410: Utilities
18.140.420: Television Antennas
18.140.430: Sewer Connections
18.140.440: Trash Storage
18.140.450: Laundry Facilities
18.140.460: Mobilehomes; Size And Equipment
18.140.470: Mobilehome Space; Maximum Coverage
18.140.480: Management Office; Mail Distribution
18.140.490: Recreation Building
18.140.500: Mobilehomes; Permit Requirements
18.140.010: PURPOSE OF PROVISIONS:
The purpose of the mobilehome park provisions set out in this chapter is to
provide for the orderly development of mobilehome parks in certain areas of the
city, provided such development can be accomplished in a manner which is
harmonious and compatible with existing and future uses in the adjacent areas.
(Ord. 1000 § 52.20, 1955)
18.140.020: MOBILEHOME PARK DEFINED:
"Mobilehome park" means a development designed and constructed as one land use
complex for the purpose of locating residential trailers or mobilehomes and
related facilities. (Ord. 1000 § 52.21(A), 1955)
18.140.030: ESTABLISHMENT CRITERIA AND REQUIREMENTS:
A mobilehome park is, in this chapter, deemed to be a single- family use, and
as such, subject to the granting of a conditional use permit, and may be
located within any residential district subject to compliance with the density
of the particular zone, except that the maximum density provisions of this
title shall apply in those zones wherein a higher density is permitted. (Ord.
1000 § 52.21(B), 1955)
18.140.040: DESIGN CRITERIA:
It is intended that the design of the park and arrangement of mobilehome sites
within the park shall present an aesthetically pleasing appearance. For this
reason, the provisions of this chapter provide that there be variations
provided in the arrangement and placement of the mobilehomes, as well as a
curvilinear circulation system within the park. In order to achieve this design
concept, a twenty percent (20%) variation in individual mobilehome site
dimensions and areas shall be permitted, provided that the average area of all
sites combined meets the required minimums; however, all yards and space
between mobilehomes must conform to the standards of this chapter. (Ord. 1000 §
52.21(C), 1955)
18.140.050: APPLICATION; REVIEW CRITERIA:
   A.   In reviewing the application, the commission and council shall take
into consideration the location of the site and its relationship to other uses
of land, topographic features, and existing as well as projected patterns of
land subdivision.
   B.   The commission and council shall make a finding in their recommendation
for approval that development of a mobilehome park in the location proposed
will have no detrimental effect on the existing or future development, use and
enjoyment of surrounding properties, and further declare the development of
such land for mobilehome park purposes to be reasonable and desirable in the
location proposed.
   C.   The commission may disapprove the application if, in their opinion, the
application does not comply with any of these criteria. (Ord. 1000 § 52.21(C),
1955)
18.140.060: CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT; REQUIREMENTS:
An application for a mobilehome park development shall be in the form of a
conditional use permit, in accordance with the provisions of chapter 18.192 of
this title. Such permit shall be subject to the additional requirements of this
section and sections
18.140.070 through
 18.140.130 of this chapter. Where conflicts occur, the regulations of sections
 18.140.070 through
18.140.130 of this chapter shall apply. (Ord. 1000 § 52.22(A), 1955)
18.140.070: DEVELOPMENT PLAN; REQUIREMENTS GENERALLY:
The applicant shall submit a development plan to the planning commission for
approval. The development plan shall be accurately prepared to a scale of not
less than one inch equals fifty feet (1" = 50'), and contain the following
information, as well as that required in chapter 18.192 of this title:
   A.   Legal description or boundary survey map of subject property;
   B.   The location and dimensions of all street dedications required by the
general plan, or which are required to handle the traffic generated by the
proposed uses;
   C.   The location of all points of entry and exit for motor vehicles, and
general circulation pattern indicating both public and private vehicular and
pedestrianways;
   D.   Arrangement and dimensions of individual mobilehome sites;
   E.   Location and arrangement of all structures;
   F.   Location of recreation and open space areas;
   G.   Schematic plans and elevations of all permanent structures to indicate
architectural type and construction materials;
   H.   Relationship of development to surrounding properties and uses;
   I.   Existing topography, with proposed grading and drainage plans;
   J.   The location and complete description of all landscaping to be
provided;
   K.   The location of all lighting standards and devices;
   L.   The location of all walls and fences, and the indication of their
height and construction materials;
   M.   The location of all off street parking facilities;
   N.   Such other information as may be appropriate to assist in the
consideration of the proposed development. (Ord. 1000 § 52.22(B), 1955)
18.140.080: DEVELOPMENT PLAN; SPECIAL CONDITIONS:
The commission may require one or more of the following, in instances where the
proposed mobilehome park development appears to create special problems of
traffic, landscaping or economic feasibility:
   A.   Circulation studies, prepared by a traffic engineer, showing the
movement of vehicular and pedestrian traffic within the development, and to and
from existing thoroughfares. Special engineering features and/or traffic
regulation devices needed to facilitate or ensure safety of circulation may be
required;
   B.   A landscaping and tree planting plan prepared by a landscape architect;
   C.   An economic feasibility report or market analysis prepared by a
qualified economist. (Ord. 1000 § 52.22(C), 1955)
18.140.090: PARK APPROVAL CONDITIONS:
In its report to the council recommending approval of a mobilehome park, the
commission shall set forth such conditions as it deems necessary and reasonable
to protect the best interests of the surrounding property or neighborhood, the
general plan, or the intent thereof. (Ord. 1000 § 52.22(D), 1955)
18.140.100: CONSTRUCTION; STARTING TIME:
An initial time limit for start of construction of one year shall be
established on the council approval date of the development plan. An extension
of that time limit, not to exceed one year, may be granted by the council upon
demonstration of cause by the applicant. Failure to begin development within
the approved time limit shall forfeit all rights to develop, and require a new
application. (Ord. 1000 § 52.22(E), 1955)
18.140.110: CONSTRUCTION; COMPLETION GUARANTEE:
As a condition for approval, the commission may require a contract, with
safeguards satisfactory to the city attorney, guaranteeing completion of the
development plan. (Ord. 1000 § 52.22(F), 1955)
18.140.120: BOUNDARIES SHOWN ON ZONING MAP:
The boundary of an approved mobilehome park development shall be outlined on
the zoning map with the letters "MHP" noted after the zone classification
(e.g., R-1-MHP). Such designation is for identification purposes only and does
not constitute an amendment to the official zoning map. (Ord. 1000 § 52.22(G),
1955)
18.140.130: MOBILEHOME SUBDIVISIONS:
   A.   A mobilehome park may be subdivided in accordance with the provisions
of the subdivision map act and the subdivision ordinance of the city of
Redlands. For the purposes of this section, a "subdivision" shall include a
condominium project, as defined in the Civil Code, or a stock cooperative as
defined in the Business and Professions Code.
   B.   The tract map may be filed concurrently with the conditional use permit
application, or following its approval. The final map shall show all building
lines and indicate the maximum dimension mobilehome permitted for each lot.
Land to be held in common ownership, access easements, and other applicable
features required in the approval conditions shall also be shown on the map.
   C.   A completed copy of the conditions, covenants and restrictions shall be
provided with the initial application. The city may be made a third party
beneficiary to the conditions, covenants and restrictions, as deemed
appropriate. (Ord. 1000 § 52.22(H), 1955)
18.140.140: PERMITTED USES AND ACCESSORY USES:
No building, structure or land shall be used, and no building shall be erected
or structurally enlarged, except for the following purposes:
Accessory uses:
Accessory uses customarily incidental to the principal permitted uses, and
operated for the convenience of the tenants only.
Principal permitted uses:
Laundry and restroom facilities.
Miscellaneous vehicle storage for tenants only.
Office.
One dwelling for resident owner or manager.
Parking of residential mobilehomes.
Recreational buildings and facilities. (Ord. 1000 § 52.23, 1955)
18.140.160: PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS; GENERALLY:
The following property development standards, set out in sections
18.140.170 through
18.140.250 of this chapter, shall apply to all mobilehome parks. (Ord. 1000 §
52.25, 1955)
18.140.170: PARK AREA:
No parcel of land containing less than nine (9) acres and capable of
accommodating less than fifty (50) mobilehome spaces may be used for mobilehome
park purposes. (Ord. 1000 § 52.25(A), 1955)
18.140.180: HIGHWAY FRONTAGE:
A mobilehome park shall have frontage on and vehicular access to a major or
secondary highway, as designated on the general plan. (Ord. 1000 § 52.25(B),
1955)
18.140.190: ZONE DENSITY SPECIFICATIONS:
   A.   The maximum number of mobilehome units per acre permitted in the
various zones shall be as follows:
 
Zone                    Adult Park Family Park
R-3, R-2-2000, R-2, R-1 7          6.1
R-S                     5          4.4
R-E                     4          3.1
R-A                     3          2.2
 
   B.   Each park type may be converted to the other with appropriate changes
as required in the number of mobilehome spaces and amount of open space areas,
subject to approval of a conditional use permit for the modified plans. (Ord.
1000 § 52.25(C), 1955)
18.140.200: MAXIMUM COVERAGE:
Maximum coverage by structures shall be forty percent (40%) of the site area.
(Ord. 1000 § 52.25(D), 1955)
18.140.210: BUILDING HEIGHT:
No building, structure or mobilehome shall have a height greater than twenty
feet (20'). (Ord. 1000 § 52.25(E), 1955)
18.140.220: YARDS:
   A.   Front: Each mobilehome park shall have a front yard of not less than
twenty five feet (25'), extending for the full width of the parcel devoted to
such use.
   B.   Side And Rear: Each mobilehome park shall have a rear yard and a side
yard of not less than five feet (5'). Where a side or rear yard abuts a street,
the yard shall be not less than twenty five feet (25') in width. (Ord. 1000 §
52.25(F), 1955)
18.140.230: WALL REQUIREMENTS:
A mobilehome park shall be entirely enclosed at its external boundary by a
decorative, six foot (6') high solid masonry wall. The wall shall be placed on
the boundary line or property line, except where abutting a street, in which
case it shall be located at the front yard setback line. (Ord. 1000 § 52.25(G),
1955)
18.140.240: SIGNS:
Each mobilehome park shall be permitted to display on each street frontage
thereof one identifying sign of a maximum size of ten (10) square feet. The
sign shall contain thereon only the name and address of the mobilehome park. If
illuminated, all lighting shall be directed away from the street and adjacent
properties. (Ord. 1000 § 52.25(H), 1955)
18.140.250: LANDSCAPING; GENERAL REQUIREMENT:
All required yards shall be landscaped and maintained. (Ord. 1000 § 52.25(I),
1955)
18.140.260: PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS; WITHIN PARKS:
The following standards, set out in sections
18.140.270 through
18.140.500 of this chapter shall apply to all development within the park.
(Ord. 1000 § 25.26, 1955)
18.140.270: MOBILEHOME SPACE; SIZE:
Each mobilehome space shall have a minimum width of fifty feet (50') and a
minimum depth of eighty feet (80'). The minimum area shall be four thousand
(4,000) square feet, except that, in order to provide for greater flexibility
in the design of mobilehome spaces, thus offering variety for the placement of
different sizes and configurations of mobilehomes, the depth, width and area
requirements of the spaces may be varied up to twenty percent (20%) of the
required minimums, provided the average area of all spaces combined is
equivalent to the required minimum. (Ord. 1000 § 25.26(A), 1955)
18.140.280: SETBACKS AND SPACES BETWEEN STRUCTURES:
   A.   A mobilehome shall be located not less than ten feet (10') from any
front or side space line, and not less than five feet (5') from a rear space
line.
   B.   Attached or detached accessory structures shall be located not less
than three feet (3') from any side or rear space line, and not less than three
feet (3') from any access road, except that enclosed accessory structures shall
be located not less than ten feet (10') from any access road. Detached
accessory structures shall be located not less than six feet (6') from any
mobilehome or accessory structure.
   C.   Permanent structures, such as laundry building, recreational buildings
and caretaker residence, shall be located not less than twenty five feet (25')
from any mobilehome or access road.
   D.   Mobilehomes, accessory structures and permanent buildings shall be
located a minimum of five feet (5') from any boundary wall.
   E.   Mobilehomes and accessory structures shall be located a minimum of five
feet (5') from any interior walkway system. (Ord. 1000 § 25.26(B), 1955)
18.140.290: ACCESSORY BUILDINGS:
Accessory buildings or structures, such as carports, cabanas, storage rooms,
patio covers and other similar structures, are permitted subject to the setback
requirements of sections
18.140.260 through
18.140.500 of this chapter. (Ord. 1000 § 25.26(C), 1955)
18.140.300: OFF STREET PARKING:
   A.   There shall be at least two (2) paved, off street parking spaces for
each mobilehome space, which shall be on the same site as the mobilehome
served, and may be located in a required rear or side yard of the mobilehome
space.
   B.   There shall be established and maintained within each mobilehome park
an automobile parking area for the use of guests. The number of spaces within
this area shall be equal to one for every four (4) mobilehome spaces, or
fraction thereof.
   C.   In addition to the required automobile parking, there may be provided
an enclosed miscellaneous vehicle storage area for the parking of travel
trailers, campers, boats and similar equipment. No parking of such vehicles is
permitted on the individual mobilehome space. (Ord. 1000 § 25.26(D), 1955)
18.140.310: PADS FOR MOBILEHOMES:
Each mobilehome pad shall be properly graded and compacted with appropriate
material so as to be adequate for the support of anticipated loads during all
seasons. (Ord. 1000 § 25.26(E), 1955)
18.140.320: PATIOS:
A cement concrete patio or raised deck of suitable material, area and dimension
shall be provided for each mobilehome space. (Ord. 1000 § 25.26(F), 1955)
18.140.330: STORAGE LOCKERS FOR TENANTS:
A minimum of ninety (90) cubic feet in a general storage locker shall be
provided for each mobilehome space. Storage lockers may be located in locker
compounds. (Ord. 1000 § 25.26(G), 1955)
18.140.340: ACCESS ROADS:
   A.   Access roads within a mobilehome park shall be paved to a curb to curb
width of not less than thirty feet (30'), except that the entrance access road
shall be not less than thirty six feet (36').
   B.   Cement concrete rolled curbs and gutters shall be installed on both
sides of all access roads.
   C.   Access road with paved width of less than thirty six feet (36') shall
not be used for automobile parking at any time.
   D.   Where all access roads are paved to a width of thirty six feet (36') or
more, the guest parking provisions may be waived.
   E.   Each mobilehome space shall have frontage on an access road. (Ord. 1000
§ 25.26(H), 1955)
18.140.350: PEDESTRIAN ACCESS:
There shall be a concrete walkway system not less than four feet (4') in width
extending throughout the park on both sides of all access roads. (Ord. 1000 §
25.26(I), 1955)
18.140.360: OPEN SPACE RECREATION AREA:
   A.   One or more common open space recreation areas, each containing not
less than three thousand (3,000) square feet, shall be provided within the
park. The total area set aside for recreation shall be not less than four
hundred (400) square feet for each mobilehome space. Each area shall contain a
minimum dimension of fifty feet (50'), and be accessible to each mobilehome
space through a system of walkways. Open space area may include swimming pools,
putting greens, court games, and other recreational-leisure facilities.
   B.   If more than twenty five percent (25%) of the spaces in the park are
occupied by persons having one or more children under the age of fifteen (15),
an additional two hundred (200) square feet of recreational space shall be
provided for each mobilehome space so occupied. Such additional recreational
space shall be provided in a separate area for the exclusive use of children.
(Ord. 1000 § 25.26(J), 1955)
18.140.370: LANDSCAPING; WITHIN PARKS:
All required yards and open space recreational areas shall be landscaped and
maintained. (Ord. 1000 § 25.26(K), 1955)
18.140.380: TREES:
A minimum of two (2) trees, at least one of which shall be an evergreen, shall
be provided for each mobilehome space. In addition, trees shall be provided
along the walled boundary of the park at intervals not greater than forty feet
(40'). Each tree shall be at least eight feet (8') in height at the time of
planting. (Ord. 1000 § 25.26(L), 1955)
18.140.390: LIGHTING SYSTEM:
A system of adequate lighting shall be provided for all interior streets and
walkways. The spacing and height of all light support structures and the
intensity of all lights shall be reviewed by the public works department to
determine the adequacy of such lighting for safe pedestrian and vehicle
circulation. (Ord. 1000 § 25.26(M), 1955)
18.140.400: MOBILEHOME SPACE; PERMANENT SITE MARKING:
The boundaries of each mobilehome space shall be clearly and permanently marked
so that each space can be readily determined at all times. (Ord. 1000 § 25.26
(N), 1955)
18.140.410: UTILITIES:
All utility distribution facilities, including television antenna service lines
serving individual mobilehome spaces, shall be placed underground. (Ord. 1000 §
25.26(O), 1955)
18.140.420: TELEVISION ANTENNAS:
Rooftop or outdoor television antennas shall not extend more than five feet
(5') above the roofline of an individual mobilehome. One single television
antenna in excess of the height limit may be situated within the mobilehome
park for community service. (Ord. 1000 § 25.26(P), 1955)
18.140.430: SEWER CONNECTIONS:
Each mobilehome space shall be provided with a connection to the city's
sanitary sewer system. (Ord. 1000 § 25.26(Q), 1955)
18.140.440: TRASH STORAGE:
All trash storage areas shall be located within enclosed areas completely
screened from public view. Common trash storage areas shall be within two
hundred feet (200') of the dwelling served. (Ord. 1000 § 25.26(R), 1955)
18.140.450: LAUNDRY FACILITIES:
   A.   Laundry facilities equipped with washing machines and dryers shall be
provided.
   B.   Outside drying yards shall be enclosed with a six foot (6') high solid
fence. Laundry drying lines shall not be permitted on any mobilehome space.
(Ord. 1000 § 25.26(S), 1955)
18.140.460: MOBILEHOMES; SIZE AND EQUIPMENT:
Each mobilehome shall be not less than forty feet (40') in length and contain
not less than four hundred fifty (450) square feet of gross floor area. Each
shall be equipped with full bathroom facilities capable of being attached to
the municipal sanitary sewer system. (Ord. 1000 § 25.26(T), 1955)
18.140.470: MOBILEHOME SPACE; MAXIMUM COVERAGE:
The maximum coverage of an individual space (lot) by a mobilehome and accessory
buildings or structures, such as garages, carports, storage rooms, patio covers
and other similar structures, shall be sixty percent (60%) of the net lot area.
(Ord. 1000 § 25.26(U), 1955)
18.140.480: MANAGEMENT OFFICE; MAIL DISTRIBUTION:
Each mobilehome park shall maintain a management office. Suitable facilities
shall be provided for mail distribution. (Ord. 1000 § 25.26(V), 1955)
18.140.490: RECREATION BUILDING:
Each mobilehome park shall provide and maintain a recreational building. The
building shall be of sufficient size to adequately serve residents of the park.
(Ord. 1000 § 25.26(W), 1955)
18.140.500: MOBILEHOMES; PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
Prior to the placement or relocation of any mobilehome or accessory structure
within a park, a permit shall be obtained from the department of building and
safety. Permit fees shall be as established by the city council and the state
of California. (Ord. 1000 § 25.26(X), 1955)
CHAPTER 18.144
PRD PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
SECTION:
18.144.010: Purpose Of Provisions
18.144.020: Planned Residential Development Defined
18.144.030: Establishment Conditions And Procedures
18.144.040: Proposed Development; Review Criteria
18.144.050: Dwelling Units Per Acre
18.144.060: Arrangement Of Building Types
18.144.070: Permitted Uses And Accessory Uses
18.144.080: Prohibited Uses
18.144.090: Property Development Standards
18.144.100: Lot Area
18.144.110: Lot Dimensions
18.144.120: Density Of Development
18.144.130: Maximum Coverage
18.144.140: Building Height
18.144.150: Front Yard
18.144.160: Side Yard
18.144.170: Rear Yard
18.144.180: Accessory Buildings
18.144.190: Off Street Parking
18.144.200: Open Space
18.144.210: Access To Street
18.144.220: Streets And Street Improvements
18.144.230: Pedestrian Access
18.144.240: Street System; Dedicated Streets
18.144.250: Storage And Trash Areas
18.144.260: Lighting System
18.144.270: Private Outdoor Living Area
18.144.280: Grading Restrictions
18.144.290: Conditional Use Permit Requirements
18.144.300: Development Plan; Information Required
18.144.310: Development Plan; Preparation By Professional Team
18.144.320: Development Plan; Approval Conditions
18.144.340: Development In Stages; Conditions
18.144.350: Development Schedule
18.144.360: Recorded Subdivision Map Required
18.144.370: Proposed Development; Additional Studies Or Conditions Required
When
18.144.380: Guarantee Of Completion
18.144.390: Changes To Development Plan
18.144.400: Boundaries Shown On Zoning Map
18.144.410: Start Of Construction; Time Limit
18.144.010: PURPOSE OF PROVISIONS:
The purpose of the planned residential development provisions is to provide for
greater flexibility in the design of residential developments and the promotion
of a more efficient, aesthetically pleasing and desirable use of land. It is
intended that developments proposed under the provisions of this chapter shall
be planned and designed in a manner that will retain the general configuration
of the natural terrain and existing plantings in order to maintain and enhance
the locally recognized values of community appearance. (Ord. 1000 § 52.50,
1955)
18.144.020: PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT DEFINED:
"Planned residential development" means a development located on a site
approved as a subdivision, to be constructed by a person or corporate body,
involving a variety of residential structure types, planned as a total entity
and, therefore, subject to approval, development and regulation as one land use
complex. (Ord. 1000 § 52.51(A), 1955)
18.144.030: ESTABLISHMENT CONDITIONS AND PROCEDURES:
A planned residential development may be permitted in any residential or
agricultural district. Such a development shall have sufficient land area to
meet the objectives and standards set forth in this section and sections
18.144.020 and
18.144.040 through
18.144.060 of this chapter. The requirements and procedures established herein
shall prevail over any conflicting requirements of this title, or those in the
laws and ordinances governing the subdivision of land. (Ord. 2136 § 2, 1990:
Ord. 1000 § 52.51(B), 1955)
18.144.040: PROPOSED DEVELOPMENT; REVIEW CRITERIA:
The planning commission shall review the site plan and elevations for the
proposed development to determine its conformity with the standards set forth
in the city's general plan, the regulations of sections
18.144.020 through
18.144.060 of this chapter, and recognized principles of urban design, land use
planning, circulation, and landscape architecture. The commission may approve
the proposed plan, impose essential conditions regarding the layout,
circulation and methods of operation and maintenance of the proposed
development and, in addition, the commission may require that appropriate and
enforceable deed restrictions acceptable by the city be filed with the county
recorder. The commission may disapprove the plan if, in their opinion, the
application does not comply with any of these criteria. (Ord. 1000 § 52.51(C),
1955)
18.144.050: DWELLING UNITS PER ACRE:
   A.   The maximum number of dwelling units per acre of net development area
for sites under fifteen percent (15%) slope shall be as follows:
 
Zone Number
R-1  6.5
R-S  4.5
R-E  3.0
R-A  2.0
 
Densities within the R-R, A-1 and A-2 are established by the zone
classification.
   B.   The maximum number of dwelling units per area for sites with an average
slope of fifteen percent (15%) or over shall be in accordance with the HD
hillside development district, chapter 18.138 of this title.
   C.   "Net development area" is defined as the gross area of the site less
land area required for completion of perimeter streets and/or streets required
by the circulation element of the general plan and less land area within the
project set aside for schools, churches, flood control improvements, and other
nonresidential uses. Common open space shall be considered in calculating the
gross area of the site. Public parks if included as part of the open space
shall also be considered in calculating the gross area of the site. (Ord. 2136
§ 3, 1990: Ord. 1000 § 52.51(D), 1955)
18.144.060: ARRANGEMENT OF BUILDING TYPES:
The location and distribution of the various permitted dwelling unit types
shall be approved by the commission. Particular attention will be given to
those units to be located on the perimeter of the site, taking into
consideration the relationship and compatibility of such dwelling to the
character and future development of surrounding properties. The commission may
require that only single-family detached dwellings be located in those areas of
the site where other types of permitted dwelling units are determined to be not
in conformity with the character of the adjacent area. (Ord. 1000 § 52.51(E),
1955)
18.144.070: PERMITTED USES AND ACCESSORY USES:
No building, structure or land shall be used, and no building shall be erected
or structurally enlarged except for the following purposes:
   A.   Principal Permitted Uses:
      1.   Attached and detached single-family homes, townhouses, patio houses
or combinations thereof not exceeding four (4) units in any one group shall be
permitted, and such other uses as are permitted in the zone in which the
planned residential development is to be located;
      2.   For the purposes of this title, all permitted dwelling types are
considered to be single-family in nature. Each unit shall be a separate and
complete entity extending from the lowest floor level to the highest point of
the building. There shall be no placement of separate dwelling units above one
another in order that each unit will be directly accessible to private, ground
level open spaces;
      3.   Where dwelling units and/or accessory structures abut on adjacent
lots, such dwellings or structures shall be structurally independent, with not
less than one inch (1") of separation between them;
      4.   Citrus and avocado groves and other agricultural uses as permitted
by the underlying zone.
   B.   Accessory Uses: In addition to the accessory uses permitted in the
district, the following uses are permitted only where they are an integral part
of the planned development and are maintained as an integral part thereof, and
where the purpose of such facilities is to provide for the residents of the
development rather than the general public:
Citrus and avocado groves.
Private parks, parkways, walking and riding paths.
Recreation buildings, structures and areas.
Swimming pools. (Ord. 2136 § 4, 1990: Ord. 1000 § 52.51(B), 1955)
18.144.080: PROHIBITED USES:
All uses and structures not listed as permitted in section
18.144.070 of this chapter are hereby deemed to be specifically prohibited.
(Ord. 1000 § 52.53, 1955)
18.144.090: PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The following property development standards set out in sections
18.144.100 through 18.144.280 of this chapter shall apply to all land and
building in a planned residential development. (Ord. 1000 § 52.54, 1955)
18.144.100: LOT AREA:
   A.   Individual lot areas may be reduced below the minimum standard required
for the zone upon the finding by the city council that the provisions of this
chapter are satisfied. Individual lots shall comply with all required setbacks,
yard areas and private outdoor living areas required by the zone. (Ord. 2404 §
1, 1999: Ord. 2136 § 5, 1990: Ord. 1000 § 52.54(A), 1955)
18.144.110: LOT DIMENSIONS:
Lot widths and depths may be reduced below the standard of the district;
however, to preserve and maintain the quality of the zone and surrounding
neighborhoods, all lots abutting a dedicated public street shall have a lot
width not less than the minimum required for the zone. Certain exceptions may
be approved by the commission where it can be shown that a reduction in lot
width will not adversely affect the character and quality of the surrounding
neighborhood. (Ord. 1000 § 52.54(B), 1955)
18.144.120: DENSITY OF DEVELOPMENT:
Population density for planned residential developments varies in accordance
with the density permitted for the zone in which the site is located. (Ord.
1000 § 52.54(C), 1955)
18.144.130: MAXIMUM COVERAGE:
Maximum coverage by planned residential development structures is thirty
percent (30%) of the total project area. (Ord. 1000 § 52.54(D), 1955)
18.144.140: BUILDING HEIGHT:
For planned residential developments, the height provisions of the zone shall
apply. (Ord. 1000 § 52.54(E), 1955)
18.144.150: FRONT YARD:
The minimum front yard provisions of the zone in which the site is located
shall apply to all lots, whether abutting a public or private street. (Ord.
1000 § 52.54(F), 1955)
18.144.160: SIDE YARD:
   A.   The side yard provisions of the zone in which the site is located shall
apply to all properties in the planned development which abut property not a
part of the development.
   B.   For the remainder of the development, the side yard(s) for a residence
or a group of residences may be modified as follows:
      1.   For a single-family detached residence on a separate lot, the side
yard(s) in a planned residential development may be reduced below that required
by the underlying zone district, subject to approval by the planning commission
pursuant to the conditional use permit. Where the side yard(s) does not permit
the parking of recreational vehicles, then the CC&Rs for the project shall
prohibit the parking of such vehicles on separate lots within the development.
No window or door openings are permitted on the zero setback line.
      2.   For attached single-family residences or patio houses and
townhouses, both interior side yards between structures in a series or group
may be reduced to zero, provided the exterior side yards of the series or group
are set back a distance not less than ten feet (10') for each story of height
of each building series or group. No window or door openings are permitted on
the zero setback line. (Ord. 2459 § 1, 2000: Ord. 1000 § 52.54(G), 1955)
18.144.170: REAR YARD:
The rear yard provisions of the zone in which the site is located shall apply.
(Ord. 1000 § 52.54(H), 1955)
18.144.180: ACCESSORY BUILDINGS:
   A.   For accessory buildings, the provisions of the zone in which the site
is located shall apply.
   B.   Garages or carports for attached dwellings in any series or group shall
not front on any public or private street. (Ord. 1000 § 52.54(I), 1955)
18.144.190: OFF STREET PARKING:
The provisions of chapter 18.164 of this title shall apply. In addition, an
appropriate number of off street parking spaces shall be provided to compensate
for the reduction in on street parking resulting from the less linear feet of
streets typically associated with planned residential developments. The number
and distribution of such required additional spaces shall be determined by an
analysis of the plan by the planning department. (Ord. 1000 § 52.54(J), 1955)
18.144.200: OPEN SPACE:
Projects processed under these regulations shall meet one of the following open
space standards as described below:
   A.   Properties Under Fifteen Percent Slope: Not less than twenty percent
(20%) of the gross land area shall be developed in common, landscaped,
recreational open space. Such open space shall contain a minimum dimension of
fifty feet (50'), and be accessible to each lot through a system of public or
private walkways. Open space areas may include swimming pools, putting greens,
court games, and other recreational leisure facilities. Such areas shall be
identified as permanent open space on the final tract map. Open space
calculations shall not include buildings, private patios, balconies, driveways,
and off street parking areas.
   B.   Properties With An Average Slope Of Fifteen Percent Or More: Not less
than twenty five percent (25%) of the gross land area shall be in common open
space. Not less than five percent (5%) of the gross land area shall be
developed in common, landscaped, recreational open space. Such open space shall
contain a minimum dimension of twenty five feet (25'), and be accessible to
each lot through a system of public or private walkways. Open space areas may
include swimming pools, putting greens, court games, and other recreational
leisure facilities. Such areas shall be identified as permanent open space on
the final tract map. Open space calculations shall not include buildings,
private patios, balconies, driveways, and off street parking areas.
   C.   Preservation Of Citrus Groves: The city recognizes the desire to
maintain citrus and avocado groves and other agricultural uses as a means to
provide open space for the community. The open space requirement may be met by
preserving citrus and/or avocado groves or other agricultural uses determined
appropriate by the planning commission or city council, and assuring ongoing
maintenance through a conservation easement or other legal mechanism to the R-
E, R-A, R-R, A-1 and A-2 zones. A minimum of two and one-half (21/2) acres of
citrus land must be provided and a minimum percentage of open space shall be
provided as follows:
 
Zone Minimum Percentage Of Open Space
R-E  20%
R-A  30%
R-R  40%
A-1  60%
A-2  50%
 
   D.   Definition Of Common Open Space: Common open space may include common
areas held in common by associations and/or other perpetual open space
guaranteed by acceptable legal mechanisms including public and private
easements and conservation easements. If an applicant proposes to dedicate a
portion of their site as public park lands, this area may be considered as
common open space if determined to be appropriate by the planning commission.
(Ord. 2136 § 6, 1990: Ord. 1000 § 52.54(K), 1955)
18.144.210: ACCESS TO STREET:
Each dwelling site shall have adequate and permanent ingress and egress
easements from a dedicated public street. The conveyance of such easements
shall be approved as to form by the city attorney. (Ord. 1000 § 52.54(L), 1955)
18.144.220: STREETS AND STREET IMPROVEMENTS:
All streets within a planned residential development, whether public or
private, shall have a curb to curb pavement width of not less than thirty six
feet (36'). Special street cross sections with lesser paving width, such as a
divided one-way, and modified street terminals such as a loop, may be permitted
for private streets, provided accessibility and vehicular maneuverability are
at least equivalent to a standard street. All streets, alleys and driveways,
whether public or private, shall be improved in accordance with standards of
the public works department. (Ord. 1000 § 52.54(M), 1955)
18.144.230: PEDESTRIAN ACCESS:
There shall be a concrete walkway system not less than five feet (5') in width
extending throughout the site to serve as pedestrian access to a dedicated
public sidewalk. (Ord. 1000 § 52.54(N), 1955)
18.144.240: STREET SYSTEM; DEDICATED STREETS:
A basic street system shall be dedicated to the city. Such system shall be not
less than the minimum determined necessary by the public works department to
properly serve the planned residential development and surrounding areas. All
streets surrounding a planned residential development shall be dedicated. (Ord.
1000 § 52.54(O), 1955)
18.144.250: STORAGE AND TRASH AREAS:
All storage and trash areas shall be located within enclosed areas completely
screened from public view. Common storage and trash areas shall be within two
hundred feet (200') of the dwelling served. (Ord. 1000 § 52.54(P), 1955)
18.144.260: LIGHTING SYSTEM:
In addition to standard streetlights for all dedicated streets, a system of
adequate lighting shall be provided for all private interior streets and
walkways. The spacing and height of all light support structures, and the
intensity of all lights, shall be reviewed by the public works department to
determine the adequacy of such lighting for safe pedestrian and vehicle
circulation. (Ord. 1000 § 52.54(Q), 1955)
18.144.270: PRIVATE OUTDOOR LIVING AREA:
Each dwelling unit shall have a private outdoor living area with minimum
dimensions of twenty five feet (25'). Such outdoor living area shall be located
to the rear of the front setback line, and may not contain any detached
accessory building, or be used for off street parking of motor vehicles. (Ord.
1000 § 52.54(R), 1955)
18.144.280: GRADING RESTRICTIONS:
It is intended that there be a minimum of grading involved in the development
of a planned residential development project. Where grading is found necessary
to improve the overall development of the site, all cut and fill slopes shall
not exceed three to one (3:1), i.e., three (3) horizontal to one vertical. In
the HD (hillside development) district, a two to one (2:1) slope may be allowed
by the planning commission when found to be in conformance with sections
18.144.010 of this chapter and 18.192.070 of this title. All other provisions
of the Redlands grading code shall apply. (Ord. 2178 § 1, 1991: Ord. 1000 §
52.54(S), 1955)
18.144.290: CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
An application for a planned residential development shall be in the form of a
conditional use permit in accordance with the provisions of chapter
18.192 of this title. Such permit shall be subject to the additional
requirements of this section and sections
18.144.300 through
18.144.410 of this chapter shall apply. (Ord. 1000 § 52.55(A), 1955)
18.144.300: DEVELOPMENT PLAN; INFORMATION REQUIRED:
   A.   The applicant shall submit a preliminary development plan to the
planning commission for approval.
   B.   The development plan shall be accurately prepared to scale and contain
the following information as well as that required in chapter 18.192 of this
title:
      1.   Legal description or boundary survey map of the subject property;
      2.   Distribution of land uses, with a tabulation of the acreage
designated for each type of use;
      3.   General circulation pattern indicating both public and private
vehicular, bicycle, equestrian and pedestrianways;
      4.   The arrangement and dimensions of individual lots;
      5.   Location and arrangement of all structures;
      6.   Relationship of development to surrounding properties and uses;
      7.   Existing topography, with proposed grading and drainage plans;
      8.   Location of proposed common open spaces;
      9.   A statement of provisions for ultimate ownership and maintenance of
the parts of the development, including streets, structures and open spaces;
      10.   The floor plans and elevations of all structures, other than
detached single-family residential, to indicate architectural type and
construction materials;
      11.   Street and walkway lighting, walkways, parking areas, landscaping,
walls or fences, utility plan, and mailboxes;
      12.   Such other information as may be appropriate to assist in the
consideration of the proposed development. (Ord. 2127 § 2, 1990: Ord. 1000 §
52.55(B), 1955)
18.144.310: DEVELOPMENT PLAN; PREPARATION BY PROFESSIONAL TEAM:
The combined professional services of qualified urban planners, registered
landscape architects, registered civil engineers, or licensed land surveyors,
and licensed architects may be required for the project in the preparation of
the development plan. (Ord. 2127 § 3, 1990: Ord. 1000 § 52.55(C), 1955)
18.144.320: DEVELOPMENT PLAN; APPROVAL CONDITIONS:
The commission shall set forth such conditions as it deems necessary and
reasonable to protect the best interests of the surrounding property or/and
neighborhood, the general plan, or the intent thereof. (Ord. 2127 § 4, 1990:
Ord. 1000 § 52.55(D), 1955)
18.144.340: DEVELOPMENT IN STAGES; CONDITIONS:
If development is carried out in progressive stages, each stage shall be so
planned that it shall be in conformity with the approved final development plan
and all requirements set forth in the approval. The intent of the planned
residential development provisions shall be fully complied with at the
completion of any stage, and each stage shall provide required open spaces to
serve the residents in that stage. (Ord. 1000 § 52.55(F), 1955)
18.144.350: DEVELOPMENT SCHEDULE:
A development schedule shall be filed concurrently with the development plan.
The schedule shall indicate:
   A.   The approximate date for start of construction;
   B.   The stages in which the project will be built and approximate starting
dates;
   C.   An anticipated rate of development and approximate dates for completion
of each phase. (Ord. 2127 § 6, 1990: Ord. 1000 § 52.55(G), 1955)
18.144.360: RECORDED SUBDIVISION MAP REQUIRED:
   A.   A separate tentative map shall be filed for the total development or
each approved stage. The tentative map may be filed concurrently with the
development plan.
   B.   The final map shall show the building lines, common land, pedestrian
easements, and other applicable features required in the approval of the
development plan.
   C.   No building permit shall be issued until a final record map of each
stage of the proposed development is approved as provided for in this chapter,
and is recorded with the county recorder of San Bernardino County. (Ord. 2127 §
7, 1990: Ord. 1000 § 52.55(H), 1955)
18.144.370: PROPOSED DEVELOPMENT; ADDITIONAL STUDIES OR CONDITIONS REQUIRED
WHEN:
The commission may require one or more of the following in instances where the
proposed development appears to create special problems of traffic, landscaping
or economic feasibility:
   A.   Circulation studies, prepared by a traffic engineer, showing the
movement of vehicular and pedestrian traffic within the planned development,
and to and from existing thoroughfares. Special engineering features and/or
traffic regulation devices needed to facilitate or ensure safety of circulation
may be required;
   B.   A landscaping and tree planting plan, prepared by a landscape
architect;
   C.   An economic feasibility report or market analysis, prepared by a
qualified economist. (Ord. 1000 § 52.55(I), 1955)
18.144.380: GUARANTEE OF COMPLETION:
As a condition for approval of a development plan, the commission may require a
contract with safeguards, satisfactory to the city attorney, guaranteeing
completion of the development plan. (Ord. 2127 § 8, 1990: Ord. 1000 § 52.55(J),
1955)
18.144.390: CHANGES TO DEVELOPMENT PLAN:
No changes shall be made in an approved development plan unless submitted to
and approved by the planning commission. No change shall be authorized which in
any way is determined to be inconsistent with the purposes and intent of the
development plan. (Ord. 2127 § 9, 1990: Ord. 1000 § 52.55(K), 1955)
18.144.400: BOUNDARIES SHOWN ON ZONING MAP:
The boundary of an approved planned residential development shall be outlined
on the zoning map with the letters "PRD" noted after the zone classification
(e.g., R-E PRD). Such designation is for identification purposes only and does
not constitute an amendment to the official zoning map. (Ord. 1000 § 52.55(L),
1955)
18.144.410: START OF CONSTRUCTION; TIME LIMIT:
Time limits for the conditional use permit shall be the same as those
prescribed by the subdivision map act pertaining to tentative maps. (Ord. 2127
§ 10, 1990: Ord. 1000 § 52.55(M), 1955)
CHAPTER 18.148
SUPPLEMENTARY DISTRICT REGULATIONS
SECTION:
18.148.010: Area Requirements For Buildings And Structures
18.148.020: Interpretation Of District Boundaries
18.148.030: Setback And Yard Specifications
18.148.040: Yards; Measurement Procedures
18.148.050: Side Yards In Hillside Areas
18.148.060: Yards; New Single-Family Subdivisions In R-1 And R-S Zones
18.148.070: Agricultural Groves
18.148.010: AREA REQUIREMENTS FOR BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES:
Except as hereinafter provided, no building or structure shall be hereafter
erected or located on a lot unless such building, structure or enlargement
conforms with the area regulations of the district in which it is located:
   A.   No parcel of land held under separate ownership at the time of the
effective date hereof may be reduced in any manner below the minimum standards
established by such ordinance for the district within which the lot is located.
   B.   No lot area may be so reduced or diminished that the yards or other
open spaces will be smaller than prescribed by this title, nor may the
occupancy be increased in any manner except in conformity with the regulations
herein established.
   C.   No required yard or other open space around an existing building, or
which is hereafter provided around any building for the purpose of complying
with the provisions of this title, may be considered as providing a yard or
open space for any other building, nor may any yard or other required open
space on an adjoining lot be considered as providing a yard or open space on a
lot whereon a building is to be erected.
   D.   No parking area, parking space or loading space which is provided for
the purpose of complying with the provisions of this title shall thereafter be
relinquished or reduced in any manner below the requirements established in
this title, unless equivalent facilities are provided elsewhere, the location
of which is approved by the commission. (Ord. 1000 § 35.00, 1955)
18.148.020: INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES:
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of any district, as shown on the
land use zoning map, the following shall apply:
   A.   Street, Alley Or Lot Lines: Where indicated, district boundaries are
approximately street, alley or lot lines, such lines are determined to be the
boundaries of the district. Otherwise, the boundaries shall be determined by
the dimensions shown on the land use zoning map. In the absence of a dimension,
the boundary shall be determined by use of the scale shown on the map.
   B.   Rights Of Way Or Watercourses: A street, alley, railroad or railway
right of way, watercourse, channel or body of water, included on the zoning
map, shall, unless otherwise indicated, be included within the zone of
adjoining property on either side thereof, and where such street, alley, right
of way, watercourse, channel or body of water serves as a boundary between two
(2) or more different zoning districts, a line midway in such street, alley,
right of way, etc., extending in the general direction of the long dimension
thereof shall be considered the boundary between zoning districts.
   C.   Uncertainties: Where uncertainties exist, the commission shall, by
written decision, determine the location of the district boundary or building
setback line.
   D.   Vacations: In the event that a vacated street, alley, right of way or
easement was the boundary between two (2) districts, the new zoning district
boundaries shall be at the new property line. (Ord. 1000 § 36.00, 1955)
18.148.030: SETBACK AND YARD SPECIFICATIONS:
   A.   The front yard requirements for the various districts shall determine
the minimum and maximum building setback from the front property lines.
   B.   In each block in the R-A, R-E, R-S, R-1, R-1-D, R-2 and R-3 residential
districts, where fifty percent (50%) or more of the frontage on a side of a
given street is already built up, the average distance from the main building
front to the property line of existing buildings shall be determined to be the
setback line, provided, however, that in no case shall this distance be less
than fifteen feet (15').
   C.   In no case shall main buildings in a residential district be set back
further than forty feet (40') from any front property line, unless provision is
made for a future street or street widening, alleys, or alley widening; in
which case, the distance shall be not more than forty feet (40') from the
future property line as determined by the commission. Deed restrictions
existing on the effective date, if requiring a greater setback than forty feet
(40'), shall take precedence over this section. This maximum forty foot (40')
building setback line is waived for properties located in zones A-1, A-2, R-
A and R-E.
   D.   On key lots, the minimum front yard shall be the average of the front
yard for the adjoining interior lot and the side yard required for the reversed
corner lot. When buildings on the adjoining interior lot may be closer to the
property line than the distance prescribed for such front yard by this title,
the location of the existing building shall determine the front yard on such
interior lot, but in no case may the key lot front yard be less than fifteen
feet (15').
   E.   On corner lots, in residential districts, side yards abutting the
street shall be not less than the required front yard for lots in the district
in which the lot is located, and in no case, not less than fifteen feet (15').
Private garages located in the side yard on the side street shall be located at
least twenty feet (20') from the property line on the side street.
   F.   On a reversed corner lot, the side yard abutting the side street shall
be not less than the distance required for a front yard on the interior lots on
the side street, provided, however, that the yard shall be not less than
fifteen feet (15'). Private garages located in the side yard within fifty feet
(50') of the key lot shall be set back the same distance from the side lot line
of the reversed corner lot as the front yard for the key lot to its rear.
   G.   Where property has a slope of more than ten percent (10%), the maximum
front yard requirement of this title is waived. (Ord. 1000 § 37.00, 1955)
18.148.040: YARDS; MEASUREMENT PROCEDURES:
   A.   In measuring a front yard or side yard adjoining a street, it shall be
the perpendicular distance between the street and a line through the corner or
face of the building closest to and drawn parallel with the street, excluding
any architectural features permitted in section
18.152.070 of this title.
   B.   If any future right of way line has been established by provisions of a
specific ordinance, or by the general plan, then the measurement of the yard
shall be made from the future right of way line, or future property line so
defined. (Ord. 1000 § 38.00(A), 1955)
18.148.050: SIDE YARDS IN HILLSIDE AREAS:
Where building sites are graded into generally horizontal planes, and where the
difference in elevation between contiguous building sites is greater than three
feet (3'), the required side yard at the toe of the slope shall be increased by
one foot (1') for each foot, or portion thereof, over three feet (3') of
elevation differential. In no case may any building or structure be closer than
three feet (3') from the toe of the slope in such side yard, so as to provide
for drainage away from the building. (Ord. 1000 § 38.00(B), 1955)
18.148.060: YARDS; NEW SINGLE-FAMILY SUBDIVISIONS IN R-1 AND R-S ZONES:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of these provisions is to provide for flexibility
in the location and arrangement of homes in smaller lot subdivisions in order
to permit a greater variety in the design of such homes. The "buildable area",
within the context of this section is defined as the lot area within the
standard setbacks of the zone.
   B.   Variation: The side and rear yard requirements may be varied in
accordance with the following provisions:
      1.   Side Yards: Structures may be placed along one side property line
for up to sixty five percent (65%) of the lot depth, provided that the opposite
side yard is not less in width than the combined side yard requirement for the
zone. For corner lots, one side yard shall be considered a rear yard; however,
the combined side and rear yard for corner lots need not exceed twenty five
feet (25'). The distance from structures on adjacent lots shall be not less
than ten feet (10'). Where structures have zero side yards, appropriate
easements for painting and maintenance shall be provided on the adjacent lot.
No zero side yards may be located along property lines abutting land not a part
of the subdivision. No window or door openings are permitted on the zero
setback line.
      2.   Rear Yards: A portion of the main building or attached garage up to
thirty feet (30') in width may project into the required rear yard area to
within ten feet (10') of the rear property line, provided that there is a
corresponding reduction in the buildable area which is equal to the area of the
projection.
   C.   Recording Of Setback Lines And Easements Required:
      1.   All setback lines shall be approved by the director of planning, and
designated on the final recorded tract map.
      2.   All required easements and covenants necessary to provide
appropriate access for adjacent properties shall be filed with the final tract
map and be recorded as a part thereof. (Ord. 1000 § 38.00(C), 1955)
18.148.070: AGRICULTURAL GROVES:
   A.   The planting, cultivating and maintenance of agricultural groves is a
permitted use in any zone district; however, such groves shall be maintained in
a healthy, live condition in accordance with customary agricultural practices.
Failure to maintain any agricultural grove in such manner that the trees are
kept alive shall be cause for the city to require abatement of the condition by
the removal of any and all dead trees, and to enforce such requirement, as
provided in this title.
   B.   For the purpose of this section, ten (10) or more trees shall be
considered an "agricultural grove". (Ord. 1000 § 46.30, 1955)
CHAPTER 18.152
EXCEPTIONS
SECTION:
18.152.010: Applicability Of Exceptions
18.152.020: Hillside Lot Exceptions
18.152.030: Height Limit Exceptions For Structures
18.152.040: Large Scale Developments; Yard Variances For Housing
18.152.050: Large Scale Developments; Commercial
18.152.060: Large Scale Developments; Condominiums
18.152.070: Projections Into Yards
18.152.080: Lot Dimensions And Lot Area; Waiver Conditions
18.152.090: Substandard Lots Of Record
18.152.010: APPLICABILITY OF EXCEPTIONS:
The following exceptions, set out in this chapter, are permitted subject to the
conditions specified. (Ord. 1000 § 45.00, 1955)
18.152.020: HILLSIDE LOT EXCEPTIONS:
Lots in the hillside areas may be developed in accordance with the following
variations in property development standards, subject to commission review and
approval:
   A.   On property having a downhill slope of twenty five percent (25%) or
greater, measured in the general direction of the side lot lines, an additional
story may be constructed on the main building; provided, however, that the
ceiling of the lowest story shall be not more than two feet (2') above the curb
level, measured at the center of the lot frontage.
   B.   1. On property having uphill or downhill slopes, as described in
subsection A of this section, the commission may approve the construction of a
residence or garage in the required front yard.
      2.   Authorized construction shall commence within a period of one year
from the date of commission approval. The commission may grant an extension of
time not to exceed one year upon determination of cause by the applicant.
      3.   Any change in conditions that pertained to the property at the time
of approval shall void the approval.
   C.   Where no other method of access can be provided to serve lots in
hillside areas, where the slope of the street is greater than ten percent
(10%), and where the slope of the land is greater than twenty percent (20%), a
private way not less than twenty feet (20') in width may be approved by the
commission. (Ord. 1000 § 45.05, 1955)
18.152.030: HEIGHT LIMIT EXCEPTIONS FOR STRUCTURES:
Penthouses or roof structures or the housing of elevators, stairways, tanks,
ventilating fans or similar equipment required to operate and maintain the
building and fire or parapet walls, skylights, towers, steeples, flagpoles,
chimneys, smokestacks, personal television antennas, water tanks, silos,
churches or similar structures, may be erected above the maximum height
permitted in each district. No structure or penthouse shall be allowed for
purposes of providing additional floor space. (Ord. 2433 § 2, 2000)
18.152.040: LARGE SCALE DEVELOPMENTS; YARD VARIANCES FOR HOUSING:
Where the entire frontage in a residential block is designed/developed as a
unit, the following provisions may be applied:
   A.   The front yard requirements may be varied by not more than five feet
(5') in either direction, provided that the average front yard for the entire
frontage is not less than that required in the district.
   B.   The side yard provisions may be varied, provided that the combined
total width of the two (2) side yards on a lot shall be not less than that
required for lots in the district, and that the distance between the sides of
buildings is not less than ten feet (10'). (Ord. 1000 § 45.20(a), 1955)
18.152.050: LARGE SCALE DEVELOPMENTS; COMMERCIAL:
Where an area of more than five (5) acres is developed as a unit, the
commission may review and approve the site plan for the development, providing
the intent and purpose of this title is complied with, and where variations do
not decrease the property development standards by more than ten percent (10%)
in any requirement, and where the standards for relationships with abutting
property are substantially improved by the proposals on such site plan. (Ord.
1000 § 45.20(b), 1955)
18.152.060: LARGE SCALE DEVELOPMENTS; CONDOMINIUMS:
   A.   The individual lot area and dimension requirements of this title may be
waived for the subdivision of property developed in accordance with the
regulations of the state law governing condominium projects, provided that all
local regulations pertaining to density, building height, setbacks, space
between buildings, and other requirements applicable to the particular zone in
which the property is located, shall be complied with.
   B.   Site plans and elevations for all condominium projects shall be
submitted for commission review and approval at the same time a subdivision map
is filed for tentative approval.
   C.   Copies of all appurtenances, covenants and deed restrictions providing
for the maintenance of the premises subject to the interest in common shall be
submitted to the city planning department with the application for the
subdivision. The aforesaid documents shall be recorded in the office of the
county recorder. (Ord. 1000 § 45.20(c), 1955)
18.152.070: PROJECTIONS INTO YARDS:
   A.   Fire escapes may extend into any required yard not more than four feet
(4').
   B.   Open, unenclosed stairways or balconies may extend into a rear yard not
more than four feet (4'), and into a front yard not more than thirty inches
(30").
   C.   Open, unenclosed porches, platforms or landing platforms which do not
extend above the level of the first floor of the building may extend or project
into the front or rear yard a distance of not more than six feet (6'), and such
features may not extend into a court more than twenty percent (20%) of the
width of such court, and not more than six feet (6').
   D.   Planting boxes may be permitted in a required yard.
   E.   Roof projections may extend into a required side yard as provided by
this title, but not closer than two feet (2') to the side property line, nor
creating less than four feet (4') of space between such projection and the
closest point on any adjoining building.
   F.   Fireplace structures may be located in a required yard, provided they
do not reduce the yard by more than two feet (2'), nor create any yard less
than three feet (3') in width.
   G.   1. Portion Of Main Building: A portion of the main building, or an
attached garage, not to exceed thirty feet (30') in width may project into the
required rear yard area to within ten feet (10') of the rear property line, if
a rear yard open space having a minimum dimension of fifteen feet (15') and
containing a minimum area of one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet for
the R-1 and R-1-D districts; two thousand one hundred (2,100) square feet for
the R-S district; and two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet for the R-
E, R-A, R-A-A, R-R and R-R-A districts, is provided. Such rear yard open space
shall be located to the rear of the front setback line and may not contain any
detached accessory buildings.
      2.   Permitted Projection: No permitted projection shall be located
closer than ten feet (10') from any existing or potential structure on abutting
residential properties.
      3.   Exception: Rear yard open space for substandard lots of record may
be reduced below the required area in direct proportion to which the lot area
is substandard for the zone district wherein it is located. In no case,
however, shall the rear yard open space be less than one thousand (1,000)
square feet.
   H.   Open, unenclosed, covered patios may project to within five feet (5')
of the rear property line.
   I.   In all residential zones where the side yard of an existing residence
is nonconforming with the side yard provisions of the zone, additions to the
residence may be permitted to be built along the same horizontal plane as the
nonconforming side yard provided the following conditions are met:
      1.   The square footage of the addition does not exceed fifty percent
(50%) of the square footage of the existing unit;
      2.   All other provisions of the zone district, especially maximum
coverage by structures, and rear yard requirements, are complied with;
      3.   In no case shall the addition be less than three feet (3') from the
property line. (Ord. 2333 § 40, 1997: Ord. 2054 § 1, 1988: Ord. 1000 § 45.30,
1955)
18.152.080: LOT DIMENSIONS AND LOT AREA; WAIVER CONDITIONS:
The minimum lot dimension(s) and area requirements for a residential zone may
be waived for housing projects approved under the provisions of chapter 18.192
of this title. (Ord. 1000 § 45.40, 1955)
18.152.090: SUBSTANDARD LOTS OF RECORD:
If two (2) or more adjoining and vacant platted lots with continuous frontage
are in a single ownership at any time after the adoption date hereof, and such
platted lots individually are too small to meet the yard dimensions and area
requirements of the district in which they are located, such group of platted
lots shall be considered a single plot, or several plots of minimum size, and
the plot or plots in one ownership shall be subject to the requirements of this
title and all sections thereof. (Ord. 1000 § 49.00, 1955)
CHAPTER 18.156
DEVELOPMENT PROVISIONS FOR SPECIFIC USES
SECTION:
Article I. Adaptive Reuses In Historically Significant Homes
18.156.010: Purpose Of Provisions
18.156.020: Definitions
18.156.030: Commission And Council Approval Requirements
18.156.040: Property Development Standards
Article II. Automobile Service Stations
18.156.170: Purpose Of Provisions
18.156.180: Commission And Council Approval Requirements
18.156.190: Property Development Standards
18.156.200: Equipment Rentals
18.156.210: Self-Service Operations
18.156.220: Combination Uses
Article III. Bed And Breakfast Inns
18.156.230: Purpose Of Provisions
18.156.240: Definitions
18.156.250: Commission Approval Requirements
18.156.260: Property Development Standards
18.156.270: Location; Conditional Use Permit
Article IV. Condominiums And Condominium Conversions
18.156.280: Purpose Of Provisions
18.156.290: Definitions
18.156.300: Commission And Council Approval Requirements
18.156.310: Application; Requirement And Procedures
18.156.320: Application; Approval Conditions
18.156.330: Covenants, Conditions And Restrictions
18.156.340: Final Map Approval Conditions
Article V. Drive-Through Restaurants And Services
18.156.350: Purpose Of Provisions
18.156.360: Commission And Council Approval Required
18.156.370: Property Development Standards
18.156.380: Traffic Study Required
Article VI. Nonresidential Uses In A Residential Building
18.156.390: Purpose Of Provisions
18.156.400: Use In Certain Zones Permitted When
18.156.410: Commission Approval Required
18.156.420: Property Development Standards
Article VII. Second Residential Dwelling Units
18.156.430: Purpose Of Provisions
18.156.440: Second Unit Defined
18.156.450: Approval Required
18.156.460: Property Development Standards
Article VIII. Family Daycare Homes
18.156.570: Purpose Of Provisions
18.156.580: Definitions
18.156.590: Application Requirements
18.156.610: Development Standards
Article IX. Automobile Sales Development Standards
18.156.650: Purpose Of Provisions
18.156.660: Property Development Standards
Article X. Private Residential Recreation Courts
18.156.700: Purpose Of Article
18.156.710: Compliance; And Permitted Courts
18.156.720: Courts Permitted By Administrative Use Permit
18.156.730: Fencing Development Standards
18.156.740: Landscape Development Standards
18.156.750: Lighting Development Standards
Article XI. Recycling Centers
18.156.800: Purpose Of Article
18.156.810: Definitions
18.156.820: Permit Requirements
18.156.830: Development And Operating Standards
Article XII. Warehouses And Logistics Distribution Centers
18.156.900: Definitions
18.156.910: Applicability
18.156.920: Site Location Requirement
18.156.930: Screening And Buffering Requirements
18.156.940: Traffic Patterns And Sign Requirements
18.156.950: Sustainable Energy
18.156.960: Operation And Construction
Article XIII. Low-Barrier Navigation Centers
18.156.1010: Purpose Of Provisions
18.156.1020: Definitions
18.156.1030: Applicability
18.156.1040: Allowed Zones
18.156.1050: Permit Required
18.156.1060: Development And Operational Standards
Article XIV. Farmworker Housing Standards
18.156.1100: Purpose
18.156.1110: Definitions
18.156.1120: Permitting And Development Standards For Farmworker Housing
18.156.1130: General Provisions
18.156.1140: Development Standards For Farmworker Housing
18.156.1150: Standards For Farmworker Housing Complex
18.156.1160: Standards For Farmworker Temporary Trailers
18.156.1170: Employment Criteria, Verification, And Enforcement
Article XV. Single Room Occupancy Facilities
18.156.1200: Purpose Of Article
18.156.1210: General Provisions
18.156.1220: Development Standards
18.156.1230: Management
18.156.1240: Existing Facilities
Article XVI. Two-Unit Projects On Residential Parcels
18.156.1300: Purpose Of Article
18.156.1310: Definitions
18.156.1320: Application Requirements
18.156.1330: Development Standards
18.156.1340: Specific Adverse Impacts
18.156.1350: Approval By Director
18.156.1360: Appeal Of Director Action
18.156.1370: Extension And Amendment
18.156.1380: Remedies
ARTICLE I. ADAPTIVE REUSES IN HISTORICALLY SIGNIFICANT HOMES
18.156.010: PURPOSE OF PROVISIONS:
The purpose of the provisions set out in this article is to establish
procedures for the permitting of certain nonresidential uses in existing
residential structures, in order to encourage the preservation of homes
identified by the Historic and scenic preservation commission as having special
historical, architectural or cultural significance in the community. (Ord. 1906
§ 1, 1986: Ord. 1000 § 52.10(J), 1955)
18.156.020: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article:
   ADAPTIVE REUSE: A nonresidential use that is to be utilized in conjunction
with a residential use. The following individual uses or a combination thereof
are allowed under this section, if determined to be appropriate for the
particular location and structure:
   A.   Art association and art galleries;
   B.   Conducting of charitable, nonprofit or political events and programs of
general public interest; premises at which events are held no more often than
yearly shall not require a permit under this section;
   C.   Conducting of receptions;
   D.   Conducting of recitals;
   E.   Conducting of weddings;
   F.   Gift shop as an accessory use to another use in this list;
   G.   Home tours, including showcase homes;
   H.   Museums;
   I.   Retreats, such as for executives and religious groups.
   HISTORICAL, ARCHITECTURAL OR CULTURAL SIGNIFICANCE: The architecture or
design of the structure is exemplary of a significant or unique architectural
style, or, that the structure as owned by a person or group of persons who have
significant historical or cultural involvement with the development of the
City. (Ord. 1906 § 1, 1986: Ord. 1000 § 52.10(J)(2), 1955)
18.156.030: COMMISSION AND COUNCIL APPROVAL REQUIREMENTS:
Application shall be in the form of a conditional use permit. The applicant
must be the owner, as demonstrated by a grant deed, the lessee pursuant to a
lease with a term of at least twenty five (25) years, or the purchaser pursuant
to a land sale contract. These additional requirements shall be imposed:
   A.   The structure shall serve as the primary residence of the owner unless
the owner is a nonprofit corporation. An exception may be granted for nonprofit
entities that qualify for tax exempt status pursuant to federal or state law.
   B.   The historic and scenic preservation commission shall review the
proposal for a determination of special historical, architectural or cultural
significance prior to planning commission review, and their recommendations
shall be considered by the planning commission in imposing conditions on the
project. The structure shall be included on the city's Register of Historic and
Scenic Properties or a state or national listing of historical significance,
during the life of the permit.
   C.   If the use at any time becomes objectionable to the neighborhood due to
noise, odors, lights, traffic, on street parking, nighttime activities, or any
other nuisances, the application may be revoked pursuant to chapter 18.192 of
this title.
   D.   The permit is granted solely to the applicant. If control of the
property is transferred to another party, a new permit shall be required.
   E.   The projected volume of traffic to be generated by the activity, as
compared to normal traffic expected with full development of the site in
accordance with the zone classification, shall be utilized as a guide in
determining the number, size, frequency and hours of activities to be
permitted. For other than home tours, art galleries and museums, the number of
activity days in the multiple-family residential zones shall not exceed four
(4) in any calendar month, and in the single- family zones shall not exceed two
(2) in any calendar month, except upon special approval by the planning
commission for good cause shown.
   F.   Permits shall be subject to a one year review period by the planning
commission after the first year of operation.
   G.   All proceeds derived from the adaptive reuse of a historic home shall
be used exclusively for the physical preservation and restoration of this
structure, and to defray the reasonable costs of administering activities
authorized by the permit. (Ord. 1906 § 1, 1986: Ord. 1000 § 52.10(J)(1), 1955)
18.156.040: PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
   A.   The lot upon which the adaptive reuse is to be established shall
conform to the minimum area and dimension standards of the zoning district in
which it is located, and shall not be further subdivided.
   B.   Parking spaces in a permitted location shall be provided on the same
lot for the adaptive reuse(s) in addition to the required parking spaces
serving the resident owner. No on street parking is permitted.
   C.   Any sign shall be reviewed as part of the conditional use permit
application and shall not exceed four (4) square feet in area. If not attached
to the residence, a sign shall not exceed three feet (3') in height. One sign
shall be permitted. The sign may only be externally lighted. Signs may only be
lighted during hours of activity. Lighting shall be turned off between ten
o'clock (10:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M.
   D.   The planning commission may, at the time of application hearing,
determine a reasonable combination of adaptive reuses to be permitted.
   E.   The applicable provisions of article VI of this chapter shall apply to
adaptive reuse(s).
   F.   In addition to standards required of all conditional use permits, per
chapter 18.192 of this title, the planning commission may require the
preservation and maintenance of significant permanent landscaping features and
significant historical, architectural or cultural features of the structures or
property, as a condition of the permit. (Ord. 2470 § 2, 2001: Ord. 1906 § 1,
1986: Ord. 1000 § 52.10(J)(3), 1955)
ARTICLE II. AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATIONS
18.156.170: PURPOSE OF PROVISIONS:
No automobile service station shall be constructed, remodeled or enlarged, and
no existing service station shall be converted for another use in any zone,
except as specifically provided in this article. (Ord. 2470 § 2, 2001: Ord.
1000 § 52.10(A), 1955)
18.156.180: COMMISSION AND COUNCIL APPROVAL REQUIREMENTS:
All service station facilities shall be subject to the provisions of this
article:
   A.   All new service stations require approval of a conditional use permit.
   B.   The remodeling or enlargement of an existing service station requires
commission review and approval.
   C.   The conversion of an existing service station facility to another use
requires commission review and approval. (Ord. 1000 § 52.10(A)(1), 1955)
18.156.190: PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The following property development standards shall apply when more restrictive
than those for the particular zone:
   A.   Site Area: Each new service station site shall be located on a lot
having an area of not less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. This
requirement shall not apply to the redevelopment of an existing service
station.
   B.   Site Dimensions: The minimum lot width and depth dimensions shall be
one hundred twenty feet (120'). This requirement shall not apply to the
redevelopment of an existing service station.
   C.   Access: The site must abut and have access to a major or secondary
highway, as shown on the Redlands general plan.
   D.   Parking: Off street parking shall be provided in accordance with the
provisions of sections
18.164.140 through
18.164.320 of this title. No outdoor parking or storage of wrecked, dismantled
or inoperative vehicles is permitted. Parked vehicles shall be limited to those
directly associated with the business, or awaiting service. No parking is
permitted in the corner cutoff area.
   E.   Landscaping:
      1.   Except for driveway openings, there shall be a landscaped planter
area not less than five feet (5') in width extending along the entire street
frontage.
      2.   A minimum of four percent (4%) of the remaining lot area shall be
landscaped, with not less than fifty percent (50%) of such landscaping provided
along the interior property lines.
      3.   All planter areas shall be enclosed by six inch (6") high concrete
curbs.
      4.   A detailed landscaping plan indicating types and distribution of
plantings shall be provided with the application.
   F.   Walls: A three foot (3') high solid masonry wall shall be constructed
along all interior property lines. The wall shall be increased in height to not
less than five feet (5') nor more than six feet (6') when the site is adjacent
to a school, church, park, club, hospital, or residential zone or use. The
planning commission may require additional walls, as determined necessary for
proper development of the site.
   G.   Restrooms: All restroom entrances shall be screened from view of
adjacent properties and street rights of way by some form of decorative wall or
similar device.
   H.   Architectural Treatment: It is the policy of the city to require a
higher than typical quality of architectural treatment for service stations.
Applicants are encouraged to submit designs which are in keeping with the
overall character and quality of the neighborhood and community. The
architectural treatment of each station will be reviewed carefully and approved
only when the appearance of the station is considered suitable to the city.
Customer pump areas shall be roofed.
   I.   Trash Storage: All trash, refuse and used merchandise shall be stored
in an area enclosed by solid walls or fences. Such area shall be located in the
rear portion of the lot.
   J.   Utilities: All utilities on the site, for direct service to the
business, shall be installed underground.
   K.   Lighting: All lighting elements on the exterior and interior of the
structure shall be shielded from horizontal view, except for sign lights or
those especially designed for illumination of the parking lots. (Ord. 2676 § 1,
2007: Ord. 1000 § 52.10(A)(2), 1955)
18.156.200: EQUIPMENT RENTALS:
The outside storage of rental trailers and similar equipment may be permitted,
provided they are completely screened from public view and the use is
specifically authorized in the conditional use permit. Additional lot area over
the required minimum, in the amount of two hundred (200) square feet per rental
unit, shall be provided. (Ord. 1000 § 52.10(A)(3)(a), 1955)
18.156.210: SELF-SERVICE OPERATIONS:
An attendant shall be on duty at all times during open business hours. (Ord.
1000 § 52.10(A)(3)(b), 1955)
18.156.220: COMBINATION USES:
The sale of gasoline and petroleum products in combination with some other type
service shall be subject to approval of a conditional use permit. (Ord. 1000 §
52.10(A)(3)(c), 1955)
ARTICLE III. BED AND BREAKFAST INNS
18.156.230: PURPOSE OF PROVISIONS:
The purpose of this article is to encourage the preservation of homes
identified by the historic and scenic preservation commission as having special
historical, architectural or cultural significance to the community by
establishing procedures for permitting bed and breakfast inns in such homes.
(Ord. 2592 § 1, 2005: Ord. 2470 § 2, 2001: Ord. 1863 § 1, 1985: Ord. 1000 §
52.10(I), 1955)
18.156.240: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article:
   BED AND BREAKFAST INN: A residential building containing a specified number
of guestrooms occupied by a specific number of persons, which provides living
units and meals for transient guests, and which is managed and occupied by the
owner of the property in residential zones or by a manager residing on the
property in nonresidential zones.
   BED AND BREAKFAST USE: Use of property for a bed and breakfast inn.
   HISTORICAL, ARCHITECTURAL OR CULTURAL SIGNIFICANCE: The architecture or
design of the structure is exemplary of a significant or unique architectural
style; or, the structure was a site of a significant historical or cultural
event; or, the structure was owned by a person or group of persons who have
significant historical or cultural involvement with the development of the
city. (Ord. 2592 § 1, 2005: Ord. 2175 § 1, 1991: Ord. 1863 § 1, 1985: Ord. 1000
§ 52.10(I)(2), 1955)
18.156.250: COMMISSION APPROVAL REQUIREMENTS:
Application shall be in the form of a conditional use permit. These additional
requirements shall be imposed:
   A.   In residential zones, the inn structure shall serve as the primary
residence of the owner, and if a corporation is the owner, a majority
shareholder shall reside primarily in the inn structure. In nonresidential
zones, a full time manager shall reside on the property.
   B.   The historic and scenic preservation commission shall review the
proposal for a determination of historical, architectural or cultural
significance prior to planning commission review, and its recommendations shall
be considered by the planning commission in imposing conditions on the project.
The inn structure shall be included on the city's Register of Historic and
Scenic Properties, or on a state or national listing of historical
significance, during the life of the permit.
   C.   Check in hours for guests shall be determined by the owner of the bed
and breakfast inn.
   D.   Meals shall be served only to overnight guests of the bed and breakfast
inn, except as provided in subsection E of this section.
   E.   In nonresidential zones only, an ancillary use limited to a coffee/tea
house, gift shop and/or restaurant serving the public may be permitted provided
the serving area or sales area of such use(s) does not occupy more than ten
percent (10%) of the gross floor area of the dwelling. The ancillary use shall
be approved as part of the permit for the bed and breakfast use. The size of
the serving area or sales area of such use(s) shall be based on the parcel's
ability to provide the required parking for the use(s) pursuant to chapter
18.164 of this title. The hours of operation shall be determined based on
compatibility with the adjacent land uses, except that if the parcel abuts a
property in residential use, the hours of operation shall not extend beyond
eight o'clock (8:00) P.M.
   F.   In residential zones, no long term rental of rooms shall be permitted;
the maximum length of stay for guests shall be fourteen (14) days. In
nonresidential zones, the maximum length of stay for guests shall be thirty
(30) days.
   G.   No cooking facilities shall be allowed in the guestrooms.
   H.   Applications shall be subject to a one year review period by the
planning commission.
   I.   If the use at any time becomes unduly intrusive to the neighborhood, or
the owner fails to comply with all conditions of approval related to the
permit, the permit may be revoked pursuant to chapter 18.192 of this title.
   J.   The permit to operate is granted in accordance with chapter 18.192,
"Conditional Use Permits", of this title. Where the bed and breakfast use or
any portion thereof is discontinued for one hundred eighty (180) days, the
permit shall become null and void and a new permit shall be required to
reestablish the use.
   K.   The owner of the bed and breakfast inn shall be subject to the
requirements of chapter 3.24 of this code regarding the collection and payment
of transient occupancy tax imposed by this chapter. The owner shall keep and
preserve, for a period of three (3) years, all records of rents and guests as
required in chapter 3.24 of this code. The city shall have the right to inspect
said records at reasonable times to ensure compliance with this chapter.
   L.   Satisfactory evidence of compliance with state and local laws in other
land use endeavors, if any, shall be provided by the owner as a prerequisite to
any approvals under this article. (Ord. 2592 § 1, 2005: Ord. 2470 § 2, 2001:
Ord. 2202 § 1, 1992: Ord. 2175 § 2, 1991: Ord. 1863 § 1, 1985: Ord. 1000 §
52.10(I)(1), 1955)
18.156.260: PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
   A.   Conformance: The lot upon which the bed and breakfast inn is to be
established shall conform to all standards of the zoning district in which it
is located, and shall not be further subdivided.
   B.   Parking: One parking space in a permitted location shall be provided on
the same lot for each guestroom and each employee, in addition to the required
parking spaces serving the resident owner.
   C.   Outdoor Living Space: Outdoor living space shall be provided in
accordance with the minimum standards of the zone.
   D.   Signs: Any sign shall be reviewed as part of the conditional use permit
application, and shall not exceed four (4) square feet in area in residential
zones, and twenty (20) square feet in nonresidential zones. If not attached to
the residence, a sign shall not exceed three feet (3') in height. One sign
shall be permitted. The sign may be lighted externally. Lighting shall be
turned off between ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M.
   E.   Number Of Rooms:
      1.   In the single-family residential zones, the number of guestrooms
shall not exceed one room for each multiple of minimum lot area required for
each dwelling unit in the underlying zone, with a maximum number of ten (10).
      2.   In the multiple-family residential and nonresidential zones, the
maximum number of rooms shall be determined by the adequacy of the parcel to
provide on site parking and outdoor living space.
   F.   Guest Limit: The planning commission may determine a reasonable maximum
limit to the total number of guests staying at the inn.
   G.   Additional Provisions: The provisions of article VI of this chapter, on
nonresidential uses in a residential building, shall apply to bed and breakfast
inns.
   H.   Preservation And Maintenance Of Significant Landscaping Features: In
addition to standards required of all conditional uses, per this chapter, the
planning commission may require the preservation and maintenance of significant
permanent landscaping features and significant historical, architectural or
cultural features of the structure or property. (Ord. 2592 § 1, 2005: Ord. 2470
§ 2, 2001: Ord. 1863 § 1, 1985: Ord. 1000 § 52.10(I)(3), 1955)
18.156.270: LOCATION; CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT:
Subject to the provisions of this article, a conditional use permit for a bed
and breakfast inn use in existing single-family homes shall be available within
any zone in the city. (Ord. 2592 § 1, 2005: Ord. 1909 § 1, 1986: Ord. 1863 § 1,
1985: Ord. 1000 § 52.10(I)(4), 1955)
ARTICLE IV. CONDOMINIUMS AND CONDOMINIUM CONVERSIONS
18.156.280: PURPOSE OF PROVISIONS:
The purpose of this article is to establish criteria, standards and procedures
for the construction of new condominium projects, or conversion of existing
residential buildings to condominiums, consistent with the following
objectives:
   A.   To make adequate provision for the housing needs of all economic
segments of the community;
   B.   To provide for inhabitant ownership of residential units, while
recognizing the need for maintaining adequate rental housing inventories;
   C.   To provide a reasonable balance of rental and ownership housing;
   D.   To inform prospective conversion buyers regarding the physical
conditions of the structure offered for sale. (Ord. 2470 § 2, 2001: Ord. 1000 §
52.10(G), 1955)
18.156.290: DEFINITIONS:
   A.   As used in this article:
   COMMON AREA: The entire project, excepting all units granted or reserved.
   CONDOMINIUM: Means and includes the following:
   A.   "Condominium", as defined by section 783 of the Civil Code;
   B.   "Community apartment project", as defined by section 11004 of the
Business and Professions Code;
   C.   "Stock cooperative", as defined by section 11003.2 of the Business and
Professions Code;
   D.   "Planned development", as defined by section 11003 of the Business and
Professions Code.
   CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION: Means and refers to condominiums in which the
existing units are being used as single-family or multiple-family residences,
not divided into separate units.
   CONDOMINIUM DOCUMENTS: The declaration of covenants, conditions and
restrictions, the description of project elements, and the enabling declaration
establishing a plan for condominium ownership.
   PROJECT ELEMENTS: The condominium units which are to be conveyed, the areas
and spaces which are to be assigned to such units, and the common areas which
are to be shared by the owners of all units.
   PROPOSED CONDOMINIUM: Means and refers to condominiums in which the unit(s)
is not as yet constructed.
   B.   A "condominium project", as defined in Civil Code section 1350, shall
be subject to the requirements and procedures applicable to subdivisions and
any additional requirements and procedures set forth in this article.
   C.   All other terms in this article shall have the same definitions as set
forth in the applicable state laws relative to the subdivision of land. The
provisions of the Redlands subdivision ordinance and the California subdivision
map act shall govern all applications under this article. (Ord. 1000 § 52.10(G)
(2), 1955)
18.156.300: COMMISSION AND COUNCIL APPROVAL REQUIREMENTS:
Residential condominiums shall comply with all appropriate provisions of this
code, and the conditions imposed by a conditional use permit. The planning
commission and city council shall review and approve the use prior to the
consideration of a tentative map application. (Ord. 1000 § 52.10(G)(1), 1955)
18.156.310: APPLICATIONS REQUIREMENT AND PROCEDURES:
   A.   The initial action in connection with the making of any condominium
subdivision shall be the preparation of a map, which shall include or be
accompanied by the following data, as well as otherwise complying with the
property development standards of the zone in which the project is to be
located:
      1.   The location, assignment and square footage of each unit, including
the number of rooms in each unit;
      2.   The location and assignment of all storage space outside of each
unit;
      3.   The location and assignment of all parking spaces;
      4.   The location and assignment of all private open space areas;
      5.   The location of all common areas;
      6.   The location of all facilities and amenities provided within the
common area for the enjoyment and use of the unit owners;
      7.   A word description of all common areas, facilities and amenities
which are provided for the enjoyment and use of the unit owners;
      8.   A tree, landscaping and irrigation plan;
      9.   A complete copy of conditions, covenants and restrictions shall be
provided. The city may be made a third party beneficiary to the conditions,
covenants and restrictions, as deemed appropriate;
The following paragraph shall be included in the conditions, covenants and
restrictions:
The condominium units have been constructed in accordance with the Uniform
Building Code as portions of an apartment house. The fire resistance of walls,
ceilings, and floors between units is not equal to the fire resistant
separations required by the Uniform Building Code for single family dwelling
units constructed on adjacent properties.
   B.   The minimum standards for condominium construction or conversion shall
be as follows:
      1.   Two (2) covered parking spaces in a fully enclosed garage, plus one-
half (1/2) open guest parking space for each dwelling unit shall be provided;
      2.   Wall and floor-ceiling assemblies shall conform to the sound
insulation performance criteria promulgated in title 25, California
Administrative Code, section 1092, or its successor;
      3.   The consumption of gas and electricity within each dwelling unit
shall be separately metered so that the unit owner can be separately billed for
each utility. A water shutoff valve shall be provided for each unit;
      4.   a. All permanent mechanical equipment, including domestic
appliances, which is determined by the building official to be a source or
potential source of vibration or noise, shall be shock mounted, isolated from
the floor and ceiling, or otherwise installed in a manner approved by the
building official to lessen the transmission of vibration and noise,
         b.   The anchorages of the permanent mechanical equipment are to be
designed to resist the lateral seismic forces, as required by the current
edition of the uniform building code. Failure of the city to identify potential
sources of vibration on the approval of a specific vibration system does not
prevent the city from subsequently requiring additional modification to the
mechanical equipment to prevent vibration or noise from being detected in other
condominium dwelling units;
      5.   The proposed condominium project shall comply with all requirements
of building, fire and housing codes, zoning provisions, and other applicable
regulations in effect at the time of the application;
      6.   A private outdoor living space containing a minimum area and
dimension as specified for the particular zone shall be provided for each unit.
   C.   In a conversion, the application shall furthermore provide:
      1.   A building report detailing the condition and estimating the
remaining useful life of each element of the project proposed for conversion,
including, but not limited to: curbs, paving, walkways, roofs, foundations,
exterior paint, systems (including sewage systems), swimming pools, elevators,
irrigation systems for landscaping, utility and air conditioning systems, fire
protection systems (including automatic sprinkler systems, alarm systems or
standpipe systems), and structural elements. Such report shall be prepared by
an appropriately licensed contractor, architect, registered civil or structural
engineer other than the owner. For any element whose useful life is less than
five (5) years, a replacement cost estimate shall be provided. The report shall
state, to the best knowledge or estimate of the applicant, when such element
was built, the condition of each element, when the element was replaced, the
approximate date upon which the element will require replacement, the cost of
replacing the element, and any variation of the physical condition of the
element from the housing code and city building code in effect on the date that
the last building permit was issued for the subject structure. The report shall
identify any defective or unsafe elements, and set forth the proposed
corrective measure to be employed. The building official shall review the
report and shall indicate improvements, repairs and/or replacements to be
provided;
      2.   A structural pest report, prepared by a licensed structural pest
control operator. The developer shall repair or replace any damaged or infested
areas in need of repair or replacement, as shown in the structural pest report;
      3.   A report on any known soil and geological conditions regarding soil
deposits, rock formations, faults, ground water and landslides in the vicinity
of the project, and a statement regarding any known evidence of soils problems
relating to the structure. Reference shall be made to any previous soils
reports for the site, and a copy submitted with the report;
      4.   The developer shall submit a current list of all tenants, and a
proposed program to accommodate tenants of units sought to be converted, with
specific reference to:
         a.   Relocation assistance,
         b.   Availability of substitute accommodations,
         c.   Notice of termination of tenancy, giving tenants one hundred
eighty (180) days' notice to vacate units,
         d.   Increase in rent during the period between the date of
application and the date of approval or disapproval of the final map, to be
limited to the increase in the bureau of labor statistics retail price index
for all items, from the date of application to the date of increase, and
         e.   A statement that tenants, as of date of the application filed,
have a preemptive right to purchase a unit, with such right being irrevocable
for ninety (90) days after recordation of final map, together with a
certification that all tenants in any building or structure have been notified
individually and in writing in accordance with all state laws and any
amendments thereto, prior to the time of filing an application under this
article;
      5.   The developer shall provide moving expenses of two (2) times the
monthly rent to any tenant who relocates from the building to be converted,
after approval of the condominium conversion by the city, except where the
tenant has given notice of his intent to move prior to receipt of notification
from the developer of his intent to convert;
      6.   The developer shall allow an extension of time to permit a tenant to
complete a school semester or quarter, as the case may be;
      7.   The developer shall be required to retain ownership to units
occupied at the time of filing of the tentative subdivision map or tentative
parcel map by senior citizens sixty two (62) years of age or older, or the
handicapped, as defined by section 50072 of the Health and Safety Code, or the
disabled, as defined by section 223 of the U.S. social security act, until
alternative comparable housing can be obtained. (Ord. 1000 § 52.10(G)(3), 1955)
18.156.320: APPLICATION; APPROVAL CONDITIONS:
   A.   An application for a condominium project shall not be approved or
conditionally approved unless the planning commission and city council
determine that the conversion is consistent with the public health, safety and
welfare, and with the city's comprehensive general plan, and the housing
element thereof. In making such determination, the planning commission and the
city council may consider such factors relevant to public health, safety or
welfare as appear in each particular case.
   B.   The council of the city finds and declares that when the number of
vacant apartments being offered for rent or lease in the city is equal to or
less than five percent (5%) of the total number of such dwelling units offered
for rent or lease in the city, a housing shortage exists which is inconsistent
with the purposes of this title, and with the declared goals and objectives of
the city. Vacancy data shall be provided by the developer and confirmed by the
city. (Ord. 1000 § 52.10(G)(4), 1955)
18.156.330: COVENANTS, CONDITIONS AND RESTRICTIONS:
Each condominium subdivision and minor subdivision shall be required to have a
declaration of restrictions which provides for those powers, duties, rights and
obligations as set forth in the Civil Code, section 1355, and such declaration
shall meet the requirements of the city attorney. (Ord. 1000 § 52.10(G)(5),
1955)
18.156.340: FINAL MAP APPROVAL CONDITIONS:
Each condominium project shall meet the following requirements prior to the
granting of final approval of the tract map or parcel map:
   A.   All requirements imposed by the conditional use permit shall have been
complied with;
   B.   The building official has certified that all required improvements,
repairs and/or replacements for a condominium conversion have been completed;
   C.   The city attorney has approved the covenants, conditions and
restrictions, and organizational documents;
   D.   The developer shall provide proof of compliance with all conditions
required for final map approval, as contained in the California Government Code
and any amendments thereto. (Ord. 1000 § 52.10(G)(6), 1955)
ARTICLE V. DRIVE-THROUGH RESTAURANTS AND SERVICES
18.156.350: PURPOSE OF PROVISIONS:
The purpose of the provisions set out in this article is to establish criteria,
standards and procedures for the development of drive-through restaurants and
services consistent with the following objectives:
   A.   Drive-through service shall not create vehicular congestion;
   B.   Drive-through service shall not create pedestrian conflicts in high
pedestrian traffic areas;
   C.   Sufficient on site parking and drive-through automobile stacking
capacity shall be provided to permit the free flow of traffic along public
streets;
   D.   Drive-through service shall not constitute a nuisance to adjacent
property owners due to increased traffic, noise, odors and lights;
   E.   Internal traffic flow shall be arranged to minimize air pollution
through separation of on site parking and drive-through aisles to reduce
waiting time. (Ord. 2470 § 2, 2001: Ord. 1964 § 1, 1986: Ord. 1000 § 52.10(K),
1955)
18.156.360: COMMISSION AND COUNCIL APPROVAL REQUIRED:
Application shall be in the form of a conditional use permit, subject to the
provisions of this article, and shall be applicable to the construction of a
new facility as well as the conversion or enlargement of an existing facility.
(Ord. 1964 § 1, 1986: Ord. 1000 § 52.10(K)(1), 1955)
18.156.370: PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The following property development standards shall apply when more restrictive
than those for the particular zone:
   A.   Site Dimensions: The minimum lot width and depth dimensions shall be
one hundred twenty feet (120').
   B.   Location: The site must abut and have access to a major or secondary
highway, as shown on the Redlands general plan.
   C.   Parking: Off street parking shall be provided in accordance with the
provisions of sections
18.164.140 through
18.164.320 of this title.
   D.   Landscaping:
      1.   Except for driveway openings, there shall be a landscaped planter
area not less than ten feet (10') in width extending along the entire street
frontage, and not less than five feet (5') in width along all interior property
lines.
      2.   A minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of the total site shall be
landscaped.
      3.   All landscaping provisions of chapter 18.168 of this title shall
apply.
   E.   Walls: A three foot (3') high solid masonry wall shall be constructed
along all interior property lines. The planning commission may require higher
walls, as determined necessary for proper development of the site and
protection of adjacent property owners.
   F.   Architectural Treatment: It is the policy of the city to require a
higher than typical quality of architectural treatment for drive-through uses.
Applicants are encouraged to submit designs which are in keeping with the
overall character and quality of the neighborhood and community.
   G.   Screening: Drive-through aisles shall be completely screened from the
view of public rights of way, to a height equal to or greater than that of
standard vehicular headlights. Screening shall be by use of walls, earth berms,
landscaping, or a combination thereof. (Ord. 2805, 2014: Ord. 2439 § 1, 2000:
Ord. 1964 § 1, 1986: Ord. 1000 § 52.10(K)(2), 1955)
18.156.380: TRAFFIC STUDY REQUIRED:
A traffic study prepared by a qualified traffic engineer shall be submitted
with the application. (Ord. 1964 § 1, 1986: Ord. 1000 § 52.10(K)(3), 1955)
ARTICLE VI. NONRESIDENTIAL USES IN A RESIDENTIAL BUILDING
18.156.390: PURPOSE OF PROVISIONS:
The purpose of the provisions set out in this article is to encourage the
preservation and continued use of homes which have historical, architectural,
cultural or aesthetic interest or value to the community. (Ord. 2470 § 2, 2001:
Ord. 1000 § 52.10(B), 1955)
18.156.400: USE IN CERTAIN ZONES PERMITTED WHEN:
A residential building may be utilized for nonresidential purposes in the A-P,
C-3, C-4 and C-M zones under the conditions set out in this article. (Ord. 2155
§ 2, 1991: Ord. 1000 § 52.10(B), 1955)
18.156.410: COMMISSION APPROVAL REQUIRED:
Application shall be in the form of a conditional use permit, subject to the
provisions of this article, and must cite the historical, architectural,
cultural or aesthetic interest or value to the community proposed to be
preserved or continued. (Ord. 1000 § 52.10(B)(1), 1955)
18.156.420: PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
   A.   The residential structure shall be improved to conform with the
requirements of the fire and building and safety departments. Their
requirements shall be developed from a careful study of each structure and the
appropriate building and fire ordinances of the city. It is anticipated that
all possible alternatives will be explored to retain the structure and still
comply with the spirit and intent of the codes.
   B.   The exterior of the structure shall not be modified in a manner that
would alter its residential character.
   C.   The commission may require complete exterior renovation of the
structure, including repainting and reroofing.
   D.   Off street parking shall be provided as required in sections
18.164.140 through
18.164.320 of this title. No parking is permitted in any existing front yard
area.
   E.   One identification sign containing the name of the business and/or use,
not exceeding twenty (20) square feet in area, is permitted. In reviewing the
sign, special emphasis will be placed on the proper integration of the sign
with the project.
   F.   All on site utilities shall be placed underground.
   G.   Front yard areas shall be landscaped and maintained in accordance with
the provisions of chapter 18.168 of this title. (Ord. 1000 § 52.10(B)(2), 1955)
ARTICLE VII. SECOND RESIDENTIAL DWELLING UNITS
18.156.430: PURPOSE OF PROVISIONS:
The purpose of this article is to establish the procedure for permitting a
second residential dwelling unit on lots zoned for residential uses. (Ord. 2533
§ 1, 2003)
18.156.440: SECOND UNIT DEFINED:
"Second unit" means a detached or attached residential dwelling unit which
provides complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons,
inclusive of, but not limited to, permanent provisions for living, sleeping,
eating, cooking, and sanitation on the same lot as a single-family dwelling is
situated. A second unit also includes an efficiency unit as defined in
California Health and Safety Code section 17958.1, and a manufactured home as
defined in California Health and Safety Code section 18007. (Ord. 2533 § 1,
2003)
18.156.450: APPROVAL REQUIRED:
Application for construction of a second unit shall be made in the form of a
site plan, floor plan and building elevations and shall be granted by the
city's community development director provided the application meets the
provisions of this article. The application must demonstrate compliance with
the following criteria:
   A.   The second unit is located on property zoned for single-family or
multi-family use.
   B.   The lot contains an existing single-family dwelling.
   C.   The square footage for the second unit does not exceed the following
standards:
      1.   The total area of floor space for a detached second unit shall not
exceed one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet.
      2.   The increased floor area for an attached second unit shall not
exceed thirty percent (30%) of the existing living area of the primary unit.
   D.   The second unit is either attached to the existing dwelling and located
within the living area of that dwelling (which means the interior habitable
area of a dwelling unit including basements and attics, but not including a
garage or an accessory structure) or is a detached unit located on the same lot
as the existing dwelling.
   E.   The second unit is not intended for sale and may be rented.
   F.   The second unit complies with city requirements relating to height,
setback, lot coverage, architectural review and maximum size of the unit.
   G.   The second unit complies with standards that prevent adverse impacts on
any real property that is listed in the California register of historic places.
(Ord. 2533 § 1, 2003)
18.156.460: PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
   A.   The lot upon which the second unit is proposed shall conform to the
minimum area and dimension standards of the zoning district in which the lot is
located.
   B.   One parking space shall be provided on the same lot as the second unit,
in addition to the required parking spaces serving the primary unit. Tandem
parking is permissible to satisfy the parking requirement for the second unit.
   C.   The second unit shall be provided with a separate outside entrance not
visible from the street, with adequate pedestrian access from a public street
to the entrance.
   D.   All second units shall comply with the standards of an efficiency
dwelling unit as defined by the uniform building code.
   E.   The second unit shall be located to the rear of the primary unit. (Ord.
2743, 2010)
ARTICLE VIII. FAMILY DAYCARE HOMES
18.156.570: PURPOSE OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   The council finds that affordable, quality licensed child and adult
care within the city of Redlands is critical to the well being of relations,
parents, children, and adults in need of supervision. Further, it is the
purpose of this article to facilitate the establishment of licensed family
daycare homes in the city of Redlands in a manner which simplifies the review
and approval process while ensuring conformance with applicable standards to
protect residential neighborhoods.
   B.   The council finds that regulation of such facilities is necessary in
order to ensure that these facilities will provide a safe client environment
while not creating any adverse effects on surrounding properties nor
contributing to a general decline of existing single-family neighborhoods.
(Ord. 2094 § 2, 1989)
18.156.580: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article:
   DAYCARE CLIENT: A child or adult who is receiving care and supervision in a
family daycare home or daycare center.
   LARGE FAMILY DAYCARE HOME: A home which serves as the provider's principal
place of residence and which incidentally provides nonmedical care, protection
and supervision of:
   A.   Nine (9) to fourteen (14) children under the age of eighteen (18)
(including those children of the provider or other staff members under the age
of 10 who are present); or
   B.   Seven (7) to twelve (12) adults in need of and actually receiving care.
   PROVIDER: A person who operates a family daycare home.
   SMALL FAMILY DAYCARE HOME: A home which serves as the provider's principal
place of residence and which incidentally provides nonmedical care, protection
and supervision of:
   A.   Eight (8) or fewer children (including those children of the provider
and other staff members under the age of 10 who are present); or
   B.   Six (6) or fewer adults in need of care and supervision, including
residents. (Ord. 2333 § 41, 1997: Ord. 2094 § 2, 1989)
18.156.590: APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   A small family daycare home is a permitted use in any residential
zoning district of the city as an accessory use to a principal residential use
and shall be exempt from business taxes, local registration fees, use permit
fees and fire inspection fees, provided that the use complies with all of the
standards defined in section
18.156.610 of this article.
   B.   A large family daycare home is a permitted use in any single- family
residential zoning district subject to the approval of a conditional use
permit. The use shall be exempt from business taxes, local registration fees,
use permit fees and fire inspection fees, provided it complies with all
applicable standards. The process and required findings shall be those in
chapter 18.192 of this title unless otherwise stated in this article.
      1.   The prospective provider shall submit a completed application to the
planning department for a conditional use permit.
      2.   Once the application is deemed complete, the department shall
prepare a notice to all property owners within one hundred feet (100') of the
proposed site and mail it at least ten (10) calendar days in advance of a
decision by the community development administrator.
      3.   The applicant or an interested party may request a public hearing in
writing. If no public hearing is requested, then the community development
administrator shall approve, conditionally approve, deny or forward to the
planning commission a request based on the required findings for a conditional
use permit.
      4.   The decision of the community development administrator shall be
final unless appealed to the planning commission within ten (10) days. Upon
appeal, the planning commission shall conduct a public hearing and make a final
decision to approve, conditionally approve or deny. planning commission
decisions may be appealed to the city council. (Ord. 2094 § 2, 1989)
18.156.610: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
   A.   Family Daycare Homes:
      1.   All family daycare homes shall secure and maintain a valid license
from the state of California, department of social services.
      2.   All family daycare homes shall notify the police department of the
clientele and capacity for which they are licensed for the purpose of
registering the information on the city's emergency response system.
   B.   Large Family Daycare Homes:
      1.   No structural changes are permitted which will alter the character
of the residential neighborhood, with the possible exception of a wheelchair
ramp and rails in the case of an adult care facility. No signs shall be
permitted.
      2.   Each site shall provide a minimum of one on site parking space per
employee or adult supervisor in addition to the required residential parking
requirements. A driveway area may be accepted if it does not interfere with the
provision of a safe client drop off/pick up or encroach on a public sidewalk.
      3.   Safe client drop off/pick up shall be provided. Sites taking access
from a major or secondary arterial street must provide circulation that does
not back onto the street. The city may also require this for sites taking
access from a collector street or other hazardous street.
      4.   In the case of a daycare home for adults, a usable outdoor
recreation area shall be provided behind the front yard setback with a minimum
dimension of fifteen feet (15') and at least seventy five (75) square feet per
client. In the case of a large family daycare home for children, a rear yard
open space shall be provided in accordance with subsections
18.152.070G1 and G3 of this title.
      5.   Large family daycare homes shall not be located within three hundred
feet (300') of any two (2) existing daycare centers or large family daycare
homes unless special circumstances are shown whereby the area will not be
adversely impacted by noise, traffic or any other harm to the general welfare.
      6.   The provider shall comply with all applicable requirements of the
Fire Department and the State Fire Marshal regarding health and safety
requirements. These requirements shall include, but are not limited to, smoke
detectors, fire extinguishers and qualified adult supervision at all times. An
annual inspection by the Fire Department is required.
      7.   The required findings listed in section
18.192.060 of this title are applicable to large family daycare homes.
      8.   The Community Development Administrator or commission may impose
conditions of approval necessary to mitigate noise, traffic or parking
generated by the proposed use.
      9.   Large family daycare home permits shall be unique to other
conditional use permits in that off site improvements and development impact
fees shall not be required in excess of that of the principal residential use
unless the City Engineer or Utilities Director finds that there is a specific
health or safety need created or worsened by the proposed use. (Ord. 2094 § 2,
1989)
ARTICLE IX. AUTOMOBILE SALES DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
18.156.650: PURPOSE OF PROVISIONS:
The purpose of the provisions of this article is to establish standards for the
development of new and used automobile sales facilities where sales are
conducted outdoors. (Ord. 2571 § 8, 2004)
18.156.660: PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The following property development standards shall apply when they are more
restrictive than the development standards for the particular zone in which new
or used automobile sales are proposed to be conducted:
   A.   Site Area: Each site shall have a minimum area of fifty thousand
(50,000) square feet.
   B.   Site Dimensions: The minimum lot width and depth dimensions shall be
two hundred feet (200').
   C.   Parking: Off street parking shall be provided in accordance with the
provisions of chapter 18.164 of this title.
   D.   Landscaping: A minimum of ten percent (10%) of the site shall be
landscaped. Landscaping shall be placed along the entire street frontage,
except for driveway openings and walkways. Landscaping shall be oriented to
enhance public views and accent on site structures.
   E.   Architectural Treatment: It is the policy of the City to require high
quality architectural treatment. The design of the facilities shall be
harmonious with the character and quality of the neighborhood and community.
   F.   Service Areas And Facilities: Service areas and facilities shall be
completely screened from view from the public right-of- way. Screening shall be
by use of walls, earth berms, landscaping or a combination thereof. (Ord. 2571
§ 8, 2004)
ARTICLE X. PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL SPORTS AND RECREATION COURTS
18.156.700: PURPOSE OF ARTICLE:
The purpose of this article is to establish regulations governing the
construction of private residential recreation courts, accessory to a single-
family residence (hereafter, "recreation court"). These regulations are
intended to control the height, size, and location of recreation courts; ensure
the compatibility of the development of recreation courts with associated land
uses; provide for privacy and protection against hazardous conditions; and
preserve neighborhood character; and protect access to light and air, and the
privacy of residents. (Ord. 2881, §13)
18.156.710: COMPLIANCE; AND PERMITTED COURTS:
   A.    Properties located within a residential zone may have one private
recreation court, including associated walls, fences, and lighting. No new
recreation court shall be constructed, and no existing recreation court shall
be relocated, altered, or enlarged, except in compliance with the provisions of
this article. The following development standards shall apply to all recreation
courts:
      1.   Recreation courts are prohibited within any front or street side
setback, or within any City-owned easement.
      2.   Recreation courts are prohibited within a yard, or other area,
between the front plane of a residence and a street.
      3.   Recreation courts are prohibited within ten (10) feet of any
interior rear or side property line, or any landscape, equestrian or pedestrian
easement.
      4.   No recreation court, nor any fencing or poles related thereto, shall
be elevated above the existing grade level.
      5.   Recreation courts shall not be used for commercial purposes.
   B.    A recreation court consisting of less than one thousand (1,000) square
feet, without lighting, and with any fencing or other enclosure no more than
six (6) feet in height, located no closer than ten (10) feet to the interior
side and rear setbacks is permitted by right. Recreation courts may be sunk
below the existing grade to meet these requirements; and for recreation courts
sunk below the existing grade, fence height shall be measured from the pre-
existing (higher) adjacent grade to determine the maximum height.
   C.    Any existing recreation court constructed prior to March 23, 2018,
shall be deemed approved, despite any non-compliance with the provisions of
this article, in its configuration existing as of March 23, 2018. Any
alteration, expansion, replacement, or other modification to such a recreation
court shall be subject to the provisions of this article, except that ordinary
repair and maintenance may be performed. Notwithstanding the foregoing or any
other provision of this article, for a recreation court constructed prior to
March 23, 2018, any existing fencing or lighting may be repaired or replaced
subject to the following requirements:
      1.   The replacement fencing (if more than six (6) feet high) and
materials and design are reviewed and approved by administrative use permit.
      2.   The height of any replacement fencing shall not exceed the height of
the previous fencing, or ten (10) feet, whichever is lower.
      3.   The replacement lighting and design are reviewed and approved
lighting is no more than twenty (20) feet above grade level.
      4.   An administrative use permit shall be required for new or
replacement of fencing that exceeds six (6) feet high, and any new or
replacement lighting, for recreation courts constructed prior to March 23,
2018. (Ord. 2881, §13)
18.156.720: COURTS PERMITTED BY ADMINISTRATIVE USE PERMIT:
   A.    Recreation courts consisting of one thousand (1,000) square feet or
more in area are permitted only upon approval of an administrative use permit.
   B.    Recreation courts with lights up to and including twenty (20) feet,
above grade level, are permitted only upon approval of an administrative use
permit (and building permit if required), and subject to the lighting
development standards below.
   C.    Recreation courts with fencing more than six (6) feet in height, above
grade level. Grade level for purposes of this section is defined as the ground
surface located at the base of the pole and/or where the footing is
constructed.
   D.    Additions or alterations to a recreation court resulting in a total
area of more than one thousand (1,000) square feet. (Ord. 2881 §13, 2019)
18.156.730: FENCING DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
All fencing shall be no more than six (6) feet above grade level to be
permitted by right. Fencing above six (6) feet and no more than fourteen (14)
feet above court level may be approved with an administrative use permit.
   1.   Proposed fence height and/or light pole height may be required to be
revised and re-submitted, if necessary, to reduce potential nuisances and
satisfy all applicable findings prior to an approval for an administrative use
permit.
   2.   All recreation court fences made of metal shall be a dark matte color.
Any chain link fencing shall be coated in a dark matte vinyl or similar
material (such as dark green or black color). Any wind screen material, such as
for tennis courts, shall be a non-reflective matte color such as green, blue,
or black.
   3.   All fencing above six (6) feet in height shall be constructed of wire
mesh, or similar material, capable of admitting at least ninety percent (90%)
of light as measured on a reputable light meter. Transparency requirement does
not include semi-transparent or perforated wind screen material, such as mesh
for tennis courts.
   4.   Recreation courts with fencing more than six (6) feet in height shall
be located no less than ten (10) feet from rear or side property lines. (Ord.
2881 §13, 2019)
18.156.740: LANDSCAPING DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
   A.    Landscaping is required for all recreation courts greater than one
thousand (1,000) square feet to screen any fencing, equipment or athletic
apparatus from adjacent properties and all public rights-of-way. Such
landscaping shall achieve its screening effect within three (3) years after
planting. Landscaping plans shall be submitted to the Development Services
Director for review and approval prior to the issuance of an administrative use
permit.
   B.    Recreation courts may be sunken below grade, such as for visual
screening or noise attenuation purposes, provided any on-site drainage
requirements applicable to the property, and cross-lot drainage for adjacent
properties, are satisfied.
   C.    Any recreation court with an impervious surface of greater than one
thousand (1,000) square feet or more requires a French drain or similar
percolation system to be constructed in conjunction with such court in order to
provide for on-site drainage of run-off into the aquifer, and shall be reviewed
and approved by the City prior to construction. The drainage plan for this
system shall be submitted before the issuance of an administrative use permit.
Said system shall be maintained so as to be functional. (Ord. 2881 §13, 2019)
18.156.750: LIGHTING DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
All lighting, if permitted by administrative use permit, shall comply with the
following restrictions:
   A.    All lighting shall be completely shielded or screened so as to direct
or contain illumination on the property. Lights shall be focused downward and
shall not wash or spill glare onto adjacent properties. Spillover prevention
may require substantial shielding of the fixture and lens. Light fixtures shall
be of full cut-off design with the bulb fully enclosed within the fixture. Low
pressure sodium and mercury vapor lamps are prohibited.
   B.    No more than six (6) supporting poles are permitted. Light poles shall
be not less than ten (10) feet from all property lines.
   C.    Lighting and light fixtures shall not be more than twenty (20) feet
above grade level, and no more than twenty (20) feet above the adjacent
prevailing grade for sunken courts.
   D.    Light fixtures and supporting poles shall be coated with a low-
reflective material.
   E.    The power rating of the lamp shall not exceed one thousand (1,000)
watts per light fixture. Sources of illumination may be required to incorporate
shielding to limit glare and direct illuminance within the property. Light
trespass shall not exceed one-half (0.5) foot-candle at any property line.
   F.    No recreation court lighting shall be operated before 10:00 a.m. or
after 8:00 p.m.
   G.    Installation or alteration of any light poles, fixtures, or bulbs
shall require a photometric plan prepared by a qualified consultant approved by
the City, and submitted with any application (including any subsequent building
permit) which includes court lighting.
   H.    All recreation court lighting is subject to review, for the thirty
(30) day period after installation, by the Development Services Director to
determine compliance with the requirements of this Section
18.156.750. (Ord. 2881 §13, 2019)
ARTICLE XI.RECYCLING CENTERS
18.156.800: PURPOSE OF ARTICLE:
The City Council finds that recycling of glass, plastic, aluminum and other
nonferrous metals is important to the community and the sustainability of
resources, and allowing for small collection recycling facilities in multiple
locations in the City:
   A.    Provides a convenience to residents and encourages recycling
activities.
   B.    The City Council finds that regulating recycling centers, also known
as small collection facilities and container redemption centers, for glass,
plastic, aluminum and other nonferrous metals is to ensure compatibility of
such uses with surrounding uses and properties and to avoid any impacts
associated with such uses.
   C.    The Council finds that regulation of such facilities is necessary in
order to ensure that these facilities will provide a safe customer environment
while not creating any adverse effects on surrounding properties nor
contributing to a general decline of existing commercial districts or single-
family neighborhoods. (Ord. 2870, 2018)
18.156.810: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article, the following words shall have the meanings ascribed
to them:
 
                                   The process of collecting, sorting,
                                   cleansing, treating and reconstituting
                                   materials that would otherwise become
RECYCLE:                           solid waste, and return them to the
                                   economic mainstream in the form of raw
                                   material for new, reused, or reconstituted
                                   products that meet the quality standards
                                   necessary to be used in the marketplace.
                                   A facility designed to only recycle
SMALL BEVERAGE CONTAINER RECYCLING California beverage containers (e.g.,
CENTER:                            reverse vending machines), and which
                                   occupies an area of less than five hundred
                                   (500) square feet.
                                   A site where beverage containers as
                                   defined in this title may be redeemed for
                                   cash or other compensation, which occupy
                                   an area not exceeding one thousand (1,000)
                                   square feet. Facility may accept
                                   containers by donation, redemption or
SMALL COLLECTION RECYCLING CENTER: purchase, and recyclable materials from
                                   the public (unless required as a certified
                                   recycling center by the California Public
                                   Resources Code). Said facility may be a
                                   beverage container recycling center or
                                   reverse vending machine(s). (Ord. 2870,
                                   2018)
 
18.156.820: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.    The location and type of the proposed facility on any site shall be
subject to the approval of an administrative use permit issued in accordance
with
chapter 18.193 of this title.
      1.   A small collection recycling center or a small beverage container
recycling center may be an allowable use in any commercial or industrial zoning
district of the City, including any commercial, industrial, or mixed use
district of a specific plan, as an accessory use to an existing principal
commercial or industrial use.
      2.   For purposes of this section, any mixed use (i.e., commercial and
residential) zoning district, including any mixed use district of a specific
plan, shall be considered a primarily commercial district, and small collection
recycling facilities may be allowable as an accessory use to an existing
principal commercial use.
   B.    Recycling centers and facilities are prohibited in all residential
zoning districts in the City, including any residential only district of a
specific plan.
   C.    Any existing small collection recycling center or beverage container
recycling center without a permit to operate as of the date of this article
shall have no more than one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of adoption
to file an application for an administrative use permit. (Ord. 2870, 2018)
18.156.830: DEVELOPMENT AND OPERATING STANDARDS:
   A.    A minimum of one hundred (100) linear feet of separation shall be
provided between a proposed recycling facility and any residential property, as
measured from the nearest residential property line.
   B.    An operational plan for a continuing cleaning and maintenance program,
as well as the control of noise, odor, dust, litter, shall be submitted for
review prior to application approval.
   C.    Conditions of approval may be imposed to protect the public health,
safety, convenience, and welfare, including but limited to: days and hours of
operation, odor and dust control, cleaning and maintenance of the facility and
surrounding area, design and appearance of related structures, or any other
conditions necessary to avoid or mitigate any potential nuisance effects of
such facilities. (Ord. 2870, 2018)
ARTICLE XII. WAREHOUSES AND LOGISTICS DISTRIBUTION CENTERS
18.156.900: DEFINITIONS:
 
                        Warehouse/distribution facilities primarily used for
                        the storage and/or consolidation of manufactured goods
                        before their distribution to retail locations or other
                        warehouses. Warehouse/distribution centers are fifty
                        thousand (50,000) square-feet or more in gross floor
                        area or contain six (6) or more truck docks or dock
                        high loading doors. They are characterized by dock high
                        loading doors and could be on opposing sides of the
                        building (cross dock facility); may include grade-level
                        loading doors; interior clear heights a minimum of 28
                        to 36 feet to ceiling for the warehousing floor area;
                        significant movement and storage of products,
                        materials, or equipment; may include receiving,
                        sorting, re-packaging, and/or re-distribution; truck
WAREHOUSE:              activities frequently outside of the peak hour of the
                        adjacent street system; and need freeway access. This
                        definition excludes facilities owned and operated by a
                        government agency or any public or private utilities.
                        Warehousing and distribution facilities include, but
                        are not limited to, the following types of uses:
                        A. Warehousing distribution/high cube distribution
                        centers.
                        B. Parcel delivery terminals or truck terminals.
                        C. Parcel sorting and distribution facilities.
                        D. Package allocation for delivery drivers or
                        independent delivery contractors.
                        E. Parcel hub or high cube fulfillment center.
                        F. Freight yards or forwarding terminals.
                        G. Moving agencies.
                        H. Shipping/receiving yards.
                        The use of a portion of a building for the related
                        storage of goods of any type by one or two businesses
                        and used for the sale or distribution of those goods
                        directly to their customers. A manufacturing, assembly,
                        service commercial, or other type of commercial or
                        industrial use (i.e., primary use) manufactures and/or
                        stores and distributes the goods or components that are
                        produced or contained on-site, and therefore includes
WAREHOUSING, ANCILLARY: the related storage of those goods or items. Ancillary
                        storage or warehousing is subordinate and incidental to
                        the primary land use (e.g., manufacturing, assembly,
                        service commercial, or other type of primary commercial
                        or industrial use). Ancillary storage or warehousing
                        may include ground level loading doors on one or more
                        sides of the building, or not more than five (5) dock
                        high loading doors on one side of the building only.
                        (Ord. 2955, 2023)
 
18.156.910: APPLICABILITY:
The provisions of this section shall apply to the following types of
development projects:
   A.   New warehouse development projects that meet one of the following
criteria (note: excludes government agency facilities and public or private
utility facilities).
      1.   Gross floor area of fifty thousand (50,000) square-feet or more; or,
      2.   A structure with six (6) or more truck docks or dock high loading
doors (does not include grade-level loading doors or loading spaces).
   B.   Development or redevelopment projects for existing or proposed
warehouse facilities involving demolition, reconstruction, repairing, or
rebuilding that exceed fifty percent (50%) of the reasonable replacement value
of the existing structure or property.
      1.   Estimates for this purpose shall be reviewed and approved by the
building official and the Development Services Director, or their respective
designees, and shall be based on the minimum cost of construction in compliance
with the California Building Code.
      2.   For the purpose of this section, "assessed value" shall mean the
assessed value of the structure as shown on the County of San Bernardino
property assessment roll in effect at the time of the occurrence of the
casualty, or at the time the repair and maintenance is first conducted.
      3.   Redevelopment of a property and/or building shall include the
feasible provisions of Section
18.156.930 through
18.156.960 of this Article, as determined by the Planning Commission.
   C.   Required Compliance. No new warehouse development project shall be
constructed, no redevelopment or reconstruction of a property for warehouse
use, and no existing warehouse shall be moved, altered, or enlarged, except in
accordance with the applicable development standards of this Article. (Ord.
2955, 2023)
18.156.920: SITE LOCATION REQUIREMENT:
No warehouses shall be located on a project site more than one mile (5,280
feet) from a freeway entrance/exit ramp to the Interstate Freeway System
(Interstate 10 and Interstate 210). For purposes of this requirement, the
linear distance shall be measured as a radius from a freeway ramp to any part
of the subject property. (Ord. 2955, 2023)
18.156.930: SCREENING AND BUFFERING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Warehouse developments shall provide a solid decorative wall(s) of at
least ten feet (10') in height when abutting any sensitive receptors. Sensitive
receptors for purposes of this section shall be defined as any residence
including private homes, condominiums, apartments, and living quarters,
schools, preschools, daycare centers, in-home daycares, hospitals, long-term
care facilities, retirement and nursing homes, community centers, places of
worship, parks (excluding trails), and dormitories. The exterior treatment of
the wall(s) shall be decorative or painted.
   B.   Unless physically impossible, loading docks and truck entries shall be
oriented away from abutting sensitive receptors. To the greatest extent
feasible, loading docks, truck entries, and truck drive aisles shall be located
away from nearby sensitive receptors. In making feasibility decisions, the City
must comply with existing laws and regulations and balance public safety and
the site development's potential impacts to nearby sensitive receptors.
Therefore, loading docks, truck entries, and drive aisles may be located nearby
sensitive receptors at the discretion of the Planning Commission, but any such
site design shall include measures designed to minimize overall impacts to
nearby sensitive receptors.
   C.   Trees shall be used as part of the solid screen buffering treatment for
any adjacent residential properties or properties with sensitive receptors.
Trees used for this purpose shall be evergreen, drought-tolerant, minimum 36-
inch box size, and shall be spaced no greater than forty (40)-feet on center.
Palm trees shall not be used for screening purposes. The property owner and any
successors in interest shall maintain these trees for the duration of ownership
ensuring any unhealthy or dead trees are replaced timely as needed.
   D.   Trees shall be installed in automobile (passenger vehicle) parking
areas to provide at least thirty five percent (35%) shade cover of parking
areas within fifteen (15) years. This requirement is in addition to the
applicable standard design requirements for parking lot landscape and related
improvements. Trees shall be planted that are capable of implementing this
requirement. (Ord. 2955, 2023)
18.156.940: TRAFFIC PATTERNS AND SIGN REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Applicants for entitlements shall prepare and submit a Truck Routing
Plan demonstrating the most direct route(s) to and from the Interstate Freeway
System based on the city's latest Truck Route Map. Routes to or from freeway
ramps shall not pass through any residential zones or districts.
   B.   A traffic impact assessment (TIA) report shall be prepared to evaluate
a proposed warehouse project's compliance with the City's Measure U traffic
system requirements, and shall include an evaluation of the City's streets and
Truck Routes that provide vehicular access to the Interstate Freeway System,
including, but not limited to: existing right-of-way width; roadway capacity to
handle the proposed quantity of truck trips to be generated by the proposed use
(including any road widening that may be necessary); roadway design and
improvements to handle the weight and frequency of proposed truck trips;
intersection operations to freeway ramps and level of service analysis to
include the proposed truck trips; truck turn radii at intersections; and other
operational elements of the City's street network to serve the proposed use.
The TIA may be prepared by a qualified consultant selected and directed by the
City (and all consultant costs to be reimbursed by the applicant), or by a
qualified traffic consultant selected by the applicant (and all work subject to
the direction, review, and approval by the City).
   C.   Entry gates into the loading dock/truck court area with more than
twenty (20) loading docks shall be positioned after a minimum of one hundred
forty (140) feet of total available stacking depth inside the property line (or
alternatively, if one hundred forty (140) feet of depth is not feasible due to
site constraints, then provide seventy (70) feet of available stacking depth
for two trucks side-by-side as an alternative design). The stacking distance
shall be increased by seventy (70) feet for every twenty (20) loading docks
beyond 50 docks. Queuing, or circling of vehicles, on public streets
immediately pre- or post-entry to an industrial commerce facility is strictly
prohibited unless queuing occurs in a deceleration lane or right turn lane
exclusively serving the facility.
   D.   Prior to entitlement approval, applicants shall submit to the City, and
obtain approval of, all turning templates to verify adequate truck turning
movements at entrance and exit driveways as well as street intersections
adjacent to industrial buildings. Unless not physically possible, truck entries
shall be located on Collector streets or streets of a higher commercial
classification, and vehicle entries shall be designed to prevent truck access
on streets that are not Collector Streets (or streets of a higher commercial
classification), including but not limited to by limiting the width of vehicle
entries.
   E.   Anti-idling signs indicating a five (5) minute restriction on engine
idling for diesel trucks shall be posted at warehouses and industrial commerce
facilities along entrances to the site and within the dock areas and shall be
strictly enforced by the facility operator (13 CCR § 2480).
   F.   Signs shall be installed at all truck exit driveways directing truck
drivers to the truck route as indicated in the Truck Routing Plan to be routed
to the Interstate Freeway System.
   G.   Signs and drive aisle pavement markings shall clearly identify the
onsite circulation pattern to minimize unnecessary on-site vehicular travel.
   H.   Facility operators shall post signs in prominent locations inside and
outside of the building indicating that off-site parking for any Medium Heavy-
Duty trucks, Heavy Heavy-Duty trucks, truck trailers or cabs, and other
operations-related vehicles is strictly prohibited. City may require facility
operator to post signs on adjacent and nearby surface or residential streets
indicating that off-site truck parking is prohibited by City ordinance.
   I.   All signs under this Section shall be legible, durable, and weather-
proof. (Ord. 2955, 2023)
18.156.950: SUSTAINABLE ENERGY:
   A.   A minimum of ninety percent (90%) of the on-site motorized operational
equipment shall be zero emission (ZE).
   B.   All warehouse building roofs shall install photovoltaic (PV) solar
collector system or other form of on-site renewable energy, provided such
renewable energy source is recognized by the State of California as a renewable
resource under the Renewable Portfolio Standard Program. The renewable energy
system shall be metered separately from the nonrenewable metered power usage of
the building (if not in conflict with other applicable regulations). The
renewable energy system shall be built to generate an amount of electricity
sufficient to meet the following criteria:
      1.   Annualized building demand based on the approved use or, if no use
is proposed, then the demand for the most energy intensive use that could
occupy the building; and
      2.   Annualized demand required to charge fully electric vehicles and
trucks, assuming that all vehicles and trucks to the site are fully electric;
and
      3.   A reasonable rate of efficiency loss over ten (10) years.
Note: Electricity demand that exceeds the generation capacity of the on-site
renewable energy system may be obtained from off-site energy sources or
suppliers.
   C.   The warehouse building's rooftop that is not covered with solar panels
or other utilities shall be constructed with light colored roofing material
with a solar reflective index (SRI) in accordance with current California
Energy Code regulations. This material shall be the minimum solar reflective
rating of the roof material for the life of the building.
   D.   The on-site passenger vehicle parking shall include electric vehicle
(EV) ready parking spaces in accordance with current requirements of the
California Building Code, and at least fifty percent (50%) of the required EV
parking spaces shall be equipped with working Level 2 Quick Charge EV charging
stations installed and operational, prior to building occupancy. Signage shall
be installed indicating EV charging stations and specifying that spaces are
reserved for clean air/EV vehicles. Unless superior technology is developed
that would replace the EV charging units, facility operator and any successors
in interest shall be responsible for maintaining the EV charging stations in
working order for the life of the facility.
   E.   Unless the owner of the facility records a covenant on the title of the
underlying property ensuring that the property cannot be used to provide
chilled, cooled, or freezer warehouse space, a conduit shall be installed
during construction of the building shell from the electrical room to all
(100%) of the loading dock doors that have potential to serve the refrigerated
space. When tenant improvement building permits are issued for any refrigerated
warehouse space, electric plug-in units shall be installed at every dock door
servicing the refrigerated space to allow transport refrigeration units (TRUs)
to plug in. Truck operators with TRUs shall be required to utilize electric
plug-in units when at loading docks. (Ord. 2955, 2023)
18.156.960: OPERATION AND CONSTRUCTION:
   A.   Cool surface treatments shall be added to all drive aisles and parking
areas, or such areas shall be constructed with a solar-reflective cool pavement
such as concrete. Solar collectors may be installed on support structures that
provide shade over parking areas to achieve minimum requirements.
   B.   To ensure that warehouse electrical rooms are sufficiently sized to
accommodate the potential need for additional electrical panels, either a
secondary electrical room shall be provided in the building, or the primary
electrical room shall be sized twenty-five percent (25%) larger than is
required to satisfy the service requirements of the building or the electrical
gear shall be installed with the initial construction with twenty-five percent
(25%) excess demand capacity.
   C.   All exterior light fixtures (including but not limited to parking lot
lighting, wall fixtures, roof fixtures, light poles, etc.) visible from public
right-of-way or abutting properties shall have shielding affixed to contain
illumination within the subject property and prevent light trespass and glare
overspill.
   D.   The facility operator shall be required to perform regular maintenance
of building structures, landscaping, and paved surfaces to ensure good physical
condition and appearance.
   E.   For any sites with warehouses that are abutting or adjacent to any
residential properties or properties containing sensitive receptors, any
outdoor storage of materials, high-pile storage, or any other manner of storage
or staging shall not exceed the height of the perimeter wall.
   F.   Additional operating conditions may be enacted for an individual
Warehouse project pursuant to a Conditional Use Permit (RMC
Chapter 18.192) for the purpose of avoiding or reducing potential off-site
nuisance effects of the warehouse facility (including but not limited to
traffic, parking, noise, vibration, air quality emissions, etc.) on nearby
sensitive receptors or residential districts, or to protect the public health,
safety, or general welfare. (Ord. 2955, 2023)
ARTICLE XIII. LOW-BARRIER NAVIGATION CENTERS
18.156.1010: PURPOSE OF PROVISIONS:
The purpose of this Article is to implement the provisions of Government Code
Section 65660 et seq. relating to Low Barrier Navigation Centers. (Ord. 2985,
2025)
18.156.1020: DEFINITIONS:
LOW BARRIER: Best practices to reduce barriers to entry, and may include, but
is not limited to, the following:
   1.   The presence of partners or co-habitants if it is not a population-
specific site (such as limited to survivors of domestic violence, crimes,
women, or youth).
   2.   Allowing personal pets.
   3.   Allowing the storage of personal possessions.
   4.   Providing privacy, such as partitions around beds in a dormitory
setting or in larger rooms containing more than two beds, or private rooms.
LOW-BARRIER NAVIGATION CENTERS: A housing first facility that provides
permanent or temporary housing, low-barrier, service-enriched shelter focused
on moving people into permanent housing while case managers connect individuals
experiencing homelessness to income, public benefits, health services, shelter,
and housing.
USE BY RIGHT: Has the meaning defined in subdivision (i) of California
Government Code Section 65583.2. Division 13 (commencing with Section 21000) of
the California Public Resources Code shall not apply to actions taken by a
public agency to lease, convey, or encumber land owned by a public agency, or
to facilitate the lease, conveyance, or encumbrance of land owned by a public
agency, or to provide financial assistance to, or otherwise approve, a Low-
Barrier Navigation Center constructed or allowed by this section. (Ord. 2985,
2025)
18.156.1030: APPLICABILITY:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all low-barrier navigation center
projects. (Ord. 2985, 2025)
18.156.1040: ALLOWED ZONES:
Low barrier navigation centers shall be allowed as a permitted use in areas
zoned for mixed uses that allow commercial uses; and nonresidential zones that
permit multifamily residential developments provided they meet the requirements
of Section
18.156.1060. (Ord. 2985, 2025)
18.156.1050: PERMIT REQUIRED:
A building permit, certificate of occupancy, and/or zone clearance review is
required prior to establishment of any low-barrier navigation center project.
The permit or zone clearance shall be a ministerial action without
discretionary review or a hearing. If site development or new construction is
proposed that meets the criteria of RMC
Chapter 18.12 (Sections
18.12.070 through
18.12.190), then a Commission Review and Approval permit shall be required for
site plan approval (and a public hearing shall not be required unless a related
permit or other entitlement requires a public hearing in accordance with the
zoning regulations). The City shall notify a developer whether the developer's
application is complete within thirty (30) days, pursuant to California
Government Code Section 65943. Action shall be taken within sixty (60) days
from the date an application has been deemed complete. (Ord. 2985, 2025)
18.156.1060: DEVELOPMENT AND OPERATIONAL STANDARDS:
A low-barrier navigation center development is a use by-right in areas zoned
for mixed-use and nonresidential zones permitting multifamily uses, if it meets
the following requirements:
   A.   Connected Services: It offers services to connect people to permanent
housing through a services plan that identifies services staffing.
   B.   Coordinated Entry System: It is linked to a coordinated entry system,
so that staff in the interim facility or staff who co-locate in the facility
may conduct assessments and provide services to connect people to permanent
housing. "Coordinated entry system" means a centralized or coordinated
assessment system developed pursuant to Section 576.400(d) or Section 578.7(a)
(8), as applicable, of Title 24 of the Code of Federal Regulations, as those
sections read on January 1, 2020, and any related requirements, designed to
coordinate program participant intake, assessment, and referrals.
   C.   It complies with Chapter 6.5 (commencing with Section 8255) of Division
8 of the Welfare and Institutions Code.
   D.   Homeless Management Information System: It has a system for entering
information regarding client stays, client demographics, client income, and
exit destination through the local Homeless Management Information System, as
defined by Section 578.3 of Title 24 of the Code of Federal Regulations. (Ord.
2985, 2025)
ARTICLE XIV. FARMWORKER HOUSING STANDARDS 1
18.156.1100: PURPOSE:
   A.   Under Section 65580(a) of the Government Code, the Legislature has
declared that the availability of housing, including farmworker housing, is of
vital statewide importance. The purpose of this section is to promote the
development of, and to establish development standards for, farmworker housing,
which is available to farmworkers and agricultural workers who are employed on
a full-time, full-time seasonal, temporary, or part-time basis; and their
families. Farmworker and agricultural worker housing includes:
      1.   Farmworker Dwelling Units: Pursuant to Health and Safety Code
section 17021.6, employee housing for six (6) or fewer employees is treated as
a single-family structure and permitted in the same manner as other dwellings
of the same type in the same zone.
   2.   Farmworker Housing Complex: Employee housing consisting of no more than
twelve (12) units or thirty-six (36) beds to be permitted in the same manner as
other agricultural uses in the same zone.
   3.   Temporary trailers for seasonal and temporary farmworkers pursuant to
Section
18.156.1160. (Ord. 2985, 2025)
18.156.1110: DEFINITIONS:
AGRICULTURAL WORKER HOUSING: Housing occupied by farmworkers or animal
caretakers in the form of farmworker dwelling units, farmworker housing
complexes, or temporary trailers in accordance with the provisions of this
Article.
FARMWORKER and AGRICULTURAL WORKER: Has the same meaning as "agricultural
employee" as defined in Section 1140.4(b) of the California Labor Code.
FARMWORKER DWELLING UNIT: A single-family residential unit occupied by a
maximum of six (6) farmworkers at any one time. The farmworkers are employed
full-time and working on the same lot on which the dwelling unit is located, or
employed on other land that is under the same ownership or lease as the subject
lot.
FARMWORKER HOUSING: A housing accommodation developed for and/or provided to
farmworkers and agricultural workers, and shall consist of any living quarters,
dwelling, boarding house, barracks, bunkhouse, mobile home, manufactured home,
recreational vehicle, travel trailer, or other housing accommodation maintained
in one or more buildings and on one or more sites. Farmworker housing shall
consist of either a farmworker dwelling unit, farmworker housing complex, or
temporary trailer.
FARMWORKER HOUSING COMPLEX: Farmworker housing other than a farmworker dwelling
unit that (1) contains a maximum of thirty-six (36) beds if the housing
consists of any group living quarters, such as barracks or a bunkhouse, and is
occupied exclusively by farmworkers; or (2) contains a maximum of twelve (12)
residential units occupied exclusively by farmworkers and their households, if
the housing does not consist of any group living quarters. The units are rented
to persons who are principally employed within San Bernardino County for
activities associated with agriculture.
FARMWORKER, PRINCIPALLY EMPLOYED: A farmworker whose income from activities
associated with agriculture is at least fifty percent (50%) of their gross
personal income, as reflected in documents cited in Section
18.156.1170. (Ord. 2985, 2025)
18.156.1120: PERMITTING AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR FARMWORKER HOUSING:
All farmworker housing shall comply with the setback, lot coverage, height, and
other development standards applicable to the zone in which it is located and
the following development standards, unless otherwise indicated in this
Article. (Ord. 2985, 2025)
18.156.1130: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   New farmworker housing shall not be located on land classified as
"Prime" or "Statewide" Importance by the California Department of Conservation
Important Farmland Inventory, unless no other feasible alternative location
exists on-site.
   B.   Farmworker housing shall not be located on areas utilized for active
crop production on the parcel, unless approved with a land use entitlement.
   C.   New farmworker housing shall be clustered together, if feasible, and
sited near existing road and other structures to reduce grading, landform
alteration, the need for construction of new roads, and potential impacts to
agricultural soils and operations.
   D.   New exterior lighting for agricultural worker housing shall be of a low
profile and limited to security needs only; all exterior lights shall be
directed downward and fully shielded from streets and any off-site residences.
(Ord. 2985, 2025)
18.156.1140: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR FARMWORKER HOUSING:
Farmworker dwelling units are subject to the following development standards:
   A.   Farmworker dwelling units may be permitted (with a building permit, if
applicable) if the maximum number of allowable units does not exceed the limits
listed below in Table 18.156-XIV-A for that lot.
   B.   No more than four (4) farmworker dwelling units shall be located on any
single lot.
   C.   New farmworker dwelling units shall not exceed one thousand eight
hundred (1,800) square feet in gross floor area. An attached accessory
structure, either habitable or non-habitable, with internal access to the
farmworker or animal caretaker dwelling unit shall count toward the total
square footage of the dwelling unit.
   D.   Pre-manufactured or mobilehome dwelling units intended as permanent
housing shall be installed on a permanent foundation and shall provide
permanent utility connections (potable water, sewer line, electricity, etc.)
including permanent heating and cooling facilities.
   E.   Single-family dwellings, including mobilehomes, shall provide a minimum
of one off-street parking space per unit. Parking areas shall be provided in
accordance with
Chapter 18.164, Article III (Property Development Standards), except Section
18.164.310 may be waived or modified by the Development Services Director or
Planning Commission.
 
Table 18.156-XIV-A: Maximum Allowable Farmworker and Animal Caretaker Dwelling
Units
Agricultural Land Use                   Maximum Allowable Farmworker and Animal
                                        Caretaker Dwelling Units
Orchards, vineyards, and field crops    One unit per 20 acres in crops
Irrigated row crops and field-grown     One unit per 10 acres in crops
plant materials
Greenhouses                             One unit per 1 acre of propagating
                                        greenhouse
                                        One unit per 10 brood mares, or one
Horse ranches and equestrian facilities unit per 25 equines, where a stall
                                        exists for each animal.
 
(Ord. 2985, 2025)
18.156.1150: STANDARDS FOR FARMWORKER HOUSING COMPLEX:
   A.   Farmworker housing complex facilities are a group of structures, or a
single structure in the form of single-room occupancy, dormitories, boarding
houses, barracks or bunkhouses, consisting of either individual or shared
facilities for the purpose of providing housing or services for farmworkers.
These facilities may be designed as a combination of sleeping rooms or bunk
beds and may include a shared kitchen, mess hall, and bathroom facilities. If
designed as group quarters with shared facilities, the housing shall only be
occupied by individual farmworkers and not their families. Farmworkers with
families or dependent children shall occupy individual dwelling units with
independent living facilities (kitchen and bathroom facilities), not within
group quarters.
   B.   Minimum Parcel Size: A farmworker housing complex is allowed on parcels
with a minimum size of five (5) contiguous acres.
   C.   A farmworker housing complex shall be prohibited in any location
designated as a Very High Fire Hazard Severity Zone.
   D.   Units in a farmworker housing complex may include studios, one-, two-
or three-bedrooms.
   E.   Accessory Structures For Use By The Residents May Include: Kitchen
facility or dining hall; laundry facilities; enclosed individual storage for
each resident or dwelling unit; and facilities primarily used to provide
residents with information regarding and referral to employment, social and
community, education, health and other services.
   F.   Open Space Requirements: When the development includes more than twelve
(12) units, then recreational facilities and outdoor living space shall be
provided for the benefit and recreational use of the residents in accordance
with the requirements of section
18.60.170 of this title.
   G.   Housing complexes or group quarters shall provide a minimum of one off-
street parking space per four beds. Parking areas shall be provided in
accordance with
Chapter 18.164, Article III (Property Development Standards), except Section
18.164.310 may be waived or modified by the Development Services Director or
Planning Commission. (Ord. 2985, 2025)
18.156.1160: STANDARDS FOR FARMWORKER TEMPORARY TRAILERS:
   A.   A maximum of one (1) temporary trailer may be used to provide housing
for seasonal or temporary farmworkers or animal caretakers, and their families,
on a limited term basis. The trailer must be located on the same lot where the
farmworkers or animal caretakers are employed.
   B.   Permit Type And Requirements:
      1.   A qualifying temporary trailer shall be permitted with a building
permit and Zoning Clearance form, which will serve as a ministerial Limited
Term Trailer Permit, permitted for a maximum of one hundred eighty (180)
consecutive calendar days or fewer in any twelve (12) month period pursuant to
the following:
         a.   The permit application shall include a description of the number
of seasonal or temporary farmworkers or animal caretakers to occupy the
temporary trailer, the area of cultivation and crops requiring these workers,
and the time period for which seasonal or temporary farmworkers or animal
caretakers are required.
         b.   The permit application shall clearly identify the location of
sewer connections, dump stations, or otherwise demonstrate adequate sewage
disposal by, for example, including a plan or contract for regular service
through registered or permitted septage pumping vehicles, or a combination
thereof, which will serve the trailer.
         c.   In addition to meeting all ministerial and Zoning Clearance
application requirements, the applicant shall submit an affidavit in a separate
signed statement affirming that the temporary trailer will only be used to
house seasonal or temporary farmworkers or animal caretakers solely employed on
the site for agricultural production or animal keeping.
         d.   After the issuance of a Zoning Clearance authorizing use of the
temporary trailer as housing for seasonal or temporary farmworkers or animal
caretakers, all electrical and plumbing connections to the trailer(s) must be
approved and inspected (and obtain a building permit, if required) by the
Building and Safety Division prior to occupancy of the trailer.
      2.   The Development Services Director may extend a Limited Term Trailer
Permit by an additional ninety (90) days, on a one-time basis, provided that
the applicant submits documentation to justify the additional seasonal
employment necessary for the agricultural activity.
   C.   General Requirements:
      1.   A maximum of one temporary trailer will be allowed on any lot.
      2.   The temporary trailer must be a motor home, travel trailer, truck
camper, recreational vehicle, or camping trailer, that is self-contained and
habitable, and that is either self-propelled, truck-mounted, or permanently
towable on roadways without a permit under the California Vehicle Code.
      3.   A temporary trailer used to house seasonal or temporary farmworkers
or animal caretakers shall be occupied for no more than one hundred eighty
(180) consecutive calendar days in any twelve (12) month period, unless the
permit is extended pursuant to Section
18.156.1160(B)(2) above.
      4.   The maximum size of a temporary trailer occupying a space on the lot
shall be three hundred (300) square feet of living area. Living area does not
include built-in equipment such as wardrobes, closets, cabinets, kitchen units
or fixtures, or bath and toilet rooms.
      5.   The temporary trailer must be "habitable" by meeting all of the
following criteria:
         a.   The temporary trailer must contain sleeping, cooking, bathing,
and sanitary facilities;
         b.   The temporary trailer must either contain an adequate source of
potable water through an internal tank or be connected to a permanent source of
potable water;
         c.   Composting toilets are not allowed. The temporary trailer's
wastewater must be disposed of by one of the following means:
            (1)   Through a connection to an existing sewer utility connection;
or
            (2)   Through the use of an incorporated wastewater tank that is
located within or outside the vehicle, provided that such tank is regularly
serviced, for the duration of the vehicle's use as temporary housing, by a
wastewater disposal provider, or a septage pumping vehicle. The permittee shall
provide proof of such regular wastewater disposal service, in the form of a
contract or receipts, to the Planning Division or Building & Safety Division
upon request.
         d.   The temporary trailer must be connected to an approved electrical
source. Acceptable electrical connections include the use of an existing
electrical source on the lot or a temporary power pole. Generators are not
considered an approved electrical source; and
         e.   Heating and cooling facilities shall be in accordance with those
associated with trailers, or equipment initially installed or designed for
trailers. No temporary heating facilities will be allowed.
      6.   Utility conduits shall be installed underground in conformance with
applicable state and local regulations.
      7.   When the temporary trailer is not in use, utilities shall be
disconnected, and such housing shall be removed from the site or stored during
the remainder of the year. The temporary trailer shall be removed from the site
within five (5) days of the expiration of the permitted period. It may be
stored on-site for the remaining days of the calendar year if screened from
public view and stored in a rear yard. A temporary trailer stored on-site shall
be covered when not in use.
   D.   Site Design Criteria:
      1.   Building height and setbacks shall be as prescribed in the
applicable zone, except where Title 25 of the California Administrative Code is
more restrictive.
      2.   The temporary trailer shall be located a minimum of six feet (6')
from any other structure on the lot.
      3.   Roadways and vehicle pads shall not be permitted in areas of natural
slope inclinations greater than fifteen percent (15%) or where grading would
result in slope heights greater than ten feet and steeper than two to one (2:
1).
      4.   One picnic table, and a grill (without any open flame if located in
a High Fire Hazard Area) may be provided on a level, landscaped front yard
area. (Ord. 2985, 2025)
18.156.1170: EMPLOYMENT CRITERIA, VERIFICATION, AND ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Occupancy Restrictions For Agricultural Worker Housing:
      1.   Farmworker housing shall only be occupied by farmworkers and members
of their household (however, group living quarters shall only be occupied
exclusively by farmworkers).
      2.   The applicant shall demonstrate that the farmworker housing shall
only be used for farmworkers (on a permanent or seasonal basis) who meet the
employment criteria in subsection B. This requirement shall not apply to
housing occupied by farmworkers who subsequently retire or become disabled and
continue to reside in the unit pursuant to subsection B3. This requirement
shall not apply to a surviving spouse or domestic partner who continues to
reside in the unit pursuant to subsection B4.
      3.   A deed restriction in a form approved by the City that runs with the
land shall be recorded with the County Recorder, prior to the issuance of a
building permit for construction for all farmworker housing except for
temporary trailers, limiting the use of such housing to farmworker housing and
setting forth the conditions and requirements applicable to such use. The
property owner shall also be required to provide written disclosure of all such
conditions and requirements before any sale, lease, or financing of the subject
lot(s) and dwelling units. This use restriction shall not be amended, released,
terminated, or removed from the property without the prior written consent of
the City. In the event the farmworker housing use is terminated and/or
structures are removed in accordance with this Municipal Code and other
applicable law as confirmed in writing by the Development Services Director,
the deed restriction that accompanies the development shall be released and
removed from the property.
   B.   Employment Criteria For Agricultural Workers:
      1.   Farmworker dwelling units shall only be rented or provided under the
terms of employment to farmworkers who are employed on a full-time (minimum of
thirty two (32) hours per week), full-time seasonal, or temporary basis by the
property owner or lessee of the lot upon which the dwelling unit is located to
work onsite or on other land in San Bernardino County that is under the same
ownership or lease. Farmworkers may retain their employment status during
periods of non-agricultural employment, as long as they meet the full-time
requirement for at least nine (9) months of the calendar year.
      2.   Units in a farmworker housing complex shall only be rented or
provided to persons who are principally employed within San Bernardino County
for activities directly associated with agriculture. This includes farmworkers
who work on a full-time, full-time seasonal, temporary or part-time basis.
      3.   A qualified farmworker who has been renting or occupying a
farmworker dwelling unit, or a unit in a farmworker housing complex, and who
subsequently retires or becomes disabled, may continue to reside in the unit
along with members of their household.
      4.   After the death of a qualified farmworker who has been renting or
occupying a farmworker dwelling unit, or a unit in a farmworker housing
complex, their surviving spouse or domestic partner may continue to reside in
the unit.
      5.   Temporary trailers shall only be rented or provided to farmworkers
who are employed on a full-time, full-time seasonal, or temporary basis by the
property owner or lessee of the lot to work on the land upon which the
temporary trailer is located.
      6.   Proof of qualifying employment for occupants of farmworker housing
shall be provided at the time of permit approval, which can be satisfied by
providing a combination of at least two (2) of the following documents, as
applicable:
         a.   Employee's income tax return;
         b.   Employee's pay receipts;
         c.   Employee's W-2 form;
         d.   Employer's DE-34 form;
         e.   Employer's ETA 790 form;
         f.   Employer's DLSE-NTE form;
         g.   A document signed by both the employer and the employee, which
states that the occupant of the agricultural worker housing is employed in
agriculture, and includes a description of the employee's job duties; or
         h.   Other proof approved in writing by the Development Services
Director.
   C.   Annual Verification Of Employment Of Agricultural Workers:
      1.   The owner or lessee of the property, property management company,
and/or designated agent of the owner or lessee, shall submit an annual
employment verification declaration, and any applicable City-required
verification fees as established by resolution of the City Council, no later
than May 15 of each year to the Development Services Director or designee to
verify that all the dwelling units or sleeping quarters in the farmworker
housing are occupied by persons who meet the employment criteria established
above. For purposes of this section, permanent farmworker housing includes all
agricultural worker housing except for temporary trailers. The completed
verification declaration and supporting documentation shall require the
property owner to meet all the following requirements:
         a.   Verify and provide evidence that any permanent agricultural
worker housing was occupied by farmworkers during the preceding calendar year;
         b.   Declare that any permanent agricultural worker housing will be
occupied by farmworkers during the current calendar year; and,
         c.   Provide proof of qualifying employment for occupants of
agricultural worker housing, upon request by the City, by using a combination
of at least two of the documents as listed in subsection B6.
   D.   Enforcement:
      1.   The provisions of subsections B and C of this Article shall be
referenced or set forth in deed restrictions and/or conditions of approval that
shall be recorded in the subject property's chain of title. Violations of
subsections B and C may be enforced through any other available legal means.
      2.   Within thirty (30) days after receiving approval for permanent or
seasonal employee housing from the Development Services Department, and before
issuance of any building permit(s), the applicant shall record with the County
Recorder, a deed restriction in a form approved by the City that runs with the
land on which the agricultural employee housing is located declaring that:
         a.   The agricultural employee housing will continuously be maintained
in compliance with this Article XIV of
Chapter 18.156 and all other applicable sections of this Municipal Code; and
         b.   If required for pre-manufactured housing and/or mobilehome units
used for farmworker housing, the property owner shall obtain the appropriate
permit(s) from the City of Redlands and/or California Department of Housing and
Community Development.
         c.   The deed restriction shall not be amended, released, terminated,
or removed from the property without the prior written consent of the City of
Redlands. In the event the agricultural employee housing use is terminated and/
or structures are removed in accordance with this Article and other applicable
law as confirmed in writing by the Development Services Director, the deed
restriction that accompanies the development shall be released and removed from
the property.
      3.   In addition to all other available enforcement and legal remedies,
the City may require the removal of a housing unit and restoration of the site
(including any affected agricultural soils) based on the unpermitted or
unverified use of the farmworker housing units, or based on other violations of
this Article. (Ord. 2985, 2025)
ARTICLE XV. SINGLE ROOM OCCUPANCY FACILITIES
18.156.1200: PURPOSE OF ARTICLE:
   A.   To expand opportunities for affordable housing where allowed by zoning
district regulations;
   B.   To facilitate the establishment of affordable housing in locations with
convenient access to services and employment;
   C.   To provide adequate standards for the orderly development of safe
housing in a high-quality environment;
   D.   To ensure development is compatible with surrounding land uses and is
consistent with the goals, objectives, and policies of the general plan; and,
   E.   For purposes of this Article, "single-room occupancy" is defined as a
multi-tenant building that provides, for rent or a fee, small rooms as a
permanent residence and/or primary residence. Private rooms may be furnished or
unfurnished. (Ord. 2985, 2025)
18.156.1210: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
All single room occupancy facilities shall be subject to the provisions of this
Article:
   A.   Any single room occupancy facility shall conform to the standards of
the zoning or specific plan district in which it is located. In case of
districts where mixed uses are permitted, single room occupancy facilities
shall be subject to the standards applying to nonresidential development. Where
any provision of this Article conflicts with another provision of this title or
any adopted specific plan, the more restrictive shall apply.
   B.   Density standards (i.e., lot area per dwelling unit) shall not apply to
single room occupancy facilities.
   C.   Floor-Area Ratio standards, if applicable, shall apply to single room
occupancy facilities. In no case may the number of units exceed three times the
maximum density that is applicable within the subject zoning district or
specific plan district.
   D.   Tenancy shall not be less than thirty (30) days.
   E.   All units shall comply with the requirements of the current edition of
the California Building Code.
   F.   All facilities shall comply with all applicable accessibility and
adaptability requirements.
   G.   The proposed conversion or retrofit of an existing structure into a
single room occupancy facility shall conform to all applicable development
standards unless a physical constraint or characteristic of the subject
property makes such conformance infeasible. The Development Services Director
(or Planning Commission if a CUP is required) is authorized to modify, reduce,
or waive one or more development standard(s) of section
18.156.1220 upon determining that strict adherence to the standard(s) is
infeasible due to physical conditions or constraints of the subject property.
The applicant shall bear the burden of proof that imposing the development
standard(s) in question would make the project physically or financially
infeasible.
   H.   All facilities and units shall not be subdivided or individually sold.
   I.   This Article shall not be applicable to short-term rentals in the City
of Redlands and shall not be construed to permit or authorize short-term rental
facilities in the City of Redlands.
   J.   Other provisions or permit requirements of the Redlands Municipal Code
may be applicable, including for properties located within local historic
districts and/or designated as a local historic resource. (Ord. 2985, 2025)
18.156.1220: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
   A.   Unit Size And Occupancy: Each unit shall have a minimum floor area of
one hundred fifty (150) square feet excluding closet and bathroom spaces. Each
unit shall be occupied by no more than two (2) persons.
   B.   Minimum Dimension: Each unit shall have a minimum horizontal dimension
of twelve feet (12').
   C.   Common Area:
      1.   A minimum of ten (10) square feet per unit or two hundred fifty
(250) square feet, whichever is greater, shall be provided as indoor common
area on the ground floor. Required common area shall exclude shared bathrooms
and kitchens, maintenance areas, laundry facilities, storage areas, and
hallways. The design of the common area shall accommodate appropriate
furnishings such as lounge seating, tables and chairs, office desks, and a
television.
      2.   Outdoor Common Area May Be Permitted: The design of all improvements
and furniture shall be of a quality to sustain weather and wear. Furniture
shall be made of durable materials such as wrought iron, wood, steel, or cast
aluminum. The following activities are prohibited in outdoor common areas
between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. to seven o'clock (7:00) A.M.:
amplification of sound or use of sound machines, storage, motor vehicle
parking, or overnight activities.
      3.   All common areas shall be fully accessible.
   D.   Kitchens: If kitchen facilities are provided within a unit, the unit
shall have a sink with a hot water connection and a garbage disposal, a cooking
appliance, refrigeration facilities, and a countertop having a minimum size of
three (3) square feet and a minimum horizontal dimension of eighteen inches
(18"). If private kitchen facilities are not provided within each unit, shared
kitchen facilities shall be provided at a ratio of one kitchen for every twenty
(20) units on each floor containing units without private kitchen facilities.
   E.   Bathrooms:
      1.   If a partial (or half) bathroom is provided within the unit, it
shall provide a water closet including a sink. The water closet shall have a
minimum area of fifteen (15) square feet. If private bathing facilities are not
provided for each unit, shared shower or bathtub facilities shall be provided
at a ratio of one for every seven (7) units or fraction thereof on each floor
with units not having full bathrooms. The shared shower or bathtub facility
shall be accessible from a common area or hallway. Each shared shower or
bathtub facility shall be provided with an interior lockable door.
      2.   If a full bathroom is provided within the unit, it shall contain a
private toilet, sink and bathtub, shower or bath/shower combination.
      3.   Common bathrooms shall be either single occupant use with provisions
for privacy, or multi-occupant use with separate provisions for men and women.
   F.   Parking:
      1.   One (1) space per two (2) units, inclusive of guest parking.
      2.   If a unit is provided for an on-site manager, one (1) space for the
resident manager.
      3.   If rent or a separate charge is assessed for use of on-site parking
spaces, the owner or management shall be required to rent or charge a separate
fee for use of the space by an individual tenant (i.e., unbundled parking).
      4.   With the exception of projects that allow only senior residents,
projects that have less than one automobile parking space per unit shall
provide one easily accessible space for storing and locking a bicycle per unit.
      5.   Government Code section 65863.2 may further reduce or eliminate the
on-site parking requirements for a residential, mixed use, or other development
project if the project site is located within one-half mile of a major transit
stop as defined in Public Resources Code sections 21064.3 and 21155.
      6.   Required on-site spaces may be provided through covered or uncovered
parking, or tandem spaces, but not on-street parking.
      7.   This section shall not reduce, eliminate, or preclude the
enforcement of any requirement imposed on a new multifamily residential or
nonresidential development that is located within one-half mile of public
transit to provide parking spaces that are accessible to persons with
disabilities that would have otherwise applied to the project if this section
did not apply.
      8.   Parking areas shall comply with the applicable property development
standards contained in
Chapter 18.164 of this title. Parking shall not be provided within any front
yard or street-side yard setbacks or any required landscape areas, except for
authorized driveways.
   G.   Exterior Architecture:
      1.   Any room addition(s) or expansion(s) to the existing residence that
modify the exterior architecture shall be matching in exterior design and
architectural treatment (including materials, colors, roof, doors and windows,
and other design elements).
      2.   Interior access for residents shall be provided to all rooms or
units within the structure, and no exterior doorways shall be provided or
created for individual dwelling units or rooms.
      3.   New exterior stairways, steps, decks or access platforms shall not
be permitted above the first floor nor more than four feet (4') above existing
ground level.
      4.   Properties designated as historic resources and/or located within
historic or scenic districts shall comply with the applicable provisions of the
City's Historic Architectural Design Guidelines.
   H.   Storage: Each unit shall have a closet. All units must have access to a
separate usable storage space (in addition to a closet) within the facility,
that is not less than fifty (50) cubic feet.
   I.   Laundry: Single room occupancy facilities shall be provided with
laundry facilities in a separate room at a minimum ratio of one washer and one
dryer for every ten (10) units. Additional washers and dryers shall be provided
for any facility that has more than twenty (20) units at the ratio of one
washer and one dryer for every additional twenty (20) units.
   J.   Trash: Refuse disposal service and receptacles shall be provided by the
property owner. Garbage receptacles must be located on the lot or property in a
manner that does not hinder access to any required off-street parking spaces,
driveways, or any means of emergency ingress or egress.
   K.   Mailboxes: A mailbox shall be provided for each unit in a commonly
accessible location within the single room occupancy facility.
   L.   Signs: Single room occupancy facilities may have signs in accordance
with the sign regulations applicable to the subject zoning district (pursuant
to
Chapter 15.36 of Title 15 of the Redlands Municipal Code) or specific plan
district where it is located. (Ord. 2985, 2025)
18.156.1230: MANAGEMENT:
   A.   Management Plan: The applicant shall prepare and submit a single-room
occupancy management plan, and shall at a minimum contain the following
elements: management policies and operations, rental procedures and rates,
maintenance plans, information for residents to contact management twenty four
(24) hours daily, residency and guest rules and procedures, security
procedures, and staffing needs including job descriptions. The management plan
shall be finalized before issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy. Such plan
shall be provided to the City upon request.
   B.   On-Site Manager: A twenty four (24) hour on-site resident manager shall
be provided for any single room occupancy use with twelve (12) or more units,
and shall include a dwelling unit designated for the manager. (Ord. 2985, 2025)
18.156.1240: EXISTING FACILITIES:
Notwithstanding the provisions of
Chapter 18.184 of this title, existing nonconforming single room occupancy uses
and buildings may be altered to comply with one or more development standards
required by this Article. (Ord. 2985, 2025)
ARTICLE XVI. TWO-UNIT PROJECTS ON RESIDENTIAL PARCELS
18.156.1300: PURPOSE OF ARTICLE:
The purpose of this Article is to allow and appropriately regulate two-unit
residential development projects in accordance with Government Code section
65852.21 in single-family residential zones that permit single-family
residences. (Ord. 2985, 2025)
18.156.1310: DEFINITIONS:
ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT: A residential dwelling unit that is accessory and
subordinate to a primary dwelling unit located on the same parcel, and such
accessory unit meets the criteria or requirements for an Accessory Dwelling
Unit pursuant to Redlands Municipal Code
Chapter 18.156, Article VII (Accessory Dwelling Units) or current State law.
PRIMARY DWELLING UNIT: For purposes of this article, means a single-family
residence that does not meet the criteria or requirements for an Accessory
Dwelling Unit pursuant to Redlands Municipal Code
Chapter 18.156, Article VII (Accessory Dwelling Units) and/or current State
law.
SB 9: Senate Bill 9 effective beginning January 1, 2022, and codified in
California Government Code section 65852.21.
SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONE: For purposes of this section, means a land use
district with a zoning designation as R-E, R-S, R-1, R-1-D, R-R, R-R-A, R-A, R-
A-A, or a single-family district within an adopted Specific Plan of the City.
TWO-UNIT PROJECT: The development of two primary dwelling units or, if there is
already a primary dwelling unit on the lot, the development of a second primary
dwelling unit on a legally subdivided lot in accordance with the requirements
of this article. (Ord. 2985, 2025)
18.156.1320: APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   The individual property owner(s) of the subject property may apply for
a two-unit project. "Individual property owner" means a natural person holding
fee title individually or jointly in the person's own name or a beneficiary of
a trust that holds fee title. Corporations, including but not limited to LLCs,
are not eligible applicants because they cannot satisfy the three-year
occupancy requirement. "Individual property owner" does not include any
corporation or corporate entity or person of any kind (partnership, LP, LLC, C
corporation, S corporation, etc.), except for a community land trust (as
defined by Revenue & Tax Code Section 402.1(a)(11)(C)(ii)) or a qualified
nonprofit corporation (as defined by Revenue & Tax Code Section 214.15).
   B.   An application for a two-unit project must be submitted on the City's
approved form together with all required application submittal items, project
plans, and other materials.
   C.   Only a complete application will be considered. The City will inform
the applicant in writing of any incompleteness within thirty (30) days after
the application is submitted.
   D.   The city may establish a fee to recover its costs for adopting,
implementing, and enforcing this section of the code, in accordance with
applicable law. The City Council may establish and change the fee by
resolution. The fee must be paid with the application. (Ord. 2985, 2025)
18.156.1330: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
A two-unit project must satisfy each of the following development standards and
requirements:
   A.   Map Act Compliance: The existing lot must have been legally subdivided.
   B.   Zone: The lot is in a single-family residential zone of the City of
Redlands (R-1, R-1-D, R-S, R-A, R-A-A, R-E, R-R, or R-R-A zoning districts) or
a single-family district within an adopted Specific Plan of the City.
   C.   Lot Location: The lot is not located on a site that meets any of the
location criteria as listed in Government Code § 66411.7(a)(3)(C) (and
incorporating Government Code section 65913.4(a)(6)(B) - (K) by reference).
   D.   Not Historic: The lot shall not be within a site that is designated or
listed as a city landmark or historic property or historic/scenic district, and
the lot shall not be a historic property or within a historic district that is
listed on the State Historic Resources Inventory (as defined in Section 5020.1
of the Public Resources Code).
   E.   No Impact On Protected Housing: The two-unit project must not require
or include the demolition or alteration of any of the types of housing
identified in Government Code § 65852.21(a)(3)-(4), inclusive.
      1.   Housing that is income-restricted for households of moderate, low,
or very low income.
      2.   Housing that is subject to any form of rent or price control through
a public entity's valid exercise of its policy power.
      3.   Housing that has been occupied by a tenant in the last three (3)
years. The applicant and the owner of a property for which a two-unit
development is sought must provide a sworn statement as to this fact with the
application for the parcel map. The City may conduct its own inquiries and
investigation to ascertain the veracity of the sworn statement, including but
not limited to, surveying owners of nearby properties; and the City may require
additional evidence of the applicant and owner as necessary to determine
compliance with this requirement.
   F.   Dwelling Unit Standards:
      1.   Quantity: For purposes of this section, "unit" means any dwelling
unit, including, but not limited to, a primary dwelling unit, a unit created
under this section of this code, an ADU, or a Junior ADU.
         a.   No more than two (2) dwelling units of any kind may be built on a
lot that results from an urban lot split
         b.   A lot that is not created by an urban lot split may have a two-
unit project under this section, plus any ADU or Junior ADU that must be
allowed under State law and the City's ADU ordinance, not to exceed two (2)
primary dwelling units per lot and a combined total of four (4) dwelling units
within the development.
      2.   Height Restriction: All dwelling units shall be subject to the same
height limitations applicable to the underlying zone.
      3.   Lot Coverage: The lot coverage limit shall be applicable within the
zoning district where the subject property is located. This lot coverage
standard is only enforced to the extent that it does not prevent the
construction of two (2) primary dwelling units on the lot at eight hundred
(800) square feet each.
      4.   Open Space: The new development shall be subject to the open space
requirement, if any, imposed within the zoning district where the subject
property is located. This open space standard is only enforced to the extent
that it does not prevent the construction of two (2) primary dwelling units on
the lot at eight hundred (800) square feet each.
      5.   Setbacks:
         a.   Generally: All setbacks must conform to those objective setbacks
that are applicable to the underlying zone.
         b.   Exceptions: Notwithstanding subsection F1a above:
            (1)   Existing Structures: No setback is required for an existing
legally established structure or for a new structure that is constructed in the
same location and to the same dimensions as an existing legally established
structure.
            (2)   Eight hundred (800) square-feet; four-foot (4') side and rear
setbacks. Exceptions to the setbacks imposed by the underlying zone may be
applied to the degree necessary to avoid physically precluding up to two (2)
units on the lot or either of the two (2) units from being of at least eight
hundred (800) square feet in floor area on the subject property; but in no
event may any structure be less than four feet (4') from a side or rear
property line.
            (3)   New Structures: Shared interior lot line; zero foot (0')
interior side setback. Setback requirements for an interior side lot line,
where the interior lot line is shared between the two (2) new parcels (and the
lot line is perpendicular to the primary street frontage of both lots), may be
modified to permit a zero foot (0') side setback. The intent of this provision
is to permit a shared wall between two (2) new dwelling units on separate lots,
so that the combined structure has the appearance from the street as one
single-family residence. Designs with a shared common wall shall comply with
all applicable California Building Code regulations, and the Director may
require a Homeowners' Association as well as CC&Rs for the subject properties.
If this provision for a zero foot (0') interior side setback is not utilized,
then the standard setback requirement shall apply, and in no case shall be less
than four feet (4').
      6.   Parking: Each new primary dwelling unit shall have one (1) off-
street parking space per unit on a paved surface, which may be covered or
uncovered, placed outside of all required setbacks, and constructed in
accordance with the applicable provisions of Article I of
Chapter 18.164 of this title. Off-street parking shall not be required if one
of the following applies:
         a.   The lot is located within one-half mile walking distance of
either:
            (1)   A corridor with fixed route bus service with service
intervals no longer than fifteen (15) minutes during peak commute hours; or
            (2)   A site that contains one of the following: an existing rail
or bus rapid transit station; or the intersection of two (2) or more major bus
routes with a frequency of service interval of fifteen (15) minutes or less
during the morning and afternoon peak commute periods.
         b.   The site is located within one block of a car-share vehicle
location that is permanently installed and permanently marked for car-share
pickup or dropoff service.
      7.   Nonconforming Conditions: A two (2) unit project may be approved
without requiring a legal nonconforming zoning condition or standard to be
corrected. This provision shall supersede
Chapter 18.184 of Title 18 of the Redlands Municipal Code for the duration that
applicable State law remains in effect.
      8.   Utilities: Each primary dwelling unit on the lot that is or that is
proposed shall comply with the development regulations applicable to the
underlying zone.
      9.   Building And Safety: All structures built on the lot shall comply
with all building code regulations applicable to the underlying zone.
   G.   Fire Hazard Mitigation Measures: For a development project on a lot
that is located in a fire hazard severity zone (as defined by the California
Department of Forestry and Fire Protection), the proposal shall comply with all
applicable fire-hazard mitigation measures:
      1.   The proposed development complies with the applicable provisions of
the California Fire Code, and any amendments thereto adopted in the Redlands
Municipal Code, that apply uniformly to development within the underlying zone.
      2.   The proposed development complies with the applicable provisions of
the California Building Code (including Chapter 7A), and any amendments or
additions thereto adopted in the Redlands Municipal Code (including RMC Chapter
15.30 Wildland-Urban Interface Code), that apply uniformly to development
within the underlying zone.
      3.   The subject property will comply with all applicable landscape
design, materials, fuel modification, and vegetation management requirements of
applicable State law (including but not limited to Calif. Gov. Code § 51182,
Public Resources Code § 4291, Calif. Fire Code § 4906, and Calif. Building Code
Chapter 7A) for requirements pertaining to landscape fuel modification zones
and vegetation management that apply uniformly to development within the
underlying zone.
   H.   Regulation Of Uses:
      1.   Residential-Only: No non-residential use is permitted on the lot.
         a.   Home occupations may be permitted with a Home Occupation Permit
issued pursuant to
Chapter 18.160 of this title.
         b.   Small family daycare homes may be permitted pursuant to
Chapter 18.156, Article VIII, of this title.
         c.   Single-room occupancy residential facilities may be permitted
pursuant to
Chapter 18.156, Article XV, of this title.
      2.   No Short-Term Rentals: No dwelling unit on the lot may be rented for
a period of less than thirty (30) days.
   I.   Deed Restriction: The owner must record a deed restriction, acceptable
to the city, that does each of the following:
      1.   Expressly prohibits any rental of any dwelling on the property for a
period of less than thirty (30) days.
      2.   Expressly prohibits any non-residential use of the lot.
      3.   States that the property was developed pursuant to SB 9 and shall
not be further developed with additional primary dwelling units, or further
subdivided subsequent to a prior SB 9 lot split.
   J.   Undergrounding Of Utilities: For construction of new SB 9 dwelling
units, utility laterals and connections shall be installed underground for the
new unit(s). (Ord. 2985, 2025)
18.156.1340:   SPECIFIC ADVERSE IMPACTS:
   A.   Notwithstanding anything else in this section, the city may deny an
application for a two-unit project if the building official makes a written
finding, based on a preponderance of the evidence, that the project would have
a "specific, adverse impact" on public health and safety and for which there is
no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse
impact.
   B.   "Specific adverse impact" has the same meaning as in Gov. Code §
65589.5(d)(2): "a significant, quantifiable, direct, and unavoidable impact,
based on objective, identified written public health or safety standards,
policies, or conditions as they existed on the date the application was deemed
complete" and does not include (1) inconsistency with the zoning ordinance or
general plan land use designation or (2) the eligibility to claim a welfare
exemption under Revenue & Taxation Code section 214(g).
   C.   The building official may consult with and be assisted by Planning
staff, Engineering staff, and others as necessary in making a finding of
specific, adverse impact. (Ord. 2985, 2025)
18.156.1350: APPROVAL BY DIRECTOR:
   A.   An application for a two-unit development pursuant to SB 9 is approved
or denied ministerially, by the Development Services Director, without
discretionary review.
   B.   A two (2) unit development is approved ministerially if it complies
with all the requirements of this article.
   C.   The approval must require the owner and applicant to hold the City of
Redlands harmless from all claims and damages related to the approval and its
subject matter.
   D.   The approval must require the owner and applicant to reimburse the City
of Redlands for all costs of enforcement, including attorneys' fees and costs
associated with enforcing the requirements of this article.
   E.   Notice Of Denial: If an application for an SB 9 two-unit housing
project is denied, then the Development Services Director shall notify the
applicant within sixty (60) days from receipt of the application and provide a
full set of comments to the applicant with a list of items that are defective
or deficient and a description of how the application can be remedied. (Ord.
2985, 2025)
18.156.1360: APPEAL OF DIRECTOR ACTION:
Appeal of the decision by the Development Services Director with respect to a
two-unit development shall be made to the planning commission or city council
in accordance with the provisions of section
18.193.070 of this title. (Ord. 2985, 2025)
18.156.1370: EXTENSION AND AMENDMENT:
Construction plans or plan checks deemed by the department to be in substantial
conformance with the approved two-unit development plan and/or tentative parcel
map shall be reviewed by the Development Services Director or designee. The
Development Services Director may approve or deny the request for an amendment
through the ministerial plan check process, or may require the filing of a new
two-unit development plan and/or new tentative parcel map for major amendments
deemed not to be in substantial conformance with the approved two-unit
development plan or tentative parcel map. (Ord. 2985, 2025)
18.156.1380: REMEDIES:
If a two-unit project violates any part of this code or any other legal
requirement:
   A.   The buyer, grantee, or lessee of any part of the property has an action
for damages or to void the deed, sale, or contract.
   B.   The City of Redlands may:
      1.   Bring an action to enjoin any attempt to sell, lease, or finance the
property.
      2.   Bring an action for other legal, equitable, or summary remedy, such
as declaratory and injunctive relief.
      3.   Pursue criminal prosecution, punishable by imprisonment in county
jail or state prison for up to one year, by a fine of up to ten thousand
dollars ($10,000.00), or both; or a misdemeanor.
      4.   Record a notice of violation.
      5.   Withhold any or all future permits and approvals.
      6.   Pursue all other administrative, legal, or equitable remedies that
are allowed by law or the Redlands Municipal Code. (Ord. 2985, 2025)
CHAPTER 18.160
HOME OCCUPATIONS
SECTION:
18.160.010: Purpose Of Provisions
18.160.020: Validity; Criteria For Staff Decision
18.160.030: Application And Fee Required
18.160.040: Scope Of Application
18.160.050: Review Procedures
18.160.060: Public Hearing
18.160.080: Validity; Time Limit And Annual Renewal
18.160.090: Noncompliance; Voiding Of Permit
18.160.100: Appeals Procedures
18.160.010: PURPOSE OF PROVISIONS:
The purpose of the home occupation provisions is to permit the conduct of a
business in the residential districts. Home occupations are limited to those
uses which may be conducted within a residential dwelling, without in any way
changing the appearance or condition of the residence. (Ord. 2077 § 1, 1989:
Ord. 1000 § 34.00, 1955)
18.160.020: VALIDITY; CRITERIA FOR STAFF DECISION:
The following criteria shall be used to determine a valid home occupation:
   A.   There shall be no employment of persons other than the resident family
of the dwelling. The individual primarily responsible for the home occupation
shall live in the dwelling.
   B.   There shall be no material or equipment used that is not recognized as
being part of the normal practices in the residential district.
   C.   There shall be no direct sales of products or merchandise from the
home, except for produce (fruit or vegetables) grown on the subject property.
   D.   The home occupation shall not allow customers or clientele to visit the
dwelling. However, incidental uses such as music lessons, tutoring, and the
sale of produce may be permitted if the intensity of such use is approved by
the community development director.
   E.   The home occupation shall not involve the use of commercial vehicles
for delivery of materials to or from the premises beyond those commercial
vehicles normally associated with residential uses.
   F.   The home occupation shall not involve the use of advertising signs on
the premises, or any other local advertising media which calls attention to the
fact that the home is being used for business purposes, telephone number
listing excepted.
   G.   No more than ten percent (10%) of the total square footage of the
dwelling or one room of the dwelling, whichever is less, shall be employed for
the home occupation. Use of the garage for the home occupation may be permitted
if such use does not obstruct required parking.
   H.   No accessory building or space outside of the main building shall be
used for the home occupation. No outdoor storage, including the storage or
parking of vehicles associated with the use, shall be permitted.
   I.   In no way shall the appearance of the structure be altered or the
occupation within the residence be conducted in a manner which would cause the
premises to differ from its residential character either by the use of colors,
materials, construction, lighting, signs, or the emission of sound, noise,
vibrations, or other visible evidence of the activity.
   J.   There shall be no increase in the use of utilities (including water,
sewer, electricity and garbage collection) or community facilities so that the
combined total use for the dwelling and home occupation does not exceed that
normal to the use of the property for residential purposes.
   K.   Use of the United States postal service in conjunction with a mail
order home occupation shall be done by means of a post office box.
   L.   A home occupation permit is not valid until a current city business
license is obtained.
   M.   If an applicant is not the legal property owner of property where a
home occupation is to be conducted, notarized written permission from the
property owner approving use of the dwelling must be submitted with the
application. (Ord. 2244 § 1, 1994: Ord. 2077 §§ 2, 3, 4, 1989: Ord. 1000 §
34.10, 1955)
18.160.030: APPLICATION AND FEE REQUIRED:
A signed application and payment of a fee as set by the city council shall be
submitted to the planning department. (Ord. 1000 § 34.20(A), 1955)
18.160.040: SCOPE OF APPLICATION:
In cases where the planning department considers the application not within the
scope of the home occupation criteria, the applicant will be so informed;
whereon, if the application is accepted, it shall be signed by the applicant to
the effect he was so informed. (Ord. 1000 § 34.20(B), 1955)
18.160.050: REVIEW PROCEDURES:
   A.   Applications for a home occupation shall be filed with the planning
department in a manner prescribed by the community development director. Upon
acceptance of a home occupation, the community development director, or their
designee, shall review the request for compliance with the above conditions.
Following a review period, the community development director shall render a
decision. The decision shall clearly state, in writing, any conditions of
approval or reasons for denial. Immediately following the effective date of an
approved home occupation, when no appeal has been filed, the applicant shall
obtain a city business license.
   B.   The decision of the community development director shall be final
unless an appeal is taken to the planning commission as provided for in section
18.160.100 of this chapter. Such decisions shall not become effective for ten
(10) days from the date that the written decision has been made and notice
thereof mailed to the applicant. A copy of the decision shall be forwarded to
the planning commission. Following the denial of a home occupation, no
application for a home occupation for the same or substantially the same home
occupation on the same site shall be filed within six (6) months from the date
of denial. (Ord. 2244 § 2, 1994: Ord. 2077 § 5, 1989: Ord. 1000 § 34.20(C),
1955)
18.160.060: PUBLIC HEARING:
   A.   If a public hearing is requested, then notices shall be mailed not less
than ten (10) days prior to the first available planning commission meeting
date. Notices shall be mailed to owners of property within a one hundred foot
(100') radius of the external boundaries of the property described in the
application.
   B.   The decision of the planning commission shall be final unless an appeal
is taken to the city council as provided for in section
18.160.100 of this chapter. Such decision shall not become effective for ten
(10) days from the date that the written decision has been made and notice
thereof mailed to the applicant. A copy of the decision shall be forwarded to
the city council. (Ord. 2077 § 6, 1989: Ord. 1000 § 34.20(D), 1955)
18.160.080: VALIDITY; TIME LIMIT AND ANNUAL RENEWAL:
   A.   The initial time limit shall not exceed one year, such time limit to be
granted to the nearest business licensing expiration date occurring during the
year.
   B.   Home occupation permits shall be renewed annually with the annual
renewal of the city business license. The fee for annual renewal of the home
occupation permit, as set by the city council, shall be paid in conjunction
with the renewal of the city business license.
   C.   The annual renewal of the home occupation permit shall include a signed
statement from the applicant identifying the continued compliance with section
18.160.020 of this chapter. (Ord. 2244 § 3, 1994: Ord. 2077 § 8, 1989: Ord.
1000 § 34.20(F), 1955)
18.160.090: NONCOMPLIANCE; VOIDING OF PERMIT:
The commission may void any home occupation for noncompliance with conditions
set forth in approving the permit. (Ord. 1000 § 34.20(G), 1955)
18.160.100: APPEALS PROCEDURES:
   A.   Appeal Of Community Development Director Decision:
      1.   Any person aggrieved by the determination of the community
development director shall have the right to appeal to the planning commission.
      2.   Appeals shall be filed, on forms supplied by the planning
department, with the planning commission within ten (10) days from the date of
the community development director's decision.
      3.   On the appeal, the planning commission shall review the decision of
the community development director, hear new evidence and testimony, if
offered, and, in deciding the appeal, may either affirm, reverse or modify the
decision of the community development director.
   B.   Appeal Of Planning Commission Decision: Appeal of the planning
commission decision shall be made in compliance with section
18.12.110, "Appeal Procedures", of this title. (Ord. 2077 § 9, 1989: Ord. 1000
§ 34.30, 1955)
CHAPTER 18.164
PARKING AND LOADING SPACE REQUIREMENTS
SECTION:
Article I. Residential Parking
18.164.010: Amount Of Facilities Required
18.164.020: Nonconforming Uses
18.164.030: Voluntary Establishment
18.164.040: Provision Is A Continuing Obligation
18.164.050: Relocation Of Facilities
18.164.060: Parking Accessibility
18.164.070: Number Of Spaces; Minimum Requirements
18.164.080: Single-Family Residential Dwellings
18.164.090: Multiple-Family Residential Dwellings
18.164.100: Location
18.164.110: Size Of Spaces
18.164.120: Access To Street
18.164.130: Limitations And Prohibited Parking
Article II. Nonresidential Parking
18.164.140: Amount Of Facilities Required
18.164.150: Nonconforming Uses
18.164.160: Voluntary Establishment
18.164.170: Plot Plan Approval Required
18.164.180: Permit Requirements
18.164.190: Use Limitations For Required Area
18.164.200: Provision Is A Continuing Obligation
18.164.210: Applicability; Parking District Exemptions
18.164.215: In Lieu Fee To Meet Parking Requirements
18.164.220: Number Of Spaces; For Unspecified Uses
18.164.230: Classification Of Uses; Clarification Procedure
18.164.240: Number Of Spaces; Specific Uses Designated
Article III. Property Development Standards
18.164.250: Location Of Parking Facilities
18.164.260: Dimensions Of Parking Spaces
18.164.270: Access To Off Street Parking
18.164.280: Circulation Within Parking Areas
18.164.290: Restrictions For Certain Uses And Zones
18.164.300: Development And Maintenance
18.164.310: Improvements To Parking Areas
18.164.315: Alternative Improvement Standards For Accessory Public Parking
Areas
18.164.320: Joint Use Agreements; Conditions
18.164.325: Adjustments To Off Street Parking Requirements For Mixed Use
Projects Within Specific Plan 45, The C-3 And C-4 Districts
Article IV. Loading
18.164.330: Loading Spaces; General Requirements
18.164.340: Number Of Spaces; Specific Uses Designated
Article V. Parking Modifications For Historic Structures
18.164.410: Purpose
18.164.420: Definitions
18.164.430: Permitted Modifications
18.164.440: Effect Of Additions To Historic Structures
18.164.450: Historic And Scenic Preservation Commission And Engineering Review
18.164.460: Notice
18.164.470: Findings For Approval
18.164.480: Maintenance Of Log
18.164.490: Appeal From Planning Commission Decision
ARTICLE I. RESIDENTIAL PARKING
18.164.010: AMOUNT OF FACILITIES REQUIRED:
Any dwelling unit constructed or located after the effective date hereof, or
any subsequent amendment thereto, shall be required to provide off street
parking facilities in accordance with the provisions of this title. (Ord. 1000
§ 39.10, 1955)
18.164.020: NONCONFORMING USES:
Any dwelling or dwelling group, which on the effective date hereof, or of any
subsequent amendment thereto, is nonconforming as to the regulations relating
to off street parking facilities, may be continued in the same manner as if the
parking facilities were conforming. However, any existing dwelling that is
enlarged by the addition of one or more bedrooms shall be required to provide
off street parking facilities in accordance with the provisions of this title.
(Ord. 1000 § 39.10(B), 1955)
18.164.030: VOLUNTARY ESTABLISHMENT:
Nothing in this title shall be deemed to prevent the voluntary establishment of
off street parking facilities in excess of those required by this title,
provided that all regulations herein governing the location, design and
operation of such facilities are adhered to. (Ord. 1000 § 39.10(C), 1955)
18.164.040: PROVISION IS A CONTINUING OBLIGATION:
The required off street parking facilities shall be a continuing obligation of
the property owner. It is unlawful for an owner to discontinue or dispense with
the required vehicle parking facilities without providing other vehicle parking
facilities which meet the requirements of this title. (Ord. 1000 § 39.10(D),
1955)
18.164.050: RELOCATION OF FACILITIES:
Whenever existing parking facilities are removed or converted to a permitted
nonparking use, the following regulations shall apply:
   A.   Any driveway approach that no longer provides access to a covered
parking facility shall be removed and replaced with standard curb and gutter,
in accordance with city specifications.
   B.   All paved surfaces in the front yard area that no longer provide access
to a covered parking facility shall be removed and the area landscaped. (Ord.
1000 § 39.10(F), 1955)
18.164.060: PARKING ACCESSIBILITY:
No covered or uncovered tandem parking is permitted for parking credit. Each
credited parking space shall be so designed that a car need not be moved to
gain access to or from any other parking space. (Ord. 1000 § 39.10(F), 1955)
18.164.070: NUMBER OF SPACES; MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS:
The number of off street parking spaces required shall be not less than that
set forth in sections
18.164.080 and
18.164.090 of this article. (Ord. 1929 § 2, 1983: Ord. 1000 § 39.20, 1955)
18.164.080: SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DWELLINGS:
   A.   In the A-1, A-2, R-A, R-E, R-S, R-1 and R-1-D districts, there shall be
not less than two (2) covered parking spaces in a garage or carport for every
dwelling unit.
   B.   A lot of record less than fifty feet (50') in width may provide only
one parking space in a garage or carport; however, a single-family dwelling
unit containing more than two (2) bedrooms shall provide two (2) covered
parking spaces regardless of lot width. (Ord. 1829 § 2, 1983: Ord. 1000 § 39.20
(A), 1955)
18.164.090: MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DWELLINGS:
   A.   Multiple residential projects shall have a minimum of the following
number of covered parking spaces:
 
No bedroom and 1 bedroom unit 1
2 bedroom units               11/2
3 or more bedroom units       2
 
   B.   Individually owned dwelling units, such as within condominium or
cooperative multiple-family residential projects, shall have a minimum of two
(2) covered parking spaces per dwelling unit. The requirements of this
subsection may be modified by the city council in a density bonus agreement
entered into pursuant to California Government Code section 65915 et seq.
   C.   In addition, all multiple residential projects containing more than two
(2) units per lot of record shall provide one uncovered off street parking
space for each two (2) units or fraction thereof.
   D.   Parking for Single Room Occupancy facilities shall be provided in
accordance with Article XV of
chapter 18.156 of this title. (Ord. 2985, 2025: Ord. 1829 § 2, 1983: Ord. 1000
§ 39.20(B), 1955)
18.164.100: LOCATION:
   A.   The off street parking facilities required by this title shall be
located on the same lot or parcel of land as the residential unit they are
intended to serve.
   B.   Parking spaces shall not be located in any required front yard, except
in mountain areas or hillside lots where garages or carports may be located in
the front yard when approved by the planning commission.
   C.   Not more than three (3) carports or garages on any one lot shall have
their entryway facing the street.
   D.   Not more than twenty five percent (25%) of the required front yard area
on each street shall be paved for driveway access to parking facilities,
remaining front yard area to be landscaped. (Ord. 1000 § 39.30(A), 1955)
18.164.110: SIZE OF SPACES:
   A.   Each covered parking space in a garage or carport shall have dimensions
not less than ten feet (10') in width and twenty feet (20') in length.
   B.   Each uncovered off street parking space shall have dimensions not less
than nine feet (9') in width and nineteen feet (19') in length, except parallel
parking stalls, which shall be a minimum of eight feet (8') in width and twenty
four feet (24') in length. No part of the area of a required parking space
shall be used for driveways, aisles, walkways or other required improvements.
(Ord. 1000 § 39.30(B), 1955)
18.164.120: ACCESS TO STREET:
The following requirements shall govern access to off street parking
facilities:
   A.   Access to parking facilities from a dedicated street or alley is
required.
   B.   Dwelling units located on lots which adjoin a major or secondary
highway and do not have access from a side street or alley shall provide
vehicular turnaround facilities on the lot to permit forward travel upon
entering a street. Such facilities may be required for lots adjacent to
collector streets.
   C.   The width of driveway entrances and exits from a public street shall be
measured at the property line and shall comply with the following standards
unless specific exemptions are made by the director of public works for
exceptional circumstances:
 
Minimum driveway width 10 feet
Maximum driveway width 20 feet
 
(Ord. 1000 § 39.30(C), 1955)
18.164.130: LIMITATIONS AND PROHIBITED PARKING:
   A.   All motor vehicles incapable of movement under their own power, other
than in cases of emergency, shall be stored in an enclosed parking space.
   B.   All detached truck campers, trailers of any type, including, but not
limited to, camping, travel and utility trailers, mobilehomes, boats or other
types of watercraft, and similar equipment incapable of movement under its own
power shall be parked in an approved parking space or stored in an area
screened from the street. No parking or storing is permitted in a driveway or
front yard area.
   C.   The storage or long term parking of vehicles and related parts shall be
within a garage or carport.
   D.   The repair, restoration and mechanical maintenance of vehicles
registered to the resident occupant is permitted provided all work shall be
conducted within an enclosed garage or an enclosed area.
   E.   The parking or storage of business related equipment, materials and
tools is not permitted on any parcel of land, in any structure or on any street
in a residential zone.
   F.   Not more than two (2) commercially licensed vehicles used in
conjunction with a business shall be parked in a residential zone.
   G.   A legally parked motor home and/or one commercial licensed vehicle with
a load capacity of one ton or less, owned by the resident occupant, is exempt
from these regulations. For purposes of this section, a "motor home" means a
motorized vehicle that is built on a single truck or motor van chassis
primarily designed to provide temporary living quarters for travel, camping,
recreation and vacation use. Under no circumstances shall any part of the
parked motor home or commercially licensed vehicle overhang into the public
right of way.
   H.   No parking is permitted in required landscaped front yard areas.
   I.   Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection B of this section, a
resident of a residential zoned parcel may park a detached camper, trailer, or
watercraft in a designated front yard driveway, or other city approved hard
surfaced area in the front yard, of said parcel provided that the resident has
obtained a minor exception permit in accordance with sections
18.168.040 through
18.168.100 of this title. Approval of said permit is contingent upon the
following:
      1.   Compliance with this section is not possible or practical, because
there is no other more suitable location in the side or rear yard of the
property for the parking of the vehicle. This finding may be made if such other
location would require significant physical remodeling of structures or
improvements, the removal of significant landscaping, or otherwise be a
hardship to the applicant;
      2.   The proposed location of the vehicle will not be detrimental to the
public health, safety or welfare or be injurious to surrounding properties;
      3.   The vehicle will not overhang into the public right of way;
      4.   The parked vehicle will not interfere with a motorist's line of
sight when approaching an intersection or when exiting a driveway;
      5.   The granting of the minor exception permit is subject to the
following conditions:
         a.   Only one permit shall be issued per residential parcel;
         b.   The permit must identify the vehicle by license number;
         c.   The permit must include an approved site plan that identifies
where on the parcel the vehicle may be parked;
         d.   The vehicle may be partially screened from view of surrounding
properties to the degree possible as determined by the committee reviewing the
permit. Such screening material may consist of fencing, walls or landscaping;
         e.   The vehicle must be maintained in a clean and usable appearance;
         f.   The permit shall expire upon the applicant's termination of their
residency upon the parcel;
         g.   The permit shall expire two (2) years after the date of approval.
An application for a new permit may be requested in accordance with this
section. (Ord. 2567 § 1, 2004: Ord. 2333 § 42, 1997: Ord. 1000 § 39.40(1),
1955)
ARTICLE II. NONRESIDENTIAL PARKING
18.164.140: AMOUNT OF FACILITIES REQUIRED:
Any building or structure constructed or located, and any use of land
established after the effective date hereof, or any subsequent amendment
thereto, shall be required to provide off street parking facilities in
accordance with the provisions of this title. (Ord. 1000 § 40.10(A), 1955)
18.164.150: NONCONFORMING USES:
Any use of property, which on the effective date hereof or of any subsequent
amendment thereto, is nonconforming only as to the regulations relating to off
street parking facilities, may be continued in the same manner as if the
parking facilities were conforming. However, such parking facilities as do
exist shall not be reduced. (Ord. 1000 § 40.10(B), 1955)
18.164.160: VOLUNTARY ESTABLISHMENT:
Nothing in this title shall be deemed to prevent the voluntary establishment of
off street parking or loading facilities in excess of those required by this
title, provided that all regulations herein governing the location, design and
operation of such facilities are adhered to. (Ord. 1000 § 40.10(C), 1955)
18.164.170: PLOT PLAN APPROVAL REQUIRED:
At the time a building permit is requested for any building or structure, or at
the time a new use of land which would require off street parking is
established, a plot plan shall be submitted to the planning department for
approval or reference to the planning commission for approval whenever
required. (Ord. 1000 § 40.10(D), 1955)
18.164.180: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Before any parcel of land is paved with asphaltic concrete or other
surfacing material, a permit shall be obtained from the building and safety
department.
   B.   No building shall be occupied and no final inspection shall be given by
the building and safety department until off street parking spaces are provided
in accordance with the provisions of this section. (Ord. 1000 § 40.10(E), 1955)
18.164.190: USE LIMITATIONS FOR REQUIRED AREA:
Required parking area shall be used exclusively for vehicle parking in
conjunction with a permitted use, and shall not be reduced or encroached upon
in any manner. (Ord. 1000 § 40.10(F), 1955)
18.164.200: PROVISION IS A CONTINUING OBLIGATION:
The required off street parking facilities shall be a continuing obligation of
the property owner so long as the use requiring vehicle parking facilities
continues. It shall be unlawful for an owner of any building or use to
discontinue or dispense with the required vehicle parking facilities without
providing other vehicle parking facilities which meet the requirements of this
title. (Ord. 1000 § 40.10(G), 1955)
18.164.210: APPLICABILITY; PARKING DISTRICT EXEMPTIONS:
The provisions of this title shall apply uniformly throughout the city, except
that property located within the territorial limits of any completed
proceedings for the formation of an off street parking district shall be deemed
to have complied with the provisions of this title. (Ord. 1000 § 40.10(H),
1955)
18.164.215: IN LIEU FEE TO MEET PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
To comply with the parking requirements as outlined in this chapter, an in lieu
parking fee may be paid instead of providing the required parking. This
provision shall apply to changes of use, additions to existing buildings and
new construction. The reduction in the number of required parking spaces and
the payment of the in lieu parking fee shall be allowed, if the commission can
make all of the following findings:
   A.   The proposed new construction is infill construction in an already
densely developed area;
   B.   The size or configuration of the property precludes providing the
required parking; or that providing the required parking would result in the
demolition of qualified historic buildings, either on site or on adjacent
properties;
   C.   The proposed project is compatible in size, scale, massing, bulk,
character, quality and rhythm with the existing streetscape and neighborhood;
   D.   The proposed building and use make a desirable contribution to the
neighborhood;
   E.   Approval of the reduced parking requirement and payment of the in lieu
fee will have no adverse impact on the existing parking district.
The in lieu fees and the in lieu parking fee area map shall be established by
resolution of the city council. Only properties within the defined boundaries
of a designated in lieu parking fee area shall be permitted to use this
provision. Parking facilities funded by the in lieu fee program shall be
located within the boundaries of the in lieu parking fee area. (Ord. 2159 § 1,
1991)
18.164.220: NUMBER OF SPACES; FOR UNSPECIFIED USES:
The required off street parking for any building, structure or use of land
which is not specifically listed in this article shall be determined by the
director of planning. Such determination shall be based upon the requirements
for the most comparable use specified herein. (Ord. 1000 § 40.10(I), 1955)
18.164.230: CLASSIFICATION OF USES; CLARIFICATION PROCEDURE:
If ambiguity or an omission arises concerning the appropriate classification of
a particular use within the meaning and intent of this chapter, the matter
shall be referred to the planning commission for decision. The commission shall
forward its findings to the city council by resolution of record for approval.
(Ord. 1000 § 40.10(J), 1955)
18.164.240: NUMBER OF SPACES; SPECIFIC USES DESIGNATED:
The number of off street parking spaces or amount of parking area required for
each listed use shall be not less than that set forth in this section. Whenever
more than one method of calculating the required number of spaces or area is
indicated, the method which provides the greatest number of spaces shall apply.
   Parking Requirement
                                          Parking Requirement
A. Commercial uses:
                                          1 space/2,000 square feet of open
                                          area devoted to display or sales;
                                          provided that where such area exceeds
  Automobile and machinery sales        10,000 square feet, 1 space shall be
                                          required per each 5,000 square feet
                                          in excess of 10,000 square feet; and
                                          5 spaces/auto service bay
  Hotels/motels                         1.1 spaces/sleeping unit
  Neighborhood center                   1 space/200 square feet of gross
                                          floor area
                                          1 space/3 seats; or 1 space/50 square
                                          foot serving area, whichever is
                                          larger; and 1 space for each 2
  Restaurants, drive-through            employees; minimum of 10 spaces; and
                                          with an additional 6 stacking spaces
                                          provided for drive-through service
                                          operation
                                          1 space/3 seats; or 1 space/50 square
  Restaurants, sit down (with or        foot serving area, whichever is
   without liquor and/or entertainment)   larger; and 1 space for each 2
                                          employees; minimum of 10 spaces
                                          1 space/400 square feet of gross
  Retail furniture/appliance            floor area; and 1 space/each 2
                                          employees
  Retail trade (includes department     1 space/250 square feet of gross
   stores)                                floor area
  Shopping centers 100,000 square feet  1 space/250 square feet of gross
   and greater                            floor area
                                          1 space/2 employees and 1 space for
  Wholesale trade                       each company vehicle; or 1 space/
                                          1,000 square feet of gross floor
                                          area, whichever is greater
B. Business services:                     
                                          1 space/1,000 square feet of gross
                                          floor area or 1 space/each employee
                                          on the largest shift, whichever is
                                          greater (Requirement may be reduced
  Automated warehousing                 if applicant submits letter
                                          justifying reduction of spaces;
                                          however, adequate area for expansion
                                          of parking shall be provided in case
                                          of conversion of use.)
  Automobile repair                     5 spaces/service bay; minimum of 6
                                          spaces
                                          1 space/200 square feet of gross
  Banks, financial institutions         floor area; minimum of 4 spaces; and
                                          a minimum of 6 stacking spaces for
                                          drive-through service operations
  Bus terminals                         1 space/100 square feet of gross
                                          floor area
  Car wash, automated                   1 space/employee on the largest shift
  Car wash, self-serve                  2 drying spaces per washing stall
  Contractor's yard                     1 space/2 employees and 1 space for
                                          each company vehicle
  Office (real estate, insurance,       1 space/250 square feet of gross
   advertising, legal, etc.)              floor area; minimum of 4 spaces
  Rail terminals                        1 space/100 square feet of gross
                                          floor area
  Repair services                       1 space/400 square feet of gross
                                          floor area
  Service station/minimart              1 space/250 square feet of gross
                                          floor area
                                          1 space/500 square feet of gross
  Warehousing                           floor area up to 20,000 square feet;
                                          1 space per 1,000 square feet over
                                          20,000 square feet
C. Professional services:                 
  Convalescent hospitals/nursing homes  1 space/3 beds; plus 1 space/each
                                          employee on the largest shift
                                          1 space/patient bed plus 1 space for
  Hospitals                             every employee and staff member on
                                          largest shift
                                          1 space/200 square feet of gross
  Medical, dental offices               floor area; minimum of 5 spaces per
                                          office
                                          6 spaces minimum up to 1,000 square
  Veterinary hospital                   feet of gross floor area, plus 1
                                          space/each 250 square feet in excess
                                          of 1,000 square feet
D. Educational services:                  
  Childcare                             1 space/employee and 1 space/
                                          5 children; minimum of 4 spaces
  Elementary school                     5 spaces plus 1 for each classroom
  High school                           1 space/5 students plus 1 space/staff
                                          member and employee
                                          1 space/3 enrolled daytime students
  College/university                    and 1 space/staff member and faculty
                                          personnel
  Trade/vocational/business             1 space/3 students plus 1 space/staff
                                          member and faculty personnel
E. Entertainment:                         
  Amusement enterprises                 1 space/4 persons using facilities
  Billiard parlor                       2 spaces/billiard table
  Bowling alleys                        5 spaces/each bowling lane and 2
                                          spaces/billiard table
                                          1 space/20 square feet of dance floor
  Dance hall                            area and 1 space/3 fixed seats or 1
                                          space per 20 square feet of seating
                                          where there are no fixed seats
                                          10 spaces for each hole, and 1 space/
  Golf course                           250 square feet of gross floor area
                                          for other commercial uses
  Organized camp                        1.5 spaces/staff member or employee
                                          To be determined based upon an
  Parks, pool, etc.                     evaluation of the park and its
                                          activities through the conditional
                                          use permit process
                                          1 space/3 fixed seats and for every
                                          20 square feet of seating area where
  Skating rinks                         there are no fixed seats and 1 space
                                          for each 250 square feet of skating
                                          area (24 linear inches of bench shall
                                          be considered a fixed seat)
                                          For theaters with 6 or fewer screens
                                          and all other public assembly uses, 1
                                          space/5 fixed seats. Where structures
                                          other than fixed seats are provided
                                          18 inches of linear seating equals 1
                                          seat. For theaters with more than 6
  Theater/auditorium                    screens, 1 space/6 fixed seats. For
                                          all public assembly uses, no
                                          additional parking shall be required
                                          for nonseating area. Where no fixed
                                          seats are provided for every 40
                                          square feet of gross floor area which
                                          spectators will be seated
F. Miscellaneous:                         
                                          1 space/5 fixed seats of all area
                                          used for assembly or 1 space/40
  Chapels/mortuaries                    square feet of assembly area; also, 1
                                          space per vehicle used in connection
                                          to the use
                                          1 space/3 fixed seats or 1 space/40
  Church                                square feet of floor space designated
                                          for assembly purposes
  Government building (little public    1 space/250 square feet of gross
   use)                                   floor space or 1 space per employee
  Government buildings (public use)     1 space/250 square feet of gross
                                          floor area
                                          1 space/500 square feet of gross
  Manufacturing                         floor area or 1 space/employee on the
                                          largest shift, whichever is greater
                                          1 space for each 50 square feet for
  Private clubs/lodges                  floor area designated for assembly
                                          purposes
 
(Ord. 2611 § 1, 2005: Ord. 2294 § 1, 1995: Ord. 2065 § 1, 1989: Ord. 1000 §
40.20, 1955)
ARTICLE III. PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
18.164.250: LOCATION OF PARKING FACILITIES:
The off street parking facilities required by this title shall be located on
the same lot or parcel of land as the use they are intended to serve, except
that in cases of practical difficulty, the planning commission may approve a
substitute location which meets the following conditions:
   A.   All or part of the substitute location is within two hundred feet
(200') of the principal use for which the parking is being provided;
   B.   The substitute lot is in the same possession as the use it is intended
to serve. Such possession may be by deed or long term lease, the terms of which
meet the approval of the city. (Ord. 1000 § 40.30(A), 1955)
18.164.260: DIMENSIONS OF PARKING SPACES:
   A.   Each off street parking space shall have dimensions not less than nine
feet (9') in width and nineteen feet (19') in length, except parallel parking
stalls which shall be a minimum of eight feet (8') in width and twenty four
feet (24') in length. No part of the area of a required parking space shall be
used for driveways, aisles, walkways or other required improvements.
   B.   Compact parking stalls are permitted subject to the following:
      1.   Compact stalls shall have dimensions no less than eight feet (8') in
width and fifteen feet (15') in length.
      2.   Compact spaces are permitted for projects that provide more than
twenty five (25) off street parking spaces. The first twenty five (25) spaces
shall be standard size stalls. Twenty five percent (25%) of the remaining
parking may be compact spaces.
      3.   Compact spaces shall be located away from the main building entrance
and in no case shall compact spaces be permitted adjacent to any building
entrance.
      4.   Compact spaces shall be designated "COMPACT" and shall be visible
day and night.
      5.   Including one of the following to be determined by staff:
         a.   Compact parking spaces are permitted in areas of the city where
parking does not currently meet code upon a finding by the planning commission
that the use of compact parking stalls will alleviate an existing parking
problem; or
         b.   Compact spaces are permitted for long term parking when there is
a proportionate increase in parking lot landscaping as follows: for each
proposed compact space, thirty (30) square feet of landscaping shall be
provided in the parking area in addition to the minimum landscape requirements
of this code. (Ord. 2068 § 1, 1989: Ord. 1000 § 40.30(B), 1955)
18.164.270: ACCESS TO OFF STREET PARKING:
The following requirements shall govern access to off street parking
facilities:
   A.   Forward travel to and from parking facilities from a dedicated street
or alley is required. The parking area shall be adequate to facilitate the
turning of vehicles to permit forward travel upon entering a street.
   B.   All uses which adjoin a major or secondary highway shall, wherever
possible, have access by way of a service road or alley.
   C.   The access to all off street parking facilities shall be designed in a
manner which will not interfere with the safe movement of traffic.
   D.   Concrete driveway approaches shall be provided for ingress to and
egress from all parking facilities. Each parking space shall be easily
accessible to the intended user. The width of driveway entrances and exits from
a public street shall be measured at the property line and shall comply with
the following standards, unless specific exemptions are made by the director of
public works:
 
Minimum driveway width for single-lane entrances and exits 14 feet
Minimum driveway width for combined entrances or exits     26 feet
Maximum driveway width                                     30 feet
 
(Ord. 1000 § 40.30(C), 1955)
18.164.280: CIRCULATION WITHIN PARKING AREAS:
   A.   Minimum lot dimensions shall be provided in accordance with the angle
of the parking spaces they serve. (See table 18.164.280(A) of this section.)
   B.   Stall depths may be reduced up to one foot (1') where the parking space
is adjacent to a six foot (6') or wider sidewalk, or adjacent to a landscaped
planter with an interior diameter of five feet (5') or more.
   C.   Wheel stops shall be provided only along side and rear property lines
when necessary to protect adjacent property from vehicle encroachment.
   D.   Circulation within a parking area with more than one aisle must be such
that a car need not enter the street to reach another aisle within the same
parking area.
TABLE 18.164.280(A)
 
Parking Angle Stall One-Way     Two-Way
              Depth Aisle Width Aisle Width
30°          17.5' 14'         20'
45°          20'   16'         20'
60°          21'   18'         22'
90°          19'   26'         26'
 
   E.   Directional signs shall be required to differentiate between entrance
and exit access points to the street. (Ord. 1852 § 1, 1984: Ord. 1000 § 40.30
(D), 1955)
18.164.290: RESTRICTIONS FOR CERTAIN USES AND ZONES:
The location of parking facilities shall comply with the following:
   A.   In the agriculture, residential, A-P, C-1, C-2 and M-P zones, parking
shall not be permitted in the required front yard. On a corner lot or through
lot, parking shall not be permitted in the required yards adjoining either
street.
   B.   In other commercial and manufacturing zones, a portion of the required
front yard areas may be used for parking, provided that the landscaping,
fencing and all other provisions of this title are met.
   C.   No part of any parking area for more than five (5) vehicles shall be
closer than ten feet (10') to any residential use, school, hospital, or other
institution for human care located on an adjoining lot, unless screened by a
masonry wall not less than four feet (4') in height. (Ord. 1000 § 40.30(E),
1955)
18.164.300: DEVELOPMENT AND MAINTENANCE:
Every parcel of land hereafter used as a public or private parking area,
including a commercial parking lot and a vehicle sales area, shall be developed
and maintained in good condition and in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter. (Ord. 1000 § 40.30(F), 1955)
18.164.310: IMPROVEMENTS TO PARKING AREAS:
All required parking areas shall have the following improvements:
   A.   All off street parking areas and vehicle sales areas, and any driveways
used for access thereto, shall be paved. Such paving shall consist of suitable
base material, topped with hard, durable, plant mix asphaltic paving at least
two inches (2") thick after first compaction, or Portland cement paving at
least three inches (3") thick. The surface shall be graded and drained so as to
dispose of all surface water. Drainage shall be taken to the curb or gutter and
away from adjoining property. Such drainage shall not be allowed to cross the
surface of a public sidewalk.
   B.   Parking spaces shall be legibly marked off on the pavement.
   C.   Where such areas adjoin residential districts, they shall be separated
therefrom by a solid masonry wall six feet (6') in height, provided such wall
shall not exceed three feet (3') in height where it is in the front yard area
of an abutting residential use or district. Where no fence or wall is required
along a boundary of an area covered by this section, there shall be a concrete
curb or concrete wheel stops not less than six inches (6") in height securely
installed and maintained as a safeguard to abutting property or public right of
way. The barrier shall not be less than two feet (2') from a property line.
   D.   Where such area adjoins a residential district, there shall be a border
of appropriate landscaping, not less than six feet (6') in depth, along the
residential street frontage to protect the character of the adjoining
residential property. Such landscaping shall be maintained by the owner or
operator of the premises. Plans for the development shall be submitted to the
planning department for approval.
   E.   When more than five (5) parking spaces are proposed for a parcel, a
minimum of seven percent (7%) of such parking area shall be landscaped and
maintained in accordance with the provisions of chapter 18.168 of this title.
   F.   Parking lots intended for nighttime use shall be adequately lighted for
safe vehicular and pedestrian movements. Lighting shall be arranged to reflect
away from adjoining properties and streets. (Ord. 2498 § 1, 2002: Ord. 1000 §
40.30(G), 1955)
18.164.315: ALTERNATIVE IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS FOR ACCESSORY PUBLIC PARKING
AREAS:
The use of alternative improvement standards for accessory parking areas that
serve public parks, trails and linear parks, or similar public uses may be
approved by the final acting authority upon the review and recommendation of
technical staff within planning, municipal utilities and engineering, building
and safety, police, fire, and quality of life, and provided the following
minimum criteria are met:
   A.   Alternative surfacing material may be allowed in all areas of the
parking lot unless otherwise required by this section. Consideration shall be
given for surface materials that are compatible with the surrounding area;
   B.   Fire and emergency access shall be approved by the fire marshal;
   C.   Disabled parking and access is provided in accordance with title 24 of
the California code of regulations;
   D.   Paved accessible access is provided in accordance with the Americans
with disabilities act to the building or facility;
   E.   The minimum parking stall dimensions shall not be less than eight feet
(8') in width and fifteen feet (15') in length, as provided by subsection
18.164.260B1 of this chapter for compact stalls. Notwithstanding the allowance
of reduced parking stalls, a portion of the parking stalls and the parking area
shall be designed to accommodate larger vehicles such as trucks, vans, and
buses;
   F.   Driveway approaches shall not be less than fourteen feet (14') in width
for single lane entrances and exits and no less than twenty six feet (26') in
width for combined entrances and exits;
   G.   The drive aisle for one-way aisles shall be no less than twelve feet
(12') in width and no less than twenty six feet (26') in width for two-way
aisles;
   H.   Twenty feet (20') of paved access shall be provided from the edge of
roadway;
   I.   Adequate site drainage and water quality management measures are
provided;
   J.   Parking areas serving more than five (5) vehicles shall comply with
subsection
18.164.290C of this chapter for minimum distances or screening of the spaces
from any residential use, school, hospital, or other institution for human care
located on an adjoining lot; and
   K.   Reduced landscape standards may be allowed pursuant to subsection
18.168.210F of this title. (Ord. 2835, 2016)
18.164.320: JOINT USE AGREEMENTS; CONDITIONS:
The planning commission may, upon application by the owner or lessee of any
property, authorize the joint use of parking facilities by the following uses
or activities under the conditions specified herein:
   A.   Up to fifty percent (50%) of the parking facilities required by this
chapter for a use considered to be primarily a daytime use may be provided by a
use considered to be primarily a nighttime use; up to fifty percent (50%) of
the parking facilities required by this chapter for a use considered to be
primarily a nighttime use may be provided by a use considered to be primarily a
daytime use, provided that such reciprocal parking area shall be subject to
conditions as set forth in subsection C of this section.
   B.   1. The following uses are typical daytime uses: banks, business and
professional offices, retail stores, personal service shops, clothing or shoe
repair or service shops, and similar uses.
      2.   The following uses are typical of nighttime and/or Sunday uses:
auditoriums, fraternal lodges, churches and theaters.
   C.   Conditions required for joint use:
      1.   A building or use for which application is being made for authority
to utilize the existing off street parking facilities provided by another
building or use, shall be located within one hundred fifty feet (150') of such
parking facilities.
      2.   The applicant shall show that there is no substantial conflict in
the principal operating hours for the buildings or uses for which the joint use
of off street parking facilities is proposed.
      3.   Parties concerned in the joint use of off street parking facilities
shall evidence agreement for such joint use by a proper legal instrument
approved by the city attorney as to form and content. (Ord. 1000 § 40.40, 1955)
18.164.325: ADJUSTMENTS TO OFF STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS FOR MIXED USE
PROJECTS WITHIN SPECIFIC PLAN 45, THE C-3 AND C-4 DISTRICTS:
The purpose of this section is to permit a reduction in the number of required
off street spaces for certain specified uses within a mixed use project through
the sharing of parking resources. This section allows for shared parking for
two (2) or more different land uses listed in this section that are located
adjacent to or near one another on the same mixed use project site.
   A.   Shared parking is based on the hourly variations during the day in the
number of parking spaces needed for each of the different identified uses. The
minimum number of required off street parking spaces is determined by the hour
in which the highest number of spaces is needed for the combined uses. Table
18.164.325(A) of this section shows the percentage of peak parking demand that
occurs for each use for each hour of the weekday. The period during which a use
is expected to generate its peak parking need is indicated as one hundred
percent (100%). Table 18.164.325(B) of this section shows the percentage of
peak parking demand that occurs for each use for each hour of the weekend day.
   B.   For a mixed use project, the total number of required off street
parking spaces for shared parking shall be calculated by using the following
methodology:
 
        Calculate the number of required parking spaces for each independent
Step 1: land use according to the parking standards in section
        18.164.240 of this chapter (nonresidential uses) for a weekday.
        For each different land use, and for each hour of the day, multiply the
        number of required spaces for that use in step 1 of this subsection by
Step 2: the hourly percentage of peak parking demand for that use as identified
        in table
        18.164.325(A) of this section, to determine the number of spaces needed
        for each hour for a weekday.
        For each hour of the day for a weekday, calculate the total number of
Step 3: spaces required for all uses by adding together the number of spaces
        calculated for each individual use in step 2 of this subsection.
        The minimum number of total off street parking spaces required by the
Step 4: overall mixed use development project for a weekday, is then
        represented by the hour for which the total number of spaces is the
        highest, as calculated in step 3 of this subsection.
Step 5: Repeat the above four (4) steps for a weekend day.
        The minimum number of total off street parking spaces required by the
Step 6: overall mixed use development project, is represented by the hour
        (weekday or weekend) for which the total number of spaces is the
        highest, as calculated in step 3 and step 5 of this subsection.
 
   C.   Residential uses shall not be included in the determination of shared
parking requirements, except for visitor parking required for a mixed use
project by article I of this chapter.
   D.   Prior to any substantial change in the tenant mix of a mixed use
project, as determined by the community development director, for which this
section was utilized for compliance with the parking requirements of this code,
an amendment to the entitlement approving the mixed use project shall be
submitted to the reviewing body to demonstrate compliance with the provisions
of this section.
   E.   In allowing a reduction in the number of off street parking spaces
required by a mixed use project under this section, the reviewing body must
determine that:
      1.   The requirements of all other applicable provisions of this chapter
are met; and
      2.   The reduction allowed under this section provides sufficient parking
to serve the intended and potential use of the proposed mixed use project.
City of Redlands
TABLE 18.164.325(A)
HOURLY ACCUMULATION (PERCENTAGE OF PEAK HOUR) BY LAND USE (WEEKDAY)
                                     Hotel
Hour                                           Restaurant/      Health Residential
Of   Office Retail Restaurant Cinema Guestroom Lounge      Bank Club   (Guest)
Day
                                         Hotel
Hour Of  Office Retail Restaurant Cinema Guestroom Restaurant/ Bank Health Residential
Day                                                Lounge           Club   (Guest)
6:00     3%     3%     14%        0%     95%       0%          0%   70%    0%
A.M.
7:00     30%    7%     28%        0%     95%       10%         0%   41%    10%
A.M.
8:00     75%    20%    36%        0%     90%       30%         54%  41%    20%
A.M.
9:00     95%    43%    44%        0%     80%       10%         94%  70%    20%
A.M.
10:00    100%   69%    57%        0%     70%       10%         100% 70%    20%
A.M.
11:00    100%   87%    70%        0%     70%       5%          68%  80%    20%
A.M.
12:00    90%    96%    89%        21%    65%       100%        68%  61%    20%
noon
1:00     90%    100%   84%        46%    65%       100%        68%  70%    20%
P.M.
2:00     100%   96%    63%        55%    70%       33%         81%  70%    20%
P.M.
3:00     100%   92%    47%        56%    70%       10%         68%  70%    20%
P.M.
4:00     90%    92%    52%        56%    75%       10%         87%  80%    20%
P.M.
5:00     50%    95%    78%        62%    80%       30%         100% 90%    40%
P.M.
6:00     25%    95%    89%        62%    85%       55%         0%   100%   60%
P.M.
7:00     10%    95%    91%        81%    85%       60%         0%   89%    100%
P.M.
8:00     7%     82%    91%        100%   90%       70%         0%   79%    100%
P.M.
9:00     3%     55%    82%        100%   95%       67%         0%   68%    100%
P.M.
10:00    1%     32%    76%        81%    95%       60%         0%   34%    100%
P.M.
11:00    0%     11%    64%        65%    100%      40%         0%   10%    80%
P.M.
12:00    0%     0%     27%        40%    100%      30%         0%   0%     50%
midnight
 
TABLE 18.164.325(B)
HOURLY ACCUMULATION (PERCENTAGE OF PEAK HOUR) BY LAND USE (WEEKEND)
                                     Hotel
Hour                                           Restaurant/      Health Residential
Of   Office Retail Restaurant Cinema Guestroom Lounge      Bank Club   (Guest)
Day
                                                    Hotel
Hour Of Day      Office  Retail  Restaurant Cinema  Guestroom Restaurant/ Bank    Health  Residential
                                                              Lounge              Club    (Guest)
      6:00    0%   3%   8%      0%   95%    0%       0%   79   0%
      7:00    20   7%   18%     0%   95%    10%      0%   45   20%
      8:00    60   16   28%     0%   90%    30%      48   36   20%
      9:00    80   39   41%     0%   80%    10%      61   50   20%
      10:00   90   57   51%     0%   70%    10%      84   36   20%
      11:00   10   71   58%     0%   70%    5%       10   50   20%
12:00 noon          90   84   77%     21   65%    100%     94   50   20%
      1:00    80   92   73%     46   65%    100%     0%   31   20%
      2:00    60   10   60%     55   70%    33%      0%   26   20%
      3:00    40   10   47%     56   70%    10%      0%   31   20%
      4:00    20   96   50%     56   75%    10%      0%   56   20%
      5:00    10   91   66%     62   80%    30%      0%   10   40%
      6:00    5%   81   83%     62   85%    55%      0%   95   60%
      7:00    0%   76   85%     81   85%    60%      0%   61   100%
      8:00    0%   67   85%     10   90%    70%      0%   31   100%
      9:00    0%   53   65%     10   95%    67%      0%   10   100%
      10:00   0%   37   61%     10   95%    60%      0%   2%   100%
      11:00   0%   15   56%     80   100%   40%      0%   2%   80%
12:00 midnight      0%   0%   32%     50   100%   30%      0%   0%   50%
 
(Ord. 2688 § 1, 2008)
ARTICLE IV. LOADING
18.164.330: LOADING SPACE; GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Every hospital, institution, hotel, commercial or industrial building
hereafter erected or established shall have and maintain loading space as
provided in section
18.164.340 of this article.
   B.   When the lot upon which the loading space is located abuts upon an
alley, such loading space shall adjoin and have access from the alley. The
length of the loading space may be measured perpendicular to or parallel with
the centerline of the alley. Where the loading space is parallel with the
alley, the loading space shall extend across the full width of the lot, except
that if only two (2) spaces are required, the length of the loading area need
not exceed fifty feet (50').
   C.   Where the loading area abuts a street, the front yard required in the
district may be used in calculating the area required for loading, providing
that there is not more than one entry or exit to a sixty foot (60') lot, or
fraction thereof.
   D.   Loading space being maintained in connection with any existing main
building on the effective date hereof shall thereafter be maintained so long as
the building remains, unless an equivalent number of such spaces are provided
on a contiguous lot in conformity with the requirements of this chapter;
provided, however, that this regulation shall not require the maintenance of
more loading space than is hereby required for a new building, nor the
maintenance of such space for any type of main building other than those
specified above.
   E.   Loading space required by this title may occupy a required rear yard,
but in no case shall any part of an alley or street be used for loading. (Ord.
1000 § 41.00, 1955)
18.164.340: NUMBER OF SPACES; SPECIFIC USES DESIGNATED:
All hospitals, institutions, hotels, commercial and industrial uses shall
provide loading spaces not less than ten feet (10') in width, twenty feet (20')
in length and fourteen feet (14') in height, as set forth in table 18.164.340
of this section.
TABLE 18.164.340
Square Feet Of Building Space    (Gross Floor AreLoading Spaces Required
Square Feet Of Building Space    (Gross Floor AreLoading Spaces Required
Commercial buildings:                                
3,000 -   15,000                                    1
15,001 -  45,000                                    2
45,001 -  75,000                                    3
75,001 -  105,000                                   4
105,001 - and over                                  5
                                                     
Industrial buildings:                                
3,500 -   40,000                                    1
40,001 -  80,000                                    2
80,001 -  120,000                                   3
120,001 - 160,000                                   4
160,001 - and over                                  5
                                                     
Hospitals and institutions:                          
3,000 -   20,000                                    1
20,001 -  50,000                                    2
50,001 -  80,000                                    3
80,001 -  110,000                                   4
110,001 - and over                                  5
                                                     
Hotels and office buildings:                         
3,500 -   50,000                                    1
50,001 -  100,000                                   2
100,001 - and over                                  3
 
(Ord. 2128 § 1, 1990: Ord. 1000 § 41.10, 1955)
ARTICLE V. PARKING MODIFICATIONS FOR HISTORIC STRUCTURES
18.164.410: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this article is to establish a process for the consideration and
approval of a permit for modified parking requirements for historic structures.
The permit allows certain specified citywide parking requirements to be
modified as an incentive to preserve and maintain designated historic
structures. The planning commission shall have the authority to approve a
request for a parking modification permit, subject to the provisions of this
article. (Ord. 2128 § 1, 1990)
18.164.420: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this article the following words shall have the meanings
ascribed to them:
   A.   "Historic structure" means a structure included on the city's Register
of Historic and Scenic Properties, list of individually designated historic
resources, or a state or national listing of historical significance. (Ord.
2128 § 1, 1990)
18.164.430: PERMITTED MODIFICATIONS:
   A.   For historic structures located in nonresidential zoning districts, and
for land in residential districts located adjacent to park lands, the off
street parking requirements of section
18.164.240 of this chapter may be modified in one of the following ways:
      1.   A reduction of the required number of parking spaces by twenty
percent (20%); or
      2.   The crediting of on street parking spaces which are adjacent to
frontage of the designated historic structure site towards the total number of
required off street parking spaces required for the use, provided that the
planning commission determines that such on street parking spaces will remain
available for public parking during all business hours in the future. No on
street parking spaces located within fifteen feet (15') of a "stop" sign or
corner radius shall be counted. No on street parking spaces located in front of
a bus stop shall be counted.
   B.   For historic structures located in all zones within the city:
      1.   A reduction of the width of driveway aisles by four feet (4') from
the requirements of section
18.164.280 of this chapter (e.g., from 26 feet to 22 feet for 90 degree
parking).
      2.   Allow the use of off site parking in parking lots that are located
up to four hundred feet (400') away from the historic structure, rather than
two hundred feet (200') as provided in section
18.164.250 of this chapter, where the planning commission determines that the
applicant has provided adequate incentives for the use of such parking lots.
      3.   Allow vehicles to back out into alleys where the planning commission
determines that visibility is good and such backing out of vehicles can be done
safely, notwithstanding the provisions of section
18.164.270 of this chapter.
      4.   Allow twenty five percent (25%) of the parking lot located on the
site of the historic structure to be compact spaces, without requiring the
first twenty five (25) spaces to be full size as required by subsection
18.164.260B2 of this chapter.
      5.   Allow tandem parking where the planning commission determines that
such parking would be effectively used.
      6.   Allow the reduction of the two-way aisle widths specified in table
18.164.280(A) of this chapter from twenty feet (20') to ten feet (10') where
the location of the historic structure on the site prohibits construction of a
full width driveway, and allow the reduction of driveway approaches to fourteen
feet (14'), as opposed to twenty six feet (26') as required in subsection
18.164.270D of this chapter. Such reductions shall only be approved for
driveways to parking areas having less than twenty (20) parking spaces.
      7.   Allow for the use of three foot (3') wide planters for required
landscape areas, notwithstanding the five foot (5') requirement of section
18.168.180 of this title.
      8.   Allow for the deletion of the loading space requirements prescribed
by section
18.164.340 of this chapter for historic structures having less than six
thousand (6,000) square feet of gross floor area.
   C.   The planning commission may approve the parking modification permit
with such conditions as are necessary to adjust the permitted parking
modification to the proposed use and effectuate the purposes of this article.
(Ord. 2128 § 1, 1990)
18.164.440: EFFECT OF ADDITIONS TO HISTORIC STRUCTURES:
Parking modification permits may be approved by the planning commission or city
council for historic structures for which additions are proposed to be
constructed; provided, however, the modification shall not be applicable to any
parking requirements necessary for any portion of the proposed addition which
exceeds fifteen percent (15%) of the gross floor area of the structure. (Ord.
2128 § 1, 1990)
18.164.450: HISTORIC AND SCENIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION AND ENGINEERING REVIEW:
Prior to rendering a decision on an application for a parking modification
permit, the planning commission shall submit the application to the city's
historic and scenic preservation commission and the city's engineering
department for their review and recommendation, and the commission's and
department's recommendations shall be considered by the planning commission in
imposing any conditions on the project. (Ord. 2128 § 1, 1990)
18.164.460: NOTICE:
Notice of an application for a parking modification permit shall be published
in a newspaper of general circulation not less than ten (10) days prior to the
date set for the planning commission hearing. Notices shall also be mailed not
less than ten (10) days prior to the date of the meeting to owners of property
within a radius of three hundred feet (300') of the external boundaries of the
property described on the application, using for this purpose the name and
address of such owners as shown on the latest official tax role of the county.
(Ord. 2128 § 1, 1990)
18.164.470: FINDINGS FOR APPROVAL:
The planning commission, in approving a parking modification permit, shall find
as follows:
   A.   The proposed parking modification and use of the historic structure is
necessary or desirable for the development of the community, is in harmony with
the various elements and objectives of the general plan, and is not detrimental
to existing uses or to uses specifically permitted in the zone;
   B.   That approving the proposed parking modification and use will
significantly improve the possibility that the structure will be preserved and
maintained as a historic structure;
   C.   That the required parking cannot be provided without the approval of
the requested modification;
   D.   That all on site parking lots will function safely;
   E.   That approval of the parking modification will not harm the integrity
of the historic structure or the surrounding neighborhood. (Ord. 2128 § 1,
1990)
18.164.480: MAINTENANCE OF LOG:
The planning department shall maintain a log of all parking modifications
approved pursuant to this article and shall make the log available to the
planning commission for its review in determining the cumulative impacts of
approving an application for a parking modification permit within the community
surrounding the historic structure. (Ord. 2128 § 1, 1990)
18.164.490: APPEAL FROM PLANNING COMMISSION DECISION:
   A.   Within ten (10) days of transmittal of the planning commission's
finding and decision to the applicant, any aggrieved party may appeal such
decision to the city council. Such appeal shall be made on forms provided by
the city, and upon payment of an appeal fee as set by council resolution.
   B.   The city council shall forthwith hold a public hearing on an appeal
after such hearing is noticed as set forth in section
18.164.460 of this article.
   C.   After such public hearing, the city council shall either approve,
modify or disapprove the appealed application. If the planning commission has
not made the findings required by section
18.164.470 of this article, the council must do so before it can approve the
application for a parking modification permit. (Ord. 2128 § 1, 1990)
CHAPTER 18.168
LANDSCAPING, FENCES, WALLS AND SIGNS
SECTION:
18.168.010: Intersection Visibility Protection; Corner Cutoffs
18.168.020: Fences And Walls; Permitted When
18.168.030: Fences And Walls; Required When
18.168.040: Minor Exception Permits; Generally
18.168.050: Minor Exception Permits; Purpose
18.168.060: Minor Exception Permits And Requests For Reasonable Accommodations
18.168.070: Minor Exception Permits; Application Procedure
18.168.080: Minor Exception Permits; Notice To Adjacent Properties
18.168.090: Minor Exception Permits; Grant Or Denial Conditions
18.168.100: Minor Exception Permits; Appeals Procedure
18.168.110: Landscaping; Purpose Of Provisions
18.168.120: Landscaping; Defined
18.168.130: Landscaping; Compliance Required
18.168.140: Landscaping; Maintenance
18.168.150: Landscaping; Screening Materials
18.168.160: Landscaping; Between Wall And Property Line
18.168.170: Landscaping; Landscape Plan Requirements
18.168.180: Landscaping; Minimum Dimensions
18.168.190: Landscaping; Nonconforming Properties
18.168.200: Landscaping; For More Intensive Uses
18.168.210: Landscaping; Parking Lot Standards
18.168.220: Landscaping; Projects Adjacent To Freeways
18.168.230: Signs
18.168.010: INTERSECTION VISIBILITY PROTECTION; CORNER CUTOFFS:
The following regulations shall apply to the intersections of streets, streets
and alleys, and private driveways with streets and/or alleys:
   A.   1. There shall be a corner cutoff on the side of each corner and
reversed corner lot abutting the intersecting streets. This corner cutoff shall
be defined by a line in a horizontal plane, taken at a forty five degree (45°)
angle with the side or front property line, which line passes through the
intersection of the required front and side yard setback lines of the side of
the lot closest to the street intersection.
      2.   There shall be no visual obstruction within this corner cutoff area.
   B.   1. There shall be a corner cutoff on the side of each corner and
reversed corner lot abutting an alley, where the alley intersects or intercepts
a street. This corner cutoff shall be defined by a line in a horizontal plane,
taken at a forty five degree (45°) angle with the side or rear property line,
which line passes through:
         a.   For corner lots, the intersection of the required side yard
setback lines and the rear property line along the alley;
         b.   For reversed corner lots, the intersection of the extension of
the required front yard setback line for the key lot on the opposite side of
the alley with the rear property line along the alley.
      2.   There shall be no visual obstruction within this corner cutoff area.
   C.   1. There shall be a corner cutoff on all lots where a private driveway
enters a street or alley. Such corner cutoff shall be defined by a line in a
horizontal plane, which line, taken at a forty five degree (45°) angle with the
side or rear property lines, passes through a point on the side or rear line
not less than ten feet (10') from the intersection of the driveway and the
street or alley.
      2.   There shall be no visual obstruction within this corner cutoff area.
   D.   1. There shall be a corner cutoff on a reversed corner lot where the
rear property line of the reversed corner lot becomes the side property line in
the required front yard of the key lot. Such cutoff shall be defined by a line
in a horizontal plane, which line, taken at a forty five degree (45°) angle
with the side or rear property line of the reversed corner lot, shall pass
through the point of intersection of the required front yard setback for the
key lot and the rear property line of the reversed corner lot.
      2.   There shall be no visual obstruction within the corner cutoff area.
   E.   There shall be no entry or exit to a parking lot from a street in any
nonresidential district, which entry is closer than twenty feet (20') from the
boundary of any residential district. (Ord. 1000 § 43.10, 1955)
18.168.020: FENCES AND WALLS; PERMITTED WHEN:
   A.   Open fences not to exceed four feet (4') in height shall be permitted
within a required front yard area. For purposes of this section, an "open
fence" means those types that are composed of wire mesh capable of admitting at
least ninety percent (90%) of light.
   B.   Fences and walls not to exceed six feet (6') in height shall be
permitted along side and rear property lines, except that no fence or wall
exceeding three feet (3') in height shall be located within any required front
yard area.
   C.   Open fences, as defined in subsection A of this section, that are over
six feet (6') in height may be located in the rear half of the lot, subject to
a commission finding that such a fence will not constitute a nuisance to
abutting property owners. Such fences, up to sixteen feet (16') in height
located within the buildable rear yard area of a lot and not less than ten feet
(10') from any property line, are exempt from the requirement.
   D.   No fence or wall, and no landscaping which obstructs visibility, shall
be permitted within the corner cutoff areas defined in section
18.168.010 of this chapter. (Ord. 1960 § 1, 1986: Ord. 1000 § 43.20(a), 1955)
18.168.030: FENCES AND WALLS; REQUIRED WHEN:
   A.   A six foot (6') high fence or wall shall be constructed at the top of
all slopes where the tops of slopes are property lines between separate
ownerships.
   B.   A six foot (6') high fence or wall shall be constructed along the
perimeter of all areas considered by the commission to be dangerous to health
and safety.
   C.   A six foot (6') high solid masonry wall shall be erected along the
property line or zone boundary lines to separate industrial and commercial
districts and/or uses from abutting residential districts, as follows:
      1.   Where the zone boundary is at a rear lot line which is not on a
street, the wall shall be on that line.
      2.   Where the boundary is a side lot line, the wall shall parallel the
side lot line, to be reduced to three feet (3') in height in the area set forth
as a required front yard for the abutting residential district. The wall
paralleling the front property line shall be set back from the property line
not less than ten feet (10'), and the space between the wall and the front
property line is to be landscaped and maintained.
      3.   Where the boundary is a street, the wall shall be set back from the
property line a distance of ten feet (10'), the space between the wall and the
property line to be landscaped and maintained.
      4.   Where the boundary is an alley, the wall shall be on the property
line along the alley.
      5.   Nothing in sections
18.168.020 through
18.168.040 of this chapter shall be deemed to set aside or reduce the
requirements established for security fencing by either local, state or federal
law. (Ord. 1000 § 43.20(b), 1955)
18.168.040: MINOR EXCEPTION PERMITS; GENERALLY:
The intent of the regulations in the following sections is to provide for the
privacy, safety and security of properties and yet maintain the park like
character and appearance of the city. (Ord. 1856 § 1, 1984: Ord. 1000 § 43.20
(c), 1955)
18.168.050: MINOR EXCEPTION PERMITS; PURPOSE:
   A.   This section provides for the granting of minor exceptions to the
fencing development standards, retaining wall height, solar collectors, grading
standards, and the requirements of chapter 15.48 of this code on fencing of
swimming pools, in those cases where such minor exceptions are determined to be
warranted by practical difficulties, unnecessary hardships or results that,
without the minor exception, may be inconsistent with the intent of this title.
The granting of a minor exception is only permitted where it is found to pose
no threat to public health and safety, and where to grant such a minor
exception would not be inconsistent with the intent of chapter 15.48 of this
code.
   B.   A minor exception may also be granted to a resident of a residential
zoned parcel to park a detached camper, trailer, or watercraft in a designated
front yard driveway, or other city approved hard surfaced area in the front
yard of said parcel, provided that the resident meets the conditions
established in subsection
 18.164.130I of this title. (Ord. 2574 § 1, 2004: Ord. 1968 § 1, 1986: Ord.
1856 § 1, 1984: Ord. 1000 § 43.20(c)(1), 1955)
18.168.060: MINOR EXCEPTION PERMITS AND REQUESTS FOR REASONABLE ACCOMMODATIONS:
   A.   Minor exceptions pertaining to garden or retaining wall heights, solar
collector or storage tank installations, grading standards, parking a detached
camper, trailer, or watercraft in the front yard driveway, and protective
swimming pool fencing may be granted by a committee composed of the city's
community development director, or his or her designee, and two (2) members of
the city's planning commission, as appointed by the members of the planning
commission.
   B.   The committee described in this section shall have the authority to
review and approve requests for reasonable accommodations in accordance with
the provisions of chapter 18.06 of this title. (Ord. 2656 § 2, 2007: Ord. 2574
§ 2, 2004: Ord. 2559 § 1, 2003: Ord. 1968 § 1, 1986: Ord. 1856 § 1, 1984: Ord.
1000 § 43.20(c)(2), 1955)
18.168.070: MINOR EXCEPTION PERMITS; APPLICATION PROCEDURE:
   A.   An application for a minor exception permit shall be made on forms
provided by the city, and shall include such plans as may be required for a
complete understanding of the request, and a filing fee as established by
resolution of the city council. Applications shall be limited to the resident
owner.
   B.   Minor exceptions which are being processed concurrently with land use
applications requiring action by the planning commission or the city council
shall be scheduled for review and action by the same approving body as the
other entitlement application(s). If approved by the planning commission or
city council, a separate or subsequent Minor Exception Permit application or
public hearing shall not be required for the specific design feature approved
with the land use entitlement. (Ord. 2985, 2025: Ord. 1000 § 43.20(c)(3), 1955)
18.168.080: MINOR EXCEPTION PERMITS; NOTICE TO ADJACENT PROPERTIES:
Upon receipt of an application for a minor exception permit, the planning
department shall notify the owners of all adjacent properties of the minor
exception request, by letter. "Adjacent properties" shall include all lots
which directly abut or are directly across any public or private right of way
from the subject property. (Ord. 1000 § 43.20(c)(4), 1955)
18.168.090: MINOR EXCEPTION PERMITS; GRANT OR DENIAL CONDITIONS:
   A.   No sooner than ten (10) days after the owners of adjacent properties
have been notified, nor later than thirty (30) days after receipt of the
application, the committee shall either grant, grant with conditions, or deny
the minor exception permit. Any conditions shall be such as to assure that the
minor exception permit is within the intent of sections
18.168.040 through
18.168.100 of this chapter.
   B.   Noncompliance with any conditions of a minor use permit shall
constitute a violation of this title. Notice of the committee's decision shall
be sent to all owners of adjacent properties and to the planning commission at
its next regularly scheduled meeting. (Ord. 1000 § 43.20(c)(5), 1955)
18.168.100: MINOR EXCEPTION PERMITS; APPEALS PROCEDURE:
No minor exception permit shall be effective until ten (10) days after
issuance, and no development permitted by a minor exception permit shall be
initiated or construction started sooner than ten (10) days after issuance. The
applicant or any other interested person may appeal the committee's decision to
the city council by filing a written appeal within this ten (10) day period.
Any such appeal shall suspend the minor exception permit until resolution of
the appeal by the city council. (Ord. 1000 § 43.20(c)(6), 1955)
18.168.110: LANDSCAPING; PURPOSE OF PROVISIONS:
The purpose of the landscaping requirements in the following sections shall be
to protect the general welfare by enhancing, conserving and stabilizing
property values, and by encouraging pleasant and attractive surroundings in all
zones of the city. (Ord. 1000 § 43.31, 1955)
18.168.120: LANDSCAPING; DEFINED:
   A.   "Landscaping" means some combination of planted trees, shrubs, vines,
ground cover, flowers or lawns. In addition, the combination or design may
include rock ground cover not to exceed twenty percent (20%) of the total for
any landscaped area, and such structural features as fountains, pools, artwork,
screens, walls, fences or benches; but such objects alone shall not meet the
requirements of sections
18.168.110 through
18.168.220 of this chapter. The selected combination of objects for landscaping
shall be arranged in a harmonious manner.
   B.   Earth berms shall be utilized in the front yard landscaping treatment
for all uses other than single-family residential.
   C.   Accessory public parking areas are subject to the minimum standards
provided in subsection
18.168.210F of this chapter. (Ord. 2835, 2016)
18.168.130: LANDSCAPING; COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
Where landscaping is required, such landscaping shall comply with the
requirements set forth in this title for the specific use or location, as well
as with the general requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 1000 § 43.33, 1955)
18.168.140: LANDSCAPING; MAINTENANCE:
   A.   Required landscaped areas shall be maintained in a neat, clean, orderly
and healthful condition. This includes proper pruning, mowing of lawns,
weeding, removal of litter, fertilizing, replacement of plants when necessary,
and the regular watering of all plantings.
   B.   Required landscaped areas shall be provided with a suitable permanent
method for watering or sprinkling of plants. This watering system shall consist
of piped water lines terminating in an appropriate number of sprinklers or hose
bibs to ensure a sufficient amount of water for plants within the landscaped
area. Sprinklers shall be shielded from sidewalk areas. Where the water system
consists of hose bibs alone, these bibs shall be located not more than fifty
feet (50') apart within the required landscaped area. Sprinklers used to
satisfy the requirements of this provision shall be so spaced as to assure
complete coverage of the required landscaped area. (Ord. 1000 § 43.34, 1955)
18.168.150: LANDSCAPING; SCREENING MATERIALS:
Where landscaped screening is required, such screening shall consist of
evergreen shrubs, closely spaced, and maintained at substantially the specified
height of the required screening. When not otherwise specified, screening shall
consist of mature shrubs, and shall be maintained at a height of from four (4)
to six feet (6'). (Ord. 1000 § 43.35, 1955)
18.168.160: LANDSCAPING; BETWEEN WALL AND PROPERTY LINE:
Any open area between a fence or wall and the adjacent property line shall be
maintained in a neat and orderly manner. (Ord. 1000 § 43.36, 1955)
18.168.170: LANDSCAPING; LANDSCAPE PLAN REQUIREMENTS:
Where landscaping is required by this chapter, a landscape plan showing the
proposed landscaped areas, placement of landscape materials by type, number and
size to include a depiction of the anticipated drip line for mature trees,
irrigation system and use of the property shall be prepared by a landscape
architect or a licensed nurseryman and shall be submitted to the community
development department. The same plot plan submitted for the project which
shows the parking layout or other requirements for the issuance of a building
permit or planning approval may be used, provided all proposed landscaping is
adequately detailed on the plot plan. Plans shall be submitted for approval to
the community development director or the planning commission, for approval
whenever required under the provisions of this zoning title. (Ord. 2498 § 2,
2002: Ord. 1000 § 43.37, 1955)
18.168.180: LANDSCAPING; MINIMUM DIMENSIONS:
The minimum width of any required landscaped area, or any form of fixed planter
box used to satisfy required landscaping, shall be five feet (5'), unless
otherwise specified in this title. (Ord. 1960 § 1, 1986: Ord. 1000 § 43.38,
1955)
18.168.190: LANDSCAPING; NONCONFORMING PROPERTIES:
Any use of property which, on the effective date hereof, or any subsequent
amendment thereto, is nonconforming only as to the regulations relating to
landscaping may be continued in the same manner as if the landscaping were
conforming. However, such use may not be increased in intensity except in
accordance with the requirements of this title, and any landscaping which may
exist in the locations specified by this title shall not be reduced unless
suitable substitutions are made which would meet the requirements of this
title. (Ord. 1000 § 43.39, 1955)
18.168.200: LANDSCAPING; FOR MORE INTENSIVE USES:
When the intensity of use of any premises is increased through addition of
twenty five percent (25%) or more of the floor area or developed lot area, that
portion of the premises shall provide the required landscaping in accordance
with the provisions of this title. When the intensity of use is increased sixty
percent (60%) or more, landscaping as required by this title shall be provided
on the entire developed portion of the property. (Ord. 1000 § 43.40, 1955)
18.168.210: LANDSCAPING; PARKING LOT STANDARDS:
   A.   The following standards shall apply to all parking areas accessible to
the public, adjacent to roadways or exposed to public view from freeways,
roadways or adjacent parcels:
      1.   Landscaping shall be provided adjacent to and within parking areas
to screen vehicles from view and to minimize the expansive appearance of
parking areas. The landscaping should include predominantly fast growing trees
in the parking areas to create summer shade. Accent trees may also be utilized
in the landscape design of the parking areas for diversity and seasonal color;
      2.   Landscaped berms, or a combination of berms, landscaping and/or wall
treatments of sufficient height to substantially screen parking areas shall be
provided between parking areas and right of way;
      3.   All double row parking spaces shall be separated by either a planter
or planter boxes with an overall outside width of five feet (5'). Planters
shall be enclosed by a six inch (6") continuous poured in place curb. The curb
shall be included in the measurement of the overall width of the planter. The
community development director, may allow breaks or gaps in the planter for
pedestrian access and drainage purposes only;
      4.   Each unenclosed parking area shall provide a perimeter landscaped
strip a minimum of five feet (5') in width where the parking area adjoins a
side or rear property line. Curbs, mow strips, or any other type of paved
surface shall not be included in the measurement of the overall width of the
planter. The perimeter landscaped strip may include any landscaped yard or
landscaped area otherwise required and shall be continuous, except for required
access to the site or parking area;
      5.   All plant material shall be sized so that the landscaping has an
attractive appearance at the time of installation and a mature appearance
within three (3) years;
      6.   Tree species should be selected with root growth habits that will
not cause damage to sidewalks, curbs or other similarly paved surfaces, or such
tree species should be sited away from such paved areas;
      7.   Trees with a trunk height of not less than six feet (6') shall be
installed in the planters at each end of an aisle, at three (3) space intervals
throughout the parking area, and at twenty foot (20') intervals along the
periphery of the parking area. Within parking areas, trees may be clustered in
groups to achieve a more natural setting provided the total number of trees
meets the previous planting requirements;
      8.   At least fifty percent (50%) of the trees shall be an evergreen
variety and shall be evenly distributed throughout the parking area;
      9.   At least fifty percent (50%) of the trees shall be fifteen (15)
gallon in size, twenty five percent (25%) shall be twenty four inch (24") box
size, and twenty five percent (25%) shall be thirty six inch (36") box in size.
All trees shall meet the following minimum caliper sizes. If the caliper size
cannot be met at the container size then the developer shall increase the
container size to meet the required caliper;
 
15 gallon    3/4" to 1"
24 inch box  11/4" to 13/4"
36 inch box  21/2" to 23/4"
 
      10.   Planter areas shall also contain ground cover and/or flowering
shrubs. Drought tolerant planting is suggested so that applicant/developer can
comply with the water conservation in landscaping act of 1990;
      11.   Where automobile bumpers overhang landscaped planters, two feet
(2') of clear areas unobstructed by trees or shrubs shall be provided for
overhang;
      12.   Large parking areas shall be broken up into sections containing no
more than two hundred (200) vehicles, with landscaped planters at least eight
feet (8') in width established between sections;
      13.   A landscaped island shall be provided for every twenty (20) parking
spaces;
      14.   Landscaped islands, interstall planters and periphery landscaping,
together, shall total at least seven percent (7%) of the total parking area;
      15.   All trees identified on the landscape plan are to be maintained and
the trimming or maintenance of them shall serve the purpose to bring them into
a full canopy type configuration. If applicant/developer fails to maintain and
trim said trees to allow for full canopy type configuration, applicant/
developer shall be in violation of its conditions of approval and subject to
enforcement as allowed by law;
      16.   All landscape planters that are ten feet (10') or less in width
shall utilize measures such as root barriers or other deep watering system to
minimize heaving of parking area pavement and curbs by tree roots; and
      17.   No landscaped area having a width of less than five feet (5') shall
be considered in the minimum landscaping requirement.
   B.   Where parking areas not accessible to the public are completely
screened from public view by building placement or a combination of walling and
landscaped buffers, landscaping requirements within the parking areas, other
than perimeter landscaping, may be reduced at the discretion of the reviewing
agency.
   C.   Pedestrian walkways shall be provided within parking areas to
destination points.
   D.   Applicant/developer should preserve mature trees in their place, where
possible, by designing the projects site plan around said mature trees. In
cases where existing mature trees are removed for new development, an
additional number of new trees, other landscaping, and/or additional mitigation
measures shall be required beyond the requirements established in this section.
   E.   Final landscape plans, irrigation system plans, tree preservation
techniques and preservation guarantees shall be reviewed and approved by the
community development director prior to the issuance of a building permit.
Plans shall be in conformance with the water conservation in landscaping act of
1990.
   F.   The development services director may approve a reduction to the
landscape standards in this section for accessory public parking areas,
provided that the parking area and any adjacent paved roadways are separated by
a planter measuring a minimum of three feet (3') in width and improved with a
decorative combination of fencing, walls, boulders, or similar hardscape
materials. Additional plant materials, such as trees, shrubs, and ground cover
shall be installed along the perimeter of accessory public parking areas which
serve public facilities that have been improved with, or are proposed to be
improved with, landscaping. Consideration should be given for the installation
of drought tolerant shade trees, where feasible. (Ord. 2835, 2016: Ord. 2498 §
3, 2002: Ord. 1000 § 43.37, 1955)
18.168.220: LANDSCAPING; PROJECTS ADJACENT TO FREEWAYS:
   A.   The planning commission shall require a landscaped area twenty five
feet (25') or more in width for projects adjacent to freeway rights of way, and
may require such an area for projects adjacent to major and secondary highways,
freeway frontage roads, and any street having historical or significant
features which warrant special landscaping requirements determined to be
essential or desirable in order to enhance and sustain the visual and aesthetic
qualities of the project site and surrounding areas.
   B.   Detailed plans shall be prepared in accordance with section
18.168.170 of this chapter. Landscaping information to be included on the plan
shall consist of common and botanical names of all ground covers, shrubs and
trees, as well as container sizes and heights, with the precise locations of
all landscaping materials indicated. (Ord. 1796 § 1, 1982: Ord. 1000 § 43.60,
1955)
18.168.230: SIGNS:
Signs for all zoning districts in the city shall be regulated by the applicable
provisions of the Redlands sign code. (Ord. 1000 § 42.00, 1955)
CHAPTER 18.172
SMALL RESIDENTIAL ROOFTOP AND OTHER SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS
SECTION:
18.172.010: Purpose Of Provisions
18.172.020: Applicability
18.172.030: Definitions
18.172.040: Solar Energy System Requirements
18.172.050: Location And Installation Specifications
18.172.060: Duties Of The Building And Safety Division And Chief Building
Official
18.172.070: Permit Review And Inspection Requirements
18.172.010: PURPOSE OF PROVISIONS:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish an expedited, streamlined solar
permitting process that complies with the solar rights act and AB 2188 (chapter
521, statute 2014) to achieve timely and cost effective installations of small
residential rooftop solar energy systems. The provisions of this chapter
encourage the use of solar systems by removing unreasonable barriers,
minimizing costs to property owners and the city, and expanding the ability of
property owners to install solar energy systems. The provisions of this chapter
further allow the city to achieve these goals while protecting the public
health, safety and welfare by providing a means of enabling the installation of
solar systems in such a manner that they are compatible with the architectural
characteristics of the city. Solar systems have been proven to be one of the
most efficient means of conserving nonrenewable energy resources, and this
chapter is not to be construed as discouraging the installation of any type of
solar system. (Ord. 2813, 2015)
18.172.020: APPLICABILITY:
   A.   This chapter applies to the permitting of all small residential rooftop
and other solar energy systems in the city.
   B.   Small residential rooftop solar energy systems legally established or
permitted prior to the effective date hereof are not subject to the
requirements of this chapter unless physical modifications or alterations are
undertaken that materially change the size, type, or components of a small
rooftop energy system in such a way as to require new permitting. Routine
operation and maintenance shall not require a permit. (Ord. 2813, 2015)
18.172.030: DEFINITIONS:
   ASSOCIATION: A nonprofit corporation or unincorporated association created
for the purpose of managing a common interest development.
   BUILDING OFFICIAL: The chief building official of the city or his or her
designee.
   COMMON INTEREST DEVELOPMENT: Any of the following:
   A.   A community apartment project;
   B.   A condominium project;
   C.   A planned development; and
   D.   A stock cooperative.
   ELECTRONIC SUBMITTAL: The utilization of one or more of the following:
   A.   E-mail;
   B.   The internet;
   C.   Facsimile.
   REASONABLE RESTRICTIONS: On a solar energy system are those restrictions
that do not significantly increase the cost of the system or significantly
decrease its efficiency or specified performance, or that allow for an
alternative system of comparable cost, efficiency, and energy conservation
benefits.
   RESTRICTIONS THAT DO NOT SIGNIFICANTLY INCREASE THE COST OF THE SYSTEM OR
DECREASE ITS EFFICIENCY OR SPECIFIED PERFORMANCE: A. For water heater systems
or solar swimming pool heating systems: An amount exceeding ten percent (10%)
of the cost of the system, but in no case more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00), or decreasing the efficiency of the solar energy system by an
amount exceeding ten percent (10%), as originally specified and proposed.
   B.   For photovoltaic systems: An amount not to exceed one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) over the system cost as originally specified and proposed, or a
decrease in system efficiency of an amount exceeding ten percent (10%) as
originally specified and proposed.
   SMALL RESIDENTIAL ROOFTOP SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM: All of the following:
   A.   A solar energy system that is no larger than ten (10) kilowatts
alternating current nameplate rating or thirty (30) kilowatts thermal.
   B.   A solar energy system that conforms to all applicable state fire,
structural, electrical, and other building codes as adopted or amended by the
city, all state and city health and safety standards, and paragraph 3 of
subdivision (c) of section 714 of the California Civil Code.
   C.   A solar energy system that is installed on a single or duplex family
dwelling.
   D.   A solar panel or module array that does not exceed the maximum legal
building height as defined by the city.
   SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM: Either of the following:
   A.   Any solar collector or other solar energy device whose primary purpose
is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for
space heating, space cooling, electric generation, or water heating.
   B.   Any structural design feature of a building, whose primary purpose is
to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for
electricity generation, space heating or cooling, or for water heating.
   SPECIFIC, ADVERSE IMPACT: A significant, quantifiable, direct, and
unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified, and written public health
or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date the
application was deemed complete. (Ord. 2813, 2015)
18.172.040: SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   All solar energy systems shall meet applicable health and safety
standards and requirements imposed by the state and the Redlands fire
department.
   B.   Solar energy systems for heating water in single-family residences and
for heating water in commercial or swimming pool applications shall be
certified by an accredited listing agency as defined by the California plumbing
and mechanical code.
   C.   Solar energy systems for producing electricity shall meet all
applicable safety and performance standards established by the California
electrical code, the Institute Of Electrical And Electronics Engineers, and
accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories and, where
applicable, rules of the public utilities commission regarding safety and
reliability. (Ord. 2813, 2015)
18.172.050: LOCATION AND INSTALLATION SPECIFICATIONS:
   A.   The installation of solar energy systems shall be a permitted use in
all zoning districts.
   B.   Flat type absorber style solar energy systems may be mounted at any
location of a roof when mounted parallel with the roof surface and the entire
unit is within twelve inches (12") of the roof surface. However, nonflat plate
absorber type solar energy systems (i.e., coiled tubing, parabolic reflectors,
tank type absorber units, and other type units), flat plate absorber style
units not parallel and within twelve inches (12") of the roof surface, or
absorber units mounted on racks shall be mounted only on the rear portions of
the roof below the peak line, and when possible located where least visible
from a public street.
   C.   Whenever possible, the piping to and from solar energy systems should
be hidden from view. When this is not possible, the piping should be run in the
most direct manner, so that the least amount of piping is exposed. The exposed
piping should then be painted to match the material over which it is run.
   D.   Any type of solar energy system may be placed on flat roofs (slopes
less than 2 vertical to 12 horizontal), provided the solar energy system is so
located that it is not visible from any point six feet (6') above a street or
sidewalk, or is screened from view by a parapet wall or screening that is
architecturally compatible with the balance of the structure. (Ord. 2813, 2015)
18.172.060: DUTIES OF THE BUILDING AND SAFETY DIVISION AND CHIEF BUILDING
OFFICIAL:
   A.   All documents required for the submission of a small residential
rooftop solar energy system application shall be made available on the publicly
accessible city website.
   B.   Electronic submittal of the required permit application and documents
by e-mail, the internet, or facsimile, shall be made available to all small
residential rooftop solar energy system permit applicants.
   C.   An applicant's electronic signature shall be accepted on all forms,
applications, and other documents in lieu of a wet signature.
   D.   The city's building and safety division shall adopt a standard plan and
checklist of all requirements with which small residential rooftop solar energy
systems shall comply to be eligible for expedited review.
   E.   The small residential rooftop solar system permit process, standard
plans, and checklists shall substantially conform to recommendations for
expedited permitting, including the checklist and standard plans contained in
the most current version of the "California Solar Permitting Guidebook" adopted
by the governor's office of planning and research, copies of which are on file
in the city's building and safety division.
   F.   All fees prescribed for the permitting of a small residential rooftop
solar energy system must comply with Government Code sections 65850.55, 66015,
and 66016, and Health And Safety Code section 17951. (Ord. 2813, 2015)
18.172.070: PERMIT REVIEW AND INSPECTION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   The city building and safety division shall establish an
administrative, nondiscretionary review process to expedite approval of small
residential rooftop solar energy systems on or before September 30, 2015. The
building and safety division shall issue a building permit or other
nondiscretionary permit the same day for over the counter applications or
within one to three (3) business days for electronic applications of receipt of
a complete application and meets the requirements of the approved checklist and
standard plan. The building official may require an applicant to apply for a
conditional use permit if the building official finds, based on substantial
evidence, that the solar energy system could have a specific, adverse impact
upon the public health and safety. Such decisions may be appealed to the city
planning commission.
   B.   Review of the application shall be limited to the building official's
review of whether the application meets local, state, and federal health and
safety requirements and the fire marshal's review for compliance with the
California fire code.
   C.   If a conditional use permit is required, the building official may deny
an application for the use permit if the building official makes written
findings based upon substantial evidence in the record that the proposed
installation would have a specific, adverse impact upon public health or safety
and there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid, as
defined, the adverse impact. Such findings shall include the basis for the
rejection of the potential feasible alternative for preventing the adverse
impact. Such decisions may be appealed to the city planning commission.
   D.   Any condition imposed on an application shall be designed to mitigate
the specific, adverse impact upon health and safety at the lowest possible
cost.
   E.   "A feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific,
adverse impact" includes, but is not limited to, any cost effective method,
condition, or mitigation imposed by the city on another similarly situated
application in a prior successful application for a permit. The city shall use
its best efforts to ensure that the selected method, condition, or mitigation
meets the conditions of subparagraphs (A) and (B) of paragraph (1) of
subdivision (d) of section 714 of the Civil Code defining restrictions that do
not significantly increase the cost of the system or decrease its efficiency or
specified performance.
   F.   The city shall not condition approval of an application on the approval
of an association, as defined in section 4080 of the Civil Code.
   G.   If an application is deemed incomplete, a written correction notice
detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information or
documentation required to be eligible for expedited permit issuance shall be
sent to the applicant for resubmission.
   H.   Only one inspection shall be required and performed by the building and
safety division and the Redlands fire department for small residential rooftop
solar energy systems eligible for expedited review.
   I.   The inspection shall be done in a timely manner and should include
consolidated inspections. An inspection will be scheduled within two (2) to
three (3) business days of a request and provide an eight (8) hour inspection
window.
   J.   If a small residential rooftop solar energy system fails inspection, a
subsequent inspection is authorized but need not conform to the requirements of
this chapter. (Ord. 2813, 2015)
CHAPTER 18.176
DISH ANTENNA INSTALLATION
SECTION:
18.176.010: Purpose Of Provisions
18.176.020: Dish Antenna Defined
18.176.030: Installation Permitted In All Districts
18.176.040: Permit And Review Requirements
18.176.050: Development Standards
18.176.060: Location Specifications
18.176.070: Height Restrictions
18.176.080: Surfacing And Screening
18.176.090: Maintenance
18.176.100: Safety Requirements
18.176.010: PURPOSE OF PROVISIONS:
The intent of the regulations in this chapter is to protect the general welfare
by providing a means of enabling the installation of dish antenna systems in
such a manner that they are compatible with the architectural characteristics
and special environment of the city. The installation of dish antennas, and
accessory equipment, can create visual blight for those who reside, work and
travel in the city, and can endanger the life, safety and welfare of persons
and property through the hazard of collapse, and create adverse economic,
aesthetic and safety impacts inconsistent with the health, safety and general
welfare of the community. (Ord. 1887 § 1, 1985: Ord. 1000 § 43.80, 1955)
18.176.020: DISH ANTENNA DEFINED:
For the purpose of this chapter, "dish antenna" means any parabolic antenna
designed for receiving satellite transmissions, having a diameter greater than
two feet (2'), and which system is external to or attached to the exterior of
any building. (Ord. 1887 § 1, 1985: Ord. 1000 § 43.80(a), 1955)
18.176.030: INSTALLATION PERMITTED IN ALL DISTRICTS:
The installation of dish antennas shall be a permitted use in all zoning
districts. (Ord. 1887 § 1, 1985: Ord. 1000 § 43.80(b), 1955)
18.176.040: PERMIT AND REVIEW REQUIREMENTS:
Dish antennas shall require a building permit and be permitted only when in
conformity with the development standards of this chapter. Every dish antenna,
whether temporary or permanent, shall be subject to review and approval of the
building official, where required by the building code. (Ord. 1887 § 1, 1985:
Ord. 1000 § 43.80(C), 1955)
18.176.050: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
Every dish antenna shall be located, designed, constructed and maintained in
accordance with the standards set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 1887 § 1, 1985:
Ord. 1000 § 43.80(d), 1955)
18.176.060: LOCATION SPECIFICATIONS:
   A.   No portion of any dish antenna system shall extend beyond the property
lines, or into any front yard of any lot or side yard on the street side of a
corner lot.
   B.   Guywires shall not be anchored within any front of any lot or within
any side yard on the street side of a corner lot.
   C.   No ground mounted dish antennas shall be located in the area between
the building and the front property line, or between the building and the side
property line on the street side of a corner lot.
   D.   All ground mounted dish antennas shall be considered to be accessory
buildings, and shall conform to the setback requirement for such buildings for
the respective zone in which the dish antenna is located.
   E.   Any dish antenna with bases of attachment on a building in a
nonresidential zone shall be located within the middle one-third (1/3) of the
roof of the building, and completely screened from the view of adjoining
properties and adjoining public rights of way. (Ord. 1887 § 1, 1985: Ord. 1000
§ 43.80(e), 1955)
18.176.070: HEIGHT RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   In residential zones, dish antennas with a diameter greater than two
feet (2') shall not be placed on or attached to the roof or wall of any
building.
   B.   In residential zones, antennas with bases of attachment on the ground
shall not exceed ten feet (10') in height above the lot grade.
   C.   In nonresidential zones, dish antennas with bases of attachment on the
ground shall not exceed sixteen feet (16') in height above the lot grade. (Ord.
1887 § 1, 1985: Ord. 1000 § 43.80(f), 1955)
18.176.080: SURFACING AND SCREENING:
   A.   The materials used in constructing dish antennas shall not be
excessively bright, garish or reflective.
   B.   Dish antennas shall be screened through the addition of architectural
features and/or landscaping that harmonize with the elements and
characteristics of the property.
   C.   All ground mounted dish antennas within residentially zoned property
shall be screened by walls, fences or landscaping obscuring visibility of the
dish antenna from the view of adjoining properties and from adjoining public
rights of way. (Ord. 1887 § 1, 1985: Ord. 1000 § 43.80(g), 1955)
18.176.090: MAINTENANCE:
Every dish antenna shall be maintained in good condition and in accordance with
all requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 1887 § 1, 1985: Ord. 1000 § 43.80(h),
1955)
18.176.100: SAFETY REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Permit applications for dish antennas proposed for roof locations shall
be accompanied by detailed installation plans and calculations signed by an
architect or engineer registered by the state.
   B.   The building official may require engineering calculations for proposed
ground mounted antennas to verify a safe installation. (Ord. 1887 § 1, 1985:
Ord. 1000 § 43.80(i), 1955)
CHAPTER 18.178
WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITIES
SECTION:
18.178.010: Purpose
18.178.020: Authority
18.178.030: Definitions
18.178.040: Applicability
18.178.050: General Guidelines And Requirements
18.178.060: Maintenance Of Facilities
18.178.070: Requirements Of Outside Agencies
18.178.080: Administrative Approval
18.178.090: Conditional Use Permits
18.178.100: Minimum Operating Standards
18.178.010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish uniform standards for the design,
placement and permitting of wireless telecommunication facilities consistent
with applicable federal requirements. The standards are intended to minimize
the adverse visual impacts and operational effects of these facilities through
appropriate design, siting and screening techniques while providing for the
communication needs of residents, local business and government agencies. (Ord.
2433 § 1, 2000)
18.178.020: AUTHORITY:
Wireless telecommunication facilities are regulated at the federal, state and
local level. The 1996 telecommunications act contains provisions concerning the
placement of antenna structures and other facilities for use in providing
wireless services, and preserving the right of local agencies to regulate these
facilities based on aesthetics, visual impacts and land use impacts. (Ord. 2433
§ 1, 2000)
18.178.030: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
   ANTENNA: Any exterior apparatus designed for telephonic, radio or television
communications through the sending or receiving of electromagnetic waves. This
definition excludes television receive only antennas and dishes as defined in
section
18.140.420 and chapter 18.176 of this title.
   FAA: The federal aviation administration.
   FCC: The federal communications commission.
   HEIGHT: The distance measured from ground level to the highest point on the
tower or other structure, even if the highest point is an antenna.
   MULTIPLE USE FACILITIES: Wireless communication facilities that are shared
with other existing or newly constructed uses.
   SERVICE PROVIDER: The applicant for a permit for a wireless service
facility, tower or antenna who is licensed by the FCC and provides services for
the wireless service facility, tower or antenna to its customers.
   STEALTH TREATMENT: To conceal, screen or camouflage a tower, antenna or
support structure from public view.
   SUPPORT FACILITIES: Equipment rooms, cabinets and cellular switching
devices.
   TOWER: Any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the
purpose of supporting one or more antennas, including self-supporting lattice
towers, guy towers and monopole towers, common carrier towers, and cellular
telephone towers. (Ord. 2433 § 1, 2000)
18.178.040: APPLICABILITY:
   A.   Permitted Uses: This chapter shall govern the location of wireless
service facilities, towers and antennas.
   B.   Amateur Radio; Receive Only Antennas: This chapter shall not govern any
tower or antenna that is less than seventy feet (75') in height, is owned and
operated by a federally licensed amateur radio station operator, or is used
exclusively as a receive only antenna.
   C.   Preexisting Towers Or Antennas: Any tower or antenna for which a permit
has been properly issued prior to the effective date hereof shall not be
required to meet the requirements of this chapter, other than the requirements
of subsection
18.178.070A of this chapter. Any such tower or antenna is referred to in this
chapter as a "preexisting tower" or "preexisting antenna". Any modification of,
or addition to, a preexisting tower or antenna shall require compliance with
this chapter.
   D.   Permit Requirement: It is unlawful for any person to erect, construct,
reconstruct, install, place, build, fasten, alter or relocate a tower or
antenna as defined in this chapter without first obtaining all required permits
and making payment of fees established by resolution of the city. Permits
include building or electrical permits. (Ord. 2433 § 1, 2000)
18.178.050: GENERAL GUIDELINES AND REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Goals: The goals of this chapter are to: 1) encourage the location of
towers in nonresidential areas and minimize the number of towers throughout the
city; 2) encourage the collocation of towers and antennas at new and existing
tower sites; 3) encourage users of towers and antennas to locate them in areas
where the adverse impact on the community is minimal; 4) encourage users of
towers and antennas to configure them in a way that minimizes their adverse
visual impact by utilizing multiple use facilities and stealth treatment to
camouflage and conceal multiple use facilities; and 5) enhance the ability of
the providers of telecommunications services to provide such services to the
community quickly, effectively and efficiently.
   B.   Principal Or Accessory Use: Antennas and towers are considered either
principal or accessory uses. A different existing use or an existing structure
on a property shall not preclude the installation of an antenna or tower on
such property. A tower or antenna shall comply with all applicable zoning
standards except for height restrictions. Towers and antennas that are
constructed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall not be
deemed to constitute the expansion of a nonconforming use or structure.
   C.   Inventory Of Existing Sites: Each applicant for an antenna or tower
shall provide to the community development department an inventory of its
existing and any planned towers that are within the city and within one-fourth
(1/4) mile of the border thereof, including specific information about the
(proposed) location, height and design of each tower. The community development
department may share such information with other applicants applying for an
antenna or tower under this chapter for the purpose of encouraging collocation;
provided, however, that the community development department is not, by sharing
such information, in any way representing or warranting that such sites are
available or suitable.
   D.   Aesthetic Requirements: This section shall govern the location of all
towers and antennas.
      1.   Towers and antennas shall be constructed using stealth treatment.
      2.   At a tower site, the design of the buildings and related structures
shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening and
landscaping that will blend the tower facilities to the natural setting and
built environment, and may include wooden fences, landscaping and trellis and
similar treatment. All on site utility lines related to a tower or antenna
shall be placed underground.
      3.   If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the
antenna shall be constructed using stealth treatment and the supporting
electrical and mechanical equipment shall be completely screened or be of a
neutral color that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of
the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and related equipment as
visually unobtrusive as possible.
      4.   Towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by law. If
site lighting is required, the planning commission may review the available
lighting alternatives and approve a design that would cause the least
disturbance to the surrounding views.
   E.   Support Equipment: Underground vaults may be required for support
equipment in order to mitigate physical, aesthetic or safety siting issues.
Aboveground support equipment in residential areas shall be discouraged. While
discouraged, support radio equipment may be allowed in the right of way in the
discretion of the community development director and subject to the issuance of
an encroachment permit by the public works department. (Ord. 2433 § 1, 2000)
18.178.060: MAINTENANCE OF FACILITIES:
   A.   The facility operator and property owner shall be responsible for
maintenance of the wireless service facility which includes, but is not limited
to, regular cleaning of the facility and keeping the facility painted. Failure
to respond to a written request from the city to perform maintenance work may
constitute grounds for revocation of the tower/antenna permit.
   B.   All facilities shall be constructed in compliance with all applicable
building, electrical and other codes in effect at the time of construction,
with particular respect to wind and seismic loads. (Ord. 2433 § 1, 2000)
18.178.070: REQUIREMENTS OF OUTSIDE AGENCIES:
   A.   Federal And State Requirements: All towers shall comply with standards
and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, the California public utilities commission
and any other agency of the federal or state government with the authority to
regulate towers and antennas. If such standards and regulations are changed,
owners of towers and antennas governed by this chapter shall bring such towers
and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations in
compliance with the schedule mandated by the controlling federal or state
agency. Failure to bring towers and antennas into compliance with such revised
standards and regulations shall constitute grounds for the removal of the tower
or antenna at the owner's expense.
   B.   Redlands Municipal Airport Influence Area: When located within the
Redlands municipal airport influence area, as defined by the Redlands municipal
airport land use compatibility plan, the application shall be reviewed by the
planning commission as part of the conditional use permit process, and must be
found consistent with the Redlands airport land use compatibility plan for a
conditional use permit to be issued. (Ord. 2433 § 1, 2000)
18.178.080: ADMINISTRATIVE APPROVAL:
   A.   Administratively Approved Uses: The following uses may be approved or
conditionally approved by the community development director after conducting
an administrative review:
      1.   Installation of an antenna on an existing structure other than a
tower (such as a building, sign, light pole, water tower or other freestanding
nonresidential structure) which does not add height to the existing structure
and utilizes stealth treatment;
      2.   Installation of an antenna on an existing tower of any height,
including support facilities, in commercial and industrial zones provided the
antenna does not increase the height of the tower;
      3.   Installation of an antenna with bases of attachment on a building in
a nonresidential zone which is located within the middle one-third (1/3) of the
roof of the building, and completely screened from the view of adjoining
properties and public right of way.
   B.   Applications: Applications for administrative approval shall be made to
the community development director, and shall contain the information set forth
in subsection
18.178.090B of this chapter.
      1.   The community development director shall respond to each such
application within thirty (30) business days, after determining that the
application is complete, by either approving or denying the application. If the
community development department fails to respond to the applicant within said
thirty (30) business days, then the application shall be deemed to be approved.
   C.   Design Standards For Administratively Approved Uses: The following
design standards shall apply to administratively approved uses:
      1.   No portion of any wireless service facility shall extend beyond the
property lines, or into any front yard of any lot or side yard on the street
side of a corner lot;
      2.   Guywires shall not be anchored within any front yard of any lot or
within any side yard on the street side of a corner lot. (Ord. 2433 § 1, 2000)
18.178.090: CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS:
   A.   General: The following provisions shall govern the issuance of
conditional use permits:
      1.   If the tower or antenna cannot be approved administratively pursuant
to section
18.178.080 of this chapter, a conditional use permit shall be required pursuant
to chapter 18.192 of this title for the construction of the tower or the
placement of the antenna.
      2.   All information of an engineering nature that the applicant submits,
whether civil, mechanical or electrical, shall be certified by a licensed
professional engineer.
   B.   Information Required: In addition to the information requested under
chapter 18.192 of this title, an applicant requesting a conditional use permit
pursuant to this chapter shall submit: 1) scaled site plan and a scaled
elevation view and other supporting drawings, calculations, and other
documentation, signed and sealed by appropriate licensed professionals, showing
the location and dimensions of all improvements, including information
concerning topography, radio frequency coverage, tower height requirements,
setbacks, vehicular circulation areas, parking, fencing, landscaping, adjacent
uses; 2) identify all towers and/or antennas within one thousand feet (1,000')
of the proposed tower/antenna; 3) an inventory of existing sites pursuant to
subsection
18.178.050C of this chapter; 4) a detailed plan of fencing for security of the
tower and support facilities; 5) a detailed landscape plan for the effective
screening of the tower and support facilities.
   C.   Factors Considered In Granting Conditional Use Permits: In addition to
the findings required under chapter 18.192 of this title, the planning
commission may consider the following factors in determining whether to issue a
conditional use permit, or in applying conditions of approval:
      1.   Height of the proposed tower;
      2.   Proximity of the tower to residential structures and residential
district boundaries including public right of way;
      3.   Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties;
      4.   Surrounding topography;
      5.   Surrounding tree coverage and foliage;
      6.   Design of the tower, with particular reference to design
characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual
obtrusiveness;
      7.   Proposed ingress and egress;
      8.   Availability of suitable and proximity of other existing towers and
other structures;
      9.   Consideration of alternative sites.
   D.   Availability Of Suitable Existing Towers Or Other Structures: No new
tower shall be approved unless the city finds that no existing tower or
structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna. Evidence submitted
to demonstrate that no existing tower or structure can accommodate the
applicant's proposed antenna may consist of any of the following:
      1.   No existing towers or structures are located within the geographic
area required to meet the applicant's engineering requirements;
      2.   Existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height to meet
the applicant's engineering requirements;
      3.   Existing towers or structures do not have sufficient structural
strength to support the applicant's proposed antenna and related equipment;
      4.   The applicant's proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic
interference with the antenna on the existing towers or structures, or the
antenna on the existing towers or structures would cause interference with the
applicant's proposed antenna;
      5.   The fees, costs or contractual provisions required by the applicant
in order to share an existing tower or structure or to adapt an existing tower
or structure for sharing are unreasonable. Costs exceeding new tower
development are presumed to be unreasonable;
      6.   The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting factors
that render existing towers and structures unsuitable.
   E.   Setbacks And Separation: The following setbacks and separation
requirements shall apply to all towers and antennas:
      1.   Towers shall be set back a distance equal to one hundred feet (100')
from any off site residential structure.
      2.   Towers, guys and accessory facilities shall satisfy the minimum
zoning district setback requirements.
   F.   Landscaping: Existing mature tree growth and natural landforms on the
site shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. In some cases, such as
towers sited on large, wooded lots, natural growth around the property
perimeter may be a sufficient buffer. (Ord. 2433 § 1, 2000)
18.178.100: MINIMUM OPERATING STANDARDS:
   A.   Wireless service facilities shall not be operated in any manner that
would cause interference with the city's emergency telecommunication system.
   B.   The service provider(s) shall maintain all required warning and
emergency contact signs at the wireless service facilities site. The signs
shall not include advertising and shall be posted in a manner to reduce visual
clutter. (Ord. 2433 § 1, 2000)
CHAPTER 18.180
MOVING OF BUILDINGS
SECTION:
18.180.010: Prerequisites For Moving Buildings
18.180.020: Permit; Application
18.180.030: Permit; Bond Required
18.180.040: Investigation Of Structure To Be Moved
18.180.050: Permit; Issuance Conditions
18.180.060: Additional Conditions Authorized When
18.180.070: Public Hearing; Notice
18.180.080: Public Hearing; Commission Decision
18.180.090: Appeals From Commission Decision
18.180.010: PREREQUISITES FOR MOVING BUILDINGS:
The moving of any building or structure onto a lot shall require the filing of
an application for commission approval and payment of a fee as set by the city
council. (Ord. 1000 § 48.00, 1955)
18.180.020: PERMIT; APPLICATION:
The following information shall be filed with the application for a permit to
move a building or structure:
   A.   Location and address of the site proposed for placement of the building
or structure;
   B.   Site plan, prepared to scale with complete dimensions, showing all
buildings and structures proposed and existing for the parcel, including the
location of all structures and improvements on adjacent lots;
   C.   Plans and specifications for other proposed improvements for the site,
including accessory buildings, walls, fences and landscaping treatment;
   D.   Architectural elevations or photographs of all sides of the buildings
or structures to be moved or constructed on the site;
   E.   Definition of the route of travel for the building(s) to be moved.
(Ord. 1000 § 48.00(a), 1955)
18.180.030: PERMIT; BOND REQUIRED:
Before a building permit may be granted, the city may require the posting of a
security, in a form and amount satisfactory to the city, to cover the estimated
costs of expenditures involved in complying with the conditions related to
improvements of the property which may have been established in the granting of
the permit. The security shall also cover the costs involved in cleaning up the
vacated site and restoring it to a safe and sightly condition.
Before a building permit may be granted, there shall be a posting of a cash
bond with the city treasurer, in an amount as determined by the city's chief
building official and the director of the municipal utilities and engineering
department to cover costs of the activities involving the city, and the
expenditures involved in complying with the conditions related to improvements
of the property which may have been established in the granting of the permit.
The bond shall also cover the costs involved in cleaning up a vacated site and
restoring it to a safe and sightly condition. (Ord. 2744, 2014)
18.180.040: INVESTIGATION OF STRUCTURE TO BE MOVED:
Upon the filing of an application, the director of building and safety shall
make an inspection of the building or structure to be moved to determine its
capability of compliance with the uniform building code standards, state
department of housing and community development factory built home standards,
or certification under the national mobilehome construction and safety
standards act of 1974 (42 USC section 5401 et seq.) on a foundation system,
pursuant to section 18551 of the California Health And Safety Code. (Ord. 1000
§ 48.00(b), 1955)
18.180.050: PERMIT; ISSUANCE CONDITIONS:
Before the commission may approve the application for moving of a building or
structure, there shall be a finding that such moving shall have no detrimental
effect on the living environment and that the structure to be moved is
compatible with existing development in the area into which the structure is to
be moved. (Ord. 1000 § 48.00(c), 1955)
18.180.060: ADDITIONAL CONDITIONS AUTHORIZED WHEN:
The commission may set forth conditions deemed necessary to support the
necessary findings. Such conditions may include:
   A.   Special yards, spaces and setbacks;
   B.   Fences and walls;
   C.   Regulation of vehicular ingress and egress points;
   D.   Required landscaping and maintenance thereof;
   E.   Regulation of signs;
   F.   Regulation of noise, vibration, odors and lights;
   G.   Regulation of exterior walls and roofing materials;
   H.   Required parking;
   I.   Minimum width and floor area of buildings and structures;
   J.   Architectural modifications, including roof pitch and overhang; and
   K.   Such other conditions as will make possible the development of the city
in an orderly and efficient manner and in conformity with the intent and
purposes set forth in this title. (Ord. 1000 § 48.00(d), 1955)
18.180.070: PUBLIC HEARING; NOTICE:
   A.   A public hearing shall be held by the planning commission on the
nearest scheduled meeting date not less than twenty one (21) days after the
filing of the application.
   B.   Notice shall be mailed not less than five (5) days prior to the date of
the meeting to owners of property within a radius of three hundred feet (300')
of the external boundaries of the property described in the application, using
for this purpose the name and address of such owners as are shown on the latest
official tax roll of the county. Such notice shall contain all pertinent data
related to the case. (Ord. 1000 § 48.00(e), 1955)
18.180.080: PUBLIC HEARING; COMMISSION DECISION:
The decision of the commission shall be final, unless an appeal therefrom is
taken to the council as provided for in section
18.180.090 of this chapter. (Ord. 1000 § 48.00(f), 1955)
18.180.090: APPEALS FROM COMMISSION DECISION:
   A.   Appeals may be taken to the council by the applicant or any other
person aggrieved by the commissions decision.
   B.   Appeals shall be filed on forms supplied by the planning department
with the council within ten (10) days from the date of the commission decision,
or at the next regular council meeting following the planning commission
meeting.
   C.   On the appeal, the council shall review the decision of the commission,
hear new evidence and testimony, if offered, and in deciding the appeal may
either affirm, reverse, or modify the decision of the commission.
   D.   The council may, on its own motion, cause any commission decision to be
appealed. (Ord. 1000 § 48.00(g), 1955)
CHAPTER 18.184
NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS AND USES
SECTION:
18.184.010: Applicability Of Regulations
18.184.020: Nonconforming Buildings; Continuation Conditions
18.184.030: Nonconforming Uses; Continuation Conditions
18.184.040: Nonconforming Lots
18.184.050: Appeals
18.184.010: APPLICABILITY OF REGULATIONS:
The following regulations, set out in this chapter, shall apply to all
nonconforming buildings and nonconforming uses of land.
   A.   This chapter provides for the orderly termination of nonconforming
rights for lots, structures and uses that were established but, due to
revisions to the provisions of this title, no longer comply. The orderly
termination of legally established nonconforming lots, structures and uses is
necessary to promote the public health, safety and general welfare, and to
bring such lots, structures and uses into conformity with the goals, objectives
and policies of this title and the City's General Plan. Where a lot, structure
or use is referred to as nonconforming it shall mean that it is legally
nonconforming.
   B.   This chapter limits the expansion of nonconforming lots, structures and
uses and establishes the circumstances under which they may be continued, and
provides for the correction, maintenance, and removal of such lots, structures
and uses.
   C.   The City finds that nonconforming lots, structures and uses within the
City, both those that are legally established and those that are illegal, are
detrimental to the orderly development of the City and are detrimental to the
health, safety, peace, comfort and general welfare of persons and property
within the City.
   D.   Nonconforming lots, structures, and uses shall be eliminated as set
forth in this chapter and without infringing upon the constitutional rights of
the owners of legally-established nonconforming properties.
   E.   Lots, structures, and uses not having previously acquired proper
permits are illegal and subject to immediate abatement. This chapter does not
grant any right to continue occupancy of property containing an illegal use or
structure.
   F.   It shall be the property owner's responsibility to provide evidence or
information to justify the establishment of nonconforming rights.
   G.   A change in ownership or tenancy without any change in use, occupancy,
or development shall not affect any of the legal nonconforming rights,
privileges, and responsibilities provided under this chapter.
   H.   A use that does not conform with the loading, parking, planting area,
or screening standards of the zoning district in which it is located shall not
be deemed a nonconforming use solely for these reasons. (Ord. 2859, 2017)
18.184.020: NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS; CONTINUATION CONDITIONS:
Any uses on the land existing at the time of adoption of City of Redlands
ordinance no. 1000 (August 1955), whether housed in structures or outside the
structures, not in conformity with the uses permitted in this title, are hereby
declared to be nonconforming uses. Such uses shall be permitted to continue,
except as provided below.
   A.   Any nonconforming building in a residential district may be continued
and maintained for the following period, representing the useful life of the
class of building, as defined in the California Building Code:
      1.   Class 1 or 2 masonry: Forty (40) years;
      2.   Class 3 or 4 construction, fire resistant: Thirty (30) years;
      3.   Class 5 construction, frame: Twenty (20) years.
   B.   Ordinary repair and maintenance may be performed on a nonconforming
structure or site.
   C.   Except as otherwise provided for nonconforming single-family or multi-
family residential uses, or for historical buildings or contributing buildings
in a historic district, nonconforming buildings may be continued if such
buildings are not added to or structurally altered, other than as required by
law, or as provided for in subsection B of this section.
   D.   Except as otherwise provided for nonconforming single-family or multi-
family residential uses, or for historical buildings or contributing buildings
in a historic district, any part of a building occupied by a nonconforming use,
which use is discontinued for a period of one hundred eighty (180) consecutive
days or more, shall thereafter only be used in conformity with the provisions
of the zoning district in which it is located. Discontinuation shall mean any
termination of a use, regardless of intent to resume the use. Payment of a
valid business license or business tax certificate shall in and of itself not
be considered to be a continuation of the use.
   E.   The provisions of this title shall not prevent the reconstruction,
repairing or rebuilding, and the continuing use of any nonconforming building,
or buildings, damaged by fire, explosion or act of God or the public enemy
subsequent to the adoption of Redlands ordinance no. 1000, wherein the cost of
such reconstruction, repairing or rebuilding does not exceed fifty percent
(50%) of the reasonable replacement value. The damaged use or structure may be
rebuilt and resumed provided that a building permit for the reconstruction or
repair is issued within twenty four (24) months after the date of destruction,
and the reconstruction or repair is diligently pursued to completion.
   F.   The extent of damage or partial destruction shall be determined by
comparing the estimated cost of restoring the structure to its condition before
the damage or partial destruction, to the estimated cost of duplicating the
entire structure as it existed before the damage or destruction occurred.
Estimates for this purpose shall be reviewed and approved by the building
official and the Development Services Director, or their respective designees,
and shall be based on the minimum cost of construction in compliance with the
California Building Code. For the purpose of this section, "assessed value"
shall mean the assessed value of the structure as shown on the County of San
Bernardino property assessment roll in effect at the time of the occurrence of
the casualty, or at the time the repair and maintenance is first conducted.
   G.   Except as otherwise provided for nonconforming single-family or multi-
family residential uses, or for historical buildings or contributing buildings
in a historic district, when the destruction exceeds fifty percent (50%) or the
nonconforming structure is voluntarily demolished or is required by law to be
demolished, the structure shall not be restored except in full conformity with
the regulations of the zone in which it is located.
   H.   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the construction,
enlargement, expansion, extension, or reconstruction (hereafter referred to as
"work") of a nonconforming structure in the following manner:
      1.   Elimination Of Nonconformity: The work shall be allowed in order to
render the use or structure in conformity with this title.
      2.   Compliance With Laws: The work shall be allowed in order to comply
with law.
      3.   Seismic Retrofitting/Building Code Compliance: Repairs or
alterations otherwise required by law shall be allowed in the following
circumstances:
         a.   Reconstruction required to reinforce unreinforced masonry
structures shall be allowed without cost limitations, provided the retrofitting
is limited exclusively to compliance with earthquake safety standards in
compliance with title 15, "Buildings And Construction", of this Code; and,
         b.   Reconstruction required to comply with the City's adopted
Building Code requirements shall be allowed without cost limitations, provided
the retrofitting/Code compliance is limited exclusively to compliance with
earthquake safety standards and/or other applicable Building Code requirements,
including State law (e.g., title 24, California Code of Regulations; California
Historical Building Code; etc.).
      4.   Alteration Or Enlargement Of A Nonconforming Structure:
         a.   A nonconforming structure shall not be altered or enlarged so as
to further increase the difference between existing conditions and the current
development standards identified for the subject zoning district, unless a
variance is obtained in compliance with this Code. Alteration and enlargement
may occur, but only in compliance with the current applicable development
standards.
         b.   A nonconforming structure shall not be enlarged or moved unless
the enlargement of new location conforms to the current development standards
identified for the subject zoning district.
      5.   Permit Required: Alteration or enlargement of a nonconforming use
shall require a permit.
         a.   A nonconforming use may not be altered or enlarged unless a
building permit is first obtained, in compliance with the applicable title of
this Code.
         b.   The use shall comply with the performance standards and
applicable development standards for the subject zoning district.
         c.   There shall be no expansion of a nonconforming use onto an
additional lot, adjacent or otherwise.
   I.   Nonconforming single-family residential uses that have been
discontinued for a period of one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days or more,
or involuntarily damaged or destroyed by more than fifty percent (50%) by a
catastrophic event (e.g., fire or other calamity, by act of God, or by the
public enemy), may be reconstructed or replaced with a new structure using the
same development standards applied to the damaged or destroyed structure (e.g.,
setbacks, square footage, building height, and density standards), if the
Development Services Director, or his or her designee makes affirmative
determination of all of the following findings:
      1.   The applicant provides documentation satisfactory to the Development
Services Director or his/her designee supporting the claim that the damage or
destruction occurred involuntarily;
      2.   The replacement structure is in compliance with current Building
Code; and,
      3.   A building permit is issued within twenty four (24) months after the
date of destruction and the construction is diligently pursued to completion.
If the preceding requirements are not met, the replacement structure shall
comply with all requirements of this Code.
   J.   A nonconforming single-family residential use located in a non-
residential zone may be expanded or enlarged by no more than twenty five
percent (25%) of its legal floor area that was existing at the time of adoption
of this chapter, whether by single or multiple addition(s). Any existing
dwelling that is enlarged by the addition of one or more bedrooms shall be
required to provide off-street parking facilities in accordance with the
provisions of this title.
   K.   Nonconforming multi-family dwelling units (including the residential
component of a mixed-use project) that have been involuntarily damaged or
destroyed by more than fifty percent (50%) by a catastrophic event (e.g., fire
or other calamity, by act of God, or by the public enemy) may be reconstructed
or replaced with a new structure using the same development standards applied
to the damaged or destroyed structures (e.g., setbacks, square footage,
building height, and density standards) in compliance with State law 1 , if the
Development Services Director or his/her designee makes affirmative
determination of all of the following findings:
      1.   The applicant provides documentation satisfactory to the Development
Services Director or his/her designee supporting the claim that the damage or
destruction occurred involuntarily;
      2.   The reconstruction, restoration, or rebuilding of the nonconforming
multi-family residential use will not adversely affect or be detrimental to the
health, safety, and general welfare of persons residing or working in the
neighborhood, and will not be detrimental or injurious to property or
improvements in the neighborhood;
      3.   No expansion of the gross floor area occurs;
      4.   The replacement structure is in compliance with current Building
Code; and,
      5.   A building permit is issued within twenty four (24) months after the
date of destruction and the construction is diligently pursued to completion.
If the preceding requirements are not met, the replacement structure shall
comply with all current requirements of this title in effect on the date a
building permit is issued.
   L.   Where parking facilities are insufficient to meet the standards set in
this title, or where no such parking facilities have been provided for
buildings constructed prior to the effective date hereof, such buildings may
not be altered, nor may additional facilities or square-footage be provided
within such buildings until after the requirements for off street parking shall
have been satisfied for those facilities or square-footage added or enlarged.
   M.   Any portion of a nonconforming building or use, which is altered or
changed to a conforming use, may not thereafter be used for a nonconforming
use. (Ord. 2859, 2017)
 
Notes
1 1. GOV § 65852.25.
18.184.030: NONCONFORMING USES; CONTINUATION CONDITIONS:
   A.   Uses Of Land: The nonconforming use of land, where no structures are
involved, may continue for a period not to exceed five (5) years after the
effective date hereof, subject to the following conditions:
      1.   No such nonconforming use of land shall be expanded or extended in
any way, either on the same or adjoining property.
      2.   Where such nonconforming use or any portion thereof is discontinued
for one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days, or changed, any future use of
the land shall be in conformity with the provisions of this title.
      3.   Such use shall not be moved in whole or in part to any other portion
of the lot or parcel of land occupied by such use when the use became
nonconforming.
      4.   If provision is made for the termination of such use, any use of
such land after termination shall conform to the requirements of this title for
the zone in which it is located.
      5.   Discontinuation shall mean any termination of a use, regardless of
intent to resume the use.
   B.   Signs And Advertising Structures: Any sign, billboard or commercial
advertising structure which lawfully existed and was maintained at the time
this title became effective, may be continued, providing no structural
alterations are made thereto and that all such nonconforming signs, billboards
or commercial advertising structures shall have been removed from the district
not later than five (5) years from such effective date. (Ord. 2859, 2017)
18.184.040: NONCONFORMING LOTS:
   A.   Determination Of Nonconforming Status: A nonconforming lot of record
that does not comply with the current access, area, or dimensional requirements
of this title for the zoning district in which it is located, shall be
considered to be a legal building site if it meets one of the criteria
specified by this section. The applicant shall be responsible for providing
sufficient evidence to establish the applicability of one or more of the
following to the satisfaction of the Development Services Director or his/her
designee.
      1.   Approved Subdivision: The lot was created through a subdivision
approved by the City or the County, before incorporation.
      2.   Individual Lot Legally Created By Deed: The lot is under one
ownership and record, and was legally created by a recorded deed before the
effective date of the zoning amendment that made the lot nonconforming or
before the City adopted regulations requiring a Parcel Map for minor
subdivisions.
      3.   Variance Or Lot Line Adjustment: The lot was approved through the
variance procedure or its current configuration resulted from a lot line
adjustment.
      4.   Partial Government Acquisition: The lot was created in conformity
with the provisions of this title, but was made nonconforming when a portion of
the lot was acquired by a governmental entity.
   B.   Further Subdivision Prohibited: Where structures have been erected on a
nonconforming lot, the area where the structures are located shall not be later
subdivided, nor shall lot lines be altered through lot line adjustment, so as
to reduce the building site area or frontage below the requirements of the
applicable zoning district or other applicable provisions of this title, or in
any way that makes the use of the lot more nonconforming. (Ord. 2859, 2017)
18.184.050: APPEALS:
   A.   Within ten (10) business days of the Development Services Director's
decision, any person may appeal the Director's decision to the Planning
Commission. The appeal shall be made on forms provided by the City, and upon
payment of the fees established by resolution of the City Council. The Planning
Commission shall forthwith hold a public hearing after the hearing is noticed
as set forth in section
18.192.040 of this title. After such public hearing, the Planning Commission
shall either approve, modify, or disapprove the decision or determination of
the Development Services Director based upon applicable provisions of this
chapter.
   B.   Within ten (10) days of the Planning Commission's decision, any person
may appeal the decision to the City Council. The appeal shall be made on forms
provided by the City, and upon payment of the fees established by resolution of
the City Council. The City Council shall hold a public hearing after the
hearing is noticed as set forth in section
18.192.040 of this title. After such public hearing, the City Council shall
either approve, modify, or disapprove the decision of the Planning Commission
based upon applicable provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2859, 2017)
CHAPTER 18.188
BUILDING PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY
SECTION:
Article I. Building Permits
18.188.010: Required, When
18.188.020: Application
18.188.030: Issuance Restrictions; Generally
18.188.040: Issuance Restrictions; Prohibited Structures
18.188.050: Issuance Restrictions; Certain Residential Buildings
18.188.060: Dedication Of Streets Required
18.188.070: Improvements Required
18.188.080: Issuance Restrictions; Flood Hazard Areas
Article II. Certificate Of Occupancy And Zoning Clearance
18.188.090: Prerequisites To Building Occupancy
18.188.100: New Buildings
18.188.110: Existing Buildings And Undeveloped Land
ARTICLE I. BUILDING PERMITS
18.188.010: REQUIRED, WHEN:
It is unlawful for any property owner, or his authorized agent, to commence any
work pertaining to the erection, construction, reconstruction, moving,
conversion or alteration of any building, or any addition to any building,
until a building permit has first been secured from the director of building
and safety for such work. (Ord. 1000 § 33.00(A)(1), 1955)
18.188.020: APPLICATION:
Each application for a building permit shall be made on a printed form to be
obtained at the department of building and safety, and shall be accompanied by
accurate information and dimensions as to the size and location of the lot, the
size and location of the buildings on the lot, the dimensions of all yards and
open spaces, and such other information as may be necessary for the enforcement
of these regulations. Where complete and accurate information is not readily
available from existing records, the department of building and safety may
require the applicant to furnish a survey of the lot, prepared by a licensed
surveyor. The original of such application shall be kept in the office of the
department of building and safety. (Ord. 1000 § 33.00(A)(2), 1955)
18.188.030: ISSUANCE RESTRICTIONS; GENERALLY:
No building permit shall be issued for the erection or use of any structure or
part thereof, or for the use of any land, which is not in accordance with the
provisions of this title, and in conformity with the approved site plan or
conditional use permit, where required by this title. Any permit issued
contrary to the provisions of this title, or not in conformity with the
approved site plan or conditional use permit, shall be void and of no effect.
(Ord. 1000 § 33.00(A)(3), 1955)
18.188.040: ISSUANCE RESTRICTIONS; PROHIBITED STRUCTURES:
No building permit shall be issued where the structure or structures to be
erected will have the effect of depriving other persons of the use of their
property, or will have the effect of invalidating the general plan. (Ord. 1000
§ 33.00(A)(4), 1955)
18.188.050: ISSUANCE RESTRICTIONS; CERTAIN RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS:
No building permit shall be issued for a residential building or structure on a
lot which does not have a minimum frontage of thirty feet (30'), and access on
a dedicated street or way acceptable to the commission. For hillside areas, see
section
18.152.020 of this title. (Ord. 1000 § 33.00(A)(5), 1955)
18.188.060: DEDICATION OF STREETS REQUIRED:
The applicant for a building permit in any zone shall dedicate any half streets
that have not been dedicated, or the applicant shall dedicate additional right
of way as may be shown on the general plan or on any approved precise street
plan or setback ordinance which sets forth rights of way in excess of those now
in existence. Any street not shown on any official plan shall have a right of
way of not less than sixty feet (60'), and the applicant for a building permit
shall dedicate additional right of way to provide for a thirty foot (30') half
street. All required setbacks shall be measured from the proposed right of way
line shown on the general plan, precise street plan, or setback ordinance.
(Ord. 1000 § 33.00(B), 1955)
18.188.070: IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED:
   A.   The applicant for a building permit shall be required to improve street
frontages and provide public facilities in accordance with the existing
standards and regulations developed by the director of public works of the
city; generally, the street improvements include paving, curbs, gutters and
sidewalks.
   B.   The applicant for a building permit shall provide for the street
improvements to be installed abutting the lots desired to be built upon. Such
street improvements shall include the half street and the concrete curbs and
gutters immediately abutting the premises to which the building permit would
apply. The street improvements shall also include sidewalks, in accordance with
standards developed by the director of public works. Public facilities shall be
installed by the developer for all construction, and in accordance with
requirements of the public works department. (Ord. 1000 § 33.00(C), 1955)
18.188.080: ISSUANCE RESTRICTIONS; FLOOD HAZARD AREAS:
   A.   The director of building and safety is hereby authorized and shall have
the duty to refuse the issuance of a building permit or permits to any
applicant whose lot is geographically located in such a manner as to constitute
a flood hazard, either to the proposed structure of the applicant, or to
structures adjacent to the lot or lots upon which the applicant desires to
build.
   B.   Persons aggrieved by the ruling of the director of building and safety
shall have the right to appeal to the planning commission. Upon written request
of the appellant, the planning commission shall review the ruling of the
director of building and safety. The appellant or the director of building and
safety may appeal the ruling of the planning commission to the city council.
The decision of the city council shall be final. (Ord. 1000 § 33.00(D), 1955)
ARTICLE II. CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY AND ZONING CLEARANCE
18.188.090: PREREQUISITES TO BUILDING OCCUPANCY:
No building or land shall be occupied or used unless a certificate of
occupancy, zoning clearance and a license for such use, where required, is
first obtained from the department or person vested with the duty or authority
to issue the same. (Ord. 1000 § 33.00(E), 1955)
18.188.100: NEW BUILDINGS:
A certificate of occupancy and zoning clearance shall be issued only after such
new building, enlargement or alteration has been completed in conformity with
the provisions of any regulating ordinance, and with any approved site plan and
required conditions, and when the proposed use conforms to this title and
required conditions. (Ord. 1000 § 33.00(E)(1), 1955)
18.188.110: EXISTING BUILDINGS AND UNDEVELOPED LAND:
   A.   A certificate of occupancy and zoning clearance shall be issued for the
reuse of an existing building, or the use of undeveloped land, only after the
improvements for such building or land conform to the property development
standards of this title. Where feasible, such standards shall include the
provision of required walls, landscaping, parking, trash enclosures, street
improvements, and all other improvements determined by the planning and
community development department to be necessary or required by any regulating
ordinance for the particular use.
   B.   The director of planning may refer any application for a certificate of
occupancy to the planning commission for their review and approval. (Ord. 1000
§ 33.00(E)(2), 1955)
CHAPTER 18.190
ALCOHOL BEVERAGE SALES ESTABLISHMENT REGULATIONS
SECTION:
18.190.010: Title And Purpose
18.190.020: Definitions
18.190.030: Hearing Officer
18.190.040: Inspection And Right Of Entry
18.190.050: Conditional Use Permits For New Alcohol Beverage Sales Activities
18.190.060: Operational Standards
18.190.070: Permit Applications
18.190.080: Action On Permit Application
18.190.090: Conditions Of Approval
18.190.100: Appeals From A Determination On An Application For Permit
18.190.110: Grounds For Conditional Use Permit Suspension Or Revocation
18.190.120: Investigative Procedures Of Potential Violation Of Conditions Of
Approval
18.190.130: Appeal From Suspension Or Revocation Of Conditional Use Permit
18.190.140: Automatic Deemed Approved Status
18.190.150: Deemed Approved Performance Standards
18.190.160: Notification To Owners Of Establishments Conducting Deemed Approved
Activities
18.190.170: Deemed Approved Status Procedures
18.190.180: Penalties
18.190.190: Separate Offenses For Each Day
18.190.200: Any Violation Is A Public Nuisance
18.190.210: Injunction As Additional Remedy
18.190.220: Administrative Penalties
18.190.230: Liability For Expenses
18.190.010: TITLE AND PURPOSE:
This chapter shall be known as the city's ALCOHOL BEVERAGE SALES ESTABLISHMENT
REGULATIONS. This chapter requires conditional use permits for newly
established alcohol beverage sales activities, confers deemed approved status
for existing alcohol beverage sales activities that constitute legal
nonconforming uses, and establishes standards and an administrative hearing
process to review violations of those standards in order to protect the general
health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the city and to prevent
nuisance activities where alcohol beverage sales activities occur. The city has
adopted the regulations described in this chapter for the following purposes:
   A.   To protect residential, commercial, industrial, civic and institutional
areas and minimize the adverse impacts of nonconforming and incompatible uses;
   B.   To provide mechanisms to address problems often associated with the
public consumption of alcohol beverages such as litter, loitering, graffiti,
unruly behavior and escalated noise levels, and ensure that alcohol beverage
sales establishments are not the source of public nuisances in the community;
   C.   To provide for properly maintained alcohol beverage sales
establishments so that the negative impacts generated by these activities are
not harmful to the surrounding environment in any way;
   D.   To monitor deemed approved establishments to ensure they do not
substantially change in mode or character of operation;
   E.   To provide opportunities for alcohol beverage sales establishments to
operate in a mutually beneficial relationship to each other and to other
surrounding uses. (Ord. 2791, 2015)
18.190.020: DEFINITIONS:
The meaning and construction of the words and phrases set forth below shall
apply throughout this chapter, except where the context clearly indicates a
different meaning or construction:
   ALCOHOL BEVERAGE: Alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and any liquid or
solid containing alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine or beer, that contains one-half
of one percent or more of alcohol by volume and that is fit for beverage
purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed or combined with other substances,
the sale of which requires an ABC license.
   ALCOHOL BEVERAGE SALES ACTIVITY: The retail sale of alcohol beverages for on
site or off site consumption.
   ALCOHOL BEVERAGE SALES ESTABLISHMENT: An establishment where alcohol
beverage sales activity occurs. Alcohol beverage sales establishments
including, but not limited to, the following recognized types of
establishments: grocery stores, liquor stores, beer and wine stores,
convenience markets, specialty food markets, retail sales establishments, wine
shops, bowling alleys, billiard or game parlors, service stations, social
halls, taverns, cocktail lounges, dance halls, nightclubs, bars, and alcohol
beverage tasting rooms. This definition excludes fast food establishments,
restaurants (serving of alcohol beverages with meals only), manufacturing,
wholesale, and temporary events.
   CALIFORNIA DEPARTMENT OF ALCOHOL BEVERAGE CONTROL OR ABC: The department of
the state of California empowered to act pursuant to article 20, section 22, of
the California constitution and authorized to administer the provisions of the
alcohol beverage control act.
   CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL: Requirements that must be carried out by a new
alcohol beverage sales activity in connection with a conditional use permit, or
by a legal nonconforming alcohol beverage sales activity to comply with deemed
approved performance standards to retain its deemed approved status.
   DEEMED APPROVED ACTIVITY: Any legal nonconforming alcohol beverage sales
activity. Such activity shall be considered a deemed approved activity as long
as it complies with the deemed approved performance standards set forth in
section
18.190.150 of this chapter.
   DEEMED APPROVED STATUS: The permitted use of land for a deemed approved
activity. Deemed approved status replaces legal nonconforming status with
respect to an alcohol beverage sales activity and remains in effect as long as
the activity complies with the deemed approved provisions and performance
standards.
   ILLEGAL ACTIVITY: An activity which has been determined to be in
noncompliance with the deemed approved provisions and performance standards.
Such an activity shall lose its deemed approved status and shall no longer be
considered a deemed approved activity.
   LEGAL NONCONFORMING ALCOHOL BEVERAGE SALES ACTIVITY OR LEGAL NONCONFORMING
ACTIVITY: An alcohol beverage sales activity which was a nonconforming use
pursuant to the city's nonconforming use regulations and for which a valid
state of California ABC license had been issued and used in the exercise of the
rights and privileges conferred by the license at a time immediately prior to
the effective date hereof. Such an activity shall be considered a deemed
approved activity and shall no longer be considered a legal nonconforming
activity.
   OPERATIONAL STANDARDS: Regulations for the business practice activities and
land use for locations with a conditional use permit or those further
requirements imposed to achieve these goals. Operational standards constitute
requirements which must be complied with by an establishment in order to
maintain its conditional use permit.
   PERFORMANCE STANDARDS: Regulations for the business practice activities and
land use for locations with deemed approved status or those further
requirements imposed to achieve these goals. Performance standards constitute
requirements which must be complied with by an establishment in order to retain
its deemed approved status.
   PERMIT: A conditional use permit issued pursuant to this chapter.
   PERMITTEE: The individual or entity that owns an alcohol beverage sales
establishment and to whom a conditional use permit to operate an alcohol
beverage sales establishment has been issued by the city.
   RESTAURANT: A bona fide eating establishment where a dining area is provided
to eat meals that are prepared and served on the premises and alcohol beverage
sales do not exceed fifty percent (50%) of all sales at any time.
   SURROGATE SALES: The purchasing of alcohol by an individual on behalf of
another individual, typically an adult purchasing alcohol on behalf of or for
consumption by a minor. (Ord. 2791, 2015)
18.190.030: HEARING OFFICER:
The administrative hearing officer ("hearing officer") shall be a designated
person as described in subsection
1.22.100A of this code who shall conduct public hearings and make
recommendations intended to encourage and achieve the compliance of particular
alcohol beverage sale establishments with the provisions of this chapter. This
section is not intended to restrict the powers and duties otherwise pertaining
to other city officers in the field of monitoring and ensuring the harmony of
alcohol beverage sales activities in the city. (Ord. 2791, 2015)
18.190.040: INSPECTION AND RIGHT OF ENTRY:
The sale of alcohol beverages is a closely regulated industry. The officials
responsible for enforcement of this code, and their duly authorized
representatives, may enter on any site or into any structure for the purpose of
investigation provided they shall do so in a reasonable manner whenever they
have cause to suspect a violation of any provision of this chapter or whenever
necessary to the investigation of violations of the conditions of approval or
deemed approved performance standards prescribed in this chapter. If an owner,
occupant or agent refuses permission to enter, inspect or investigate, the
officials or their representatives may seek an inspection warrant under the
provisions of Code Of Civil Procedure section 1822.50 et seq. All such
inspections shall be conducted in compliance with the fourth amendment to the
United States constitution. (Ord. 2791, 2015)
18.190.050: CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS FOR NEW ALCOHOL BEVERAGE SALES ACTIVITIES:
The general purposes of these regulations are to protect and promote the public
health, safety, comfort, convenience, prosperity and general welfare by
requiring consideration and approval of a land use permit before a new alcohol
beverage sales activity will be permitted. This chapter alone does not allow or
permit alcohol beverage sales activities, but only applies to these activities
where otherwise allowed or permitted within an applicable land use or zoning
district. All new alcohol beverage sales establishments are required to comply
with the operational standards and objectives set forth in this chapter.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, no new alcohol beverage sales
establishment may be established unless a conditional use permit is first
obtained in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. The provisions of
this chapter are intended to complement the state of California alcohol related
laws. The city does not intend to replace or usurp any powers vested in the
ABC. (Ord. 2791, 2015)
18.190.060: OPERATIONAL STANDARDS:
All new alcohol beverage sales establishments shall be designed, constructed,
and operated to conform to all of the following operational standards:
   A.   That the establishment does not result in adverse effects to the
health, welfare, peace or safety of persons visiting, residing, working, or
conducting business in the surrounding area.
   B.   That the establishment does not jeopardize or endanger the public
health or safety of persons visiting, residing, working, or conducting business
in the surrounding area.
   C.   That the establishment does not result in repeated nuisance activities
within its premises or in close proximity of the premises, including, but not
limited to, disturbance of the peace, illegal drug activity, public
drunkenness, drinking in public, harassment of passersby, gambling,
prostitution, sale of stolen goods, public urination, theft, assaults,
batteries, acts of vandalism, littering, loitering, graffiti, illegal parking,
excessive loud noises, especially in the late night or early morning hours,
traffic violations, curfew violations, lewd conduct, or police detentions and
arrests.
   D.   That the establishment complies with all provisions of local, state
and/or federal laws, regulations or orders, including, but not limited to,
those of the ABC, California Business And Professions Code sections 24200,
24200.6, and 25612.5, as well as any condition imposed on any permits issued
pursuant to applicable laws, regulations or orders. This includes compliance
with annual city business license taxes.
   E.   That the establishment's upkeep and operating characteristics are
compatible with, and will not adversely affect the livability or appropriate
development of abutting properties and the surrounding neighborhood.
   F.   That the owners and all employees of the establishment complete an
approved course in "responsible beverage sales" (RBS) within sixty (60) days of
hire for employees hired after the passage of this chapter, or within six (6)
months of the passage of this chapter for existing employees. To satisfy this
requirement, a certified program must meet the standards of the California
coordinating council on responsible beverage service (CCC/RBS) or other
certifying/licensing body designated by the state of California.
A copy of these operational standards, any applicable ABC or city operating
conditions, and any training requirements shall be posted in at least one
prominent place within the interior of the establishment where it will be
readily visible and legible to the employees and patrons of the establishment.
(Ord. 2791, 2015)
18.190.070: PERMIT APPLICATIONS:
Any person, association, partnership, corporation or other entity desiring to
obtain an alcohol beverage sales activity conditional use permit shall file an
application with the city's development services department on a form provided
by the city. The application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable
application processing fee in an amount established by resolution of the city
council. The application for a conditional use permit shall contain the
following information:
   A.   The name, address and telephone number of the applicant. If the
applicant is a corporation, the applicant shall set forth the name of the
corporation exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation. An applicant
corporation or partnership shall designate one of its officers or general
partners to act as its responsible management officer.
   B.   The name, address, and telephone number of the person who shall manage
and operate the establishment.
   C.   The name, address, and telephone number of a person authorized to
accept service of legal notices.
   D.   The proposed business name of the alcohol beverage sales establishment
and description of all operating aspects of the proposed business.
   E.   The type of ABC license the applicant is seeking for the alcohol
beverage sales establishment.
   F.   The street address of the proposed establishment and the assessor
parcel number for the property.
   G.   A site plan for the property depicting the location of the building
housing the alcohol beverage sales activity on the property, and all existing
and proposed parking, exterior lighting, signage, and landscaping, trash
enclosures, waiting or queuing areas.
   H.   Any other information determined reasonably necessary by the city to
accomplish the purposes of this chapter.
The application shall be forwarded to the development services department which
may refer the application to other city departments to determine whether the
premises where the alcohol beverage sales establishment will be located,
complies with the city's building, health, zoning and fire ordinances or other
applicable ordinances or laws. City departments may conduct an inspection of
the premises to determine compliance with the ordinances and other laws they
administer. City departments may prepare reports summarizing their inspections
and recommending whether to approve or deny the application based on their
inspections. (Ord. 2791, 2015)
18.190.080: ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATION:
The planning commission may approve issuance of the conditional use permit to
allow a new alcohol beverage sales establishment upon making the following
findings:
   A.   The establishment is located in a zoning district in which the
establishment is a conditionally permitted use.
   B.   That the operations of the establishment do not cause or result in
adverse effects to the health, welfare, peace or safety of persons visiting,
residing, working, or conducting business in the surrounding area.
   C.   That the establishment does not jeopardize or endanger the public
health or safety of persons visiting, residing, working or conducting business
in the surrounding area.
   D.   A finding of "public convenience and necessity" 1 , if the activity
will be located in an area that has been determined by the ABC to have an undue
concentration of licenses as defined in Business And Professions Code section
23958.4(a).
   E.   That the operations of the establishment will not aggravate existing
problems in the neighborhood created by the sale of alcohol such as disturbance
of the peace, illegal drug activity, public drunkenness, drinking in public,
harassment of passersby, gambling, prostitution, sale of stolen goods, public
urination, theft, assaults, batteries, acts of vandalism, littering, loitering,
graffiti, illegal parking, excessive loud noises, especially in the late night
or early morning hours, traffic violations, curfew violations, lewd conduct, or
police detentions and arrests.
   F.   The establishment will not detrimentally affect nearby neighborhoods
considering the distance of the alcohol establishment to residential buildings,
schools, parks, playgrounds or recreational areas, nonprofit youth facilities,
places of worship, hospitals, alcohol or other drug abuse recovery or treatment
facilities, social service offices, or other alcohol beverages sales activity
establishments.
   G.   The establishment will otherwise be compatible with existing and
potential uses within the surrounding area. (Ord. 2791, 2015)
 
Notes
1 1. BPC § 23958.4(b)(2).
18.190.090: CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL:
Reasonable conditions of approval that may be imposed include, but are not
limited to, the following:
   A.   Sound Walls: If the deemed approved activity abuts residential areas a
sound wall may be required between the establishment conducting the deemed
approved activity and the abutting residential areas. The sound wall must
comply with all state and local requirements for construction and location and
must not obstruct the view of the building and parking areas from the street.
Vegetation may be required to be planted along the sound wall to improve the
appearance of the sound wall.
   B.   Trash Receptacles: Permanent, nonflammable trash receptacles may be
required to be located at convenient locations appropriately screened from view
outside the establishment and in any establishment parking area. The operators
of the establishment may be required to remove on a daily basis, or more
frequently if needed to maintain a litter free environment, all trash from
these receptacles and from the sidewalk adjacent to the establishment. The
operators of the establishment also may be required to remove at least three
(3) times per week all trash originating from its establishment deposited on
public property within two hundred fifty feet (250') of any boundary of its
premises.
   C.   Pay Telephones: Pay telephones on the site of the establishment may
either be: 1) prohibited; or 2) required to be of the type that only allow
outgoing calls and be located in a visible and well lighted location.
   D.   Program: A "complaint response community relations" program established
and maintained by the establishment conducting the deemed approved activity may
be required. The program may include the following:
      1.   Posting at the entry of the establishment a sign providing the
telephone number for the area commander of the local police department
substation to any requesting individual.
      2.   Coordinating efforts with the police department to monitor community
complaints about the establishment activities.
      3.   Having a representative of the establishment meet with neighbors or
the applicable neighborhood association on a regular basis and at their request
attempt to resolve any neighborhood complaints regarding the establishment.
   E.   Activities: If appropriate, the following activities may be prohibited
on the premises: pool or billiard tables, football or pinball games, arcade
style video and electronic games, and amusement devices.
   F.   Prohibited Products: To discourage nuisance activities, an off site
alcohol beverage sales establishment may be prohibited from selling one or more
of the following products:
      1.   Wine or distilled spirits in containers of less than seven hundred
fifty milliliters (750 ml).
      2.   Malt beverage products with alcohol content greater than five and
one-half percent (51/2%) by volume.
      3.   Wine with an alcohol content greater than fourteen percent (14%) by
volume unless aged at least two (2) years.
      4.   Single containers of beer or malt liquor.
      5.   Containers of beer or malt liquor not in their original factory
packages of 6-packs or greater.
      6.   Containers of beer or malt liquor larger than twenty four (24) to
thirty nine (39) ounces.
      7.   Distilled spirits in bottles or containers smaller than three
hundred seventy five milliliters (375 ml).
      8.   Cooler products, either wine or malt beverage based, in less than 4-
pack quantities.
   G.   Chilled Alcohol Beverages: An off site alcohol beverage sales activity
may be prohibited from maintaining refrigerated or otherwise chilled alcohol
beverages on the premises.
   H.   Hours Of Operation: In off site alcohol beverage sales activity, the
sale of alcohol beverages may be restricted to certain hours of each day of the
week unless limited further by the ABC.
   I.   Cups: In off site alcohol beverage sales activity, the sale or
distribution to the customer of paper or plastic cups in quantities less than
their usual and customary packaging may be prohibited.
   J.   Signs: The following signs may be required to be prominently posted in
a readily visible manner in English, Spanish, and the predominant language of
the patrons:
      1.   "California State Law Prohibits The Sale Of Alcohol Beverages To
Persons Under 21 Years Of Age".
      2.   "No Loitering Or Public Drinking".
      3.   "It Is Illegal To Possess An Open Container Of Alcohol In The
Vicinity Of This Establishment".
   K.   Presentation Of Documents: A copy of the conditions of approval and the
ABC license may be required to be kept on the premises of the establishment and
presented to any law enforcement officer or authorized state or city official
upon request.
   L.   Mitigating Alcohol Related Problems: The establishment may be required
to operate in a manner appropriate with mitigating alcohol related problems
that negatively impact those individuals living or working in the neighborhood
including, but not limited to, sales to minors, surrogate sales, the
congregation of individuals, violence on or near the premises, drunkenness,
public urination, solicitation, drug dealing, drug use, loud noise and litter.
   M.   Drug Paraphernalia: The establishment may be prohibited from selling
drug/tobacco paraphernalia products as defined in Health And Safety Code
sections 11014.5 and 11364.5. "Drug paraphernalia" means all equipment,
products and materials of any kind that are used, intended for use or designed
for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting,
manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing,
testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing,
injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body a
controlled substance in violation of the California uniform controlled
substances act commencing with Health And Safety Code section 11000.
   N.   Loitering: The establishment's operators or employees may be required
to discourage loiterers and to ask persons loitering longer than fifteen (15)
minutes to leave the area and contact local law enforcement officials for
enforcement of applicable trespassing and loitering laws if persons requested
to leave fail to do so.
   O.   Security Cameras: The establishment may be required to implement a
video camera safety plan which may include:
      1.   Digital video camera system which records activity of patrons and
employees at service counters, entrances and exits, and primary parking areas.
      2.   Video recordings must be stored and retrievable for a minimum period
of seven (7) days from the time of recording.
      3.   Video clarity must be such that a person's facial features can be
identified from the video.
      4.   The video system must be engaged, and recording at all times, while
the establishment is open to the public. The system must be maintained in
working order at all times.
      5.   The video system must be approved by the Redlands police department
before it is installed to ensure compliance with city requirements, and
approved again after the system is operational.
   P.   Security Guards: An establishment may be required to retain a specified
number of security guards. The number of security guards shall vary based upon
the specific facts and circumstances of each establishment site and operation.
All security guards shall have all required state and city permits and
licenses.
   Q.   Vegetation: Any required exterior vegetation shall be planted in
accordance with this code, and shall be maintained in a manner that minimizes
its use as a hiding place. (Ord. 2791, 2015)
18.190.100: APPEALS FROM A DETERMINATION ON AN APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
Pursuant to sections
18.192.070 and
18.192.080 of this chapter, any applicant or other person aggrieved by a
decision of the planning commission on an application for a permit required by
this chapter may appeal the decision to the city council. (Ord. 2791, 2015)
18.190.110: GROUNDS FOR CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION:
An alcohol beverage sales establishment conditional use permit may be suspended
by the planning commission and/or the city council for up to one year, or
revoked, for failure to comply with operational standards, training
requirements or conditions imposed through the conditional use permit in
accordance with section
18.192.100 of this code. Notice of intention to suspend or revoke shall be in
writing and shall state the grounds therefor. Notice shall be mailed by U.S.
first class mail and certified mail return receipt requested. (Ord. 2791, 2015)
18.190.120: INVESTIGATIVE PROCEDURES OF POTENTIAL VIOLATION OF CONDITIONS OF
APPROVAL:
The city shall appoint a hearing officer to conduct hearings, make findings and
determine whether violations of this chapter, including the operational
standards, conditions of approval as well as whether undue negative impacts or
public nuisance activities have occurred, are occurring, or are likely to occur
in the future. The hearing officer shall exercise all powers relating to the
conduct of the administrative hearing as set forth in title 1, chapter 1.22 of
this code.
Upon the city's receipt of a complaint from the public, city official, or any
other interested person, that a conditional use permit activity is in violation
of the operational standards and/or conditions of approval set forth in this
chapter, the following procedure shall be followed:
   A.   The city code enforcement officer (or other designated city
representative) shall assess the nature of the complaint and its validity by
conducting an on site observation and inspection of the premises to assess the
activity's compliance with operational standards and/or conditions of approval.
The enforcement officer shall provide the business owner and any manager on the
premises during the on site inspection with a copy of any complaint made in
writing or with information about the details of any oral complaint.
   B.   If violations are observed during the observation and inspection, the
enforcement officer shall record the violations and send via both U.S. first
class mail and certified mail return receipt requested a "notice to abate" to
the owner of the activity and the property owner, if not the same person or
entity. Such "notice to abate" shall notify the owner and property owner of the
violations recorded by the officer and that continued noncompliance may result
in the penalties and shall set forth a reasonable period of not less than
thirty (30) calendar days within which to abate any violations.
   C.   At the end of the abatement period prescribed in the "notice to abate",
the code enforcement officer shall conduct a reinspection visit. If the
violations have not been abated within the prescribed abatement period and the
officer determines that it is reasonably unlikely that further efforts to
compel compliance with operational standards and/or conditions of approval by
the owner of the activity is likely, the officer shall determine that the
activity is in persistent violation of the operational standards and/or
conditions of approval and shall refer the matter and all material evidence to
the hearing officer for adjudication. A copy of the officer's determination of
continued noncompliance shall be sent via both U.S. first class mail and
certified mail return receipt requested to the owner of the deemed approved
activity and the property owner, if not the same person or entity.
   D.   Upon referral from the code enforcement officer that an activity is in
persistent violation of the operational standards and/or conditions of approval
of this chapter, the operating status of the activity in question shall be
reviewed by the hearing officer at a public hearing. The purpose of the
administrative hearing is to receive information as to whether the activity is
in compliance with the operational standards and/or conditions of approval.
   E.   The hearing officer shall determine whether the activity is in
compliance with the operational standards and/or conditions of approval. Based
on this determination, the officer may continue the conditional use status for
the use in question, may impose administrative penalties for violations of the
operational standards and/or conditions of approval or may make a
recommendation to the planning commission to revoke the activity's conditional
use permit. If the officer determines instead to impose further, new conditions
on the activity, such conditions shall be based upon the information then
before the officer. In reaching a determination as to whether a use has
violated the operational standards, or as to the appropriateness of imposing
conditions on a use, assessing administrative penalties, or the amount of
administrative penalties to assess, the hearing officer may consider:
      1.   The length of time the activity has been out of compliance with the
performance standards.
      2.   The impact of the violation of the operational standards and/or
conditions of approval on the community.
      3.   Any information regarding the owner of the activity's efforts to
remedy the violation of the operational standards and/or conditions of
approval.
   F.   "Efforts to remedy" shall include, but are not limited to:
      1.   Timely calls to the police department that are placed by the owner
of the deemed approved activity, his or her employees, or agents.
      2.   Requesting that those persons engaging in activities causing
violations of the operational standards and/or conditions of approval cease
those activities, unless the owner of the activity, or his or her employees or
agents feels that their personal safety would be threatened in making that
request.
      3.   Making improvements to the establishment's property or operations,
including, but not limited to, the installation of lighting sufficient to
illuminate the area within the use's property line, the installation of
security cameras, clear unobstructed windows, clean sidewalks and graffiti
abated within three (3) days.
   G.   The decision of the hearing officer shall be final unless appealed to
the planning commission, by written form approved by the city, within ten (10)
days after the date of the decision.
   H.   The decision of the planning commission shall be final unless appealed
to the city council, by written form approved by the city, within ten (10) days
after the date of the decision. (Ord. 2791, 2015)
18.190.130: APPEAL FROM SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT:
Any applicant or other person aggrieved by a decision of the planning
commission from a suspension or revocation of a conditional use permit may
appeal the decision to the city council. (Ord. 2791, 2015)
18.190.140: AUTOMATIC DEEMED APPROVED STATUS:
The deemed approved alcohol beverage sales regulations shall apply to all
alcohol beverage sales activities for on site or off site consumption that have
been legally established and operating, without a conditional use permit,
within the city as of the effective date hereof. All alcohol beverage sales
activities that were legal nonconforming activities immediately prior to the
effective date hereof shall automatically become deemed approved activities as
of the effective date hereof and shall no longer be considered legal
nonconforming activities. Each deemed approved activity shall retain its deemed
approved status as long as it complies with the performance standards of this
chapter. The occurrence of any of the following shall terminate the deemed
approved status of the alcohol beverage sales activity and require the issuance
of a conditional use permit in order to continue the alcohol beverage sales
activity:
   A.   An existing alcohol beverage sales establishment changes its activity
so that ABC requires a different type of license.
   B.   There is a substantial modification to the mode or character of
operation.
   C.   As used herein, the phrase "substantial change of mode or character of
operation" includes, but is not limited to, the following:
      1.   The off site alcohol beverage sales establishment increases the
floor or land area or shelf space devoted to the display or sales of any
alcohol beverage.
      2.   The on site alcohol beverage sales establishment increases the floor
or land area or shelf space devoted to the display, sales or service of any
alcohol beverage.
      3.   The off site or on site alcohol beverage sales establishment expands
the sale or service of any alcohol beverages and/or increases the number of
customer seats primarily devoted to the sale or service of any alcohol
beverages.
      4.   The off site or on site alcohol beverage sales establishment extends
the hours of operation.
      5.   The alcohol beverage sales establishment proposes to reinstate
alcohol sales after the ABC license has been either revoked or suspended for a
period greater than thirty (30) days by ABC.
      6.   The alcohol beverage sales establishment voluntarily discontinues
active operation for more than ninety (90) consecutive days or ceases to be
licensed by the ABC.
   D.   A substantial change in the mode of character of operation shall not
include:
      1.   Reestablishment, restoration or repair of an existing alcohol
beverage sales establishment on the same premises after the premises have been
rendered totally or partially inaccessible by a riot, insurrection, toxic
accident or act of God, provided that the reestablishment, restoration or
repair does not increase the sales or service of any alcohol beverage, extend
the hours of operation of any establishment or add to the capacity, floor or
land area or shelf space devoted to alcohol beverages of any establishment that
sells or serves any alcohol beverages.
      2.   Temporary closure for not more than ninety (90) days in cases of
vacation or illness or for purposes of repair, renovation, or remodeling if
that repair, renovation, or remodeling does not change the nature of the
premises and does not increase the sales or service of any alcohol beverage,
extend the hours of operation of any establishment, or add to the capacity,
floor or land area, or shelf space devoted to alcohol beverages of any
establishment that sells or serves any alcohol beverages.
   E.   If it is determined by the city that there has been a discontinuance of
active operation for ninety (90) consecutive days or a cessation of ABC
licensing, it may be resumed only upon the granting of a conditional use permit
as provided in this chapter. The property owner shall be notified by the city
of the termination of the deemed approved status and shall be informed of the
property owner's right to appeal the city's decision to the hearing officer.
(Ord. 2791, 2015)
18.190.150: DEEMED APPROVED PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
The provisions of this section shall be known as the deemed approved
performance standards. The purpose of these standards is to control dangerous
or objectionable environmental effects of alcohol beverage sales activities.
These standards shall apply to all deemed approved alcohol beverage sales
activities that hold deemed approved status pursuant to this chapter. An
alcohol beverage sales activity shall retain its deemed approved status only if
it conforms to all operational standards identified in section
18.190.060 of this chapter. (Ord. 2791, 2015)
18.190.160: NOTIFICATION TO OWNERS OF ESTABLISHMENTS CONDUCTING DEEMED APPROVED
ACTIVITIES:
The city or its hearing officer shall notify the owner of each deemed approved
activity, and also, if not the same, any property owner at the address shown on
the city's property tax assessment records, of the activity's deemed approved
status. The notice shall be sent by U.S. first class mail and certified mail
return receipt requested and shall include a copy of the performance standards
in this chapter with the requirement that they be posted in a conspicuous and
unobstructed place visible from the entrance of the establishment for public
review. This notice shall also provide that the activity is required to comply
with all performance standards and that the activity is required to comply with
all other aspects of the deemed approved regulations. Failure of any person to
receive notice given pursuant to this chapter shall not affect the deemed
approved status of the activity. (Ord. 2791, 2015)
18.190.170: DEEMED APPROVED STATUS PROCEDURES:
The city shall appoint a hearing officer to conduct hearings, make findings and
determine whether violations of this chapter, including the deemed approved
performance standards, conditions of approval, undue negative impacts or public
nuisance activity, have occurred, are occurring, or are likely to occur in the
future. The hearing officer shall exercise all powers relating to the conduct
of the administrative hearing unless or until the decision of the hearing
officer is appealed to the planning commission. Upon the city's receipt of a
complaint from the public, the city's police department, city official or any
other interested person that a deemed approved use is in violation of the
performance standards set forth in this chapter, the procedures identified in
section
18.190.120 of this chapter shall be followed. (Ord. 2791, 2015)
18.190.180: PENALTIES:
Any person who violates, causes, or permits another person to violate any
provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, except as otherwise
determined by this code and the city attorney. Any person convicted of either
an infraction or misdemeanor under the provisions of this chapter shall be
punished by a fine, imprisonment, or both, in accordance with state law. (Ord.
2791, 2015)
18.190.190: SEPARATE OFFENSES FOR EACH DAY:
Any violator shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day
during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this chapter is
committed, continued, permitted, or caused by such violator and shall be
punishable accordingly. (Ord. 2791, 2015)
18.190.200: ANY VIOLATION IS A PUBLIC NUISANCE:
In addition to the penalties provided in this chapter, any use or condition
caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be and is declared to be a public nuisance and may be abated as
such by the city. (Ord. 2791, 2015)
18.190.210: INJUNCTION AS ADDITIONAL REMEDY:
Any violation of any provision of this chapter shall be and is declared to be
contrary to the public interest and shall, at the discretion of the city,
create a cause of action for injunctive relief. (Ord. 2791, 2015)
18.190.220: ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTIES:
In addition to any other penalties provided in this chapter, the administrative
penalties set forth in title 1, chapter 1.22 of this code shall apply for any
violation of this chapter. (Ord. 2791, 2015)
18.190.230: LIABILITY FOR EXPENSES:
In addition to the punishment provided by law, a violator is liable for such
costs, expenses and disbursements paid or incurred by the city or any of its
contractors in correction, abatement and prosecution of the violation.
Reinspection fees to ascertain compliance with previously noticed or cited
violations shall be charged against the owner of the establishment conducting
the deemed approved activity or owner of the property where the establishment
is located. The inspection official shall give the owner or other responsible
party of such affected premises a written notice showing the itemized cost of
such chargeable service and requesting payment thereof. Should the bill not be
paid in the required time the charges may be placed as a lien against the
property. (Ord. 2791, 2015)
CHAPTER 18.192
CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS
SECTION:
18.192.010: Purpose
18.192.020: Specific Uses Permitted Subject To Conditional Use Permit
18.192.030: Application; Submittal Requirements
18.192.040: Consideration Of Permit; Public Hearing By Planning Commission
18.192.050: Public Improvement And Dedication Requirements
18.192.060: Approval Of Permit; Findings
18.192.070: Appeal From Planning Commission Decision
18.192.080: Council Action In Absence Of Appeal
18.192.090: Conditional Use Permit; Expiration
18.192.100: Revocation Or Voiding Of Permit
18.192.110: Reapplication; Waiting Period
18.192.120: Violation
18.192.010: PURPOSE:
   A.   The purpose of a conditional use permit (CUP) is to establish a review
process for the development of a use that may be desirable under appropriate
circumstances but is not permitted by right in the applicable zone. The intent
of this chapter is to permit review of such proposed uses on a case by case
basis to determine whether, and under what conditions, the use may be approved
at a given site. Further, the intent of this chapter is that each use be
developed so as to fully protect the public health, safety and welfare of the
city. To provide this protection, conditions may be imposed on a use to address
potential adverse effects. The privileges and conditions of a CUP are a
covenant that runs with the land and, in addition to binding the permittee,
bind each successor in interest. A CUP is granted at the discretion of the
city, and is not an automatic right of any applicant. (Ord. 2503 § 1, 2003)
18.192.020: SPECIFIC USES PERMITTED SUBJECT TO CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT:
   A.   Uses listed in the city's zones as "uses permitted subject to a
conditional use permit" may be permitted in such zones pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter.
   B.   The following uses may be permitted in any zone, except where expressly
prohibited, when such uses are determined by the city to be essential or
desirable for the public health, safety and welfare in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter:
      Airport, heliport.
      Cemeteries, columbariums, mausoleums.
      Convalescent homes, board and care homes.
      Development of natural resources (excluding drilling for or producing
oil, gas or other hydrocarbon substances or the production of rock and gravel),
together with the necessary buildings, apparatus or appurtenances incident
thereto.
      Educational institutions, public or private.
      Golf courses, excepting driving ranges and miniature courses.
      Governmental enterprises.
      Hospitals and medical clinics.
      Meeting places of nonprofit civic groups or community organizations other
than social or fraternal clubs.
      Neighborhood stores and shopping centers.
      Planned residential developments, subject to the provisions of
chapter 18.144 of this title.
      Problem Areas: In those areas that are so located that their relationship
to other uses of land or to topographical features, or where existing land
subdivision patterns make use for the zoned purposes impractical, and where one
particular use would be reasonable and desirable, the commission may determine
such a use, if otherwise permitted by ordinance, to be reasonable.
      Public utility structures and service facilities.
      Religious places of worship.
      Transitional Uses: A use, or combination of uses that will provide an
orderly bridge between more intensive and less intensive uses:
      1.   Adjacent to commercial districts, excepting C-1 and C-2:
Administrative and professional offices, off street parking, motels and hotels;
no retail sales are permitted unless proposed in conjunction with a complex of
uses whereby the adjacent residential districts are buffered by the uses
specifically listed as permitted;
      2.   Adjacent To Industrial Districts: Administrative and professional
offices, and off street parking; no retail sales are permitted;
      3.   Adjacent To Administrative-Professional Districts: Off street
parking, and administrative and professional offices, provided property abuts a
major or secondary highway and is not separated from the A-P district by a
street. (Ord. 2985, 2025: Ord. 2503 § 1, 2003)
18.192.030: APPLICATION; SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS:
Applications for a CUP shall be made to the planning commission on forms
prescribed by the city. The applicant for a CUP shall be the property owner or
the authorized agent of the property owner as evidenced by written document. A
completed application and payment of all applicable fees as established by the
city shall be submitted to the community development department. The
application for a CUP shall include a site plan prepared to scale, showing
accurately and with complete dimensions, all buildings and structures proposed
and existing on property. (Ord. 2503 § 1, 2003)
18.192.040: CONSIDERATION OF PERMIT; PUBLIC HEARING BY PLANNING COMMISSION:
   A.   The planning commission shall have the authority to approve,
conditionally approve or deny an application for a CUP. In instances when an
application for a CUP is processed concurrently with other land use
entitlements requiring action by the city council, the planning commission
shall make a recommendation on the CUP application to the city council.
   B.   A public hearing shall be held by the planning commission after a
complete application has been filed and legally required notice has been given
for the hearing. Notice of the hearing shall be published in a newspaper of
general circulation and be mailed to owners of property within a radius of
three hundred feet (300') of the external boundaries of the property described
in the application not less than ten (10) days before the date set for the
commission hearing. For this purpose, the name and address of such owners shall
be as shown on the latest official assessors roll of the county.
   C.   At the public hearing, the planning commission shall review the
application and statements, plans and drawings submitted therewith and shall
review evidence concerning the proposed use and the proposed conditions under
which the use would be operated and maintained. The planning commission shall
make findings and its decision on whether to approve or deny the application
based upon substantial evidence in the form of verbal or written testimony
presented during the public hearing. (Ord. 2503 § 1, 2003)
18.192.050: PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT AND DEDICATION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   The city may require the dedication of land and improvements for
streets, alleys, drainage, public utilities, bridle trails and flood control
purposes that are reasonably related to the proposed use of the project and
which are necessary for the orderly development of the site and surrounding
properties. Improvements include, but are not limited to:
      1.   Grading and drainage structures;
      2.   Curbs and gutters;
      3.   Sidewalks;
      4.   Street pavement;
      5.   Water service;
      6.   Sanitary sewer facilities and connections;
      7.   Services from public utilities;
      8.   Street trees;
      9.   Streetlights and street signs.
   B.   Security, in a form acceptable to the city, may be required by the city
to ensure that any public improvements required in connection with the approval
of a CUP are constructed and completed prior to the issuance of any building
permit or certificate of occupancy for the CUP. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
the city shall not require a bond as security for any improvements not
reasonably related to the use approved in the CUP. (Ord. 2503 § 1, 2003)
18.192.060: APPROVAL OF PERMIT; FINDINGS:
A CUP may be approved or conditionally approved only if the planning
commission, or the city council as appropriate, makes the following findings:
   A.   That the proposed development will not adversely affect the applicable
land use plans of the city;
   B.   That the proposed development will not be detrimental to the public
health, safety and welfare;
   C.   That the proposed development will comply to the maximum extent
feasible with the regulations of the city's general plan, the applicable zoning
district and the city's development standards;
   D.   That the proposed development is appropriate at the proposed location.
(Ord. 2503 § 1, 2003)
18.192.070: APPEAL FROM PLANNING COMMISSION DECISION:
   A.   Within ten (10) days of the planning commissions decision, any person
may appeal the decision to the city council. The appeal shall be made on forms
provided by the city, and upon payment of the fees established by resolution of
the city council.
   B.   The city council shall forthwith hold a public hearing on the CUP after
the hearing is noticed as set forth in section
18.192.040 of this chapter.
   C.   After such public hearing, the city council shall either approve,
modify or disapprove the CUP based upon findings required by section
18.192.050 of this chapter. (Ord. 2503 § 1, 2003)
18.192.080: COUNCIL ACTION IN ABSENCE OF APPEAL:
   A.   Within ten (10) days after the commission's decision, or at its next
regularly scheduled city council meeting after the commission's decision,
whichever is later, the city council may, if determined to be in the public
interest to do so, appeal any decision of the commission.
   B.   Notice of the city council hearing shall be published and mailed as
required by section
18.192.040 of this chapter.
   C.   After the hearing, the city council shall either approve, modify or
disapprove the CUP. (Ord. 2503 § 1, 2003)
18.192.090: CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT; EXPIRATION:
   A.   Except for a CUP issued for a planned residential development and,
unless otherwise specified by the planning commission or city council in the
conditions of approval for a CUP, a CUP shall expire two (2) years from the
date of its approval unless the holder of the permit obtains a building permit
or, in those instances where no building permit is required, a certificate of
occupancy for the use, within such two (2) year period. The planning commission
may, upon submittal of a written application for a time extension by the holder
of the permit and prior to the expiration of the CUP, grant a one year
extension of time; provided, however, that the total number of extensions for a
CUP shall not exceed three (3).
   B.   Failure to develop the use within the time limits of this section shall
amount to the forfeiture of all development entitlement under the CUP. (Ord.
2985, 2025: Ord. 2503 § 1, 2003)
18.192.100: REVOCATION OR VOIDING OF PERMIT:
   A.   The commission may, after notice and public hearing, revoke any CUP for
noncompliance with any of its conditions.
   B.   Notice shall be mailed to the record owner or lessee of the subject
property not less than twenty (20) days prior to giving public notice. Such
notice shall set forth the noncompliance, and shall request appearance by the
permittee at the time and place specified for the hearing, to show cause why
the CUP should not be revoked.
   C.   Notice shall be given as provided in section
18.192.040 of this chapter.
   D.   Within ten (10) days after the hearing, the planning commission may
revoke or modify the CUP. After revocation, the subject property shall conform
to all regulations of the zone in which it is located. (Ord. 2503 § 1, 2003)
18.192.110: REAPPLICATION; WAITING PERIOD:
Following the denial of a CUP or the revocation of a CUP by the city, no
application for a CUP for the same or substantially the same use on the same or
substantially same site shall be filed within six (6) months of the date of the
denial or the revocation of the CUP. (Ord. 2503 § 1, 2003)
18.192.120: VIOLATION:
It is unlawful for any person to maintain, use or develop any premises without
a CUP if such a permit is required for the use or development, or to maintain,
use or develop any premises contrary to the requirements or conditions of any
existing CUP. (Ord. 2503 § 1, 2003)
CHAPTER 18.193
ADMINISTRATIVE USE PERMIT
SECTION:
18.193.010: Purpose And Authority
18.193.020: Uses Permitted Subject To Administrative Use Permit
18.193.030: Application; Submittal Requirements
18.193.040: Requirements For Administrative Use Permit
18.193.050: Conditions
18.193.060: Determination For Administrative Use Permit; Notice And Public
Hearing
18.193.070: Appeals
18.193.080: Administrative Use Permit; Expiration
18.193.090: Termination Or Revocation Of Permit
18.193.100: Violation
18.193.010: PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY:
   A.   The purpose of this chapter is to create an administrative use permit
process for those land use situations where there is a need to exercise limited
discretion under certain designated types of circumstances. The purpose of an
administrative use permit is to allow the Development Services Director to
exercise this limited discretion and control in those land use situations where
the type of permitted use generally has less potential impact with the
surrounding neighborhood than are those uses for which a conditional use permit
is required.
   B.   The Development Services Director, or his or her designee, as
hereinafter provided, may grant an administrative use permit on terms and
conditions that are harmonious with the general intent and purposes of this
chapter so long as it is shown that the granting of such permit will be
consistent with the purposes of this chapter and the General Plan and will
serve the public health, convenience, safety and welfare. (Ord. 2861, 2018)
18.193.020: USES PERMITTED SUBJECT TO ADMINISTRATIVE USE PERMIT:
   A.   Uses listed in the City's zones as uses permitted subject to an
administrative use permit may be permitted in such zones pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2861, 2018)
18.193.030: APPLICATION; SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS:
Applications for an administrative use permit shall be made as follows:
   A.   On forms prescribed by the Director;
   B.   Signed by the owner of the property, or his or her authorized agent;
   C.   Filed with the Director; and
   D.   Submitted with a site plan. (Ord. 2861, 2018)
18.193.040: REQUIREMENTS FOR ADMINISTRATIVE USE PERMIT:
   A.   Except as otherwise specified in this Code, in granting an
administrative use permit, the Director shall find that:
      1.   The use applied for at the location set forth in the application is
one for which an administrative use permit is authorized by this Code;
      2.   The use is not detrimental to adjacent uses or to uses specifically
permitted in the zone in which the proposed use is to be located;
      3.   The use will be compatible with other uses in the general area in
which the use is proposed to be located;
      4.   The site for the proposed use is adequate in size and shape to
accommodate the use and all of the yards, setbacks, walls, fences, landscaping
and other features required to adjust the use to the existing or future use as
is permitted in the neighborhood;
      5.   The site for the proposed use relates to streets and highways
properly designed and improved to carry the type and quantity of traffic
generated or to be generated by the proposed use; and
      6.   The conditions imposed are necessary to protect the public health,
safety, convenience and welfare. (Ord. 2861, 2018)
18.193.050: CONDITIONS:
Except as otherwise provided in this Code, the Director may impose the same
conditions on an administrative use permit as are allowed to be imposed on a
conditional use permit pursuant to chapter 18.192 of this title. Any conditions
imposed shall be necessary to protect the public health, convenience, safety,
and welfare. (Ord. 2861, 2018)
18.193.060: DETERMINATION FOR ADMINISTRATIVE USE PERMIT; NOTICE AND PUBLIC
HEARING:
   A.   Director To Investigate: Upon the submission of a complete application
for an administrative use permit, the Director shall investigate and hold a
public hearing on the application within sixty (60) days of such submission.
The public hearing may be continued from time to time in the discretion of the
Director.
   B.   Notice Of Application: Within fourteen (14) days of the application
being deemed complete, notice of the proposal and project description shall be
mailed to all property owners within three hundred feet (300') of the property
for which the administrative use permit is being sought, mailed to all other
parties who request notice and provided to all Planning Commission members. The
notice shall also set a date and time for the Director's public hearing on the
application at which all interested persons may appear and provide testimony
related to the application.
   C.   Decision And Notice: At the conclusion of the hearing, the Director
shall render a decision in writing to approve, approve with conditions, or
disapprove the application. Notice of the Director's decision and appeal period
shall be mailed to the applicant, to all property owners within three hundred
feet (300') of the property for which the administrative use permit is being
sought, mailed to all other parties who request notice, and provided to all
Planning Commission members.
   D.   Staff Referral: Within fourteen (14) days of the application being
deemed complete, the Director may refer the administrative use permit
application to the Planning Commission for a decision. (Ord. 2861, 2018)
18.193.070: APPEALS:
   A.   Within ten (10) calendar days of the Development Services Director's
decision on an application, any person may appeal the Director's decision to
the Planning Commission. Appeals by applicants or the public shall be made on
forms provided by the City, and upon payment of the fees established by
resolution of the City Council. The Planning Commission shall forthwith hold a
public hearing after the hearing is noticed as set forth in section
18.192.040 of this title. After such public hearing, the Planning Commission
shall either approve, modify, or disapprove the decision or determination of
the Development Services Director based upon applicable provisions of this
chapter.
   B.   Within ten (10) calendar days of the Planning Commission's decision,
any person may appeal the decision to the City Council. The appeal shall be
made on forms provided by the City, and upon payment of the fees established by
resolution of the City Council. The City Council shall hold a public hearing
after the hearing is noticed as set forth in section
18.192.040 of this title. After such public hearing, the City Council shall
either approve, modify, or disapprove the decision of the Planning Commission
based upon applicable provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2861, 2018)
18.193.080: ADMINISTRATIVE USE PERMIT; EXPIRATION:
   A.   An administrative use permit shall expire one year from the date of its
approval unless the holder of the permit obtains a building permit or, in those
instances where no building permit is required, a certificate of occupancy for
the use, within such one year period. The Development Services Director may,
upon submittal of a written application for a time extension by the holder of
the permit and prior to the expiration of the administrative use permit, grant
an extension of time for a period not to exceed one year; provided, however,
that only one extension may be granted.
   B.   Failure to develop the use within the time limits of this section shall
amount to the forfeiture and nullity of all development entitlement under the
administrative use permit. (Ord. 2861, 2018)
18.193.090: TERMINATION OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
   A.   Termination: An administrative use permit shall terminate when any one
or more of the following occurs:
      1.   The permit is not used within the time specified in the
administrative use permit, or if no date is specified, within one year from the
granting of the permit;
      2.   The use for which the permit has been acquired has been abandoned
for six (6) consecutive months or the owner of the property files a declaration
with the Director that the permit has been abandoned or discontinued; or
      3.   The permit has expired or been revoked.
   B.   Revocation: The Director may, after twenty (20) days' notice by mail to
the permit holder, revoke an administrative use permit on any one or more of
the following grounds:
      1.   The administrative use permit was obtained by fraud;
      2.   The property subject to the administrative use permit has been
utilized contrary to the terms and conditions of approval, or in violation of
any statute, ordinance, law or regulation not otherwise allowed pursuant to the
administrative use permit; or
      3.   The property subject to the administrative use permit is being or
has been exercised in a manner which is detrimental to the public health,
safety and welfare, or so as to constitute a public nuisance.
The decision of the Director to revoke an administrative use permit can be
appealed pursuant to the procedures contained in this chapter. (Ord. 2861,
2018)
18.193.100: VIOLATION:
It is unlawful for any person to develop, use, or maintain any premises without
an administrative use permit if such a permit is required for the use or
development. It is unlawful for any person to develop, use, or maintain any
premises contrary to the requirements or conditions of any existing
administrative use permit, and may be cause for permit revocation. (Ord. 2861,
2018)
CHAPTER 18.194
TEMPORARY HOLIDAY SALES FACILITIES
SECTION:
18.194.010: General Provisions
18.194.020: Permit Procedures
18.194.010: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish regulations governing holiday sales
facilities that are temporary in nature and which are not otherwise permitted
in the zoning district in which they are proposed.
   A.   A "holiday sales facility" means an indoor or outdoor facility
established during the period beginning on September 15 and ending on January
15 which is devoted primarily to the sale of goods and services related to the
holidays occurring during this period (e.g., Halloween pumpkins, Christmas
trees and decorations, and the like). Temporary holiday sales facilities are
permitted in any zoning district.
   B.   All temporary holiday sales facilities shall be subject to the
following requirements:
      1.   Period Of Operation: Holiday sales facilities may be open for
business during any calendar year between September 15 and January 15 only, or
for any portion of such period.
No holiday sales facilities shall be open for business during any calendar year
between January 16 and September 14.
      2.   Merchandise To Be Sold: A holiday sales facility may sell only items
directly associated with those holidays occurring between September 15 and
January 15.
      3.   Electrical Permit: An applicant for a holiday sales facility shall
secure an electrical permit from the city if the facility is to be energized.
      4.   Removal Of Facility: Within fourteen (14) days of its closing, the
holiday sales facility shall be removed and the premises cleared of all debris
and restored to at least as good a condition as existed prior to the
establishment of the facility.
      5.   Fire Prevention Standards: Each holiday sales facility shall comply
with fire prevention standards as approved and enforced by the fire chief.
   C.   Holiday sales facilities may be required, at the discretion of the
approving person/body, to post a cash deposit or other security satisfactory to
the city in an amount sufficient to restore the site of the facility to its
preexisting condition. The property owner shall also provide to the city
written permission for the city to enter the site for cleanup. (Ord. 2355 § 1,
1997)
18.194.020: PERMIT PROCEDURES:
   A.   Application: Applications for holiday sales facilities shall be filed
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The application shall
include payment of a fee as established by resolution of the city council. In
addition, a site plan shall be required to be submitted to the city for a
holiday sales facility.
This site plan shall be drawn to scale with dimensions and shall show the
following:
      1.   The boundaries of the site on which the facility is proposed.
      2.   Proposed access, including the type and location of any proposed
traffic control devices or persons.
      3.   The location of the proposed facility, including all fences,
structures, and vehicles to be used as part of the operation of the facility.
      4.   The location and size of any proposed utility service.
      5.   The method of providing toilet facilities, including the location
and type of any portable toilets.
      6.   The applicant's name, address, and phone number.
      7.   The name, address, and phone number of a person to contact in the
event of an emergency.
   B.   Report Of Decision: Within fifteen (15) days of receiving a completed
application, the director shall prepare a written report stating his/her
decisions and findings. The report shall include the facts and reasons for
granting or denying the application. The report shall be mailed to the
applicant and may, at the discretion of the community development director, be
mailed to all owners of adjacent property via mail or by similar means.
   C.   Appeal Of The Community Development Director's Decision:
      1.   The decision of the community development director is considered
final on the date that the report is issued.
      2.   Any person affected by the determination of the community
development director shall have the right to appeal that determination to the
city council.
      3.   Upon appeal, the city council shall review the decision of the
community development director, hear new evidence and testimony if offered,
and, in deciding the appeal, either affirm, reverse or modify the decision of
the community development director.
   D.   Referral To City Council: The director may, at his/her discretion,
refer an application for a holiday sales facility to the city council for
review and approval. In that event, the city council shall have the authority
to approve or deny the application.
   E.   Conditions: In approving a holiday sales facility, the director or city
council may impose conditions reasonably related to the use and necessary to
protect the public health, safety and welfare.
   F.   Denial Of Application: Any application for a holiday sales facility
which would adversely affect the public health, safety, or welfare shall be
denied. (Ord. 2355 § 1, 1997)
CHAPTER 18.195
TEMPORARY SALES AND SPECIAL EVENT FACILITIES
SECTION:
18.195.010: General Provisions
18.195.020: Permitting Procedures
18.195.010: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish regulations governing certain
temporary or intermittent uses or activities proposed within developed
commercial or industrial zoned properties and to allow temporary retail sales
or other special events which are not related to any holiday event regulated by
chapter 18.194 of this title.
   A.   A "temporary sales and special event facility" (hereinafter "facility
or facilities") means an outdoor facility proposed to be located within
developed commercial or industrial zoned properties that is devoted to the sale
of goods or services for any organization, which represents a variation from
the facility's normal operation or location. Examples include, but are not
limited to:
      1.   Parking lot sales events;
      2.   Automobile sales for dealerships proposing to use off site premises
for an event, and whose principal dealership location is in the city;
      3.   Charitable fundraisers for nonprofit organizations;
      4.   Carnivals, circuses and other entertainment events, excluding
concerts.
   B.   All facilities shall be subject to the following requirements:
      1.   Period Of Operation: The facility may be conducted any time during
the year. The permit issued will allow the operation of the facility for a
maximum of three (3) consecutive days of use. A maximum of four (4) permits may
be issued to any property in any calendar year.
      2.   Site Restrictions: Facilities are prohibited on vacant and
unimproved lots.
      3.   Electrical Permit: An applicant shall secure an electrical permit
should the facility need to be energized.
      4.   Removal Of Facility: Within two (2) days of its closing, the
facility shall be removed and the site cleared of all debris and restored to at
least as good a condition as existed prior to the establishment of the
facility.
      5.   Fire Prevention Standards: Each facility shall comply with fire
prevention standards as approved and enforced by the fire chief.
      6.   Business License: All businesses that apply for a facility permit
must have a city of Redlands business license.
      7.   Other Permits: An applicant shall apply for and obtain all other
permits needed to conduct the facility.
   C.   Facility permit applicants may be required, at the discretion of the
development services director ("director"), to post a cash deposit or other
security satisfactory to the city in an amount sufficient to restore the site
of the facility to its preexisting condition. The applicant shall also provide
the city with written permission for the city to enter the site for cleanup at
the applicant's cost. (Ord. 2763, 2012)
18.195.020: PERMITTING PROCEDURES:
   A.   Application: Applications for a facility permit shall be filed in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The application shall include
written authorization from the property owner, if the applicant is not the
property owner, for the applicant to file the application. The application
shall include payment of a fee as established by resolution of the city
council. In addition, a site plan shall be required to be submitted to the city
for the facility. This site plan shall be drawn to scale and fully dimensioned
and shall show the following:
      1.   The boundaries of the site on which the facility is proposed and the
boundaries of the facility.
      2.   Proposed access, including the type and location of any proposed
traffic control devices or persons.
      3.   The proposed location of the facility, including all fences,
structures and vehicles to be used as part of the operation of the facility.
      4.   The location and size of any proposed utility service, such as
electrical power generators.
      5.   The method for providing restrooms, including the location and type
of any portable toilets, if needed.
      6.   The proposed hours of operation for the facility.
      7.   Any other operation characteristics unique to the facility.
      8.   The applicant's name, address and phone number.
      9.   The name, address and phone number of a person to contact in the
event of an emergency.
   B.   Report Of Decision: Within fifteen (15) days of receiving a completed
application, the director, or his/her designee, will prepare a written report
stating the facts and reasons for granting or denying the application. The
report will be mailed to the applicant and may, at the discretion of the
director, be sent to all owners of adjacent property via mail or by other
means.
   C.   Referral To City Council: The director may refer an application for a
facility to the city council for review. In that event, the city council may
approve or deny the application.
   D.   Conditions: In approving a facility permit, the director or city
council may impose conditions reasonably related to the use and reasonably
necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 2763, 2012)
CHAPTER 18.196
VARIANCES AND MODIFICATIONS
SECTION:
18.196.010: Purpose
18.196.020: Variances Prohibited When
18.196.030: Granting A Variance; Commission Findings Required
18.196.040: Application; Required; Fee
18.196.050: Application; Accompanying Maps And Data
18.196.060: Application; Scope; Notice To Applicant
18.196.070: Public Hearing; Notice
18.196.080: Public Hearing; Commission Decision
18.196.090: Notice Of Decision
18.196.100: Approval Conditions
18.196.110: Appeal Of Commission Decision
18.196.120: Variance; Expiration
18.196.130: Modifications To Property Development Standards
18.196.010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of a variance shall be to ensure that no property, because of
special circumstances applicable to it, such as size, shape, topography,
location or surroundings, shall be deprived of privileges commonly enjoyed by
other properties in the same vicinity and identical zone. (Ord. 1000 § 50.00,
1955)
18.196.020: VARIANCES PROHIBITED WHEN:
In no case shall a variance be granted to permit a use other than a use
permitted in that district. (Ord. 1000 § 50.10, 1955)
18.196.030: GRANTING A VARIANCE; COMMISSION FINDINGS REQUIRED:
   A.   The planning commission shall have the authority, subject to the
procedures set forth in this title, to grant variances from any property
development standard of this title when it is found that the strict and literal
interpretation of such provisions would deny a use of property consistent with
the intent and purpose of this title and the general plan. In instances when a
variance is processed concurrently with other land use entitlements requiring
action by the city council, the planning commission shall make a recommendation
to the city council.
   B.   The commission, before it may grant a variance, shall make a finding
that, in the evidence presented, all of the following conditions exist in
reference to the property being considered:
      1.   That there are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or
conditions applicable to the property or to the intended use that do not apply
generally to other properties or uses in the same vicinity and zone;
      2.   That such variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment
of a substantial property right possessed by other properties in the same
vicinity and zone district, but which is denied to the property in question;
      3.   That the granting of such variance will not be detrimental to the
public welfare or injurious to the property or improvements of others in the
vicinity;
      4.   That the granting of such variance will not adversely affect the
general plan of the city of Redlands. (Ord. 2503 § 2, 2003: Ord. 1000 § 50.20,
1955)
18.196.040: APPLICATION; REQUIRED; FEE:
A signed application for a variance shall be made by the property owner, or his
authorized agent, to the planning department, and shall be accompanied by a fee
as set by the city council. (Ord. 1000 § 50.30(a), 1955)
18.196.050: APPLICATION; ACCOMPANYING MAPS AND DATA:
An application for a variance shall be accompanied by maps showing the subject
property as well as the surrounding area. Plans of the subject property shall
show all existing and proposed buildings and uses, and any other data required
by the planning department to adequately present the application to the
commission. (Ord. 1000 § 50.30(b), 1955)
18.196.060: APPLICATION; SCOPE; NOTICE TO APPLICANT:
In cases where the planning department considers the application not within the
scope of the variance procedure, the applicant will be so informed; whereupon,
if the application is accepted, it shall be signed by the applicant to the
effect that he was so informed. (Ord. 1000 § 50.30(c), 1955)
18.196.070: PUBLIC HEARING; NOTICE:
   A.   A public hearing shall be held by the planning commission on the
nearest scheduled meeting date not less than twenty one (21) days after the
filing of the application.
   B.   Notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation not
less than ten (10) days before the date set for the planning commission
hearing. The notice shall contain all data related to the case.
   C.   Notices shall be mailed, not less than five (5) days prior to the date
of the meeting, to owners of property within a radius of three hundred feet
(300') of the external boundaries of the property described in the application,
using for this purpose the name and address of such owners as are shown on the
latest official tax roll of the county. Such notice shall contain all pertinent
data related to the case. (Ord. 1000 § 50.30(d), 1955)
18.196.080: PUBLIC HEARING; COMMISSION DECISION:
The decision of the commission shall be final, unless an appeal therefrom is
taken as provided for in section
18.196.110 of this chapter. Such decision shall not become effective for ten
(10) days from the date that the written decision has been made and notice
thereof mailed to the applicant. (Ord. 1000 § 50.30(e), 1955)
18.196.090: NOTICE OF DECISION:
Not later than ten (10) days following the planning commissions action in
granting or denying the variance, a written report of the decision shall be
mailed to the applicant at the address shown on the application form. A copy of
the report shall be forwarded to the city council. (Ord. 1000 § 50.30(f), 1955)
18.196.100: APPROVAL CONDITIONS:
Any variance granted shall be subject to such conditions as will assure that
the adjustment thereby authorized shall not constitute a grant of special
privileges inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the
vicinity and zone in which such property is situated. The commission shall set
forth such conditions as it deems necessary and reasonable to protect the best
interests of the surrounding property or neighborhood, the general plan, or the
intent thereof. Such conditions may include the dedication and development of
streets adjoining the property, and other improvements. All such conditions
shall be binding upon the applicants, their successors and assigns. (Ord. 1000
§ 50.30(g), 1955)
18.196.110: APPEAL OF COMMISSION DECISION:
   A.   Appeals may be taken to the council by the applicant or any other
person aggrieved by the commissions decision.
   B.   Appeals shall be filed on forms supplied by the planning department
with the council within ten (10) days from the date of the commission decision,
or at the next regular council meeting following the planning commission
meeting.
   C.   On the appeal, the council shall review the decision of the commission,
hear new evidence and testimony, if offered, and, in deciding the appeal, may
either affirm, reverse, or modify the decision of the commission.
   D.   The council may, on its own motion, cause any commission decision to be
appealed. (Ord. 1000 § 50.40, 1955)
18.196.120: VARIANCE; EXPIRATION:
A variance shall expire on the expiration date, if any, of the project for
which the variance was granted. (Ord. 2390 § 3, 1999)
18.196.130: MODIFICATIONS TO PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
   A.   The commission may, as an administrative act, consider and approve
modifications to property development standards at a public meeting when such
modifications are determined to be in the public interest.
   B.   Written notice of the hearing date, time and subject request shall be
mailed to adjacent property owners not less than five (5) days prior to the
meeting.
   C.   Such modifications are limited as follows: Lot area requirements, yard
requirements and lot dimension requirements may be reduced for an individual
lot by not more than twenty percent (20%) of that required in the district
where, in the commission's judgment, the shape of the individual building site,
topography of the site, the location of an existing building, or other
conditions make strict compliance impossible without practical difficulties or
personal hardships. (Ord. 1000 § 50.60, 1955)
CHAPTER 18.200
CHANGE OF ZONE
SECTION:
18.200.010: Changes To Zone Boundaries Permitted When
18.200.020: Initiation
18.200.030: Application By Owner; Fee
18.200.040: Accompanying Maps And Data
18.200.050: Public Hearing; Notice Requirements
18.200.060: Public Hearing; Commission Consideration
18.200.070: Action By Commission
18.200.080: Public Hearing; Council Consideration
18.200.010: CHANGES TO ZONE BOUNDARIES PERMITTED WHEN:
Whenever the public necessity, convenience, general welfare, good zoning
practice, or the policies set forth in the general plan justify such action,
this title may be amended by changing the boundaries of zone districts. (Ord.
1000 § 51.00, 1955)
18.200.020: INITIATION:
Zone changes may be initiated by the city council, by the planning commission,
or by an application of the owner of any property within the area proposed to
be changed. (Ord. 1000 § 51.01, 1955)
18.200.030: APPLICATION BY OWNER; FEE:
Application by an owner shall be made on a form provided by the planning
department, and accompanied by a filing fee as set by the city council. (Ord.
1000 § 51.01(A), 1955)
18.200.040: ACCOMPANYING MAPS AND DATA:
An application for a change of zone shall be accompanied by maps showing the
subject property, as well as any other data required by the planning department
to adequately present the application to the commission. (Ord. 1000 § 51.01(C),
1955)
18.200.050: PUBLIC HEARING; NOTICE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   A public hearing shall be held by the planning commission on the
application and notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation
not less than ten (10) days before the date set for the planning commission
hearing.
   B.   Notice shall be mailed not less than ten (10) days prior to the date of
the meeting to owners of property within a radius of three hundred feet (300')
of the boundaries of the property described in the application, using for this
purpose the name and address of such owners as are shown on the most recent
assessor's roll of the county of San Bernardino.
   C.   Not later than ten (10) days following the hearing, the planning
commission shall render its decision in the form of a recommendation to the
city council. (Ord. 2744, 2014)
18.200.060: PUBLIC HEARING; COMMISSION CONSIDERATION:
In considering any request for a change of zone, the commission shall satisfy
itself, before recommending to the city council that the change be granted,
that the proposed change of zone is in conformity with the general plan of the
city, and that the proposed change of zone is rescinded related to the public
health, safety or general welfare. (Ord. 2744, 2014)
18.200.070: ACTION BY COMMISSION:
The commission, based on the evidence submitted and its own study and knowledge
of the circumstances involved, may recommend to the city council that the city
council deny, modify or approve all or any part of a request for a change of
zone. (Ord. 2744, 2014)
18.200.080: PUBLIC HEARING; COUNCIL CONSIDERATION:
   A.   Upon receipt of the recommendation of the planning commission, the city
council shall hold a public hearing. Notice of the time and place of the
hearing shall be given in the manner provided by law. In addition to notice by
publication, the city council may give notice of the hearing in such other
manner as it may deem necessary or desirable. Any hearing may be continued from
time to time.
   B.   The city council may approve, modify, or disapprove the recommendation
of the planning commission; provided, that any modification of the proposed
change of zone by the city council shall first be referred to the planning
commission for report and recommendation.
   C.   Failure of the planning commission to report within forty (40) days
after the reference, or such longer period as may be designated by the city
council, shall be deemed to be approval of the proposed modification. (Ord.
2744, 2014)
CHAPTER 18.204
AMENDMENTS
SECTION:
18.204.010: Amendments To Zoning Provisions Authorized When
18.204.020: Procedures Generally
18.204.030: Initiation
18.204.040: Public Hearing; Notice
18.204.050: Public Hearing; Commission Action
18.204.060: Council Hearing And Determination
18.204.070: Minor Amendments
18.204.010: AMENDMENTS TO ZONING PROVISIONS AUTHORIZED WHEN:
Whenever the public necessity, convenience or general welfare justifies such
action, the ordinance codified in this title may be amended. (Ord. 1000 §
51.10, 1955)
18.204.020: PROCEDURES GENERALLY:
An amendment to the text of the ordinance codified in this section which
imposes any regulation not heretofore imposed, or removes or modifies any such
regulation heretofore imposed, shall be made in accordance with procedures
provided by this section and sections
18.204.030 through
18.204.060 of this chapter. (Ord. 1000 § 51.11, 1955)
18.204.030: INITIATION:
   A.   The planning commission may initiate proceedings by motion.
   B.   The city council may initiate proceedings by motion, and then refer the
matter to the planning commission for public hearing.
   C.   The planning department may propose amendments to the planning
commission for consideration. (Ord. 1000 § 51.11(A), 1955)
18.204.040: PUBLIC HEARING; NOTICE:
The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on any such ordinance or
amendment. Notice of the time and place of the hearing, including a general
explanation of the matter to be considered and including a general description
of the areas affected, shall be given not less than ten (10) calendar days
before the hearing. The notice shall be published at least once in a newspaper
of general circulation published and circulated in the city. (Ord. 1000 § 51.11
(B), 1955)
18.204.050: PUBLIC HEARING; COMMISSION ACTION:
The planning commission shall review the proposed ordinance or amendment, as
prepared by the planning department, and following the required public hearing
shall file a written report of its recommendation with the city council. (Ord.
1000 § 51.11(C), 1955)
18.204.060: COUNCIL HEARING AND DETERMINATION:
   A.   Upon receipt of the recommendation of the planning commission, the city
council shall hold a public hearing.
   B.   Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given in the
manner provided for by law.
   C.   In addition to the notice by publication, the city council may give
notice of the hearing in such other manner as it may deem necessary or
desirable.
   D.   Any hearing may be continued from time to time.
   E.   The city council may approve, modify or disapprove the recommendation
of the planning commission, provided, that any modification of the proposed
ordinance or amendment by the city council shall first be referred to the
planning commission for report and recommendation; but the planning commission
shall not be required to hold a public hearing thereon.
   F.   Failure of the planning commission to report within forty (40) days
after the reference, or such longer period as may be designated by the city
council, shall be deemed to be approval of the proposed modification. (Ord.
1000 § 51.12, 1955)
18.204.070: MINOR AMENDMENTS:
Minor amendments to the text of this title which neither impose new regulations
nor remove or modify existing regulations may be initiated and adopted as other
ordinances are initiated and adopted. (Ord. 1000 § 51.15, 1955)
CHAPTER 18.208
ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
18.208.010: Building Inspector Authority
18.208.020: Police Department And Community Development Department Enforcement
Authority
18.208.030: Citation Issuance Procedures
18.208.040: Unlawful Activities Designated; Abatement And Other Remedies
18.208.050: Violation; Penalty
18.208.010: BUILDING INSPECTOR AUTHORITY:
It shall be the duty of the building inspector to enforce the provisions of
this title pertaining to the erection, construction, reconstruction, moving,
conversion, alteration, setback, yards or addition to any building or
structure. (Ord. 1000 § 54.00, 1955)
18.208.020: POLICE DEPARTMENT AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT ENFORCEMENT
AUTHORITY:
It shall be the duty of the Redlands police department and the city services
representative of the community development department to enforce the
provisions of this title. (Ord. 1934 § 1, 1986: Ord. 1000 § 54.25, 1955)
18.208.030: CITATION ISSUANCE PROCEDURES:
   A.   The city services representative of the community development
department who has the discretionary duty to enforce the provisions of this
title, is hereby authorized by the city council, pursuant to sections 832,
836.5 and 19d of the California Penal Code, and subject to the provisions
thereof, to arrest a person without warrant whenever the city services
representative has reasonable cause to believe that the person to be arrested
has either violated a provision of this title in the city services
representative's presence, or fails to correct a violation of this title, and
therefore has committed an infraction which the city services representative
has the discretionary duty to enforce.
   B.   The city services representative is further authorized by the city
council to issue a notice to appear, and to release such person on his or her
written promise to appear in court, pursuant to sections 853.5 and 853.6 of the
California Penal Code. Under no circumstances may the city services
representative take the person to be arrested into custody. In the event that
the person to be arrested demands to be taken before the magistrate or refuses
to provide his or her written promise to appear in court, the city services
representative must either summon a Redlands police officer, explain the
situation, and request that the police officer arrest the person, and take the
person into custody, or seek the assistance of the city attorney, and request
that an infraction complaint be prepared and filed against that person.
   C.   In addition to the mandatory course of training prescribed by the
commission of peace officers standards pursuant to section 832 of the
California Penal Code, the chief of Redlands police department shall establish
and cause to be administered a special enforcement training program designed to
instruct the city services representative regarding provisions of this title to
be enforced, the evidentiary prerequisites to proper prosecution for violations
thereof, the appropriate procedures for making arrests or otherwise prudently
exercising such arrest and citation authority, and limitations attendant
thereto.
   D.   The city services representative shall be appropriately instructed to
file executed citations within the department of community development, and
such citations shall be filed with the court. (Ord. 1934 § 2, 1986: Ord. 1000 §
54.50, 1955)
18.208.040: UNLAWFUL ACTIVITIES DESIGNATED; ABATEMENT AND OTHER REMEDIES:
   A.   Any building or structure set up, erected, constructed, altered,
enlarged, converted, moved or maintained contrary to the provisions of this
title, and any use of land, building or premises established, conducted or
operated, or maintained contrary to the provisions of this title, is unlawful
and a public nuisance, and the city attorney, upon order of the council, shall
immediately commence action or proceedings for the abatement and removal and
the enjoining thereof in the manner prescribed by law, and shall take such
other steps and shall apply to such courts as may have jurisdiction to grant
such relief as will abate and remove the structure or building, and enjoin any
person, firm or corporation from setting up, erecting, building, maintaining or
the use of any such building or structure, or using property contrary to the
provisions of this title.
   B.   The remedies provided herein shall be cumulative and not exclusive.
(Ord. 1000 § 55.00, 1955)
18.208.050: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
   A.   No person shall violate any of the provisions or fail to comply with
any of the requirements of this title or of any applicable specific plan, or
the terms or conditions of any land use entitlement issued by the city.
   B.   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any of the provisions of
this title or any applicable specific plan of the city, or the terms or
conditions of any land use entitlement issued by the city, is guilty of a
misdemeanor. Such person, firm or corporation shall be deemed guilty of a
separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any
violation of this title is committed or continued by such person, firm or
corporation, and shall be punishable as herein provided. (Ord. 2744, 2014)
CHAPTER 18.212
LAND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
SECTION:
Article I. General Provisions
18.212.010: Purpose Of Provisions
18.212.020: Applicability To Excavation, Grading And Similar Work
18.212.030: Grading Permit And Map Required
18.212.040: Retaining Wall Construction
18.212.050: Residential Driveway Gradients
18.212.060: Minor Exceptions
Article II. Minimum Fill Grading
18.212.070: Applicability
18.212.080: Lots Abutting Streets Having A Slope Of One Percent Or Less
18.212.090: Corner Lots At Intersections Of Streets With A Slope Of One Percent
Or Less
18.212.100: Lots Abutting Streets With A Slope Greater Than One Percent
18.212.110: Corner Lots At Intersections Of Streets With A Slope Greater Than
One Percent
Article III. Grading Adjacent To Property Lines
18.212.120: Applicability
18.212.130: Cut And Fill Slope Gradient
18.212.140: Slopes Between Lots
18.212.150: Property Line Boundaries On Natural Slopes Of Five Percent Or Less
18.212.160: Side Property Line Boundaries On Natural Slopes Of Five Percent Or
Less
Article IV. Grading Property With Slopes Steeper Than Five Percent
18.212.170: Applicability
18.212.180: Cut And Fill Slope Gradient
18.212.190: Prohibited Slopes
18.212.200: Slopes Exceeding Ten Percent On Two Or More Lots
18.212.210: Irrigation Systems And Ground Cover Required For Certain Slopes
18.212.220: Retaining Walls Required When
ARTICLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS
18.212.010: PURPOSE OF PROVISIONS:
The city finds and declares that it is necessary to prevent excessive grading
of single lots and perimeter lots of multilot developments beyond that
necessary for the use and drainage of the site, and also to regulate slopes and
retaining walls along property lines. Minimum grading requirements and
treatment of slopes at property lines are also to be regulated for the purpose
of minimizing adverse environmental effects on surrounding properties. (Prior
code § 86001)
18.212.020: APPLICABILITY TO EXCAVATION, GRADING AND SIMILAR WORK:
   A.   The standards of this chapter shall apply to all land within the city,
to control excavation, grading and earthwork construction, including fills and
embankments contained in chapter 70 of the uniform building code. Where in any
specific case a section of this chapter specifies different requirements than
chapter 70 of the uniform building code, the most restrictive shall apply.
   B.   If, in the opinion of the soils engineer, improper drainage from a
building or property would result from strict adherence to the grading
standards of this chapter for a specified location and soils condition, the
building and safety director may approve alternate grading systems, provided
that his recommendation is submitted in writing or incorporated in his soils
investigation report. (Prior code § 86002)
18.212.030: GRADING PERMIT AND MAP REQUIRED:
In addition to the grading permit requirements of chapter 70 of the uniform
building code, information on plans shall include the following:
   A.   A map showing the tributary drainage area or areas and estimated
runoff, expressed in cubic feet per second, together with supporting
calculations signed by a registered engineer;
   B.   The concrete or gunite interceptor and storm drain construction
details, with its size, slopes and capacity to be justified by supporting
calculations signed by a registered engineer. Seventy eight hundredths of an
inch (0.78") per hour, estimated 10-year storm, shall be the minimum criteria
for design of such interceptor or storm drains. (Prior code § 86003)
18.212.040: RETAINING WALL CONSTRUCTION:
   A.   For the purpose of this chapter, retaining walls shall be essentially
vertical, and shall be constructed of concrete, masonry, or wood treated with
an approved preservative under the treating and quality control requirements
specified in the uniform building code standards 25-12, or wood of natural
resistance to decay, as defined in chapter 25 of the uniform building code.
   B.   Such retaining walls shall be engineered to resist all imposed loads.
   C.   All retaining walls exceeding thirty inches (30") in height shall have
a fence, wall or guardrail at least three feet (3') above the highest adjacent
ground level. In open guardrail type fencing, intermediate members shall be so
placed that a sphere nine inches (9") in diameter cannot pass through. (Prior
code § 86004)
18.212.050: RESIDENTIAL DRIVEWAY GRADIENTS:
   A.   Gradient And Driveway Width Adjacent To Garage Entrance: Driveways
shall have a maximum gradient of twelve and one-half percent (121/2%) along the
centerline of that portion of the driveway located within fifteen feet (15') of
the garage entrance. The width of twenty five feet (25') of driveway adjacent
to the front of the entrance shall be not less than the width of the garage
opening or openings, with a minimum width of ten feet (10').
   B.   Gradient And Width Of The Remainder Of Driveway: The maximum gradient
for driveways other than that portion within twenty feet (20') of the garage
opening shall be twenty percent (20%) along its centerline, and shall not be
less than ten feet (10') wide.
   C.   Driveway Drainage: Driveways are to drain with a minimum slope of one-
half percent (1/2%) and a maximum transverse slope of five percent (5%).
   D.   Vertical Transition: Any vertical transitions shall be designed and
constructed so that any portion of a vehicle having a twelve foot (12')
wheelbase and a five inch (5") under vehicle clearance will not make contact
with the driveway surface. (Prior code § 86005)
18.212.060: MINOR EXCEPTIONS:
When it is claimed by an owner, contractor or developer of property that
special circumstances or conditions applicable to the property would result in
a particular hardship or unreasonable loss of enjoyment and utility of property
when requirements of this chapter are strictly applied, the owner may file for
a minimum exception permit in accordance with the provisions of sections
18.108.020 through
18.108.100 of this title. The application for a minor exception will be
processed in accordance with sections
18.108.020 through 18.108.100 of this title. (Prior code § 86006)
ARTICLE II. MINIMUM FILL GRADING
18.212.070: APPLICABILITY:
This article shall apply to single lots and perimeter lots of multiple lot
projects where it is necessary to provide fill materials to elevate at least
thirty percent (30%) of a building pad to provide that the site drain to the
street with a minimum drainage swale gradient of one percent (1%). (Prior code
§ 86101)
18.212.080: LOTS ABUTTING STREETS HAVING A SLOPE OF ONE PERCENT OR LESS:
For grading lots abutting streets having a slope of one percent (1%) or less:
   A.   Such lots shall have drainage gradients not exceeding 1.25 percent, nor
shall the drainage gradient be less than one percent (1%) in all areas;
   B.   The slope of the finish grades adjacent to a dwelling or structure may
differ from these specified gradients if the soils engineer determines that the
specified one percent (1%) to 1.25 percent gradients are not adequate for
proper drainage, or, if in the opinion of the building official, steeper grades
are necessary to provide drainage from the building foundations;
   C.   The lot may drain to the street at any location of the lot frontage.
(Prior code § 86102)
18.212.090: CORNER LOTS AT INTERSECTIONS OF STREETS WITH A SLOPE OF ONE PERCENT
OR LESS:
For grading lots abutting the intersection of two (2) streets (corner lots),
each street with a slope of one percent (1%) or less, such lots shall be graded
according to the criteria of section
18.212.080 of this chapter. (Prior code § 86103)
18.212.100: LOTS ABUTTING STREETS WITH A SLOPE GREATER THAN ONE PERCENT:
For grading lots abutting streets having a slope in excess of one percent (1%),
such lots shall conform with subsections
18.212.080A and B of this chapter, except that the building pad shall be no
higher than is necessary to drain the lot to any location of the lower fifty
percent (50%) of the frontage of the lot. (Prior code § 86104)
18.212.110: CORNER LOTS AT INTERSECTIONS OF STREETS WITH A SLOPE GREATER THAN
ONE PERCENT:
For grading lots abutting the intersection of two (2) streets (corner lots)
with one or both streets having a slope exceeding one percent (1%), such lots
shall be graded so the pad will be no higher than necessary to drain the lot to
any location to the lower fifty percent (50%) of the frontage abutting the
street with the steepest slope. (Prior code § 86105)
ARTICLE III. GRADING ADJACENT TO PROPERTY LINES
18.212.120: APPLICABILITY:
This article applies to treatment of slopes within multilot developments, and
to permit boundary slopes. (Prior code § 86200)
18.212.130: CUT AND FILL SLOPE GRADIENT:
Cut and fill slopes adjacent to property line and at other approved locations
shall not be steeper than one vertical to two (2) horizontal. (Prior code §
86201)
18.212.140: SLOPES BETWEEN LOTS:
When two (2) or more lots are graded, and cut and fill slopes of steeper than
ten percent (10%) occur adjacent to the property line between the lots, the top
of the slope shall be located at the property line. (Prior code § 86202)
18.212.150: PROPERTY LINE BOUNDARIES ON NATURAL SLOPES OF FIVE PERCENT OR LESS:
Where earth fill of twelve inches (12") or more is placed on property having a
natural average slope of five percent (5%) or less, a retaining wall not to
exceed five feet (5') above the original natural grade shall be placed adjacent
to the property lines at locations where a grading permit boundary line abuts
vacant property, or the rear yard area of adjacent properties when the slope of
the finish grade exceeds ten percent (10%) within twenty feet (20') of the
permit boundary line. (Prior code § 86203(A))
18.212.160: SIDE PROPERTY LINE BOUNDARIES ON NATURAL SLOPES OF FIVE PERCENT OR
LESS:
Where earth fill of twelve inches (12") or more is placed on property having a
natural slope of five percent (5%) or less, or is abutting a street which has a
slope of five percent (5%) or less, a retaining wall not to exceed thirty
inches (30") in height shall be placed adjacent to the property line when the
grading permit boundary abuts a side yard of adjacent properties, excepting the
rear twenty five feet (25') thereof when the fill slope exceeds ten percent
(10%) in any area within the side property line. The treatment of the rear
twenty five feet (25') of a lot upon a permit boundary which abuts an adjacent
side yard may comply with section
18.212.150 of this chapter. (Prior code § 86204(A))
ARTICLE IV. GRADING PROPERTY WITH SLOPES STEEPER THAN FIVE PERCENT
18.212.170: APPLICABILITY:
This article IV will apply to cut and fill grading for property having a
natural slope steeper than five percent (5%). (Prior code § 86300)
18.212.180: CUT AND FILL SLOPE GRADIENT:
No cut or fill slope shall exceed one vertical to two (2) horizontal. (Prior
code § 86301)
18.212.190: PROHIBITED SLOPES:
No cut or fill slope shall be created which exceeds thirty feet (30') in
vertical height, and any cut or fill slope which exceeds five feet (5') in
height shall not exceed three hundred feet (300') in horizontal length, except
slopes required for public streets may exceed three hundred feet (300') in
length. (Prior code § 86302)
18.212.200: SLOPES EXCEEDING TEN PERCENT ON TWO OR MORE LOTS:
When two (2) or more lots are graded and cut and fill slopes exceeding ten
percent (10%) occur adjacent to lot lines other than permit boundaries and
streets, the top of the slope shall be located at the lot line. (Prior code §
86303)
18.212.210: IRRIGATION SYSTEMS AND GROUND COVER REQUIRED FOR CERTAIN SLOPES:
   A.   Slopes exceeding three feet (3') in height shall be provided with
irrigation systems and sufficient plants chosen from a list of erosion
resisting plants available at the department of building and safety, or as
approved by the Redlands park director.
   B.   Unless the final landscaping plans have been submitted, approved, and
slopes planted, perennial rye or approved blade grass shall have been seeded,
and the growth shall be evident prior to the final inspection of the premises.
(Prior code § 86304)
18.212.220: RETAINING WALLS REQUIRED WHEN:
   A.   Retaining walls shall not exceed six feet (6') in height, except in
front yard areas where retaining walls may not exceed thirty inches (30") in
height. However, retaining walls necessary for the construction of an adjacent
driveway may be constructed to a maximum of six feet (6') in height at any
location on the property.
   B.   Retaining walls exceeding thirty inches (30") in height will require a
protective fence or guardrail of at least thirty six inches (36") in height
either of solid material or with intermediate members so spaced that a nine
inch (9") sphere will not pass through. The combination of a retaining wall may
not exceed nine feet (9'), except if such retaining wall and guardrail is
within fifteen feet (15') of an existing dwelling, the combination of retaining
walls and guardrails shall not exceed six feet (6') in height. (Prior code §
86305)
CHAPTER 18.216
REDLANDS PARKING AND BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT AREAS
(Rep. by Ord. 2760, 2011)
CHAPTER 18.220
DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS
SECTION:
18.220.010: General Provisions
18.220.020: Application Forms And Information
18.220.030: Fees
18.220.040: Parties To The Development Agreement
18.220.050: Proposed Form Of Development Agreement
18.220.060: Review Of Application
18.220.070: Contents Of Development Agreement
18.220.080: Public Hearing
18.220.090: Review; Standard
18.220.100: Findings And Recommendation By Planning Commission
18.220.110: Ordinance; Public Hearing
18.220.120: Conduct Of Hearing
18.220.130: Consistency With General And Specific Plans
18.220.140: Notice
18.220.150: Form And Time Of Notice Of Intention To Consider Adoption Of
Development Agreement
18.220.160: Failure To Receive Notice
18.220.170: Irregularity In Proceeding
18.220.180: Periodic Review Of Development Agreements
18.220.190: Cancellation Or Modification By Mutual Consent
18.220.200: Cancellation By The City
18.220.210: Rights Of The Parties After Cancellation Or Termination
18.220.220: Rules Affecting Development Agreements
18.220.230: Separate Procedure
18.220.240: Effect Of Development Agreement
18.220.250: Construction
18.220.260: Execution And Recordation Of Development Agreements, Amendment Or
Cancellation
18.220.270: Severability
18.220.010: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority of Government Code
sections 65864 through 65869.5, inclusive.
   B.   The purpose of this chapter is to establish rules and regulations for
the processing and review of development agreements. (Ord. 2073 § 1, 1989)
18.220.020: APPLICATION FORMS AND INFORMATION:
   A.   The director of community development shall prescribe the form of
applications, notice and documents provided for or required under this chapter
for the preparation and implementation of development agreements, consistent
with the provisions of this chapter.
   B.   The director of community development may require an applicant for a
development agreement to submit such information and supporting data as the
planning commission, city council and other city departments to which the
application is referred under this chapter consider necessary to process the
application. (Ord. 2073 § 1, 1989)
18.220.030: FEES:
The city council, by resolution, shall fix the schedule of fees and charges for
the filing and processing of each application, review, and document required
under this chapter. (Ord. 2073 § 1, 1989)
18.220.040: PARTIES TO THE DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT:
   A.   An applicant for a development agreement shall possess a legal or
equitable interest in the real property which is to be the subject of the
development agreement. The director of community development shall require an
applicant to submit proof of the applicant's interest in the real property and
of the authority of any agent representing the applicant. Such proof may
include a preliminary report issued by a title company licensed to do business
in the state of California. Before processing the application, the director of
community development shall obtain the opinion of the city attorney as to the
sufficiency of the applicant's interest in the real property to enter into the
development agreement.
   B.   In addition to the city and the applicant, any federal, state or local
governmental agency may be included as a party to a development agreement. Any
such additional party may be made a party to a development agreement pursuant
to the provisions of the joint exercise of powers act 1  providing for joint
powers agreements, or provisions of other applicable federal, state or local
law, in order to create a legally binding agreement among such parties. (Ord.
2073 § 1, 1989)
 
Notes
1 1. Gov.C. § 6500 et seq.
18.220.050: PROPOSED FORM OF DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT:
   A.   Each application shall be accompanied by the form of development
agreement proposed by the applicant. This requirement may be met by designating
the city's then standard form of development agreement, if any, and including
specific proposals for changes in or additions to the language of the standard
form, or by submitting a form of development agreement prepared by the
applicant.
   B.   Any development agreement prepared by an applicant shall contain the
provisions required under this chapter and shall also include the following:
      1.   The parties to the development agreement;
      2.   Written evidence of the nature of the applicant's interest in the
real property, demonstrating to the satisfaction of the community development
director and the city attorney, the applicant's legal or equitable interest in
the property which is the subject of the development agreement;
      3.   A description of the development project sufficient to permit the
development agreement to be reviewed under the applicable criteria of this
chapter. Such description may include, but is not limited to, references to
site and building plans, elevations, relationships to adjacent properties and
operational data. Where appropriate, such description may distinguish between
elements of the development project which are proposed to be fixed under the
development agreement, those which may vary and the standards and criteria by
which the same may be reviewed.
      4.   An identification of the approvals and permits for the development
project issued or contemplated by the development agreement.
      5.   The proposed duration of the development agreement.
      6.   A program and standards for periodic review under this chapter.
      7.   Appropriate provisions, acceptable to the city attorney, providing
security for the performance of the applicant under the development agreement.
      8.   Any other relevant provisions which may be deemed necessary by the
director of community development. (Ord. 2073 § 1, 1989)
18.220.060: REVIEW OF APPLICATION:
   A.   The director of planning and community development shall review the
application and determine whether any additional information is necessary to
complete the form of development agreement. After receiving all necessary
information, he shall prepare a staff report and recommendation and shall state
whether the development agreement as proposed, or in an amended form
(specifying the nature of the amendments), would be consistent with the general
plan, any applicable specific plan, and the provisions of this chapter.
   B.   The director of community development shall, as part of his review of
the application, circulate copies of the proposed development agreement to
those city departments having jurisdiction over the development project for
review and comment. The city attorney shall also review the proposed
development agreement for legal sufficiency. The staff report and
recommendation of the director of community development shall include any
appropriate recommendations received from other city departments and the
proposed form of ordinance authorizing the city to enter into the development
agreement. (Ord. 2073 § 1, 1989)
18.220.070: CONTENTS OF DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT:
   A.   A development agreement shall specify its duration, the permitted uses
of the property, the density or intensity of use, the maximum height and size
of proposed buildings, and provisions for reservation or dedication of land for
public purposes. A development agreement may also include conditions and
requirements for subsequent discretionary actions, provided that such
conditions and requirements for subsequent discretionary actions shall not
prevent development of the land for the uses and to the density or intensity of
development set forth in the development agreement.
   B.   A development agreement shall include all conditions imposed by the
city with respect to the development project including those conditions
required as a result of any environmental impact report prepared under the
California environmental quality act and the city's environmental review
process to eliminate or mitigate environmental impacts caused by or aggravated
as a result of the development project.
   C.   All development agreements shall contain an indemnity and insurance
clause, in form and substance acceptable to the city attorney, requiring the
applicant to defend and indemnify the city against any claims arising out of
the development agreement process.
   D.   All development agreements, or any part of a development agreement, may
be subject to subsequent condemnation proceedings by the city. (Ord. 2073 § 1,
1989)
18.220.080: PUBLIC HEARING:
All development agreements shall be considered at a public hearing before the
planning commission under the procedures described in sections
18.220.090 and
18.220.100 of this chapter. (Ord. 2073 § 1, 1989)
18.220.090: REVIEW; STANDARD:
   A.   The planning commission may approve use of a development agreement as a
method of implementing or providing standards and criteria for any approval of
the planning commission or permits or approvals issued or made by any city
department. (Ord. 2073 § 1, 1989)
18.220.100: FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATION BY PLANNING COMMISSION:
   A.   After the hearing before the planning commission, the planning
commission shall make its recommendation in writing to the city council. The
recommendation shall include the planning commission's findings as to whether
the proposed development agreement:
      1.   Is consistent with the objectives, policies, general land uses and
programs specified in the city's general plan and any applicable specific plan;
      2.   Is compatible with the uses authorized in, and the regulations
prescribed for, the zoning district in which the real property is located;
      3.   Is in conformity with and will promote public convenience, general
welfare and good land use practice;
      4.   Will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and general
welfare;
      5.   Will not adversely affect the orderly development of property or the
preservation of property values; and
      6.   Will promote and encourage the development of the proposed project
by providing a greater degree of requisite certainty. (Ord. 2073 § 1, 1989)
18.220.110: ORDINANCE; PUBLIC HEARING:
A development agreement is a legislative act and shall be enacted by ordinance
only after a public hearing before the city council held pursuant to the
procedures described in sections
18.220.120 and
18.220.130 of this chapter. The ordinance shall refer to and incorporate by
reference the text of the development agreement. (Ord. 2073 § 1, 1989)
18.220.120: CONDUCT OF HEARING:
At the hearing, the city council shall consider the planning commission's
recommendation together with any additional public testimony, and may approve,
disapprove or modify any recommendation of the planning commission. If public
testimony is presented on an issue which was not considered by the planning
commission, then the city council may refer the issue back to the planning
commission for further hearings and recommendations. The city council may also
act on any such issue without reference back to the planning commission. (Ord.
2073 § 1, 1989)
18.220.130: CONSISTENCY WITH GENERAL AND SPECIFIC PLANS:
Before the city council may approve a development agreement, it must find that
its provisions are consistent with the city's general plan and any applicable
specific plans. If the city council approves the development agreement in the
form recommended by the planning commission, then the city council shall be
deemed to have also adopted the findings of the planning commission. If a
development agreement is modified or disapproved in whole or in part, the city
council shall set forth the reasons therefor and its findings with respect
thereto in accordance with the criteria specified in this chapter. (Ord. 2073 §
1, 1989)
18.220.140: NOTICE:
The director of community development shall give all notices of the city's
intention to consider adoption of a development agreement and of any other
public hearing on a development agreement required by law or this chapter.
(Ord. 2073 § 1, 1989)
18.220.150: FORM AND TIME OF NOTICE OF INTENTION TO CONSIDER ADOPTION OF
DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT:
   A.   The form of notice to consider adoption of a development agreement
before the planning commission or city council shall contain:
      1.   The time and place of the hearing;
      2.   A general explanation of the matter to be considered including a
general description of the area affected;
      3.   The location or locations where a copy of the proposed development
agreement may be reviewed;
      4.   Other information required by specific provisions of this chapter or
which the director of community development considers necessary or desirable.
   B.   The time and manner of giving notice is by:
      1.   Publication at least once and at least ten (10) days prior to the
hearing in a newspaper of general circulation, circulated in the city.
      2.   Mailing of the notice at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing to
the applicant, to the owner of the property subject to the development
agreement, to each local agency expected to provide water, sewage, streets,
roads, schools, or other essential facilities or services to the project whose
ability to provide those facilities and services may be significantly affected,
to any person who has filed a written request for notice with either the city
clerk, and to all persons shown on the last equalized assessment roll as owning
real property within three hundred feet (300') of the property which is the
subject of the proposed development agreement; provided, the director of
community development may direct that notice be given over a wider area to
adequately inform interested persons. If the number of owners to whom notice is
to be mailed is greater than one thousand (1,000), the director of community
development may as an alternative provide notice in the manner set forth in
section 65901 of the Government Code.
   C.   The planning commission or city council, as the case may be, may direct
that notice of the public hearing to be held before it shall be given in a
manner that exceeds the notice requirements prescribed by state law, but
failure to comply with such procedure shall not invalidate a development
agreement.
   D.   The notice requirements referred to in this chapter are declaratory of
existing law (Government Code sections 65867, 65090 and 65091). If and when
state law prescribes any different notice requirement, notice shall be given in
that manner. (Ord. 2073 § 1, 1989)
18.220.160: FAILURE TO RECEIVE NOTICE:
The failure of any person entitled to receive any notice required by law or
this chapter shall not affect the authority of the city to enter into, nor
invalidate, any development agreement. (Ord. 2073 § 1, 1989)
18.220.170: IRREGULARITY IN PROCEEDING:
Formal rules of evidence or procedure which must be followed in a court of law
shall not apply to the consideration of a proposed development agreement. No
action, inaction or recommendation regarding a development agreement shall be
held void or invalid on the ground of the improper admission or rejection of
evidence or by reason of any error or informality, as to any matter procedure
whatsoever unless, after an examination of the entire case, including the
evidence, a court of law finds that the error complained of was prejudicial and
that by reason of the error the complaining party sustained and suffered
substantial injury, and that a different result would have been probable if the
error had not occurred or existed. There is no presumption that error is
prejudicial or that injury resulted if error is shown. (Ord. 2073 § 1, 1989)
18.220.180: PERIODIC REVIEW OF DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS:
   A.   Annual Review: The city shall review development agreements at least
once every twelve (12) months from the date of their approval. Pursuant to
Government Code section 65865.1, the applicant for a development agreement
shall have the duty to demonstrate its good faith compliance with the terms of
the development agreement at the time of such periodic review. The city's cost
for such periodic review shall be paid by the applicant to the city prior to
the time of such review.
   B.   Applicant's Submission: Not less than thirty (30), nor more than sixty
(60), days prior to the anniversary date of a development agreement, and each
anniversary date thereafter, the applicant shall submit to the community
development department a letter setting forth the applicant's good faith
compliance with the terms and conditions of the development agreement. Such
letter shall be accompanied by documents and other information as may be
necessary and available to enable the city to undertake its annual review of
applicant's good faith compliance under the terms of the development agreement,
and shall also state that such letter is submitted to the city pursuant to the
requirements of Government Code section 65865.1 and this chapter. Not less than
thirty (30), nor more than sixty (60), days prior to the anniversary date of a
development agreement, the city's community development department shall
provide notice to the city council, at a regularly scheduled meeting of the
city council, that a development agreement will be subject to annual review in
accordance with this chapter.
   C.   Finding Of Compliance: The community development department shall
review the applicant's submission to ascertain whether the applicant has
complied in good faith with the terms of the development agreement. Upon
request of the community development department, the applicant shall furnish
such additional documents or information as may be reasonably required and
available to the applicant to enable the community development department to
make and complete its review hereunder. If the community development department
finds good faith compliance by the applicant with the terms of the development
agreement, it shall issue a certificate of compliance, certifying the
applicant's good faith compliance with the terms of the agreement through the
period of the applicable annual review. Such certificate of compliance shall be
in recordable form and shall contain such information as may be necessary in
order to impart constructive record notice of the finding of good faith
compliance hereunder. The applicant shall have the right to record the
certificate of compliance, at the applicant's sole cost, in the official
records of the county of San Bernardino. At least ten (10) days prior to making
its determination, the community development department shall provide to the
applicant copies of all staff reports and other information concerning the
applicant's compliance with the terms of the development agreement and the
determination made by the community development department.
   D.   Finding Of Noncompliance: If the community development department finds
that the applicant has not complied in good faith with the terms of the
development agreement, it shall specify to the applicant in writing the
respects in which the applicant has failed to comply. The community development
department shall also specify a reasonable time for the applicant to comply
with such terms for compliance, which shall not be less than thirty (30) days,
and shall be reasonably related to the time necessary to adequately bring the
applicant's performance into good faith compliance with the development
agreement. If the areas of noncompliance specified by the community development
department are not perfected within such reasonable time limits prescribed by
the department, then the development agreement shall be subject to modification
or cancellation pursuant to this chapter and the provisions of Government Code
section 65865.1.
   E.   Referral To City Council: The community development department may
refer any review to be conducted hereunder to the city council. Such referral
shall be made by the community development department director, together with a
staff report on the department's preliminary findings. Upon such referral, the
city council shall conduct a noticed public hearing on the applicant's
compliance with the terms of the development agreement in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter and Government Code section 65865.1. If, after
considering all the evidence at such public hearing, the city council finds and
determines on the basis of substantial evidence that the applicant has not
complied in good faith to the terms and conditions of the development
agreement, then the city council shall specify to the applicant the respects in
which the applicant has failed to comply and shall also specify a reasonable
time for the applicant to comply with such terms which shall not be less than
thirty (30) days, and shall be reasonably related to the time necessary to
adequately bring the applicant's performance into good faith compliance with
the terms of the development agreement. If the areas of noncompliance specified
by the city council are not perfected within such reasonable time limits, then
the city council, by noticed hearing, may terminate, modify or take such other
action with regard to the development agreement.
   F.   Miscellaneous Requirements In Connection With Annual Review: The
community development department's determination shall be made within thirty
(30) days after the submission by the applicant of the required material
hereunder, and, if the community development department refers the matter to
the city council, then the determination by the city council shall be made
within fifteen (15) days after such referral. The applicant shall be permitted
an opportunity to be heard orally, or in writing, before the community
development department regarding such performance and before the community
development department makes its determination or referral. The issuance of the
certificate of compliance by the community development department (or the city
council on referral) shall conclude the review for the applicable period, and
such determination shall be final and conclusive up to and including the date
of the annual review hereunder. All costs incurred by city for the annual
review conducted under this chapter shall be borne by the applicant, including,
but not limited to, the city's retention of professionals. (Ord. 2385 § 2,
1998: Ord. 2385 § 2, 1998)
18.220.190: CANCELLATION OR MODIFICATION BY MUTUAL CONSENT:
Any development agreement may be cancelled or modified by mutual consent of the
parties, but only in the manner provided for by California Government Code
section 65868. Any proposal to cancel or modify a development agreement shall
be heard and determined in accordance with the same procedures specified by
this chapter for approval of a development agreement. (Ord. 2385 § 3, 1998:
Ord. 2073 § 1, 1989)
18.220.200: CANCELLATION BY THE CITY:
   A.   If, at any time during the term of a development agreement the director
of community development determines that the applicant has not complied in good
faith with the terms and conditions of the development agreement, the director
of community development shall, pursuant to the notice provisions of this
chapter, request that the planning commission conduct a public hearing at which
the applicant must demonstrate good faith compliance with the terms of the
development agreement. The burden of proof by substantial evidence of
compliance by the applicant is upon the applicant. If such compliance cannot be
shown, the planning commission shall recommend to the city council that the
city council either commence proceedings to cancel the development agreement or
recommend new terms and conditions intended to remedy the noncompliance.
   B.   The city council shall conduct a noticed hearing on the recommendations
of the planning commission at which the applicant and any other interested
person shall be entitled to submit such evidence and testimony as may be
germane to the issue of the applicants good faith compliance with the terms of
the development agreement. If the city council finds, based on substantial
evidence, noncompliance with the terms and conditions of the development
agreement, it may either cancel the development agreement upon giving sixty
(60) days' notice to the applicant, or in its discretion, may allow the
development agreement to be continued by imposition of new terms and conditions
intended to remedy such noncompliance. The city council may impose such
conditions to the action it takes as it considers necessary to protect the
interests of the city. The decision of the city council shall be final.
   C.   Any cancellation or imposition of new terms and conditions pursuant to
this section shall be noticed in accordance with the procedures specified in
section
18.220.150 of this chapter. (Ord. 2385 § 3, 1998: Ord. 2073 § 1, 1989)
18.220.210: RIGHTS OF THE PARTIES AFTER CANCELLATION OR TERMINATION:
In the event a development agreement is cancelled, unless otherwise agreed, all
rights of the applicant, or his successor in interest under the development
agreement, shall terminate. Any and all benefits, including money or land,
received by the city shall be retained by the city. Notwithstanding the above
provision, the termination of a development agreement shall not prevent an
applicant from completing a building or other improvements authorized pursuant
to a valid building permit previously approved by the city or under
construction at the time of termination, but the city may take any action
permitted by law to prevent, stop, or correct any violation of law occurring
during and after construction, and the applicant or any tenant shall not occupy
any portion of the project or any building not authorized by a previously
issued building permit. As used herein, "construction" shall mean work
performed in good faith in reliance upon a valid building permit, and
"completing" shall mean completion for beneficial occupancy for an applicant's
use, or if a portion of the project is intended for use by a lessee or tenant,
then for such portion "completing" shall mean completion except for interior
improvements such as partitions, duct and electrical run outs, floor covering,
wall coverings, lighting, furniture, trade fixtures, finished ceilings and
other improvements typically constructed by or for tenants of similar
buildings. All such uses shall, to the extent applicable, be deemed
nonconforming uses and shall be subject to the nonconforming use provisions of
this code. (Ord. 2385 § 3, 1998: Ord. 2073 § 1, 1989)
18.220.220: RULES AFFECTING DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS:
All development agreements shall be subject to the regulation and requirements
of the laws of the state of California, the constitution of the United States
and any codes, statutes and any court decisions, state or federal. In the event
that any law, code, statute or decision made or enacted after a development
agreement has been entered into prevents or precludes compliance with one or
more provisions of the development agreement, then such provisions of the
development agreement shall be modified or suspended in the manner and pursuant
to the procedures specified in the development agreement, as may be necessary
to comply with that law, code, statute or decision. (Ord. 2385 § 3, 1998: Ord.
2073 § 1, 1989)
18.220.230: SEPARATE PROCEDURE:
Development agreements shall not take the place of zoning ordinances, the
general plan, conditional use permits, subdivision approvals, building permits
or any other city planning functions. To the extent practicable, public
hearings on a proposed development agreement may be held concurrently with the
public hearings on all related land use approvals and all such approvals shall
be made concurrently with the approval of the development agreement. (Ord. 2385
§ 3, 1998: Ord. 2073 § 1, 1989)
18.220.240: EFFECT OF DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT:
When approved, a development agreement and any development control maps and all
notations, references and regulations which are a part of the development
agreement shall be considered part of this code. Development control maps
include, but are not limited to, regulations intended to carry out any plan
respecting location or type of activities; height, bulk, siding or design of
structures; location or design of open areas; and landscaping and other
comparable regulations. In the case of any conflict with any other provisions
of this code, such development agreement provisions shall take precedence.
Unless otherwise provided by the development agreement, the city's rules,
regulations and official policies governing permitted uses of the land, density
and design, improvement and construction standards and specifications
applicable to development of the property subject to a development agreement
shall be those city rules, regulations and official policies in force at the
time of the approval of the development agreement by the city council. (Ord.
2385 § 3, 1998: Ord. 2073 § 1, 1989)
18.220.250: CONSTRUCTION:
This chapter and any subsequent development agreement shall be read together.
With respect to any development agreement enacted under this chapter, any
provision of a development agreement which is in conflict with this chapter
shall be void. (Ord. 2385 § 3, 1998: Ord. 2073 § 1, 1989)
18.220.260: EXECUTION AND RECORDATION OF DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS, AMENDMENT OR
CANCELLATION:
   A.   Within ten (10) days after the ordinance approving a development
agreement takes effect, the mayor shall execute the development agreement, and
the city clerk shall have the development agreement recorded in the official
records of the county of San Bernardino.
   B.   If the parties to a development agreement, or their successors in
interest, amend or cancel the development agreement as provided for in
Government Code section 65868 and this chapter, or if the city council
terminates or modifies a development agreement as provided for in Government
Code section 65865.1 and this chapter for failure of the applicant to comply in
good faith with the terms or conditions of the development agreement, the city
clerk shall, after such action takes effect, have notice of such action
recorded in the official records of the county of San Bernardino. (Ord. 2385 §
3, 1998: Ord. 2073 § 1, 1989)
18.220.270: SEVERABILITY:
Should any provision of this chapter be held by a court of competent
jurisdiction to be either invalid, void, or unenforceable, the remaining
provisions of this chapter shall remain in full force and effect, unimpaired by
the holding, except as may otherwise be provided for in the development
agreement. (Ord. 2385 § 3, 1998: Ord. 2073 § 1, 1989)
CHAPTER 18.224
TRANSPORTATION CONTROL MEASURES
SECTION:
18.224.010: Purpose
18.224.020: Requirements
18.224.030: Monitoring Criteria
18.224.040: Enforcement
18.224.050: Fees
18.224.010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the transportation control measures is to implement the 1991 air
quality management plan and the 1992 attainment plan for carbon monoxide. The
requirements, as provided in this chapter, are established to achieve the trip
reduction targets as established by the air resources board and environmental
protection agency. (Ord. 2233 § 2, 1994)
18.224.020: REQUIREMENTS:
These requirements shall be applicable to developments which receive
discretionary approvals from the city after the effective date of the ordinance
codified in this chapter.
   A.   New nonresidential and multi-family (of 10 or more units) developments
or remodel, when discretionary review is required, shall install bicycle racks
or secured lockers at a rate of one per thirty (30) parking spaces with a
minimum of a three (3) space bicycle rack.
   B.   New nonresidential and multi-family (of 10 or more units) developments
shall provide on site pedestrian walkways and bicycle facilities to connect
each building in the development to public streets.
   C.   New nonresidential development producing two hundred fifty (250) or
more peak hour vehicle trips shall provide a shower facility accessible to both
men and women who bicycle or walk to work.
   D.   New nonresidential and multi-family (of 10 or more units) developments
with one hundred (100) or more parking spaces shall have a passenger loading
area with a curb length of at least one hundred feet (100') in a location close
to the building entrance. The loading area shall be designed so as not to
interfere with vehicle circulation.
   E.   New nonresidential development shall designate preferential parking
spaces for vanpools near building entrances at a rate of one parking space per
one hundred (100) spaces.
   F.   New nonresidential and residential (of 10 or more units) developments
along existing or planned transit routes shall install transit improvements
such as bus pullouts, bus pads and bus shelters. The need for and nature of
these improvements are to be defined by the city in cooperation with Omnitrans.
   G.   New residential developments over five hundred (500) units shall
provide a telecommuting center or contribute toward the development of a
telecommuting center.
   H.   Office park developments for over one thousand (1,000) employees shall
provide on site videoconferencing facilities.
   I.   New nonresidential developments linked to other actions that reduce
vehicle trips may reduce parking space requirements to account for increased
ridesharing and other modes of transportation. The land areas which would
otherwise be utilized for parking shall be landscaped.
   J.   New nonresidential and multi-family (of 10 or more units) developments
shall participate in the development of a bicycle route system consistent with
SCAG's regional mobility element.
   K.   New nonresidential developments producing two hundred fifty (250) or
more peak hour vehicle trips shall designate on site parking areas to be used
by commuters as park and ride lots.
   L.   New nonresidential development shall designate preferred parking spaces
for employee vanpools and rideshare vehicles near employee building entrances.
The designation of preferential parking spaces shall be at a rate of ten (10)
spaces per one hundred (100) employees with a minimum of one space for
businesses with over ten (10) employees. (Ord. 2233 § 2, 1994)
18.224.030: MONITORING CRITERIA:
The monitoring criteria set forth in this section shall be applicable to the
individual requirements set forth in section
18.224.020 of this chapter. The letter designations in this section correspond
to the letter designations for the individual requirements set forth in section
18.224.020 of this chapter.
   A.   Bicycle parking facilities shall be indicated on approved development
plans and shall be constructed as a component of the approved project.
Installation shall be verified by city building inspectors. The site shall be
inspected by the city on a periodic basis to assure the maintenance of the
facilities.
   B.   On site pedestrian walkways and bicycle facilities shall be indicated
on the approved development plans and shall be constructed as a component of
the approved project. Installation shall be verified by city building
inspectors. The maintenance of the facilities shall be verified by city staff
on a periodic basis.
   C.   Shower facilities shall be indicated on the approved development plans
and shall be constructed as a component of the approved project. Installation
shall be verified by city building inspectors.
   D.   Passenger loading areas shall be indicated on the approved development
plans. Signs and curb painting shall be installed designating such areas as a
component of the approved project. Installation shall be verified by city
building inspectors. The maintenance of loading areas shall be verified by the
city on a periodic basis.
   E.   Preferential parking spaces for vanpools shall be shown on plans prior
to issuance of a building permit and on designated parking spaces before final
occupancy of the project. The spaces shall be designated by appropriate signing
or painting. Maintenance of the specified number of designated spaces shall be
verified by the city on a periodic basis.
   F.   Transit improvements shall be indicated on the approved development
plans. Installation as a part of the approved project shall be verified by city
building or public works inspectors.
   G.   Establishment of a telecommuting center or contribution toward the
establishment of a center shall be identified prior to the issuance of building
permits and verification made before issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
   H.   Establishment of videoconferencing facilities shall be identified prior
to the issuance of building permits and verification made before issuance of a
certificate of occupancy.
   I.   Parking requirements shall be reduced by the number of vehicles reduced
by other trip reduction actions. Deletion of parking areas and installation of
appropriate landscaped areas shall be verified by city building inspectors.
   J.   Installation of a bicycle route system shall be accomplished by the
city. A fee to implement the development of the bicycle route system shall be
established based upon the size of a project. Some projects may be required to
install portions of the bicycle route system within their developments and
would be approved at the time of final city approvals and inspected by building
and public works inspectors.
   K.   An agreement designating a portion of the parking lot as a park and
ride lot shall be executed before the issuance of a building permit. The
agreement shall specify the area so designated, any exceptions to the
designation and the authority of the city to install and maintain signs
informing of the designation.
   L.   Preferential parking spaces for employee vanpools and rideshare
vehicles shall be designated on plans before issuance of building permits and
designated on parking spaces before final occupancy of the project. The spaces
shall be designated by appropriate signing or painting. Maintenance of the
specified number of designated spaces shall be verified by the city on a
periodic basis. (Ord. 2233 § 2, 1994)
18.224.040: ENFORCEMENT:
Enforcement of this chapter shall be in accordance with chapter 18.208 of this
title. (Ord. 2233 § 2, 1994)
18.224.050: FEES:
Fees to implement the provisions of this chapter shall be adopted by city
council resolution. (Ord. 2233 § 2, 1994)
CHAPTER 18.226
ADULT ORIENTED BUSINESSES
SECTION:
18.226.010: Legislative Purpose
18.226.020: Definitions
18.226.030: Minimum Proximity Requirements
18.226.040: Amortization Of Nonconforming Adult Oriented Business Uses
18.226.050: Extension Of Time For Termination Of Nonconforming Use
18.226.010: LEGISLATIVE PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate adult oriented businesses in
order to promote the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Redlands and
to prevent communitywide adverse economic impacts, increased crime, decreased
property values and the deterioration of neighborhoods which can be brought
about by the concentration of adult oriented businesses in close proximity to
each other or proximity to other incompatible uses such as schools for minors,
churches and residentially zoned districts or uses. The city council of the
city of Redlands finds that it has been demonstrated in various communities
that the concentration of adult oriented businesses causes an increase in the
number of transients in the area and an increase in crime, and in addition to
the effects described above, can cause other businesses and residents to move
elsewhere. The provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose nor effect
of imposing a limitation or prohibition on the content of any communicative
materials, including adult oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent
nor effect of this chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to adult
oriented materials protected by the first amendment, or to deny access by the
distributors and exhibitors of adult oriented entertainment to their intended
market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this chapter to condone or
legitimize the distribution of obscene material. It is, therefore, the purpose
of this chapter to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the
concentration of adult oriented businesses or their close proximity to
incompatible uses, while permitting the location of adult oriented businesses
in certain areas. (Ord. 2345 § 1, 1997)
18.226.020: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
   ADULT ORIENTED BUSINESS: Any one of the following:
Adult Arcade: An establishment where, for any form of consideration, one or
more still or motion picture projectors, or similar machines, for viewing by
five (5) or fewer persons each, are used to show films, computer generated
images, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic
reproductions thirty percent (30%) or more of the number of which are
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description
of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
Adult Bookstore: An establishment that has thirty percent (30%) or more of its
stock in books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or of
photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, tapes, records or
other form of visual or audio representations which are distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified
sexual activities and/or specified anatomical areas.
Adult Cabaret: A nightclub, restaurant or similar business establishment which:
a) regularly features live performances which are distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis upon the display of specified anatomical areas or
specified sexual activities; and/or b) which regularly features persons who
appear seminude; and/or c) shows films, computer generated images, motion
pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions thirty
percent (30%) or more of the number of which are distinguished or characterized
by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical areas.
Adult Hotel/Motel: A hotel or motel or similar business establishment offering
public accommodations for any form of consideration which: a) provides patrons
with closed circuit television transmissions, films, computer generated images,
motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions
thirty percent (30%) or more of the number of which are distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and b) rents, leases or lets
any room for less than a six (6) hour period, or rents, leases or lets any
single room more than twice in a twenty four (24) hour period.
Adult Motion Picture Theater: A business establishment where, for any form of
consideration, film, computer generated images, motion pictures,
videocassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions are shown, and
thirty percent (30%) or more of the number of which are distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
Adult Theater: A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar establishment
which, for any form of consideration, regularly features live performances
which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the display of
specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities.
Modeling Studio: A business which provides, for pecuniary compensation,
monetary or other consideration, hire or reward, figure models who, for the
purposes of sexual stimulation of patrons, display "specified anatomical areas"
to be observed, sketched, photographed, painted, sculpted or otherwise depicted
by persons paying such consideration. "Modeling studio" does not include
schools maintained pursuant to standards set by the state board of education.
"Modeling studio" further does not include a studio or similar facility owned,
operated or maintained by an individual artist or group of artists, and which
does not provide, permit, or make available "specified sexual activities".
   ADULT ORIENTED BUSINESS OPERATOR (HEREINAFTER "OPERATOR"): A person who
supervises, manages, inspects, directs, organizes, controls or in any other way
is responsible for or in charge of the premises of an adult oriented business
or the conduct or activities occurring on the premises thereof.
   APPLICANT: A person who is required to file an application for a permit
under this chapter, including an individual owner, managing partner, officer of
a corporation or any other operator, manager, employee or agent of an adult
oriented business.
   BAR: Any commercial establishment licensed by the state department of
alcoholic beverage control to serve any alcoholic beverages on the premises.
   CHIEF OF POLICE: The chief of police of the city of Redlands or the
authorized representatives thereof.
   CHURCH: A structure which is used primarily for religious worship and
related religious activities.
   DISTINGUISHED OR CHARACTERIZED BY AN EMPHASIS UPON: Means and refers to the
dominant or essential theme of the object described by such phrase. For
instance, when the phrase refers to films which are distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, the films so described are
those whose dominant or predominant character and theme are the depiction of
the enumerated sexual activities or anatomical areas. See Pringle v. city of
Covina, 115 Cal.App.3rd 151 (1981).
   ESTABLISHMENT OF AN ADULT ORIENTED BUSINESS: Means and includes any of the
following:
   A.   The opening or commencement of any adult oriented business as a new
business;
   B.   The conversion of an existing business, whether or not an adult
oriented business, to any adult oriented business defined in this chapter;
   C.   The addition of any of the adult oriented businesses defined in this
chapter to any other existing adult oriented business; or
   D.   The relocation of any such adult oriented business.
   FIGURE MODEL: Any person who, for pecuniary compensation, consideration,
hire or reward poses in a modeling studio to be observed, sketched, painted,
drawn, sculptured, photographed or otherwise depicted.
   HEALTH OFFICER: The health officer of the county of San Bernardino or his/
her duly authorized representative.
   MASSAGE PARLOR: Any place where, for any form of consideration or gratuity
massage, alcohol rub, administration of fomentations, electric or magnetic
treatments, or any other treatment manipulation of the human body which occurs
as a part of or in connection with "specified sexual activities", or where any
person providing such treatment, manipulation or service related thereto,
exposes "specified anatomical areas". The definition of a sexually oriented
businesses or massage parlor shall not include the practice of massage in any
licensed hospital, nor by a licensed hospital, nor by a licensed physician,
surgeon, chiropractor or osteopath, nor by any nurse or technician working
under the supervision of a licensed physician, surgeon, chiropractor or
osteopath, nor by trainers for any amateur, semiprofessional or professional
athlete or athletic team or school athletic program.
   NUDITY OR A STATE OF NUDITY: The showing of the human male or female
genitals, pubic area or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering, the
showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part
of the nipple, or the showing of the covered male genitals in a discernible
turgid state.
   OPERATE AN ADULT ORIENTED BUSINESS: As used in this chapter "operate an
adult oriented business" means the supervising, managing, inspecting,
directing, organizing, controlling or in any way being responsible for, or in
charge of, the conduct of activities of an adult oriented business or
activities within an adult oriented business.
   PERMITTEE: The person to whom an adult oriented business permit is issued.
   PERSON: Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, association, joint
stock company, corporation or combination of the above in whatever form or
character.
   REGULARLY FEATURES: With respect to an adult theater or adult cabaret means
a regular and substantial course of conduct. The fact that live performances
which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the display of
specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities occurs on two (2) or
more occasions within a thirty (30) day period; three (3) or more occasions
within a sixty (60) day period; or four (4) or more occasions within a one
hundred eighty (180) day period, shall to the extent permitted by law be deemed
to be a regular and substantial course of conduct.
   SCHOOL: Any child or day care facility, or an institution of learning for
minors, whether public or private, offering instruction in those courses of
study required by the California Education Code and maintained pursuant to
standards set by the state board of education. This definition includes a
nursery school, kindergarten, elementary school, middle or junior high school,
senior high school, or any special institution of education, but it does not
include a vocation or professional institution of higher education, including a
community or junior college, college or university.
   SEMINUDE: A state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the
genitals, pubic region, buttocks, areola of the female breast, as well as
portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices.
   SEMINUDE MODEL STUDIO: Any place where a person, who appears seminude or
displays "specified anatomical areas" is provided for money or any form of
consideration to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured,
photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons.
   SEXUAL ENCOUNTER ESTABLISHMENT: A business or commercial establishment that
as one of its primary business purposes, offers for any form of consideration,
a place where two (2) or more persons may congregate, associate, or consort for
the purpose of "specified sexual activities" or the exposure of "specified
anatomical areas" or activities when one or more of the persons is seminude.
The definition of sexually oriented businesses shall not include an
establishment where a medical practitioner, psychologist, psychiatrist, or
similar professional person licensed by the state engages in medically approved
and recognized sexual therapy.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: Means and includes any of the following:
   A.   Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic
region; buttocks; and female breast below a point immediately above the top of
the areola; and
   B.   Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if completely
and opaquely covered;
   C.   Any device, costume or covering that simulates any of the body parts
included in subsection A or B of this definition.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: Means and includes any of the following,
whether performed directly or indirectly through clothing or other covering:
   A.   The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks, anus or female breast;
   B.   Sex acts, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation
or sodomy;
   C.   Masturbation, actual or simulated;
   D.   Excretory functions, as part of or in connection with any of the other
activities described in subsections A through C of this definition.
   SUBSTANTIAL ENLARGEMENT OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS: An increase in the
floor areas occupied by the business by more than fifteen percent (15%), as the
floor areas exist on the effective date of this chapter. (Ord. 2345 § 1, 1997)
18.226.030: MINIMUM PROXIMITY REQUIREMENTS:
No adult oriented business shall be established or located in any zone in the
city other than the city's "C-M" commercial manufacturing zone, the "M-2"
general industrial zone, the "I-P" industrial district zone or within the "EV/
IC" commercial industrial land use designation of the city's East Valley
Corridor specific plan (specific plan #40), all as designated on the city's
official zoning map as defined in this title, or within certain distances of
certain specified land uses or zones as set forth below:
   A.   No such business shall be established or located within five hundred
feet (500') of any other adult oriented business.
   B.   No such business shall be established or located within one thousand
feet (1,000') from any existing residential zone, park, church or school.
   C.   The distances set forth in this section shall be measured from the
nearest exterior wall of the facility housing the adult use or proposed adult
use and the nearest lot line included with the residential zone, park, school
or church, along a straight line extended between the two (2) points without
regard to intervening structures. (Ord. 2345 § 1, 1997)
18.226.040: AMORTIZATION OF NONCONFORMING ADULT ORIENTED BUSINESS USES:
Any use of real property existing on the effective date of this chapter, which
does not conform to the provisions of section
18.226.030 of this chapter, but which was constructed, operated and maintained
in compliance with all previous regulations, shall be regarded as a
nonconforming use which may be continued until one year after the effective
date of this chapter. On or before such date, all such nonconforming uses shall
be terminated unless an extension of time has been approved by the hearing
officer in accordance with the provisions of section
18.226.050 of this chapter.
   A.   Abandonment: Notwithstanding the above, any discontinuance or
abandonment of the use of any lot or structure as an adult oriented business
shall result in a loss of legal nonconforming status of such use.
   B.   Amortization; Annexed Property: Any adult oriented business which was a
legal use at the time of annexation of the property and which is located in the
city, but which does not conform to the provisions of section
18.226.030 of this chapter shall be terminated within one year of the date of
annexation unless an extension of time has been approved by the city's hearing
officer in accordance with the provisions of section
 18.226.050 of this chapter. (Ord. 2345 § 1, 1997)
18.226.050: EXTENSION OF TIME FOR TERMINATION OF NONCONFORMING USE:
The owner or operator of a nonconforming use as described in section
18.226.040 of this chapter may apply under the provisions of this section to
the city's director of community development for an extension of time within
which to terminate the nonconforming use.
   A.   Time And Manner Of Application: An application for an extension of time
within which to terminate a use made nonconforming by the provisions of section
18.226.030 of this chapter, may be filed by the owner of the real property upon
which such use is operated, or by the operator of the use. Such an application
must be filed with the city's director of community development at least ninety
(90) days but no more than one hundred eighty (180) days prior to the time
established in section
18.226.040 of this chapter for termination of such use.
   B.   Content Of Application; Fees: The application shall state the grounds
for requesting an extension of time. The filing fee for such application shall
be the same as that for a variance as is set forth in the schedule of fees
established by resolution from time to time by the city council.
   C.   Hearing Procedure: The city manager shall appoint a hearing officer to
hear the application. The hearing officer shall set the matter for hearing
within forty five (45) days of receipt of the application. All parties involved
shall have the right to offer testimonial, documentary and tangible evidence
bearing on the issues; may be represented by counsel; and shall have the right
to confront and cross examine witnesses. Any relevant evidence may be admitted
that is the sort of evidence upon which reasonable persons are accustomed to
rely in the conduct of serious affairs. Any hearing under this section may be
continued for a reasonable time for the convenience of a party or a witness.
The decision of the hearing officer shall be final and subject to judicial
review pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure section 1094.6.
   D.   Approval Of Extension Findings: An extension under the provisions of
this section shall be for a reasonable period of time commensurate with the
investment involved, and shall be approved only if the hearing officer makes
all of the following findings or such other findings as are required by law:
      1.   The applicant has made a substantial investment (including, but not
limited to, lease obligations) in the property or structure on or in which the
nonconforming use is conducted; such property or structure cannot be readily
converted to another use; and such investment was made prior to the effective
date of this chapter;
      2.   The applicant will be unable to recoup the investment as of the date
established for termination of the use; and
      3.   The applicant has made good faith efforts to recoup the investment
and to relocate the use to a location in conformance with section
18.226.030 of this chapter. (Ord. 2345 § 1, 1997)
CHAPTER 18.228
DENSITY BONUS
SECTION:
18.228.010: Purpose
18.228.020: Eligibility For Bonus And Incentives Or Concessions
18.228.030: Types Of Bonuses And Incentives Or Concessions Allowed
18.228.040: Continued Affordability; Equity Sharing
18.228.050: Location Of Affordable Units
18.228.060: Childcare Facilities
18.228.070: Processing Of Bonus Request
18.228.080: Appeals
18.228.010: PURPOSE:
This chapter provides for the preservation and maintenance of the city's
affordable housing supply, as well as incentives or concessions for the
development of housing that is affordable to the types of households and
qualifying residents identified in section
18.228.020 of this chapter. In offering these incentives or concessions, this
chapter is intended to implement the requirements of state law 1  and the goals
and policies of the city's general plan housing element. (Ord. 2762, 2012)
 
Notes
1 1. Gov.C. §§ 65302, 65913, 65915 et seq.
18.228.020: ELIGIBILITY FOR BONUS AND INCENTIVES OR CONCESSIONS:
To be eligible for a density bonus and other incentives or concessions as
provided by this chapter, a proposed residential development project shall:
   A.   Consist of five (5) or more dwelling units; and
   B.   Provide for the construction of one or more of the following within the
development:
      1.   Ten percent (10%) of the total units of a housing development for
lower income households, as defined in Health And Safety Code section 50079.5;
or
      2.   Five percent (5%) of the total units of a housing development for
very low income households, as defined in Health And Safety Code section 50105;
or
      3.   A senior citizen housing development as defined in Civil Code
sections 51.3 and 51.12; or
      4.   Ten percent (10%) of the total dwelling units in a condominium
project or in a planned development as defined in Civil Code subsection 1351(f)
and (k), respectively, for persons and families of moderate income, as defined
in Health And Safety Code section 50093. (Ord. 2762, 2012)
18.228.030: TYPES OF BONUSES AND INCENTIVES OR CONCESSIONS ALLOWED:
A residential development project that satisfies all relevant provisions of
this chapter shall be entitled to a density bonus and one or more incentives or
concessions described below. If the density bonus incentives or concessions
cannot be accommodated on a parcel due to strict compliance with the provisions
of this title, the city shall waive or modify development standards to
accommodate the bonus units or incentives or concessions to which the
development would be entitled, unless such waiver or modification would have a
specific, adverse impact, as defined in Government Code section 65589.5(d)(2),
upon health, safety or the physical environment, or any real property that is
listed in the California register of historical resources, and for which there
is no feasible method to mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact.
   A.   Minimum Density Bonus: The density bonus granted to a residential
development project shall consist of an increase over the otherwise maximum
allowable residential density under the applicable zoning ordinance and land
use element of the city's general plan as of the date of application. Such
increase shall be equal to at least:
      1.   A twenty percent (20%) increase in density when the development
meets the requirements of subsection
18.228.020B1, B2 or B3 of this chapter; or
      2.   A five percent (5%) increase in density, when the development meets
the requirements of subsection
18.228.020B4 of this chapter.
      3.   A fifteen percent (15%) increase in density, when an applicant for a
residential development donates land to the city in accordance with the
requirements of Government Code section 65915(g)(1). Nothing in this subsection
shall be construed to enlarge or diminish the authority of the city to require
a developer to donate land as a condition of development.
      4.   The city may, at its discretion, grant a density bonus that is
greater than that described in subsections
18.228.020B1, B2 and B3 of this chapter for a development that meets the
requirements therein or proportionately lower than that described in
subsections
18.228.020B1, B2 and B3 of this chapter for a development that does not meet
the requirements therein.
   B.   Additional Density Bonus: The amount of density bonus to which the
applicant is entitled shall vary according to the amount by which the
percentage of affordable housing units exceeds the base percentage established
in subsection
18.228.020B of this chapter. The amount of density bonus for a donation of land
shall vary according to the amount by which the donation exceeds the base
donation established by Government Code section 65915(h)(2).
      1.   Lower Income Households: For each one percent (1%) increase above
ten percent (10%) in the percentage of units affordable to lower income
households, the density bonus shall be increased by one and one-half percent
(1.5%).
      2.   Very Low Income Households: For each one percent (1%) increase above
five percent (5%) in the percentage of units affordable to very low income
households, the density bonus shall be increased by two and one-half percent
(2.5%).
      3.   Moderate Income Households: For each one percent (1%) increase above
ten percent (10%) in the percentage of units affordable to moderate income
households, the density bonus shall increase by one percent (1%).
      4.   Donation Of Land: For each one percent (1%) increase above the
minimum ten percent (10%) land donation, the density bonus shall be increased
by one percent (1%). Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to enlarge
or diminish the authority of the city to require a developer to donate land as
a condition of development.
The base density bonus shall not be included when determining the number of
housing units that is greater than five percent (5%) or ten percent (10%) of
the total development. All calculations resulting in fractional units shall be
rounded up to the next whole number. In no event shall the city be required to
grant more than a thirty five percent (35%) increase over the otherwise maximum
allowable residential density under the applicable zoning ordinance and land
use element of the city's general plan.
 
               Qualifying       Minimum            Increase In Density
               Percentage       Density Bonus      Bonus (For Each 1% Over
               (Of Total Units) (Above Maximum     Qualifying Percentage)
                                Allowable Density)
Lower          10%              20%                1.5%
Very low       5%               20%                2.5%
Moderate       10%              5%                 1%
Senior citizen n/a              20%                n/a
Donation       10%              15%                1%
 
   C.   Incentives, Number: An eligible project shall receive one, two (2) or
three (3) incentives as follows:
      1.   Lower Income Households: An applicant shall receive:
         a.   One incentive or concession for a project that includes at least
ten percent (10%) of the total units for lower income households;
         b.   Two (2) incentives or concessions for a project that includes at
least twenty percent (20%) of the total units for lower income households; and
         c.   Three (3) incentives or concessions for a project that includes
at least thirty percent (30%) of the total units for lower income households.
      2.   Very Low Income Households: An applicant shall receive:
         a.   One incentive or concession for a project that includes at least
five percent (5%) of the total units for very low income households;
         b.   Two (2) incentives or concessions for a project that includes at
least ten percent (10%) of the total units for very low income households; and
         c.   Three (3) incentives or concessions for a project that includes
at least fifteen percent (15%) of the total units for very low income
households.
      3.   Moderate Income Households: An applicant shall receive:
         a.   One incentive or concession for a project that includes at least
ten percent (10%) of the total units for persons and families of moderate
income in a condominium or planned development;
         b.   Two (2) incentives or concessions for a project that includes at
least twenty percent (20%) of the total units for persons and families of
moderate income in a condominium or planned development; and
         c.   Three (3) incentives or concessions for a project that includes
at least thirty percent (30%) of the total units for persons and families of
moderate income in a condominium or planned development.
   D.   Incentives And Concessions, Description: A project that is eligible to
receive incentives or concessions pursuant to subsection C of this section
shall be entitled to at least one of the following incentives or concessions
identified in Government Code section 65915:
      1.   A reduction in site development standards (e.g., coverage, setback,
zero lot line and/or reduced parcel sizes), or a modification of zoning
requirements or architectural design requirements that exceed the minimum
standards approved by the California building standards commission.
      2.   Approval of mixed use zoning in conjunction with the housing project
if nonresidential land uses would reduce the cost of the housing project, and
the nonresidential land uses would be compatible with the housing project and
adjoining development.
      3.   Other regulatory incentives or concessions proposed by the developer
or the city that would result in identifiable, financially sufficient and
actual cost reductions.
      4.   A reduction in the number of required parking spaces, upon request
by the applicant. For a one bedroom unit, one parking space is required; for
two (2) and three (3) bedroom units, two (2) parking spaces are required and
for four (4) or more bedroom units, two and one-half (21/2) parking spaces are
required.
Nothing in this section shall be construed to require the city to provide, or
limit the city's ability to provide, direct financial incentives for housing
development, including the provision of publicly owned land by the city or the
waiver of fees and dedication requirements.
   E.   Limitations And Exceptions:
      1.   To receive incentives or concessions as described in subsections C
and D of this section, an applicant must submit a proposal to the city
requesting the specific incentives or concessions that the applicant desires.
      2.   The city shall grant the incentives or concessions requested by the
applicant pursuant to subsection E1 of this section and required pursuant to
subsection C of this section, unless the city makes a written finding, based
upon substantial evidence, of either of the following:
         a.   The incentive or concession is not required in order to provide
for affordable housing costs, as defined in Health And Safety Code section
50052.5; or
         b.   The incentive or concession would have a specific adverse impact
as defined in Government Code section 65589.5(d)(2), upon public health and
safety or the physical environment, or on any real property that is listed in
the California register of historical resources, and for which there is no
feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact
without rendering the development unaffordable to low and moderate income
households.
      3.   The city's granting of an incentive or concession shall not be
interpreted, in and of itself, to require a general plan amendment, zoning
change, or other discretionary approval.
      4.   Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to require the city to
waive or reduce development standards or to grant an incentive or concession
that would have a specific, adverse impact upon health, safety or the physical
environment for which there is no feasible method to mitigate or avoid the
specific adverse impact; nor shall this subsection require the city to waive or
reduce development standards or to grant an incentive or concession that would
have an adverse impact on any real property that is listed in the California
register of historical resources. (Ord. 2762, 2012)
18.228.040: CONTINUED AFFORDABILITY; EQUITY SHARING:
   A.   Written Covenant: Before the issuance of a building permit for any
dwelling unit in a development for which density bonus units have been awarded
or incentives or concessions have been received, the developer shall identify
the restricted units and shall enter into a written covenant with the city to
guarantee one or both of the following, as applicable:
      1.   Lower And Very Low Income Households; Continued Affordability: The
continued affordability and availability of the lower and very low income units
shall be for a minimum of thirty (30) years, as required by state law 1 . Those
units targeted for lower income households, as defined in Health And Safety
Code section 50105, shall be affordable at a rent that does not exceed thirty
percent (30%) of fifty percent (50%) of the area median income.
      2.   Moderate Income Households; Equity Sharing: The initial occupant of
any moderate income unit in a condominium or planned development shall be a
person or family of moderate income, as required by state law 2 . Upon resale,
the seller of the unit shall retain the value of any improvements, the down
payment and the seller's proportionate share of appreciation. The city shall
recapture its proportionate share of appreciation, which shall be equal to the
percentage by which the initial sale price to the moderate income person or
family was less than the fair market value of the home at the time of initial
sale. The city shall spend recaptured funds within three (3) years for any
purposes to promote homeownership, as described in Health And Safety Code
section 33334.2(e).
   B.   Recordation Of Agreement: The terms and conditions of the covenant
shall run with the land which is to be developed, shall be binding upon the
successors in interest of the developer, and shall be recorded in the official
records of the county of San Bernardino. In addition to the requirements
described in subsection A of this section, the agreement shall include the
following provisions:
      1.   The developer shall give the city a continuing right of refusal to
purchase or lease any or all of the designated units at the fair market value;
      2.   The deeds to the designated units shall contain a covenant stating
that the developer shall not sell, rent, lease, sublet, assign or otherwise
transfer any interests for the same without the written approval of the city
confirming that the sales or rental price of the units is consistent with the
limits established for lower, very low and moderate income households, which
shall be related to the consumer price index; and
      3.   The city shall have the authority to enter into other agreements
with the developer, or purchasers of the dwelling units, as may be necessary to
ensure that the lower and very low income units are continuously occupied by
eligible households. (Ord. 2762, 2012)
 
Notes
1 1. Gov.C. §§ 65915(c)(1), 65916.
2 2. Gov.C. § 65915(c)(2).
18.228.050: LOCATION OF AFFORDABLE UNITS:
   A.   Location/Dispersal Of Units: The location of affordable units within
the qualifying project shall be at the discretion of the city with the goal to
integrate the units into the overall project. However, the affordable units
shall be reasonably dispersed throughout the development where feasible, shall
contain on average the same number of bedrooms as the nonaffordable units, and
shall be compatible with the design or use of the remaining units in terms of
appearance, materials and finish quality.
   B.   Alternative Development Site: Circumstances may arise in which the
public interest would be served by allowing some or all of the affordable units
associated with one housing development to be produced and operated at an
alternative development site. Where the owner/developer and the city form an
agreement, the resulting linked developments shall be considered a single
housing development for the purposes of this chapter. Under these
circumstances, the owner/developer shall be subject to the same requirements of
this chapter for the affordable units to be provided on the alternative site.
(Ord. 2762, 2012)
18.228.060: CHILDCARE FACILITIES:
   A.   When an applicant proposes to construct an eligible residential
development project as defined in section
18.228.020 of this chapter, and includes a childcare facility that will be
located on the premises of, as part of, or adjacent to, the project, the city
shall grant either of the following:
      1.   An additional density bonus that is an amount of square feet of
residential space that is equal to or greater than the amount of square feet in
the childcare facility.
      2.   An additional incentive or concession that contributes significantly
to the economic feasibility of the construction of the childcare facility.
   B.   The city shall require, as a condition of approving the housing
development, that the following occur:
      1.   The childcare facility shall remain in operation for a period of
time that is as long as or longer than the period of time during which the
density bonus units are required to remain affordable pursuant to section
18.228.040 of this chapter.
      2.   Of the children who attend the childcare facility, the children of
very low, lower and moderate income households shall equal a percentage that is
equal to or greater than the percentage of dwelling units that are required for
very low, lower or moderate income households pursuant to subsection
18.228.020B of this chapter.
   C.   Notwithstanding subsections A and B of this section, the city shall not
be required to provide a density bonus or incentive for a childcare facility if
it finds, based upon substantial evidence, that the community has adequate
childcare facilities. (Ord. 2762, 2012)
18.228.070: PROCESSING OF BONUS REQUEST:
   A.   Permit Required: Requests for affordable units shall require approval
of a planned residential development permit in compliance with chapter 18.144
of this title.
   B.   Initial Review Of Bonus Request: The city shall notify the developer
within ninety (90) days of the filing of the development plan permit
application whether the development project qualifies for the additional
density.
   C.   Criteria To Be Considered: Criteria to be considered in analyzing a
requested density bonus shall include whether the applicant has agreed to
construct a development that meets the requirements of section
18.228.020 of this chapter. Criteria to be considered in analyzing a requested
incentive shall include whether an incentive or concession has a specific
adverse impact upon health, safety or the physical environment, and whether
there is no feasible method to eliminate or mitigate such specific adverse
impact.
   D.   Findings For Approval: The approval of a density bonus shall require
the following findings to be made in a positive manner:
      1.   The development project would not be a hazard or nuisance to the
city at large or establish a use or development inconsistent with the goals and
policies of the city's general plan;
      2.   The number of dwellings can be accommodated by existing and planned
infrastructure capacities;
      3.   Adequate evidence exists to ensure that the development of the
property would result in the provision of affordable housing in a manner
consistent with the purpose and intent of this chapter;
      4.   In the event that the city does not grant at least one financial
concession or incentive as defined in state law 1  in addition to the density
bonus, that additional concessions or incentives are not necessary to ensure
affordable housing costs; and
      5.   There are sufficient provisions to guarantee that the lower and very
low income units would remain affordable in the future.
   E.   Development Standards: In no case may the city apply any development
standard that would have the effect of precluding the construction of a
development meeting the criteria of subsection
18.228.020B of this chapter at the densities or with the incentives or
concessions permitted by this chapter. An applicant may submit to the city a
proposal for the waiver or reduction of development standards. The applicant
must show that the waiver or modification is necessary to make the affordable
housing units economically feasible. (Ord. 2762, 2012)
 
Notes
1 1. Gov.C. § 65915.
18.228.080: APPEALS:
An applicant may initiate judicial proceedings if the city refuses to grant a
requested density bonus, incentive, or concession. If a court finds that the
refusal to grant a requested density bonus, incentive, or concession is in
violation of this chapter or Government Code section 65915, the court shall
award the plaintiff reasonable attorney fees and costs of suit. (Ord. 2762,
2012)
CHAPTER 18.230
INCLUSIONARY HOUSING
SECTION:
18.230.010: Purpose
18.230.020: Definitions
18.230.030: Inclusionary Housing Requirements
18.230.040: Duration Of Affordability Covenants
18.230.050: Development Standards For For-Sale Inclusionary Units
18.230.060: Development Standards For Rental Inclusionary Units
18.230.070: Development Standards For Off-Site Inclusionary Units
18.230.080: Access To Common Amenities
18.230.090: Inclusionary Housing Policies And Procedures
18.230.100: Marketing Of Inclusionary Units
18.230.110: Alternative Means Of Fulfilling Incusionary Housing Obligations
18.230.120: Exemptions
18.230.130: Compliance Procedures
18.230.140: Requirements For For-Sale Inclusionary Units
18.230.150: Occupancy Of Rental Units
18.230.160: Adjustments, Waivers
18.230.170: Administration And Enforcement
18.230.010: PURPOSE:
The City's purpose in enacting this title are as follows:
   A.   To ensure the development and availability of decent, affordable
housing to a broad range of households with varying income levels throughout
the City.
   B.   To promote the City's goal to add affordable housing units to the
City's housing stock.
   C.   To ensure the long-term affordability of units and availability for
income-eligible households in years to come.
   D.   To ensure that the private sector, in addition to public sector,
participates in the provision of affordable housing for current and future
residents of the City of Redlands.
   E.   To ensure that affordable housing will be dispersed throughout the City
and not be segregated from market-rate housing. (Ord. 2959, 2023)
18.230.020: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this title, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
                              The housing cost for for-sale Inclusionary Units
AFFORDABLE HOUSING COST:      as defined by California Health & Safety Code
                              section 50052.5 for owner occupied housing, as
                              applicable to the moderate-income households.
                              T legally binding agreement between an applicant
                              and the City, in a form and substance
                              satisfactory to the City Manager and City
AFFORDABLE HOUSING AGREEMENT: Attorney and suitable for recording, setting
                              forth those provisions necessary to ensure that
                              the requirements of this chapter are, and will
                              continue to be, satisfied.
                              The affordable rent for rental dwelling units as
AFFORDABLE RENT:              defined in California Health and Safety Code
                              Section 50053.
                              The maximum sales price for which a for-sale
                              Inclusionary Unit may be sold, that will result
                              in the purchaser paying an Affordable Housing
AFFORDABLE SALES PRICE:       Cost for the for-sale Inclusionary Unit, assuming
                              a benchmark mortgage interest rate and minimum
                              down payment as may be established by the City
                              from time to time.
                              A person, persons, or entity that applies to the
                              City for one or more discretionary or residential
                              permits required for the development of a
APPLICANT OR DEVELOPER:       Residential Development and also includes the
                              owner or owners of the property if the Applicant
                              does not own the property on which the
                              development is proposed.
                              The annual median household for San Bernardino
                              County, adjusted for household size, as published
AREA MEDIAN INCOME:           periodically in the California Code of
                              Regulations, Title 25, Section 6932, or its
                              successor provision.
BUILDING PERMIT:              Full structural building permits as well as
                              partial permits such as foundation-only permits.
                              The permit issued by the City of Redlands
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY:     building division authorizing the initial
                              occupancy of a residential unit, including a
                              temporary certificate of occupancy.
CITY MANAGER:                 The City of Redlands City Manager or designee.
                              Dwelling units approved in a Residential
                              Development pursuant to California Government
                              Code section 65915 et seq. and the City Density
DENSITY BONUS UNITS:          Bonus Ordinance (Redlands Municipal Code
                              chapter 18.228) that are in excess of the maximum
                              residential density otherwise permitted by the
                              City of Redlands General Plan or Zoning
                              Ordinance, and any applicable Specific Plan.
                              Shall have the definition given for dwelling unit
DWELLING UNIT:                in subsection
                              18.08.225 of the Redlands Municipal Code.
                              Any dwelling unit, including but not limited to a
                              condominium, townhome, other attached or detached
                              single family dwelling unit, for which a parcel
                              or tentative and final map is required for the
FOR-SALE:                     lawful subdivision of the parcel upon which the
                              dwelling unit is located for the creation of the
                              unit in accordance with the Subdivision Map Act
                              (California Government Code section 66410 et
                              seq.).
HOUSEHOLD:                    One person living alone or two or more persons
                              sharing residency.
                              The fund established pursuant to subsection
                              18.230.170(B) of this chapter, which is
INCLUSIONARY HOUSING FUND:    designated by the City to maintain and account
                              for all funds received pursuant to this title,
                              including but not limited to, all In-lieu Fees.
                              A plan containing all the information specified
                              in and submitted in conformance with subsection
INCLUSIONARY HOUSING PLAN:    18.230.140 of this chapter specifying the manner
                              in which Inclusionary Units will be provided in
                              conformance with this chapter.
                              A dwelling unit that is designated to meet the
                              requirements set forth in this chapter, and that
INCLUSIONARY UNIT:            must be made available at an Affordable Housing
                              Cost or an affordable rent to eligible moderate-,
                              low- or very low-income households, as applicable
                              to the unit.
                              A fee paid by an applicant into the City's
                              Inclusionary housing fund in-lieu of constructing
IN-LIEU FEE:                  Inclusionary Units pursuant to this chapter.
                              Payment of In-lieu Fees shall be allowed as an
                              option in accordance with subsection
                              18.230.120(A) of this title.
                              A household whose income does not exceed the
                              qualifying limits for lower income families as
                              established and amended from time to time for San
                              Bernardino County pursuant to Section 8 of the
LOW-INCOME HOUSEHOLD:         United States Housing Act of 1937. The income
                              limit for low-income households, adjusted for
                              family size, is published periodically in the
                              California Code of Regulations, Title 25, Section
                              6932.
                              A dwelling unit that is required to be sold or
LOW-INCOME UNIT:              rented to a low-income household at an Affordable
                              Sales Price or an affordable rent, as applicable.
MARKET-RATE UNIT:             A dwelling unit in a Residential Development that
                              is not an Inclusionary Unit.
                              Shall have the same definition of "persons and
                              families of low or moderate-income as set forth
MODERATE-                     in California Health & Safety Code Section 50093.
INCOME HOUSEHOLD:             The income limit for moderate-income households,
                              adjusted for family size, is published
                              periodically in the California Code of
                              Regulations, Title 25, Section 6932.
                              A dwelling unit that is required to be sold or
MODERATE-                     rented to a moderate-income household, or a low-
INCOME UNIT:                  income unit that is able to qualify to rent or
                              purchase the moderate-income unit.
                              A dwelling unit that is not a for-sale dwelling
                              unit, and does not include any dwelling unit,
                              whether offered for rental or sale, that may be
RENTAL:                       sold as a result of the lawful subdivision of the
                              parcel upon which the dwelling unit is located or
                              creation of the unit in accordance with the
                              Subdivision Map Act (Government Code section
                              66410 et seq.).
                              A legally binding agreement between the City and
                              the purchaser of a for-sale Inclusionary Unit, in
                              a form as approved by the City Attorney, which
RESALE RESTRICTION AGREEMENT: requires that the Inclusionary Unit to be
                              occupied by the purchaser for the term of the
                              agreement or sold to another Moderate-Income
                              Household at an Affordable Sales Price.
                              Any development project for which an application
                              for any ministerial or discretionary permit has
                              been submitted to the City, and where the
                              development would create new or additional
RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT:      dwelling units by the construction or alteration
                              of structures, the conversion of a use to
                              residential from any other use, or the conversion
                              of a use to for-sale residential from rental
                              residential use.
                              Garbage collection, sewer, water, electricity,
UTILITIES:                    gas and other heating, cooling, cooking and
                              refrigeration fuels.
                              A household whose income does not exceed the
                              qualifying limits for very low-income families as
                              established and amended from time to time for San
                              Bernardino County pursuant to Section 8 of the
VERY LOW-INCOME HOUSEHOLD:    United States Housing Act of 1937. The income
                              limits for very low-income households, adjusted
                              for family size, is published periodically in the
                              California Code of Regulations, Title 25, Section
                              6932.
                              That is required to be rented to a very low-
VERY LOW-INCOME UNIT:         income household at an affordable rent. (Ord.
                              2959, 2023)
 
18.230.030: INCLUSIONARY HOUSING REQUIREMENTS:
A Residential Development that includes ten (10) or more Dwelling Units shall
be subject to the provisions of this chapter.
   A.   Inclusionary Requirements for For-Sale Dwelling Units: Residential
developments that include for-sale single-family detached dwelling units,
townhomes, and condominiums shall include for-sale moderate-income units equal
to five percent (5%) of the total number of dwelling units in the Residential
Development. If a residential condominium development is developed with the
intent to initially rent the dwelling units, the Residential Development shall
comply with the inclusionary requirements for rental dwelling units set forth
in subsection B below, and any future sale of the Inclusionary Units shall be
addressed in the Affordable Housing Agreement for the Inclusionary Units for-
sale dwelling units shall provide Inclusionary Units through one of the
following means:
   B.   Inclusionary Requirements for Rental Dwelling Units: Residential
Developments that are comprised of Rental dwelling units shall include, within
the residential development, one of the following as a percentage of the total
number of Dwelling Units:
      1.   Five percent (5%) Low Income Units and seven percent (7%) Moderate
Income Units; or
      2.   Five percent (5%) Very Low Income Units and five percent (5%)
Moderate Income Units; or
      3.   Nine percent (9%) Low Income Units.
   C.   Notwithstanding the requirements contained in 18.230.030(A) and (B),
projects for which the City has received a development application on or before
March 1, 2023 may fulfill the requirements of this title by providing five
percent (5%) Very Low-Income rental units.
   D.   Density Bonus Units: For purposes of calculating the number of
Inclusionary Units required, any additional units authorized as density bonus
units will not be counted in determining the required number of Inclusionary
Units.
   E.   Fractional Units: If, in computing the total number of Inclusionary
Units required in a Residential Development, there is a fractional unit
required, the Applicant shall pay an In-lieu Fee in the amount determined
pursuant to subsection
18.230.120(A)(4) of this title, equal to the amount calculated for that
fractional unit on a per Dwelling Unit basis.
   F.   Residential Development with a Combination of For-sale and Rental
Dwelling Units: When a Residential Development includes a combination of for-
sale and rental Dwelling Units, the number and income levels for Inclusionary
Units required for the Residential Development shall be calculated for each
category of dwelling units (i.e., for-sale and rental) individually, and
combined to comprise the Residential Development's total inclusionary housing
requirement pursuant to this title. (Ord. 2959, 2023)
18.230.040: DURATION OF AFFORDABILITY COVENANTS:
   A.   For-sale Inclusionary Units produced pursuant to this chapter must be
legally restricted to sale to and occupancy by households of the income levels
for which the units were designated for a single cumulative term of fifty-five
(55) years. During that term, the for-sale Inclusionary Units may only be sold
and resold to Moderate or Low-Income Households at an Affordable Sales Price
for Moderate-Income Households.
   B.   Rental units produced pursuant to this chapter must be legally
restricted to rental to and occupancy by households in the income level for
which the Inclusionary Units are developed for a term of not less than fifty-
five (55) years. At the end of the fifty-five-year term, the restrictions on
rental of the Inclusionary Units may only be removed in the event that the
property upon which the rental Inclusionary Unit or units are located is
rezoned and used for non-residential use.
   C.   To ensure compliance with the durational requirement, Affordable
Housing Agreements, and resale restriction agreements for For-sale Inclusionary
Units, shall be recorded in the chain of title for every Inclusionary Unit as
provided in subsection
18.230.140(E) of this title. (Ord. 2959, 2023)
18.230.050: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR FOR-SALE INCLUSIONARY UNITS:
Unless otherwise specified by the City Council, Inclusionary Units shall be
developed and incorporated into the applicable Residential Development in a
manner consistent with the following requirements:
   A.   For-sale Inclusionary Units shall be reasonably dispersed throughout a
Residential Development and not clustered in a specific portion of the
development, and the location of the for-sale Inclusionary Units within a
Residential Development shall be designated before issuance of building permits
for the development.
   B.   The for-sale Inclusionary Units shall be built concurrently with the
market rate units in the Residential Development. The Inclusionary Units may be
constructed in phases if the market rate units are constructed in phases,
provided that the percentage of Inclusionary Units developed in each phase
shall be equivalent to or greater than the total percentage of Inclusionary
Units to be developed as part of the Residential Development until such time
that all the Inclusionary Units have been built.
   C.   For-sale Inclusionary Units shall be comparable in infrastructure
(including sewer, water and other utilities), construction quality and exterior
design to the market-rate units.
   D.   The bedroom mix for the for-sale Inclusionary Units must be
proportional to the bedroom mix of the market rate units, but the for-sale
Inclusionary Units may be smaller in square footage than the market rate units.
   E.   The interior finishes and features for the Inclusionary Units must be
comparable to the base level interior finishes for the market-rate units, and
the appliance packages in the for-sale Inclusionary Units must be the same as
the appliance packages provided in the base level market rate units. (Ord.
2959, 2023)
18.230.060: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR RENTAL INCLUSIONARY UNITS:
   A.   The rental Inclusionary Units developed in a rental Residential
Development shall be designated before issuance of building permits for the
development and shall be reasonably dispersed throughout the Residential
Development.
   B.   The rental Inclusionary Units shall be built concurrently with the
market rate units in the rental Residential Development.
   C.   The bedroom mix for the rental Inclusionary Units in a rental
Residential Development must be proportional to the bedroom mix of the market
rate units, but the Inclusionary Units may be smaller in square footage than
the market rate units.
   D.   The interior improvements for the rental Inclusionary Units must be
consistent with defined housing quality standards as established for
Inclusionary Units by the City. If no such housing quality standards have been
established by the City, the improvements shall comply with the standards
established or approved by the California Tax Credit Allocation Committee for
residential units developed pursuant to the federal low-income housing tax
credit program. The market rate units can include enhanced interior
improvements. (Ord. 2959, 2023)
18.230.070: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR OFF-SITE INCLUSIONARY UNITS:
Inclusionary units that are constructed to satisfy this title that are outside
the boundaries of the market-rate Residential Development shall comply with the
following requirements:
   A.   The Inclusionary Units constructed must be rental dwelling units.
   B.   The parcel upon which the rental Inclusionary Units are constructed
must be constructed within one mile of the boundary of the market rate
Residential Development that is subject to the requirements of this title.
   C.   The Inclusionary Units shall not create an over concentration of deed
restricted affordable housing units in any specific neighborhood. For purposes
of this title, "over concentration" is defined as more than fifty (50) deed
restricted very low or low-income dwelling units within one-fourth (¼) mile of
the site of the proposed Inclusionary Units, or more than two hundred (200) of
such units within one-half (½) mile of the site of the proposed Inclusionary
Units.
   D.   The developer of the for-sale Residential Development may enter into an
agreement with a separate affordable housing developer to construct, own and
operate the rental Inclusionary Units, subject to the following requirements:
      1.   The affordable housing developer must have relevant recent
experience developing affordable housing and be approved by the City in its
sole discretion; and
      2.   The affordable housing developer may not request any financial
assistance from the City.
      3.   The affordable housing developer may apply to use the density bonus,
incentives and concessions available pursuant to Government Code section 65915
for the Residential Development based on the Inclusionary Units developed
outside the boundaries of the Residential Development as provided in this
subsection.
   E.   Design, building quality and maintenance standards must be consistent
with defined housing quality standards as established for Inclusionary Units by
the City. If no such housing quality standards have been established by the
City, the improvements shall comply with the standards established or approved
by the California Tax Credit Allocation Committee for residential units
developed pursuant to the federal low-income housing tax credit program.
   F.   The bedroom mix for the rental Inclusionary Units shall not be required
to be proportionate to the for-sale residential units, provided that the rental
Inclusionary Units shall be consistent with the following requirements:
      1.   No more than fifteen percent (15%) of the rental Inclusionary Units
may be studio units.
      2.   At least forty percent (40%) of the rental Inclusionary Units must
include two or more bedrooms.
      3.   The remaining units must be one or more bedrooms.
   G.   The rental Inclusionary Units shall be built prior to or concurrently
with the market rate units in the Residential Development that triggered the
requirements for the Inclusionary Units. If the market rate units are
constructed in phases, the rental Inclusionary Units must be constructed prior
to or concurrently with the first phase of the market rate Residential
Development. The developer shall not commence construction on the second phase
of the Residential Development until the required rental Inclusionary Units are
completed. (Ord. 2959, 2023)
18.230.080: ACCESS TO COMMON AMENITIES:
Residents and tenants of Inclusionary Units located within the Residential
Development shall be provided the same rights and access to common amenities in
the development project as residents and tenants occupying market-rate units.
(Ord. 2959, 2023)
18.230.090: INCLUSIONARY HOUSING POLICIES AND PROCEDURES:
The City will prepare manuals that detail the Inclusionary Housing policies and
procedures that will be applied to residential projects that are subject to the
Inclusionary Housing program requirements. Separate manuals will be prepared
for For-sale and Rental housing developments. (Ord. 2959, 2023)
18.230.100: MARKETING OF INCLUSIONARY UNITS:
Developer shall use commercially reasonable efforts to market the Inclusionary
Units to eligible residents of the City of Redlands, consistent with the City's
Inclusionary Housing Policies and Procedures. (Ord. 2959, 2023)
18.230.110: ALTERNATIVE MEANS OF FULFILLING INCLUSIONARY HOUSING OBLIGATIONS:
   A.   Payment of In-lieu Fee: As an alternative to constructing Inclusionary
Units as required by this title, all or a portion of the inclusionary housing
requirement may be fulfilled through the payment of an In-lieu Fee pursuant to
an In-lieu Fee schedule adopted by the City pursuant to this title, subject to
the following:
      1.   For-sale Residential Developments of any size may pay an In-lieu Fee
by-right.
      2.   Rental Residential Developments with twenty two (22) or fewer units
may pay an In-lieu Fee by-right.
      3.   Rental Residential Developments with twenty three (23) or greater
units may pay an In-lieu Fee, subject to approval by the City Council, upon a
demonstration that providing the affordable units in the Residential
Development would create an unreasonable economic hardship due to such factors
as project size, site constraints, and/or excessively large affordability gaps.
      4.   Prior to the effective date of this title, and from time to time
thereafter, the City Council shall adopt by resolution a schedule of In-lieu
Fees that shall be levied based on the square footage of the saleable area of
For-sale Residential Developments or leasable area of Rental Residential
Developments, but excluding the affordable units in a project that received a
density bonus in accordance with Government Code section 65915.1. The amount of
In-lieu Fees shall be established by resolution of the City Council. The In-
lieu Fee schedule shall be updated periodically by the City Council.
      5.   The required In-lieu Fees shall be paid at the time that the first
building permit is obtained for the Residential Development, except that, for
phased projects, the developer may pay a pro rata share of the In-lieu Fee,
based on the number and size of phases in the development, concurrently with
the issuance of the first building permit for each phase of the Residential
Development.
      6.   All In-lieu Fees collected under this title shall be deposited in
the Inclusionary Housing fund established by the City pursuant to subsection
18.230.170(B) of this title.
   B.   Off-site Development of Affordable Units: Residential Developments can
fulfill Inclusionary Housing requirements by renting 9% of the total number of
units in the development at the Low-income standard in one of the following
ways:
      1.   Off-site production of affordable rental units; or
      2.   Creation of a parcel within a For-sale Housing Development site on
which affordable rental units are constructed.
   C.   Land Dedication: As an alternative to constructing the required
inclusionary units in accordance with this title, the City Council may, in its
discretion, allow an applicant to dedicate real property to the City for the
purpose of developing affordable housing, provided that the real property
dedicated to the City must satisfy all of the following requirements:
      1.   The real property must be conveyed to the City at no cost.
      2.   At the time the applicant submits a proposal to dedicate real
property to the City pursuant to this title, the applicant must provide
evidence satisfactory to the City that the property meets the following
requirements:
         a.   The applicant has control over the property through fee
ownership, an option to purchase the property, or other property interest
demonstrating site control satisfactory to the City, and the real property is
free of any monetary liens. In the event that there are any encumbrances or
easements that adversely impact title to the property, those encumbrances or
easements must be disclosed and factored into the estimated value of the real
property interest to be conveyed to the City.
         b.   The applicant must provide evidence satisfactory to the City that
the property does not contain any hazardous materials at the time of
conveyance; must disclose whether any hazardous materials were previously found
on the property; and if hazardous materials were previously remediated from the
property, the applicant must provide evidence satisfactory to the City that
such hazardous materials were remediated in accordable with all applicable laws
and regulations.
         c.   The property cannot have been improved with any residential use
for at least five years prior to the submission of the proposal for dedication
of the property to the City pursuant to this title.
         d.   The property must be located within one mile of the property upon
with the applicant proposes to develop the market rate residential development
that has triggered the requirements of this title.
         e.   The property must have a general plan designation that authorizes
residential uses and is zoned for residential development at a density to
accommodate at least a number of dwelling units equal to at least ten percent
(10%) of the number of dwelling units proposed in the Applicant's residential
development.
         f.   The property must be suitable for development of inclusionary
units equal to at least ten percent (10%) of the number of dwelling units
proposed in the applicant's residential development, in terms of configuration,
physical characteristics, location, access, adjacent uses, and other relevant
planning and development criteria including, but not limited to, factors such
as the cost of construction or development arising from the nature, condition,
or location of the property.
         g.   Infrastructure to serve the property, including but not limited
to streets and public utilities, must be available at the property line and
have adequate capacity to serve the maximum allowable residential development
pursuant to zoning regulations.
      3.   In order to assist the City in evaluating a proposal by an applicant
to dedicate property pursuant to this title, the applicant shall submit the
following documents:
         a.   A conceptual site plan and narrative description of a residential
development that could be developed on the property.
         b.   An identification of the income and affordability restrictions
proposed to be imposed on the property.
         c.   A pro forma analysis that quantifies any financial gap associated
with the identified development scope and describes how this financial gap will
be filled.
         d.   If the applicant believes a density bonus would be required
pursuant to Government Code Section 65915, the terms of the requested density
bonus; and the incentives, concessions, and development waivers that applicant
anticipates will be requested for the development of the property.
      4.   Prior to scheduling a proposal for dedication of property pursuant
to this title for consideration by the City Council, City staff will
independently evaluate the applicant's proposal and provide the City Council
with an analysis of whether the proposal meets the required standards set forth
in this title.
   D.   The alternative means of compliance set forth herein are intended to
implement the City's authority to promote the development of affordable
housing, in accordance with California Government Code § 65850, subdivision
(g), and shall not be considered or construed as an ad hoc exaction, a mandated
fee required to develop a specific property, or a fee imposed to offset the
development impacts of a specific project. (Ord. 2959, 2023)
18.230.120: EXEMPTIONS:
The requirements of this chapter do not apply to:
   A.   Residential developments of nine (9) or fewer housing units.
   B.   The reconstruction of any structures that have been destroyed by fire,
flood, earthquake, or other act of nature provided that the reconstruction of
the site does not increase the number of residential units by three or more.
   C.   Residential building additions, repairs or remodels, provided that such
work does not increase the number of existing units by three or more.
   D.   Residential developments that have been deemed complete by the City
pursuant to Government Code Section 65589.5 or 65943 as of the effective date
of this title. Further, for Residential Developments that have been deemed
complete by the City pursuant to Government Code Section 65589.5 or 65943
within forty-five (45) days of the effective date of this title, the
inclusionary housing requirement imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be
reduced by fifty percent (50%). (Ord. 2959, 2023)
18.230.130: COMPLIANCE PROCEDURES:
   A.   No Residential Development subject to this title shall be approved or
deemed approved without approval of an Inclusionary Housing Plan as provided
herein.
   B.   Submittal of Inclusionary Housing Plan: The applicant for a residential
project subject to this title shall submit an Inclusionary Housing Plan in
conjunction with its application for discretionary approvals required of the
City for the Residential Development, or if no discretionary approvals are
required, in conjunction with the application for the first ministerial permit
or approval required for the Residential Development. The Inclusionary Housing
Plan shall be in a form as required by the City and must include the following
information as applicable based on the applicant's method of compliance with
this title:
      1.   Whether the Residential Development is For-sale or Rental;
      2.   How the inclusionary housing requirement will be satisfied pursuant
to this title;
      3.   The number, unit type, tenure, number of bedrooms, approximate
location, size and design, construction and completion schedule of all
Inclusionary Units;
      4.   For off-site development of Inclusionary Units, such information as
is required to demonstrate compliance with subsection
18.230.120(B);
      5.   Phasing of Inclusionary Units in relation to market rate units;
      6.   The amount of In-lieu Fees to be paid by applicant, if applicable.
      7.   Any other information reasonably requested by the City Manager to
assist with evaluation of the plan under the requirements of this ordinance.
      8.   Acknowledgement that an instrument as specified by the City
restricting the Inclusionary Unit(s) as affordable shall be recorded against
every Inclusionary Unit and that a recordable Affordable Housing Agreement
shall be entered into by the applicant and any other necessary party, and/or
that all required In-lieu Fees shall be paid at the time set forth in
subsection 18.230(A)(5).
   C.   Approval of Inclusionary Housing Plan.
      1.   In the event that the Residential Development requires discretionary
approvals in order to be developed, the Inclusionary Housing Plan shall be
considered with the application for such inclusionary approvals by the entity
responsible for reviewing such discretionary approvals and may be appealed in
accordance with the appeals procedures established for such approvals.
      2.   In the event that the Residential Development does not require
discretionary approvals in order to be developed, the Inclusionary Housing Plan
shall be considered by the City Manager and must be approved prior to the
issuance of any ministerial permits required for the Residential Development.
The City Manager's decision is final unless a written appeal is filed with the
City Clerk's office within ten days from the date of issuance of the City
Manager's decision under this title. The City Council's decision on appeal
shall be final.
      3.   Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the event the applicant desires to
comply with this title by means of a method that specifically requires City
Council approval pursuant to this title, the Inclusionary Housing Plan shall be
considered by the City Council either prior to or concurrently with
consideration by the required decision-making body for the approvals required
for the Residential Development.
   D.   Form of restrictions: The forms of the Affordable Housing Agreement and
any related declarations, resale restrictions, deeds of trust, and other
documents authorized by this title shall be in a general form as prescribed by
the City and shall be approved by the City Manager and approved as to form by
the City Attorney prior to being executed with respect to any Residential
Development subject to this program.
   E.   Recording of Affordable Housing Agreements.
      1.   An Affordable Housing Agreement in a form approved by the City must
be recorded against Inclusionary Units or the Residential Development in its
entirety, as deemed appropriate by the City Manager in consultation with the
City Attorney, prior to the issuance of any building permit for the Residential
Development. The Affordable Housing Agreement shall ensure that the applicant
develops the required Inclusionary Housing Units and complies with all other
terms of the approved Inclusionary Housing Plan and this title.
      2.   Resale restrictions, deeds of trust, and/or other documents as
deemed necessary or appropriate by the City Manager shall be recorded against
For-Sale Inclusionary Units to ensure the continued affordability of the For-
Sale Inclusionary Units in compliance with this title.
   F.   Building permits: The City shall not issue a building permit for a
Residential Development subject to the requirements of this title without an
Affordable Housing Agreement executed by the owner, the applicant (if not the
owner) and the City Manager, and approved as to form by the City Attorney, and
recorded against the property, or payment of In-lieu Fees in accordance with
this title. (Ord. 2959, 2023)
18.230.140: REQUIREMENTS FOR FOR-SALE INCLUSIONARY UNITS:
   A.   Initial sales price and resale: The initial sales price and resale
price of the For-sale Inclusionary Unit will be at an Affordable Sales Price
that will ensure that the purchaser of the Inclusionary Unit will pay an
Affordable Housing Cost for the unit. The City shall, from time to time, set a
benchmark mortgage interest rate and an assumed home buyer down payment amount
to be used to calculate the Affordable Sales Price. The City Manager may
establish and adjust such benchmark mortgage interest rates, establish an
assumed home buyer down payment amount, along with a range of allowable home
buyer down payments pursuant to the delegated authority set forth in
18.230.170(A). Such standards shall be in writing and available to the public
upon request.
   B.   Transfer: A resale restriction agreement will be entered into on each
change of ownership of For-sale Inclusionary Units, to maintain the household
income restriction on the Inclusionary Unit prior to the expiration of the
affordability period established pursuant to subsection
18.230.040.
   C.   Owner occupancy required: All for-sale Inclusionary Units are subject
to the following regulations:
      1.   Principal residence. The purchaser of the Inclusionary Unit shall
use and occupy the Inclusionary Unit as purchaser's principal place of
residence.
      2.   No rental. Owner is expressly prohibited from leasing or renting the
Inclusionary Unit unless the City has given its prior written consent to such
lease or rental on the basis of a demonstrated hardship by the owner.
      3.   Annual report. The City from time to time may require certification
of continuing occupancy of the Inclusionary Unit by owner, which shall be
verified by owner to the reasonable satisfaction of the City by means of a
written report by owner to the City setting forth the income and family size of
the occupants of the Inclusionary Unit. Such report shall be submitted to the
City annually. Owner shall not be deemed to be in default of the affordable
agreement and this program for any failure to deliver such annual report until
30 days after receipt by owner of written notice from the City requesting such
report. The City shall have the option of establishing the type of form to be
used for the report. (Ord. 2959, 2023)
18.230.150: OCCUPANCY OF RENTAL UNITS:
   A.   Occupancy of Rental Units: Unless determined otherwise by the City
Council, all rental Inclusionary Units required by this title shall be only
rented to households in the appropriate income category for the Inclusionary
Units, as set forth in this title.
   B.   Use and occupancy of rental Inclusionary Units: The applicant shall
designate and offer rental Inclusionary Units for rent to households in the
appropriate income category, based on the approved Inclusionary Housing Plan.
   C.   Establishment of rental rates: The maximum allowable rent of
Inclusionary Units will be the Affordable Rent as defined herein, based on the
applicable income levels for the Inclusionary Units, and shall be confirmed by
the City on an annual basis.
   D.   Annual report: The owner shall submit an annual report summarizing the
occupancy of each Rental Inclusionary Unit for the year. The City may require
additional information if deemed necessary. The owner must obtain and review
documents that demonstrate the prospective renter's total income, such as
income tax returns or W-2s for the previous calendar year, and submit such
information on a form approved by the City. (Ord. 2959, 2023)
18.230.160: ADJUSTMENTS, WAIVERS:
The requirements of this ordinance may be adjusted or waived if the applicant
demonstrates to the City Manager that applying the requirement of this
ordinance would take property in violation of the United States or California
Constitutions.
   A.   Timing: For an adjustment or waiver to be considered, the applicant
must apply for the same at the time of an application for the Residential
Development.
   B.   Adjustment or waivers: If the City Manager determines that applying the
requirement of this program, considered together with any variances, or
regulatory concessions or incentives that may be applied to the proposed
residential project, would take property in violation of the United States or
California Constitutions, the requirements of this program shall be modified,
adjusted or waived to reduce the obligations but only to the extent necessary
to avoid an unconstitutional result. If the City Manager determines no
violation of the United States or California Constitutions would occur through
application of this ordinance, the requirements of this ordinance remain
applicable.
   C.   Decision and further appeal: The City Manager will determine the
adjustment or waiver application and issue a written decision. The City
Manager's decision may be appealed to the City Council in the manner and within
ten days of issuance of the written decision by the City Manager. In making the
(adjustment or waiver) determination, the City Manager or City Council, as
applicable shall assume each of the following:
      1.   Application of the inclusionary housing requirement to the
Residential Development;
      2.   Application of any applicable inclusionary or density bonus
concessions, incentives or waivers;
      3.   Utilization of the most cost-efficient product type for the
Inclusionary Units; and
      4.   The potential for the external funding, including but not limited
to, governmental grants, loans, or subsidies of any nature where reasonably
likely to occur. (Ord. 2959, 2023)
18.230.170: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Program administration: The City Manager is hereby given authority to
initiate any administrative procedures or implementation guidelines as may be
necessary to implement and carry out the purpose and intent of this title.
Further, the City Manager may, in the implementation of this program, develop
application forms and submittal requirements reasonably related to the
implementation of this title.
Forms or materials needed for implementation of this title may be introduced
and utilized by the City as the City Manager deems may be necessary or
desirable. All form changes or administrative procedures initiated by the City
Manager, and all administrative determinations or exercises of delegated
authority by the City Manager, shall be carried out in a manner consistent
with, and reasonably related to, the purposes and intent of this title, the
housing element and all other elements of the City's General Plan, and the
furtherance of state and local housing policies and goals, while respecting at
all times the rights of property owners and applicants.
   B.   Inclusionary Housing Fund:
      1.   Unless otherwise required by law, all In-lieu Fees and any other
funds collected under this title shall be deposited into a separate account to
be designated as the City of Redlands Inclusionary Housing Fund.
      2.   The moneys in the inclusionary housing fund and all earnings from
investment of the moneys in the inclusionary housing fund shall be expended
exclusively to provide housing affordable to Very Low-income, Low-income, and
Moderate-income households in the City of Redlands leveraging funds, and
administration and compliance monitoring of the Inclusionary Housing Program.
   C.   Enforcement:
      1.   The City Attorney shall be authorized to enforce the provisions of
this title and all Affordable Housing Agreements, resale restrictions, deed of
trust, and other requirements placed on Inclusionary Units by civil action and
any other proceeding or method permitted by law. The City may, at its
discretion, take such enforcement action as is authorized under this code and/
or any other action authorized by law or by any regulatory document,
restriction, or agreement executed under this title.
      2.   Failure of any official or agency to fulfill the requirements of
this title shall not excuse any applicant or owner from the requirements of
this title. No permit, license, map, or other approval or entitlement for a
Residential Development shall be issued, including without limitation a final
inspection or certificate of occupancy, until all applicable requirements of
this title have been satisfied.
      3.   The remedies provided for herein shall be cumulative and not
exclusive and shall not preclude the city from any other remedy or relief to
which it otherwise would be entitled under law or equity. (Ord. 2959, 2023)
CHAPTER 18.266
SURFACE MINING AND LAND RECLAMATION
SECTION:
18.266.010: Purpose And Intent
18.266.020: Definitions
18.266.030: SMARA And State Regulations
18.266.040: Applicability
18.266.050: Vested Rights
18.266.060: Permit And Reclamation Plan
18.266.070: Processing
18.266.080: Performance Standards For Reclamation Plans
18.266.090: Reclamation Phasing
18.266.100: Statement Of Responsibility
18.266.110: Findings For Approval
18.266.120: Inspections
18.266.130: Financial Assurances
18.266.140: Interim Management Plans
18.266.150: Periodic Review
18.266.160: Time Limit Commencement Of Use Permits For Surface Mining
Operations
18.266.170: Appeals
18.266.180: Violations And Penalties
18.266.190: Fees
18.266.200: Mineral Resource Protection
18.266.010: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The city of Redlands recognizes that the extraction of minerals is essential to
the continued economic well being of the city and its surrounding community and
that the reclamation of mined lands is necessary to prevent or minimize adverse
effects on the environment and to protect the public health, safety and
welfare. The city also recognizes that surface mining takes place in diverse
areas where the geologic, topographic, climatic, biological and social
conditions are significantly different and that reclamation operations and the
specifications therefor may vary accordingly. The purpose and intent of this
chapter is to regulate surface mining operations and implement the minimum
requirements of California's surface mining and reclamation act of 1975 1 , as
amended (hereinafter referred to as "SMARA"), Public Resources Code section
2207, and the California Code of Regulations adopted pursuant thereto, to
ensure that:
   A.   Adverse environmental and other effects of surface mining operations
will be prevented or minimized and that the reclamation of mined lands will
provide for the beneficial, sustainable long term productive use of such lands;
and
   B.   The production and conservation of minerals will be encouraged while
potential hazards to public health and safety and adverse effects on the
environment, including, but not limited to, geologic subsidence, air pollution,
water quality degradation, damage to biological resources, flooding, erosion,
degradation of scenic quality and noise pollution shall be reduced or
eliminated. (Ord. 2399 § 2, 1999)
 
Notes
1 1. Pub.Res.C. § 2710 et seq.
18.266.020: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall be defined
as follows:
   AREA OF REGIONAL SIGNIFICANCE: An area designated by the board which is
known to contain a deposit of minerals, the extraction of which is judged to be
of prime importance in meeting future needs for minerals in a particular region
of the state within which the minerals are located and which, if prematurely
developed for alternate incompatible land uses, could result in the premature
loss of minerals that are of more than local significance.
   AREA OF STATEWIDE SIGNIFICANCE: An area designated by the board which is
known to contain a deposit of minerals, the extraction of which is judged to be
of prime importance in meeting future needs for minerals in the state and
which, if prematurely developed for alternate incompatible land uses, could
result in the permanent loss of minerals that are of more than local or
regional significance.
   BOARD: The state mining and geology board.
   BORROW PITS: Excavations created by the surface mining of rock,
unconsolidated geologic deposits or soil to provide material (borrow) for fill
elsewhere.
   CEQA: The California environmental quality act as enacted in sections 21000
et seq., of the Public Resources Code.
   COMPATIBLE LAND USES: Land uses inherently compatible with mining that
require a minimum public or private investment in structures or land
improvements, and which may allow mining because of the relative economic value
of the land and its improvements. Examples of such uses may include, but shall
not be limited to, very low density residential, geographically extensive but
low impact industrial, recreational, agricultural, grazing and open space.
   DIRECTOR: The director of the state of California department of
conservation.
   HAUL ROAD: A road along which minerals and other materials are transported
from an area of excavation to a processing plant or stock pile area of a
surface mining operation.
   IDLE: To curtail, for a period of one year or more, surface mining
operations by more than ninety percent (90%) of the operation's previous
maximum annual mineral production, with the intent to resume those surface
mining operations at a future date.
   INCOMPATIBLE LAND USES: Land uses inherently incompatible with mining and/or
that require public or private investment in structures, land improvements and
landscaping and that may prevent mining because of the greater economic value
of the land and its improvements. Examples of such uses may include, but shall
not be limited to, high density residential, low density residential with high
unit value, public facilities, geographically limited but impact intensive
industrial and commercial.
   MINED LANDS: The surface, subsurface and ground water of an area in which
surface mining operations will be, are being, or have been conducted, including
private ways and roads appurtenant to any such area, land excavations,
workings, mining waste and areas in which structures, facilities, equipment,
machines, tools or other materials or property which result from, or are used
in, surface mining operations are located.
   MINERALS: Any naturally occurring chemical element or compound, or groups of
elements and compounds, formed from inorganic processes and organic substances,
including, but not limited to, coal, peat, and bituminous rock, but excluding
geothermal resources, natural gas and petroleum.
   OPERATOR: Any person who is engaged in surface mining operations, who
permits others to conduct surface mining operations on his property and who
receives a financial benefit therefrom, or who contracts with others to conduct
operations on his behalf, except for a person who is engaged in surface mining
operations as an employee with wages as sole compensation.
   OVERBURDEN: Soil, rock or other material that lies above a mineral deposit
or in between mineral deposits, before or after its removal by surface mining
operations.
   PERSON: Any individual, firm, association, corporation, organization or
partnership, or any city, county or district of the state, or any department or
agency thereof.
   RECLAMATION: The process of land treatment that minimizes water degradation,
air pollution, damage to aquatic or wildlife habitat, flooding, erosion and
other adverse effects from mining operations, including adverse surface effects
incidental to underground mines, so that mined lands are reclaimed to a usable
condition which are readily adaptable for alternative land uses and create no
danger to public health or safety. Reclamation may extend to lands surrounding
mined lands, and may require backfilling, grading, recoiling, revegetation,
soil compaction, stabilization or other measures.
   STATE REGULATIONS: Collectively the California surface mining and
reclamation act of 1975 1  (the "act"), Public Resources Code section 2207 and
the California Code of Regulations implementing the act (14 California Code of
Regulations section 3500 et seq., and article 9, chapter 8, sections 3700 et
seq.).
   STREAMBED SKIMMING: Excavation of sand and gravel from streambed deposits
above the mean summer water level or stream bottom, whichever is higher.
   SURFACE MINING OPERATION(S): All or any part of the process involved in the
mining of minerals by removing overburden and mining directly from mineral
deposits, open pit mining of minerals naturally exposed, mining by the auger
method, dredging or quarrying, or surface work incidental to an underground
mine. Surface mining operations shall include, but are not limited to, in place
distillation, retorting or leaching; the production and disposal of mining
waste; prospecting and exploratory activities; and the creation of borrow pits,
streambed skimming, segregation and stockpiling of mined materials and their
recovery. (Ord. 2399 § 2, 1999)
 
Notes
1 1. Pub.Res.C. § 2710 et seq.
18.266.030: SMARA AND STATE REGULATIONS:
The state regulations, as those provisions may be amended from time to time,
are made a part of this chapter by this reference and shall have the same force
and effect as if the provisions therein were specifically and fully set out
herein, excepting that when the provisions of this chapter are more restrictive
than conflicting state regulations, this chapter shall prevail. (Ord. 2399 § 2,
1999)
18.266.040: APPLICABILITY:
   A.   Requirement For Conditional Use Permit: Unless exempted by the
provisions of this chapter, any person who proposes to conduct surface mining
operations, or who proposes to permit another person to engage in surface
mining operations on his property shall, prior to the commencement of said
operations, file and obtain approval from the city for a conditional use permit
as provided in chapter 18.192 of this title, a reclamation plan in accordance
with the provisions set forth in this chapter, and the state regulations, and
any applicable financial assurances for reclamation. A conditional use permit
shall be required for all surface mining operations in all zoning districts in
which surface mining is allowed and for the expansion or substantial change of
operation of any surface mine for which such expansion or change has not been
thereby approved, including any operation which meets the definition of a
"nonconforming use" as provided for in this code.
   B.   Requirement For Reclamation Plan: A reclamation plan shall be required
for all surface mining operations including those portions of existing surface
mining operations which claim to have vested rights as defined by the state
regulations, unless otherwise exempted from the requirements of the state
regulations or as set forth herein.
   C.   Exemptions: This chapter shall not apply to the following activities:
      1.   Excavations or grading conducted for farming or on site construction
for the purpose of restoring land following a flood or natural disaster.
      2.   On site excavation and on site earthmoving activities which are an
integral and necessary part of a construction project that are undertaken to
prepare a site for construction of structures, landscaping, or other land
improvements, including the related excavation, grading, compaction or the
creation of fills, road cuts, and embankments, whether or not surplus materials
are exported from the site, subject to all of the following conditions: a) all
required permits for the construction, landscaping or related land improvements
have been approved by a public agency in accordance with applicable provisions
of state land and locally adopted plans and ordinances, including, but not
limited to, CEQA; b) the city's approval of the construction project included
consideration of the on site excavation and on site earthmoving activities
pursuant to CEQA; c) the approved construction project is consistent with the
general plan or zoning of the site; and d) surplus materials shall not be
exported from the site unless and until actual construction work has commenced
and shall cease if it is determined that construction activities have
terminated, have been indefinitely suspended, or are no longer being actively
pursued.
      3.   Prospecting for, or the extraction of, minerals for commercial
purposes and the removal of overburden in total amounts of less than one
thousand (1,000) cubic yards in any one location of one acre or less.
      4.   Surface mining operations that are required by federal law to
protect a mining claim, if such operations are conducted solely for that
purpose.
      5.   Such other surface mining operations which the board determines to
be of an infrequent nature and which involve only minor surface disturbances.
      6.   Emergency excavations or grading conducted by the department of
water resources or the reclamation board for the purpose of averting,
alleviating, repairing, or restoring damage to property due to imminent or
recent floods, disaster or other emergencies.
      7.   The solar evaporation of sea water or bay water for the production
of salt and related minerals.
      8.   Excavations or grading for roadbed materials for construction and
maintenance for timber or forest operations if the land is owned by the same
person or entity, and if the excavation is conducted adjacent to timber or
forest operating roads. This exemption is only available if slope stability and
erosion are controlled in accordance with board regulations and, upon closure
of the site, the person closing the site implements, where necessary,
revegetation measures and postclosure uses in consultation with the department
of forestry and fire protection. This exemption does not apply to on site
excavation or grading that occurs within one hundred feet (100') of a class one
watercourse or seventy five feet (75') of a class two watercourse, or
excavation for materials that are sold for commercial purposes.
An exemption under this chapter does not exempt a project or activity from the
application of other federal, state and local regulations, ordinances or
policies including, but not limited to, CEQA. (Ord. 2399 § 2, 1999)
18.266.050: VESTED RIGHTS:
No person who obtained a vested right to conduct surface mining operations
prior to January 1, 1976, shall be required to secure a permit to mine, so long
as the vested right continues and as long as no substantial changes have been
made in the operation except in accordance with SMARA, state regulations and
this chapter. Where a person with vested rights has continued surface mining in
the same area subsequent to January 1, 1976, he shall obtain city of Redlands
approval of a reclamation plan covering the mined lands disturbed by such
subsequent surface mining. In those cases where an overlap exists (in the
horizontal and/or vertical sense) between pre- and post-act mining, the
reclamation plan shall call for reclamation proportional to that disturbance
caused by the mining after the effective date of the act (January 1, 1976). All
other requirements of state law and this chapter shall apply to vested mining.
(Ord. 2399 § 2, 1999)
18.266.060: PERMIT AND RECLAMATION PLAN:
   A.   An application for a conditional use permit or reclamation plan for
surface mining operations or a land reclamation project shall be made on the
form provided by the community development department. The application shall be
filed in accordance with this chapter and any written procedures established by
the community development director.
   B.   Copies of the reclamation plan application as may be required by the
community development director shall be submitted in conjunction with all
applications for conditional use permits for surface mining operations. For
surface mining operations that are exempt from a conditional use permit
pursuant to this chapter, the reclamation plan application shall include
information concerning the mining operation that is required for processing the
reclamation plan.
   C.   Applications shall include all required environmental review forms and
information prescribed by the community development director.
   D.   Upon completion of the environmental review procedure and filing of all
documents required by the community development director, consideration of the
conditional use permit or reclamation plan for the proposed or existing surface
mine shall be completed pursuant to this code at a noticed public hearing
before the planning commission, and pursuant to section 2774 of the Public
Resources Code. (Ord. 2399 § 2, 1999)
18.266.070: PROCESSING:
   A.   Notification Of Filing Application: Within thirty (30) days of
acceptance of an application for a conditional use permit to conduct surface
mining operations and/or for a reclamation plan as complete, the community
development department shall notify the director of the filing of the
application. Whenever mining operations are proposed in the 100-year floodplain
of any stream, as shown in zone A of the flood insurance rate maps issued by
the federal emergency management agency, and within one mile, upstream or
downstream, of any state highway bridge, the community development department
shall also notify the state department of transportation that the application
has been received.
   B.   Review Of Application:The community development department shall
process the application in accordance with CEQA and the city's CEQA guidelines
and prepare a staff report with recommendations for consideration to the
planning commission. Prior to final approval of a reclamation plan, financial
assurances (as provided in this chapter), or any amendments to the reclamation
plan or existing financial assurances, the planning commission shall certify to
the director that the reclamation plan and/or financial assurance complies with
the applicable requirements of the state regulations and submit the plan,
assurances, or amendments to the director for review. The planning commission
may conditionally approve the reclamation plan and financial assurances before
submittal to the director. If a conditional use permit is being processed
concurrently with the reclamation plan, the planning commission may
simultaneously also conceptually approve the conditional use permit. However,
the planning commission may defer action on the conditional use permit until
taking final action on the reclamation plan and financial assurance. If
necessary to comply with permit processing deadlines, the planning commission
may conditionally approve the conditional use permit with the condition that
the community development department shall not issue the conditional use permit
for the mining operation until financial assurances have been reviewed by the
director and final action has been taken on the reclamation plan and financial
assurances.
The director shall have thirty (30) days to prepare written comments on the
reclamation plan and financial assurances and forty five (45) days to review
and comment, if the director so chooses. The planning commission shall evaluate
written comments received from the director during the forty five (45) day
comment period. The community development department shall prepare a written
response describing the disposition of the major issues raised by the state for
the planning commission's approval. When the planning commissions position is
at variance with the recommendations and objections raised in the director's
comments, the written response shall address in detail, why specific comments
and suggestions were not accepted. Copies of any written comments received and
responses prepared by the planning commission shall be promptly forwarded to
the operator/applicant. The planning commission may approve, conditionally
approve, or deny the reclamation plan pursuant to section 2774 of the Public
Resources Code, and the financial assurances pursuant to section 2770(d) of the
Public Resources Code.
   C.   Copies Distributed: The community development department shall forward
a copy of each approved conditional use permit for mining operations and/or
approved reclamation plan, and a copy of the financial assurances to the
director. By July 1 of each year, the community development department shall
submit to the director for each active or idle mining operation a copy of the
conditional use permit or reclamation plan amendments, as applicable, or a
statement that there have been no changes during the previous year.
   D.   Annual Reports: Surface mining operators shall forward an annual status
report to the director and the city community development department on a date
established by the director upon forms furnished by the board. (Ord. 2399 § 2,
1999)
18.266.080: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS FOR RECLAMATION PLANS:
All new or revised reclamation plans shall conform to minimum statewide
performance standards required pursuant to Public Resources Code section 2773
(b), as conditional use permit and/or reclamation plan, pursuant to section B
adopted by the board, including, but not limited to, wildlife habitat,
backfilling, revegetation, drainage, agricultural land reclamation, equipment
removal, stream protection, topsoil salvage, and waste management.
The city of Redlands may impose additional performance standards developed
either in review of individual projects, as warranted, or through the
formulation and adoption of citywide performance standards. (Ord. 2399 § 2,
1999)
18.266.090: RECLAMATION PHASING:
Reclamation activities may be phased with respect to the mining operation and
shall be initiated at the earliest possible time on those portions of the mined
lands that will not be subject to further disturbance (see also section
18.266.140, "Interim Management Plans", of this chapter for idle mining
operations). Interim reclamation may also be required for mined lands that have
been disturbed and that may be disturbed again in future operations.
Reclamation may be done on an annual basis, in stages compatible with
continuing operations, or on completion of all excavation, removal, or fill, as
approved by the city. Each phase of reclamation shall be specifically described
in the reclamation plan and shall include: a) the beginning and expected ending
dates for each phase; b) all reclamation activities required; c) criteria for
measuring completion of specific reclamation activities; and d) estimated costs
as provided under financial assurances hereinbelow. (Ord. 2399 § 2, 1999)
18.266.100: STATEMENT OF RESPONSIBILITY:
The person submitting the reclamation plan shall sign a statement accepting
responsibility for reclaiming the mined lands in accordance with the
reclamation plan. Said statement shall be kept by the planning department in
the mining operators permanent record. Upon sale or transfer of the operation,
the new operator shall submit a signed statement of responsibility to the
planning department for placement in the permanent record. (Ord. 2399 § 2,
1999)
18.266.110: FINDINGS FOR APPROVAL:
   A.   Approval Of A Conditional Use Permit: In addition to the findings for
approval of a conditional use permit contained in chapter 18.192 of this title,
conditional use permits for surface mining operations shall include a finding
that the project complies with the provisions of the state regulations.
   B.   Approval Of Reclamation Plans: For reclamation plans, the following
findings shall be required:
      1.   That the reclamation plan complies with sections 2772, 2773 and
2773.1 of the Public Resources Code and any other applicable provisions.
      2.   That the reclamation plan complies with the state regulation.
      3.   That the reclamation plan and potential use of reclaimed land
pursuant to the plan are consistent with this chapter and the city's general
plan.
      4.   That the reclamation plan has been reviewed pursuant to the CEQA and
the city's CEQA guidelines, and all significant adverse impacts from
reclamation of the surface mining operations are mitigated to the maximum
extent feasible.
      5.   That the land and/or resources such as water bodies to be reclaimed
will be restored to a condition that is compatible with the surrounding natural
environment, topography, and other resources, or that suitable off site
development will compensate for related disturbances to resource values.
      6.   That the reclamation plan will restore the mined lands to a usable
condition which is readily adaptable for alternative land uses consistent with
the city's general plan.
      7.   That a written response to the director has been prepared,
describing the disposition of major issues raised by the director. Where the
city's position is at variance with the recommendations and objections raised
by the director, said response shall address, in detail, why specific comments
and suggestions were not accepted. (Ord. 2399 § 2, 1999)
18.266.120: INSPECTIONS:
The community development department shall arrange for inspection of a surface
mining operation within six (6) months of receipt of the annual report required
by this chapter to determine whether the surface mining operation is in
compliance with the approved conditional use permit and/or reclamation plan,
approved financial assurances, and the state regulations. In no event shall
less than one inspection be conducted in any calendar year. Said inspections
may be made by a state registered geologist, state registered civil engineer,
state licensed landscape architect, state registered forester, who is
experienced in land reclamation and who has not been employed by the mining
operation in any capacity during the previous twelve (12) months, or other
qualified specialists, as selected by the community development director and as
retained by the city. All inspections shall be conducted using a form approved
and provided by the state mining and geology board. The community development
department shall notify the director within thirty (30) days of completion of
the inspection that the said inspection has been conducted and shall forward a
copy of said inspection notice and any supporting documentation to the mining
operator. The operator shall be solely responsible for the reasonable cost of
such inspection. (Ord. 2399 § 2, 1999)
18.266.130: FINANCIAL ASSURANCES:
   A.   To ensure that reclamation will proceed in accordance with the approved
reclamation plan, the city shall require as a condition of approval of any
surface mining operation security which will be released upon satisfactory
performance.
   B.   The applicant may post security in an acceptable form of a surety bond,
trust fund, irrevocable letter of credit from an accredited financial
institution, or other method acceptable to the city and the board as specified
in statewide regulations adopted by the board, and which the city reasonably
determines are adequate to perform reclamation in accordance with the surface
mining operations approved reclamation plan. Financial assurances shall be made
payable to the city and the department of conservation. Financial assurances
shall be required to ensure compliance with elements of the reclamation plan,
including, but not limited to, revegetation and landscaping requirements;
restoration or aquatic or wildlife habitat; restoration of water bodies and
water quality; slope stability and erosion and drainage control, disposal of
hazardous materials; and other mitigation measures. Financial assurances for
such elements of the plan shall be monitored by the community development
department.
   C.   The amount of the financial assurances shall be based upon the
estimated costs of reclamation for the years or phases stipulated in pursuant
to the approved reclamation plan, including any maintenance of reclaimed areas
as may be required, subject to adjustment for the actual amount required to
reclaim lands disturbed by surface mining activities since January 1, 1976, and
new lands to be disturbed by surface mining activities in the upcoming year, as
provided in subsection F of this section. Cost estimates shall be prepared by a
licensed engineer and/or other qualified professionals retained by the operator
and approved by the community development director. The estimated amount of the
financial assurance shall be based on an analysis of physical activities
necessary to implement the approved reclamation plan, the unit costs for each
of these activities, the number of units of each of these activities, and the
actual administrative costs. Financial assurances to ensure compliance with
revegetation, restoration of water bodies, restoration of aquatic or wildlife
habitat, and any other applicable element of the approved reclamation plan
shall be based upon cost estimates that include, but may not be limited to,
labor, equipment, materials, mobilization of equipment, administration, and
reasonable profit by a commercial operator other than the permittee.
   D.   In projecting the costs of financial assurances, it shall be assumed
without prejudice or insinuation that the surface mining operation could be
abandoned by the operator and, consequently, the city or state may need to
contract with a third party commercial company for reclamation of the site.
   E.   The financial assurances shall remain in effect for the duration of the
surface mining operation and any additional period until reclamation is
completed including any maintenance required.
   F.   The amount of financial assurances required of a surface mining
operation for any one year shall be adjusted annually to account for new lands
disturbed by operations, inflation, and reclamation of lands accomplished in
accordance with the approved reclamation plan. The financial assurances shall
include estimates to cover reclamation for existing conditions and anticipated
activities during the upcoming year, excepting that the permittee may not claim
credit for reclamation scheduled for completion during the coming year.
   G.   Revisions to financial assurances shall be submitted to the community
development director each year prior to the anniversary date for approval of
the financial assurances. The financial assurance shall cover the cost of
existing disturbance and anticipated activities for the next calendar year,
including any required interim reclamation. If revisions to the financial
assurances are not required, the operator shall explain, in writing, why
revisions are not required. (Ord. 2399 § 2, 1999)
18.266.140: INTERIM MANAGEMENT PLANS:
   A.   Within ninety (90) days of a surface mining operation becoming idle,
the operation shall submit to the community development department a proposed
interim management plan (the "IMP"). The proposed IMP shall fully comply with
the requirements of Public Resources Code, section 2770 (h) and shall provide
measures the operator will implement to maintain the site in compliance with
SMARA, and all conditions of the conditional use permit and/or reclamation
plan. The proposed IMP shall be processed as an amendment to the reclamation
plan and shall not be considered a project for the purposes of environmental
review.
   B.   Financial assurances for idle operations shall be continued as
addressed in the reclamation plan or an otherwise approved through the idle
mine's IMP. Upon receipt of a complete proposed IMP, the community development
department shall forward the IMP to the department of conservation for review.
The IMP shall be submitted to the department of conservation at least forty
five (45) days prior to approval by the planning commission.
   C.   Within sixty (60) days of receipt of the proposed IMP, or a longer
period mutually agreed upon by the community development director and the
operator, the planning commission shall review and approve or deny the IMP in
accordance with this chapter. The operator shall have thirty (30) days or a
longer period mutually agreed upon by the operator and the community
development director to submit a revised IMP. The planning commission shall
approve or deny the revised IMP within sixty (60) days of receipt. If the
planning commission denies the revised IMP, the operator may appeal that action
to the city council.
   D.   The IMP may remain in effect for a period not to exceed five (5) years,
at which time the planning commission may renew the IMP for another period not
to exceed five (5) years or require the surface mining operator to commence
reclamation in accordance with its approved reclamation plan. (Ord. 2399 § 2,
1999)
18.266.150: PERIODIC REVIEW:
As a condition of approval for either the conditional use permit or the
reclamation plan, a periodic review schedule shall be established to evaluate
the compliance with such permit or plan. (Ord. 2399 § 2, 1999)
18.266.160: TIME LIMIT COMMENCEMENT OF USE PERMITS FOR SURFACE MINING
OPERATIONS:
The time limits for commencing surface mining operations that are permitted
pursuant to this chapter shall be as provided in this code. (Ord. 2399 § 2,
1999)
18.266.170: APPEALS:
Any person aggrieved by an act or determination of the planning commission in
the exercise of the authority granted herein shall have the right to appeal to
the city council. An appeal shall be filed on forms provided by the city within
ten (10) calendar days after the date of the decision being appealed. (Ord.
2399 § 2, 1999)
18.266.180: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
If the community development director, based upon an annual inspection or
otherwise confirmed by an inspection of the mining operation, determines that a
surface mining operation is not in compliance with this chapter, the applicable
conditional use permit, any required permit and/or the reclamation plan, the
city shall follow the procedures set forth in Public Resources Code sections
2774.1 and 2774.2 concerning violations and penalties, as well as those
provisions of this code for revocation and/or abandonment of a conditional use
permit which are not preempted by SMARA. (Ord. 2399 § 2, 1999)
18.266.190: FEES:
The city shall establish such fees as it deems necessary to cover the
reasonable costs incurred in implementing this chapter and the state
regulations, including, but not limited to, processing of applications, annual
reports, inspections, monitoring, enforcement and compliance. Such fees shall
be paid by the operator of the surface mining and/or reclamation plan, as
required by the city, at the time of filing of the conditional use permit
application, reclamation plan application, or at such other time as is
determined by the city to be appropriate in order to ensure that all reasonable
costs of implementing this chapter are borne by the operator. (Ord. 2399 § 2,
1999)
18.266.200: MINERAL RESOURCE PROTECTION:
Mine development is encouraged in compatible areas before encroachment of
conflicting uses. Mineral resource areas that have been classified by the state
department of conservation's division of mines and geology or designated by the
state mining and geology board, as well as existing surface mining operations
that remain in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, shall be
protected from intrusion by incompatible land uses that may impede or preclude
mineral extraction or processing, to the extent possible consistent with the
city's general plan.
In accordance with Public Resources Code section 2762, the city's general plan
and resource maps will be prepared to reflect mineral information
(classification and/or designation report) within twelve (12) months of receipt
from the state mining and geology board of such information. Land use decisions
within the city will be guided by information provided on the location of
identified mineral resources of regional significance. Conservation and
potential development of identified mineral resource areas will be considered
and encouraged. Recordation on property titles of the presence of important
mineral resources within the identified mineral resources areas may be
encouraged as a condition of approval of any development project in the
impacted area. Prior to approving a use that would otherwise be incompatible
with mineral resource protection, conditions of approval may be applied to
encroaching development projects to minimize potential conflicts. (Ord. 2399 §
2, 1999)
TITLE 19
GROWTH MANAGEMENT
CHAPTER 19.04
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
19.04.005: Definitions
19.04.010: Accelerating And Disorderly Residential Growth; Findings
19.04.020: Accelerating And Disorderly Residential Growth; Program For
Alleviation
19.04.030: Annual Development Limitations
19.04.040: Subdivision Applications; Competitive Evaluation And Selection
Process
19.04.050: Previously Approved Tentative Tract Plans
19.04.060: Water And Sewer Service Extensions; Annual Limitations
19.04.070: No Exemptions From Zoning Or Other Regulations
19.04.080: Provisions Deemed Minimum Requirements
19.04.090: Implementation; Information To Be Stamped On Final Subdivision Maps
19.04.100: Urban Reserve (Agricultural) Lands
19.04.110: Sloped Areas
19.04.120: Policy To Preserve And Foster Agriculture
19.04.130: Planning To Minimize Adverse Impacts To The City's Sphere Of
Influence Area
19.04.140: Conformance Of General Plan And Code
19.04.150: Implementation
19.04.160: Guidelines
19.04.170: Exemption For Certain Projects
19.04.005: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of measure N, the following words and phrases shall have the
following meanings:
   AGRICULTURAL LAND(S), AGRICULTURE OR AGRICULTURAL USE: All lands designated
as urban reserve (agricultural) in the Redlands general plan and/or zoning
ordinance as of the effective date of measure N, and all parcels of land in
active agricultural production as of the effective date of measure N or within
one year prior thereto.
   DWELLING AND DWELLING UNITS: Any single-family residence, apartment or
dwelling unit or dwelling unit in a multi-unit structure, or mobilehome.
   EFFECTIVE DATE: The date on which the initiative measure N was adopted by
the city council of the city of Redlands or the date on which it was passed by
the voters at the polls, whichever occurs first.
   MEASURE R: The citizens' initiative labeled "Ballot Measure R" adopted by
the voters of the city of Redlands on November 7, 1978, the full text of which
is contained in the petition from which this section derives.
   SPHERE OF INFLUENCE: The sphere of influence for the city of Redlands as
adopted and amended from time to time by the local agency formation commission
(LAFCO). (§ 3 of measure N, passed by voters 11-3-1987)
19.04.010: ACCELERATING AND DISORDERLY RESIDENTIAL GROWTH; FINDINGS:
The people of the city of Redlands find that accelerating and disorderly
residential growth have caused conditions harmful to the public health, safety
and general welfare, and have resulted or will soon result in overcrowding of
schools, deteriorating water quality and sewage treatment capacity, inadequate
police and fire protection, increasing traffic congestion, inadequate parks and
recreation facilities, loss of irreplaceable agricultural land, loss of open
space, increased air pollution, deterioration of older urban areas, general
urban sprawl, and a substantial increase in the cost of government services. (§
1 of proposition R, passed by voters 11-7-1978)
19.04.020: ACCELERATING AND DISORDERLY RESIDENTIAL GROWTH; PROGRAM FOR
ALLEVIATION:
The people declare that the foregoing conditions can be avoided, or alleviated,
by the enactment of the following program of residential construction designed
to encourage planned residential growth within existing urban areas and
coordinated with necessary public facilities. (§ 2 of proposition R, passed by
voters 11-7-1978)
19.04.030: ANNUAL DEVELOPMENT LIMITATIONS:
Henceforth, further residential development shall be limited to four hundred
(400) dwelling units per calendar year. In any given year, if less than four
hundred (400) units are approved or constructed, the unused number may not be
carried forward to any future year. (§ 4 of measure N, passed by voters 11-3-
1987: Ord. 1911, 1986: § 3 of proposition R, passed by voters 11-7-1978)
19.04.040: SUBDIVISION APPLICATIONS; COMPETITIVE EVALUATION AND SELECTION
PROCESS:
   A.   The city shall accept subdivision development applications in final
approval form for each calendar year at a prescribed time. The city shall
competitively evaluate the submitted applications for quality in at least:
tract design, architecture and construction proximity and access to available
city and school services, preservation of agricultural land, low income and
minority housing requirements, senior citizen needs and price. The city shall
select those applications, within the limits of section
19.04.030 of this chapter, which are superior in overall evaluation, for
building permit approval. The city shall amend the existing procedure for
competitive evaluation within ninety (90) days from the date of adoption of the
ordinance codified herein to make the procedure and evaluation system
consistent with measure N.
   B.   To encourage construction of single-family infill housing, the city
council shall reserve until October 1 of each year, fifty (50) of the four
hundred (400) authorized building permits for the construction of single-family
homes on existing lots of record as of the effective date of measure N. (§ 4 of
measure N, passed by voters 11-3-1987: § 4 of proposition R, passed by voters
11-7-1978)
19.04.050: PREVIOUSLY APPROVED TENTATIVE TRACT PLANS:
Previously approved tentative tract plans shall be subject to the competitive
evaluation and selection process described in section
19.04.040 of this chapter, and shall have no precedence with respect to other
development applications. (§ 5 of proposition R, passed by voters 11-7-1978)
19.04.060: WATER AND SEWER SERVICE EXTENSIONS; ANNUAL LIMITATIONS:
The city shall not make water or sewer service allocations or connections to
more than one hundred fifty (150) dwelling units outside its corporate
boundaries in any calendar year. Water or sewer service shall not be extended
to any dwelling unit which is not within the city's adopted sphere of influence
and which is not zoned or prezoned consistent with the Redlands general plan or
plan for development of the sphere of influence area. Water or sewer service
connections made pursuant to this provision which are not used or allocated
within a given calendar year may not be carried forward to any future year. (§
4 of measure N, passed by voters 11-3-1987: § 6 of proposition R, passed by
voters 11-7-1978)
19.04.070: NO EXEMPTIONS FROM ZONING OR OTHER REGULATIONS:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to exempt compliance with the
provisions of the zoning ordinance and any other applicable city ordinance,
regulation or code. (§ 7 of proposition R, passed by voters 11-7-1978)
19.04.080: PROVISIONS DEEMED MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS:
The provisions of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements for
the promotion of the public safety, health, convenience, comfort, prosperity,
and general welfare. These sections are not intended to interfere with,
abrogate, annul or repeal any ordinance, rule or regulation which has been
previously adopted, and is not in conflict with any of the provisions of this
chapter. (§ 8 of proposition R, passed by voters 11-7-1978)
19.04.090: IMPLEMENTATION; INFORMATION TO BE STAMPED ON FINAL SUBDIVISION MAPS:
   A.   Proposition R, set out in this chapter, may be implemented by
resolution to further the purposes set forth in proposition R.
   B.   All lots created by the subdivision process, whether or not initially
subject to this title, ordinance 1680 and subsequent amendments or related
ordinances, that are capable of being further subdivided under the state map
act and local ordinances existing at the time of subdivision, shall have the
final plat map stamped with a note stating that:
Any further subdivision will be subject to the development allocation process
under the provisions of Proposition "R" as implemented by City ordinance.
(Ord. 1843 § 5, 1984: prior code art. 940)
19.04.100: URBAN RESERVE (AGRICULTURAL) LANDS:
No lands designated as urban reserve (agricultural) on the Redlands general
plan map as the same existed on June 1, 1987, shall be rezoned or changed to a
different general plan designation which would permit a density higher than the
R-E designation as the same existed on June 1, 1987, in the Redlands city
zoning ordinance unless the city council finds, by four- fifths (4/5)
affirmative vote by the total authorized council membership, that each and all
of the following is true:
   A.   There are specific overriding benefits to the city and its residents
and taxpayers from the proposed density increase;
   B.   The proposed density increase will not cause any adverse environmental
impacts, either individually or cumulatively, directly or indirectly;
   C.   The proposed density increase will not convert viable agricultural
lands to nonagricultural uses;
   D.   The proposed density increase will not have a growth inducing effect on
other property. (§ 4 of measure N, passed by voters 11-3-1987: § 10 of
proposition R, passed by voters 11-7-1978)
19.04.110: SLOPED AREAS:
   A.   From and after the effective date of measure N, all property having an
average natural slope of fifteen percent (15%) or more shall be limited in
density to one dwelling unit per two (2) acres, except that all property having
an average natural slope of thirty percent (30%) or more shall be limited to
one dwelling unit per five (5) acres. Uses permitted on such properties shall
conform to chapter 18.24 of this code, as revised March 2, 1987.
   B.   PRDs shall be allowed on lands affected by this section, but must
conform to the following limitations:
      1.   Densities shall be no greater than those defined elsewhere in this
section;
      2.   Projects shall conform to development standards in force on the
effective date of measure N, without exception;
      3.   Projects shall be designed to preserve ridgelines and scenic vistas.
(§ 4 of measure N, passed by voters 11-3-1987: § 11 of proposition R, passed by
voters 11-7-1978)
19.04.120: POLICY TO PRESERVE AND FOSTER AGRICULTURE:
It is declared to be the policy of the city of Redlands to preserve and foster
agriculture as a vital industry and a desirable open space use because of our
high soil quality, favorable climate, low water costs and economic benefit to
our community. It is further declared to be the policy of the city to retain,
wherever feasible, agricultural lands in private ownership and to encourage and
assist the maintenance and formation of locally owned farms. The city shall
forthwith adopt such policies, ordinances and resolutions as may be necessary
to achieve these goals, including, but not limited to, the following:
   A.   The city shall establish programs to encourage and assist owners in the
replanting of dying groves and/or vacant agricultural land, for the
installation of water conserving irrigation systems and/or for the protection
of agricultural land from theft, vandalism and dumping. Total cost of this
assistance shall be borne by those directly benefited;
   B.   Plan and implement programs wherever feasible in appropriate areas for
recreational opportunities for biking, equestrian and hiking uses, consistent
with farming needs, agricultural uses and wildlife protection;
   C.   Develop and implement public service and infrastructure standards
compatible with and appropriate to agricultural and rural living purposes. (§ 4
of measure N, passed by voters 11-3-1987: § 12 of proposition R, passed by
voters 11-7-1978)
19.04.130: PLANNING TO MINIMIZE ADVERSE IMPACTS TO THE CITY'S SPHERE OF
INFLUENCE AREA:
   A.   The city shall forthwith initiate a planning process leading to the
development and adoption of a plan for the ultimate development of the city's
sphere of influence area. Until such plan is adopted by the city, the city
shall not, unless compelled by law to do so, initiate or approve any
annexations to the city. Upon adoption of the plan required by this section,
the city may initiate and/or approve annexations consistent with the plan.
   B.   The city's plan for sphere of influence area shall meet, at minimum,
all of the following criteria:
      1.   The plan shall extend, at minimum, the provisions of proposition R
and of measure N to the sphere of influence area;
      2.   The plan shall identify and make provision to protect sensitive
wildlife, open space, and agricultural lands;
      3.   The process leading to adoption of the plan and its implementation
shall include residents of the sphere of influence area and shall include
notice and public hearing; and
      4.   The plan shall require that upon annexation, new development in the
sphere of influence area shall pay all costs of providing public services and
urban infrastructure to such development. (§ 4 of measure N, passed by voters
11-3-1987: § 13 of proposition R, passed by voters 11-7-1978)
19.04.140: CONFORMANCE OF GENERAL PLAN AND CODE:
The Redlands city general plan and this code shall be amended forthwith to
conform with the requirements of measure N. To the extent that any policy or
provision of measure N is not self- executing the city council shall promptly
enact such regulation and ordinances as may be necessary to carry out the
purposes, intent and directives hereof. The provisions of measure N are
expressly declared to be minimum requirements. (§ 4 of measure N, passed by
voters 11-3-1987: § 14 of proposition R, passed by voters 11-7-1978)
19.04.150: IMPLEMENTATION:
The city council and all city agencies, boards and commissions are directed to
take any and all actions necessary to carry out measure N, including, but not
limited to, adoption and implementation of any amendments to the city general
plan, zoning ordinance and/or this code. This measure shall be implemented
forthwith as a matter of the highest priority of the city. (§ 4 of measure N,
passed by voters 11-3-1987: § 15 of proposition R, passed by voters 11-7-1978)
19.04.160: GUIDELINES:
The city council may adopt guidelines to implement and interpret measure N and
measure R, following public notice and public hearing; provided, that any such
guidelines shall be consistent with measure N. Any such guidelines must be
adopted by four- fifths (4/5) affirmative vote of the total authorized
membership of the city council. (§ 4 of measure N, passed by voters 11-3-1987:
§ 16 of proposition R, passed by voters 11-7-1978)
19.04.170: EXEMPTION FOR CERTAIN PROJECTS:
   A.   Measure N shall apply to all properties and projects covered by its
terms, except it shall not apply to any development project which has obtained
a vested right as of the effective date of measure N. For purposes of measure
N, a vested right shall have been obtained only if each and all of the
following criteria are met:
      1.   The proposed project has received a building permit or its final
discretionary approval;
      2.   Substantial expenditures have been incurred in good faith reliance
on the permit or final discretionary approval; and
      3.   Substantial construction has been performed in good faith reliance
on the permit or final discretionary approval.
   B.   The substantiality of expenditures incurred and of construction
performed and the question of whether or not such expenditures and construction
were in good faith are questions of fact to be determined on a case by case
basis by the city council following application by the developer and notice of
public hearing. Actions taken by a developer to speed up or expedite a
development project with knowledge of the pendency of this measure shall not be
deemed to be good faith and shall not qualify for vested rights. Phased
projects shall be considered for exemption on a phase by phase basis to the
extent permitted by California law. For purposes of section 19.04.060 of this
chapter, with regard to water or sewer connections outside the city, an
applicant shall qualify for a vested right only if the foregoing criteria are
met after the application has obtained a sewer or water, commitment, or both if
both are required, from the city. (§ 4 of measure N, passed by voters 11-3-
1987: § 17 of proposition R, passed by voters 11-7-1978)
CHAPTER 19.08
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
19.08.010: Annual Allocation
19.08.020: Applicant
19.08.030: Construction Year
19.08.040: Development Allocation
19.08.050: Dwelling
19.08.060: Development
19.08.070: Exempt From Allocation
19.08.080: Existing Development
19.08.090: Parcel
19.08.100: Project
19.08.010: ANNUAL ALLOCATION:
"Annual allocation" means the four hundred (400) development allocations issued
each calendar year within the city limits, along with the sewer or water
service allotments made to not more than one hundred fifty (150) dwelling units
outside the city limits in a calendar year. (Ord. 2036 § 1, 1988: Ord. 1843 § 1
(B), 1984: prior code art. 940)
19.08.020: APPLICANT:
"Applicant" means the owner, developer or authorized agent who applies for a
development allocation for a particular property. (Ord. 1843 § 1(C), 1984:
prior code art. 940)
19.08.030: CONSTRUCTION YEAR:
"Construction year" means a period of twelve (12) months, with the first such
twelve (12) month period commencing January 1, 1979, and subsequent twelve (12)
month periods beginning on the same date in each succeeding year. (Ord. 1843 §
1(E), 1984: prior code art. 940)
19.08.040: DEVELOPMENT ALLOCATION:
"Development allocation" means approval required after tentative subdivision
map approval and as a condition precedent to obtaining a building permit for a
dwelling unit. Each development allocation shall be assigned to a particular
property. (Ord. 1843 § 1(A), 1984: prior code art. 940)
19.08.050: DWELLING:
"Dwelling" means a single-family residence, an apartment, or a mobilehome.
(Ord. 1843 § 1(F), 1984: prior code art. 940)
19.08.060: DEVELOPMENT:
"Development" means any plan by a landowner or his authorized representative to
construct or place five (5) or more dwelling units on a particular parcel of
land within a particular area of the city. Each development needs an allocation
equal to the number of dwelling units planned, unless expressly exempt. (Ord.
1843 § 1(G), 1984: prior code art. 940)
19.08.070: EXEMPT FROM ALLOCATION:
"Exempt from allocation" means:
   A.   A development consisting of four (4) or fewer single-family dwelling
units;
   B.   The construction of a fourplex or a lesser number of multiple dwellings
on a single lot which the owner, developer or agent did not create through the
subdivision process;
   C.   The construction of a single-family home by an individual in a
development in which the subdivider or his agent or contractor is constructing
no more than four (4) dwelling units;
   D.   A residential development constructed pursuant to the authorization
given in November 1978, by ballot measures B and S;
   E.   The construction of buildings to be used for industrial or commercial
purposes. (Ord. 1843 § 1(D), 1984: prior code art. 940)
19.08.080: EXISTING DEVELOPMENT:
"Existing development" means land containing structures permitted by right of
zone, including vacant land having a recorded subdivision or finalized
application as defined in title 18, "Zoning Regulations", of this code, as
amended. (Ord. 1843 § 1(H), 1984: prior code art. 940)
19.08.090: PARCEL:
"Parcel" means the specific area of a property proposed for a development
allocation. (Ord. 1843 § 1(I), 1984: prior code art. 940)
19.08.100: PROJECT:
"Project" means any plan by a landowner or his authorized representative to
construct or place five (5) or more dwelling units on a particular parcel of
land that has been submitted for a development allocation during any one
allocation review period. (Ord. 1843 § 1(J), 1984: prior code art. 940)
CHAPTER 19.12
POINT RATING SYSTEM
SECTION:
19.12.010: Number Of Points Required To Receive Development Allocations;
Categories
19.12.020: Compliance With General Plan
19.12.030: Consistency With Zone Classification And Standards
19.12.040: Relationship Of Project To Public Services
19.12.050: Tract Design, Architecture And Construction
19.12.060: Very Low And Low Income And Senior Citizen Housing
19.12.070: Phased Projects
19.12.010: NUMBER OF POINTS REQUIRED TO RECEIVE DEVELOPMENT ALLOCATIONS;
CATEGORIES:
Each application for competitive evaluation of a major residential subdivision
development ("project") shall be given a point rating pursuant to this chapter.
A minimum total of ninety (90) points is required for any project to receive
development allocations. The categories established in sections
19.12.030 through
19.12.070 of this chapter shall be used for awarding points to a project. (Ord.
2672 § 1, 2007)
19.12.020: COMPLIANCE WITH GENERAL PLAN:
As a prerequisite for point rating evaluation, the project shall comply with
the Redlands general plan. (Ord. 2672 § 1, 2007)
19.12.030: CONSISTENCY WITH ZONE CLASSIFICATION AND STANDARDS:
 
                                                        Points (Maximum: 5)
A. Project significantly exceeds the property development 5
   standards of the zone in 3 or more substantive ways.
B. Project significantly exceeds the property development 2
   standards of the zone in at least 1 substantive way.
 
(Ord. 2672 § 1, 2007)
19.12.040: RELATIONSHIP OF PROJECT TO PUBLIC SERVICES:
   Points (Maximum: 65)
                                                                                      Points
                                                                                      (Maximum:
                                                                                      65)
A. Location Of Project (Maximum 15 Points):                                            
  1. Project abuts existing development on at least 3 sides.                         15
  2. Project abuts existing development on 2 sides.                                  10
  3. Project abuts existing development on 1 side or is surrounded by developed      5
   properties in close proximity.
  4. Projects located within 1/2 mile of existing or planned public transit facility 3
   (rail or bus).
  5. Project is located within 1/4 mile of existing or planned public transit        5
   facility (rail or bus).
B. Fire Protection And Emergency Assistance (Maximum 10 Points):                       
  1. Project is within 11/2 miles of a first due engine company and 21/2 miles of a  5
   ladder service company.
  2. Project is within 2 miles of a first due engine company and 3 miles of a ladder 3
   service company.
  3. Project is within 21/2 miles of a first due engine company and 31/2 miles of a  1
   ladder service company.
  4. All project structures are sprinklered pursuant to NFPA residential sprinkler   5
   requirements (pamphlet 13D or as may be superseded).
C. Storm And Flood Control (Maximum 5 Points):                                         
   1. Points shall be awarded on the basis of the percentage of coverage of the total
   lot area or project area by the roof area, and all paved areas on site. The
  coverage percentage shall be exclusive of streets and public rights of way. An      
   analysis of the percentage of the total impervious area shall be submitted with
   the residential development allocation application. Such analysis shall be subject
   to independent verification by the city.
      Less than 15%                                                                   5
      20% but not less than 15%                                                       4
      25% but not less than 20%                                                       3
      30% but not less than 25%                                                       2
      35% but not less than 30%                                                       1
    40% but not less than 35%                                                       0
      45% but not less than 40%                                                       -1
      50% but not less than 45%                                                       -2
      55% but not less than 50%                                                       -3
      60% but not less than 55%                                                       -4
      More than 60%                                                                   -5
   2. Project has a final water quality management plan (WQMP) that provides for 100%
  of the runoff from the site during a 100-year storm to be contained on site after  5
   development.
   3. Project has a final water quality management plan (WQMP) that provides for all
  postdevelopment runoff from the site during a 100-year storm to be contained on    3
   site after development.
  4. Calculation shall be as follows:                                                 
   a. Percentage of impervious area =       %. Points =      
  b. WQMP runoff Points =                                                        
      TOTAL POINTS = a.      + b.      =       (maximum 5 points)
D. Water Distribution (Maximum 7 Points):                                              
   1. Existing water distribution system to serve project meets city standards for
  water service and no off site system extensions or improvements required beyond    5
   the project boundaries.
  2. Existing water distribution system to serve project requires off site pipeline  3
   extension of less than 700 feet to meet city standards for water service.
   3. Project incorporates specific water conservation measures such as drought
  tolerant landscaping turf area no more than 20% of total landscaped area, or water 2
   saving fixtures and appliances.
  4. Project provides water facilities other than pipeline that benefit all existing 1
   users in the pressure zone.
  5. Development requires water sources in the 2340 or higher water system pressure  -2
   zones.
  6. On lots smaller than 21/2 acres, project proposes to provide city water service -3
   only; and septage systems for sewage disposal.
  7. Project utilizes nonpotable water for commonly owned lots.                      1
  8. Project is defined under section                                                1
   19.12.060 of this chapter as very low or low income housing.
E. Wastewater Collection (Maximum 7 Points):                                           
  1. Existing sewer system to project meets city standards for services and no off   5
   site extensions or improvements are required beyond project boundaries.
  2. Existing sewer system to serve project requires minor off site sewer extensions 3
   of less than 700 feet.
  3. Project provides local sewers and extensions along the frontage of unsewered    1
   developed areas (minimum of 4 unsewered dwelling units).
  4. Project requires a wastewater pumping station.                                  -3
F. Solid Waste (Maximum 4 Points):                                                     
   1. Project utilizes physical features above and beyond minimum compliance with
  chapter 13.66 of this code to promote source separation (e.g., recycling carts     1
   built into mailbox centers in multiple residential communities).
  2. Project provides recycling plans to recycle 90% of construction and demolition  1
   debris.
   3. Project utilizes significant deconstruction in lieu of demolition such as
  utilizing deconstruction for reuse of wood in lieu of recycling and preserving     2
   special architectural features for reuse (e.g., molding, doors, brackets, windows,
   etc.).
  4. Project landscaping contains sustainable plantings and plant spacing guidelines 1
   to reduce the generation of green waste over the life of the project.
G. Streets (Maximum 5 Points):                                                         
   1. Points shall be awarded on the basis of the overall condition of the streets
   fronting the project as well as streets surrounding the project. The overall
   conditions include the structural ability of the street to handle increased
  traffic loads, the width of the streets surrounding the proposed project pursuant   
   to the general plan, and the overall need for general maintenance and improvements
   completed by the developer for the streets surrounding the proposed project. Point
   allocations shall not include routine development requirements to improve the
   section of the adjacent streets fronting the development to the street centerline.
   The limits for analysis of such streets surrounding the project shall be to the
   nearest intersection of a collector or larger street, or within 1/4 mile (1,320
  feet) from the development boundary, whichever distance is less. If surrounding     
   streets within these limits are at specified structural standards, points shall be
   awarded as though the development has made such improvements.
  2. Points shall be awarded as follows:                                             Points
         a. Project is adjacent to and/or improves surrounding streets to the defined
    limits that includes widening streets to general plan standards, and            5
      reconstruction or resurfacing of the entire roadway within the defined limits
      to meet specified structural standards; or
         b. Project is adjacent to and/or improves surrounding streets to the defined
    limits that includes reconstruction or resurfacing of the entire roadway within 4
      the defined limits to the existing width of the street to meet specified
      structural standards; or
         c. Project is adjacent to and/or improves streets fronting the project to
    the defined limits that includes reconstruction or resurfacing of the entire    2
      roadway width fronting the project to meet specified structural standards.
       d. Shoulder grading to improve drainage.                                  1
       e. Enhanced landscaping, planting of larger street trees.                 1
       f. Installation of master planned traffic signals.                        2
       g. Installation of master planned storm drainage facilities.              2
       h. Project incorporates walking paths and/or bikeways into project.       1
H. Schools (Maximum 10 Points):                                                        
  1. Project located within safe walking distance of an elementary school, as        4
   defined by the school district.
  2. Project located within safe walking distance of a junior high school, as        3
   defined by the school district.
  3. Project located within safe walking distance of a high school, as defined by    3
   the school district.
   4. Upon completion and occupancy of the project, unsafe pedestrian access exists
  or will exist from the project to any school serving the project, as determined by -3
   the school district.
  5. Project uses 1 or more school service levels declared impacted pursuant to      -10
   school district policy.
I. Parks (Maximum 2 Points):                                                           
  1. Project located within 1/2 mile of a developed public park.                     2
  2. Project located within 3/4 of a mile of a developed public park.                1
  3. Project located within 1/2 mile of a city owned undeveloped park site.          1
 
(Ord. 2672 § 1, 2007)
19.12.050: TRACT DESIGN, ARCHITECTURE AND CONSTRUCTION:
   Points
    (Maximum: 72)
                                                                                    Points
                                                                                   (Maximum:
                                                                                    72)
A. Architectural Design (Maximum 10 Points):                                         
   Elevations shall be evaluated and incremental points awarded based upon design
   quality, consistency with neighborhood, and durability and appearance of
  exterior construction materials. Elements adding points include quality and      0 to 10
   durability of roofing materials, elevations of all sides of structures with
   particular emphasis on elevations facing public rights of way, orientation and
   impact of garages, and inclusion of neighborhood entry statements.
B. Energy Conservation And Savings (Maximum 5 Points):                               
  1. Project utilizes solar hot water panels capable of providing 50% or more of   1
   hot water utilized.
  2. Project utilizes photovoltaic cells to provide estimated 75% of electrical    2
   demand.
  3. Project utilizes a combination of energy conservation features, including,     
   but not limited to, the following:
     a. Use of double pane windows throughout the residence, insulation that    1
   exceeds minimum standards and shade trees.
     b. Project utilizes reflective roof coatings, awnings or window covers and 1
   skylights to light several rooms of each residence.
     c. Residences utilize passive design and architecture to further reduce    1
   energy consumption in the winter and summer.
  4. Project has 100% of homes Energy Star qualified.                              1
C. Leadership In Energy And Environmental Design (LEED) (Maximum 6 Points):          
  1. Certified level LEED certification from the U.S. Green Building Council.      2
  2. Silver level LEED certification from the U.S. Green Building Council.         3
  3. Gold level LEED certification from the U.S. Green Building Council.           5
  4. Platinum level LEED certification from the U.S. Green Building Council.       6
   Points allotted for LEED certification require the submittal of a copy of the
  LEED application, a letter from the LEED for homes provider attesting to the      
   applicant working with them to secure LEED certification and a copy of the LEED
   rating system checklist.
D. Site And Grading Design (Maximum 11 Points):                                      
   1. Grading design shall be evaluated and incremental points awarded for lot
  arrangement, preservation or improvement of existing site topography, design of   
   foundation and floor systems as well as routing of streets that tend to reduce
   grading to a level substantially less than legally permitted as follows:
     a. Grading is limited to the minimum needed to accommodate streets, drivewa5s
   and building pads; or
      b. Grading maintains the basic site topography and reduces grading to a level
   substantially less than legally permitted by contouring foundation and floor
  systems, routing of streets and circulation, contouring pads, tying in with      4
   natural landforms and maintaining landforms to the extent reasonably possible;
   or
      c. Grading maintains the basic site topography and minimizes grading so that
  grading is not imposing on adjacent properties and grade differential between    2
   the project and adjacent property does not exceed 5 feet at the adjoining
   property lines.
   2. Site design shall be evaluated and incremental points awarded based upon
  favorable orientation of units, which includes a combination of variable          
   setbacks, provision of open spaces, preservation of special views, preservation
   of ridgelines and scenic vistas, solar access and unusual privacy as follows:
      a. Site does not utilize variable setbacks, does not utilize open space areas
  to improve aesthetics, does not take advantage of special views, grades or       -4
   impacts ridgelines or scenic vistas; or
     b. Site utilizes variable setbacks, provides for integration of open space 2
   areas, and provides unusual privacy; or
      c. Site has favorable orientation of units, which includes a combination of
  variable setbacks, provision of open spaces, preservation of special views,      4
   preservation of ridgelines and scenic vistas, solar access and unusual privacy.
   3. Project eliminates ecologically sensitive areas that exist on the site such
  as a floodplain, major natural drainage, swales, unstable soils and steep        -2
   slopes.
  4. Project preserves ecologically sensitive areas that exist on the site such as 2
   a floodplain, major natural drainage, swales, unstable soils and steep slopes.
  5. Where appropriate street pattern tends toward curvilinear design rather than  1
   a simple grid system.
E. Circulation (Maximum 7 Points):                                                   
  1. Avoidance of conflict with neighboring street intersections except as         2
   required by general plan.
  2. Special consideration for residential privacy and pedestrian safety (use of   3
   cul-de-sacs, three-way intersections and similar amenities).
  3. 2 or more access roads for public safety service.                             2
F. Landscaping (Maximum 10 Points):                                                  
  1. Elimination of existing ornamental trees and basic landforms (destruction of  -3
   existing ornamental trees or landforms results in minus points).
  2. Preservation of existing ornamental trees and basic landforms.                3
   3. Points are awarded under this category for increments in quality, size and
   variety of landscaping, and for screening of ugly or undesirable features. Use
   of drought tolerant or native plant materials, automatic irrigation systems with
  assured maintenance, custom landscaping on individual lots, or special            
   landscaping adjacent to collector or arterial streets will result in additional
   points. Unusually abundant and mature planting and screening is required for
   maximum credit.
   Project meets minimum legal requirements for landscaping, provides minimum size
  trees (15 gallon) and shrubs (1 and 5 gallon), utilizes insufficient quantities  -3
   to enhance front yard areas, provides no automatic irrigation system, and/or
   uses inappropriate plant materials; or
   Project exceeds minimum legal requirements for landscaping by providing a
   variety of tree types and varieties (includes 24 inch box trees), shrub types
  and varieties (5 gallon and larger), a variety of ground cover, utilizes         3
   sufficient quantities to enhance all front yard areas, provides automatic
   irrigation systems, uses appropriate plant materials; or
   Project exceeds minimum legal requirements for landscaping by providing a
   variety of tree types and varieties (includes 24 inch box trees and larger),
   shrub types and varieties (5 gallon and larger), a variety of ground cover,
  utilizes sufficient quantities to enhance all front yard areas, provides         5
   automatic irrigation systems, uses appropriate plant materials to include
   drought tolerant or native plant materials, incorporates special plantings at
   gateways to the project and along major arterials within the project; or
   Project exceeds minimum legal requirements for landscaping by providing a
   variety of tree types and varieties (includes 24 inch box trees and larger),
   shrub types and varieties (5 gallon and larger), a variety of ground cover to
   include sod within all front yard areas, utilizes sufficient quantities to
  enhance all front yard areas, provides automatic irrigation systems to include   7
   drip systems as appropriate, uses appropriate plant materials to include drought
   tolerant or native plant materials, incorporates special plantings at gateways
   to the project and along major arterials within the project, provides complete
   landscaping for the entire site to include rear yards.
  4. Use of decorative masonry walls around perimeter of project.                  1
   5. Use of decorative masonry walls around perimeter of project that includes
  features such as pilasters, variations of wall fascia, and/or variations of      2
   materials.
  6. Use of decorative masonry walls around perimeter of project and throughout    3
   the project separating all private yards.
   7. Covenants, conditions and restrictions establishing a homeowners'
  association, a community facilities district and/or other legal mechanism to     2
   ensure both on and off site maintenance of all landscaped areas.
  8. Aesthetic treatment of WQMP treatments into the landscape palette.            1
G. Open Space (Maximum 5 Points):                                                    
  1. For multiple-family and planned residential developments the following         
   criteria apply:
     a. Open Space:                                                              
   (1) Amount of common open space exceeds minimum standards of zone by 10%; or   1
   (2) Amount of common open space exceeds minimum standards of zone by 25%; or   2
   (3) Amount of common open space exceeds by 50% or more the minimum standards   3
     of zone.
     b. Recreation Amenities:                                                    
     (1) Private recreation facilities are provided beyond minimum legal
   requirements with passive recreational facilities such as benches, tables,     1
     open areas, community gardens and active areas such as fields, tot lots and
     exercise areas.
     (2) Substantial private recreation facilities are provided and overall
   recreational amenities well exceed minimum legal requirements such as the      2
     inclusion of swimming pools, clubhouses, and tennis courts.
   (3) Project develops and maintains a local or regional trail.                  1
   (4) Project incorporates citrus (minimum 1 acre) into site open space.         1
  2. For single-family detached projects the city recognizes that open space is a   
   unique issue and the following criteria apply:
     a. Open Space:                                                              
   (1) 50% of the lots in the project exceed by 10% the minimum lot area          1
     requirement of the zone.
     (2) 50% of the lots in the project exceed by 20% the minimum requirements of   2 for
   the zone in one of the following categories: a) lot area; b) front yard; c)    each
     rear yard.                                                                     category
   (3) Project develops and maintains a local or regional trail.                  1
   (4) Project incorporates citrus (minimum 1 acre) into site open space.         1
     b. View Protection:                                                         
   (1) Project obstructs or blocks views of an adjacent development and           -2
     negatively impacts views within the subdivision.
   (2) Protection of views of an adjacent development and preservation of views   2
     within the subdivision.
H. Preservation Of Agriculture (Maximum 10 Points):                                  
   1. Project has preserved agricultural lands by utilization of transfer of
  development rights, planned residential development permit process, or other     5
   process regulated and controlled by the city.
  2. Project did not require the rezoning of agriculturally zoned land within 1    2
   year prior to application.
  3. Project will not be located adjacent to an agricultural preserve.             4
  4. Project will be located in immediate vicinity of land under Williamson act    -2
   contract.
I. Preservation Of Cultural And Historical Resources (Maximum 5 Points):             
  1. Preservation of historically significant resources, including buildings,      2/feature
   walls, cut stone curbing, or landscaping.
  2. Project does adversely impact character or setting of any historical or       -2
   cultural resource in close proximity to or within the project.
  3. Project does not adversely impact character or setting of any historical or   2
   cultural resource in close proximity to or within the project.
  The recommendations of the city's historic and scenic preservation commission     
   shall be a prerequisite to a point award pursuant to this subsection.
J. Art In Public Places (Maximum 3 Points):                                          
  1. Project incorporates public art having a value of 1/4% to 1/2% of building    1
   valuation of the project.
  2. Project incorporates public art having greater than 1/2% but less than 1% of  2
   building valuation of the project.
  3. Project incorporates public art having a value equal to 1% or more of         3
   building valuation of the project.
 
(Ord. 2672 § 1, 2007)
19.12.060: VERY LOW AND LOW INCOME AND SENIOR CITIZEN HOUSING:
 
                                                           Points (Maximum: 20)
   Project with 15% dwelling units restricted for very low
A. or low income persons at prices as established by the   2/unit
   United States department of housing and urban
   development.
B. Project with 90% or more of the dwelling units          6
   restricted for senior citizen persons.
 
   C.   For a project to receive points for senior citizen housing, senior
residency shall be established and restricted in accordance with federal law.
   D.   For a project to receive points hereunder, the project applicant shall
file a detailed, written statement indicating the proposed method of providing
such units and shall enter into a restrictive covenant with the city to ensure
the same. In addition, the favorable recommendation of the city's planning
commission shall be a prerequisite to the award of any points hereunder. (Ord.
2751, 2011)
19.12.070: PHASED PROJECTS:
 
                                                                     Points
Project has completed 1 or more phases under an approved and recorded
final map but requires additional development allocations for         5
completion.
 
(Ord. 2672 § 1, 2007)
CHAPTER 19.16
PROCEDURE FOR DEVELOPMENT ALLOCATION
SECTION:
19.16.010: Prerequisites And Entities Assigning Points
19.16.020: Application For Development Allocations
19.16.030: Filing And Allocation Award Dates
19.16.040: Application; Review And Evaluation Period
19.16.050: Allocation; Council Procedures
19.16.060: Allocation Resolution Of Tie Scores
19.16.070: Alteration Of Approved Projects
19.16.080: Transfer Of Allocations
19.16.090: Expiration Of Allocations
19.16.100: Water And Sewer Connections Outside City
19.16.010: PREREQUISITES AND ENTITIES ASSIGNING POINTS:
   A.   Tentative Approval Required: In order to assure that a project is in
final approval form, as required by proposition R, the project shall be
environmentally assessed and tentatively approved by the planning commission
and city council before an application for development allocations can be
filed.
   B.   Point Assignments: The planning commission will assign points in the
following categories:
      1.   Consistency with zone classifications and standards;
      2.   Architectural design variety;
      3.   Site and grading design;
      4.   Circulation;
      5.   Landscaping;
      6.   Open space.
   C.   Point Assignment Categories: The city staff will assign points in the
following categories:
      1.   Relationship to public services;
      2.   Preservation of agriculture;
      3.   Preservation of cultural and historical resources;
      4.   Low and moderate income housing.
   D.   Schools Category: The Redlands Unified School District ("district")
will assign points in the schools category. (Ord. 1843 § 3(A), 1984: prior code
art. 940)
19.16.020: APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT ALLOCATIONS:
   A.   Following environmental review and tentative approval of the project by
the city, the applicant shall submit an application for development allocations
on a form provided by the planning department.
   B.   Applications do not require the preparation of final engineering or
construction plans in order to be considered; however, all required information
must be of sufficient detail to clearly illustrate the development proposal.
   C.   Incomplete or partial applications will not be accepted. Only one
application is allowed per allocation period on the same property. To enable
the city to review projects as fairly as possible, the application must
describe how the proposed project satisfies the criteria of chapter 19.12 of
this title. A detailed description in the application is important because the
applicant, unless there are no other competing projects at the time allocations
are sought pursuant to this chapter, will have no further opportunity to
explain how the development in question satisfies the criteria of this title.
(Ord. 2593 § 1, 2005: Ord. 1843 § 3(B), 1984: prior code art. 940)
19.16.030: FILING AND ALLOCATION AWARD DATES:
   A.   Subject to temporary arrangements for vested rights projects, one
hundred (100) development allocations shall be awarded per quarter. The
allocation filing and award schedule shall be no more than:
 
Application Deadline Allocation By Number Of Units
January 15           March 30      117
April 15             June 30       117
July 15              September 15  117
October 15           December 30   All remaining available units
 
   B.   Prior to the closing date, plans and written material submitted as part
of an application are not open for public review; however, after the closing
date has passed, all material that has been submitted as part of an application
is open for public review. (Ord. 2036 § 6, 1988: Ord. 1891 § 4, 1985: Ord. 1843
§ 3(C), 1984: prior code art. 940)
19.16.040: APPLICATION; REVIEW AND EVALUATION PERIOD:
   A.   When an application has been determined to be complete and timely
filed, it shall be reviewed by city staff and representatives of the local
school district for subsequent submission and recommendation to the city's
planning commission. City planning staff shall meet with representatives of the
various city departments and appropriate commissions to review each project
application and assign numerical values based on the criteria contained in
chapter 19.12 of this title. After an application is submitted to the planning
commission for an allocation, the development project that is the subject of
that application shall not be altered by the applicant except as provided in
subsection C of this section.
   B.   Following the review period, the city planning staff shall issue an
evaluation of all projects requesting development allocations, with numerical
values assigned to each. The report assigning numerical values to each project
shall be open to public review prior to the actual allocation awards by the
city council.
   C.   If, after the review by staff and the planning commission, a project
has failed to obtain the required number of points to receive allocations, that
project applicant may revise its development application, based on input from
city staff and the planning commission, in an attempt to enhance the
development project and obtain additional points prior to review by the city
council. This opportunity to revise a project application to obtain additional
points shall only be available to a project if that project applicant is the
sole entity seeking allocations and the allocations are sought during the final
quarter of the year. (Ord. 2593 § 2, 2005: Ord. 1843 § 3(D), 1984: prior code
art. 940)
19.16.050: ALLOCATION; COUNCIL PROCEDURES:
   A.   At a public meeting, the city council shall evaluate all recommended
point assignments, hear from the applicant and the general public if requested,
and award the development allocations pursuant to this title. Projects
receiving ninety (90) points will be considered for awards, with higher
priority being given to projects with higher point values. A maximum of thirty
five (35) development allocations may be awarded to any project in any single
allocation period, unless this limit and the total successful applications
results in less than the scheduled number of development allocations being
awarded. If the latter occurs, the excess allocations may be awarded to
successful projects applying for more than thirty five (35) allocations.
   B.   The decision of the city council on development allocation awards is
final. (Ord. 2036 § 7, 1988: Ord. 2007 § 1, 1987: Ord. 1891 § 5, 1985: Ord.
1843 § 3(E), 1984: prior code art. 940)
19.16.060: ALLOCATION RESOLUTION OF TIE SCORES:
Should more than one project receive the same passing point score under the
provisions of this title, but insufficient development allocations are
available to provide both projects with their requested totals, each project
will receive an equitably prorated share of the remaining allocations, based on
initial applications. (Ord. 1843 § 3(F), 1984: prior code art. 940)
19.16.070: ALTERATION OF APPROVED PROJECTS:
   A.   The council may set guidelines by resolution to allow the alteration of
a project in any manner which would not have resulted in the assignment of
fewer points if the alteration had been incorporated into the original approved
application.
   B.   Such a review of altered approved projects shall be based upon the
ordinance in effect at the time of the original point allocation for the
project. (Ord. 1843 § 3(G), 1984: prior code art. 940)
19.16.080: TRANSFER OF ALLOCATIONS:
A development allocation is awarded under this title based upon the particular
location and characteristics of a specific development proposal on a specific
site, and may not therefore be transferred to another site or used for another
development proposal. However, a development allocation may be transferred with
city council approval to successors in interest who acquire title to the
specific development proposal on the specified site, upon proof satisfactory to
the city attorney that legal title has so passed. (Ord. 1843 § 3(H), 1984:
prior code art. 940)
19.16.090: EXPIRATION OF ALLOCATIONS:
A development allocation expires and is of no further effect when the
underlying tentative map or use permit expires. This section applies only to
residential development allocations awarded after May 15, 1984. (Ord. 1843 § 3
(I), 1984: prior code art. 940)
19.16.100: WATER AND SEWER CONNECTIONS OUTSIDE CITY:
In implementing section 6 of proposition R (section
 19.04.060 of this title), no allotments shall be made to projects which
conflict with the intent of proposition R or the general plan, as interpreted
by the city council. (Ord. 1885 § 1, 1985: Ord. 1843 § 3(J), 1984: prior code
art. 940)
CHAPTER 19.20
EMERGENCY SITUATIONS OR IMPACTION OF PUBLIC FACILITIES ON SERVICES
SECTION:
19.20.010: Emergency Or Impaction Conditions; Development Approval And Water Or
Sewer Connection Limitations
19.20.010: EMERGENCY OR IMPACTION CONDITIONS; DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL AND WATER OR
SEWER CONNECTION LIMITATIONS:
   A.   No further development approvals of any kind, or sewer or water
connections, shall be approved by the city when an emergency situation or
impaction of public facilities or services has been identified by the
appropriate agency. Such conditions shall be any one or more of the following:
      1.   Notification of a city department, other public agency, or the
district that its ability to meet the public needs is impacted. Such notice
shall be presented to the city council in writing, and be followed with a
presentation by the impacted agency to the city council in public sessions, to
provide detailed, clear and convincing evidence of an emergency or impaction.
In the event of notification by the district, the requirements of chapter 13.84
of this code shall apply in addition to the above;
      2.   Before the close of filing for an allocation period, purveyors of
city and school services shall notify the city manager if their particular
service would be impacted by the award of development allocations to the
applications to be considered that period. If emergency or impaction is
declared and concurred with by the city council, no development allocation
shall be approved without attaching a requirement that no building permit shall
be issued until documentation has been received from the declaring agency that
such impaction has been adequately mitigated. This requirement shall remain in
force until the declaration of emergency or impaction is rescinded by the
declaring agency, or as otherwise determined by the city council by resolution;
      3.   Any other danger to the public safety or welfare which the city
council determines to exist for the purpose of this section.
   B.   If the dwelling unit(s) under consideration is/are outside the city
limits, any and all mitigating measures arising from declaration of emergency
or impaction shall apply if the city supplies water and/or sewer services, and
if a water and/or sewer emergency or impaction exists.
   C.   In the event the city council concurs that such emergency or impaction
exists, no further development approvals of any kind, and/or sewer or water
connection permits, shall be issued, except when approved by a majority of the
city council for each applicant considered individually, after it has
determined that the specific project will not contribute additionally to the
existing emergency or impaction situation, or upon notice by the appropriate
agency that the specific project has adequately mitigated its additional
impact. (Ord. 1843 § 4, 1984)
CHAPTER 19.24
VESTED RIGHTS PROJECTS UNDER MEASURE N
SECTION:
19.24.010: Exemption Of Vested Rights Projects From Restrictions Of Measure N
19.24.020: Yearly Limit On Building Permits
19.24.030: Interim Allocation Of Building Permits
19.24.040: Standard Agreement With Vested Rights Projects
19.24.010: EXEMPTION OF VESTED RIGHTS PROJECTS FROM RESTRICTIONS OF MEASURE N:
Section 17 of measure N as adopted by the voters in 1987 states that the
measure shall not apply to any development project which has obtained a vested
right to develop as of the effective date of the initiative, December 11, 1987.
This is construed by the city council to mean that projects found by the city
council after public hearing to have obtained vested rights by December 11,
1987, are exempt from the revised competitive evaluation, the reduced yearly
limits, and all other new requirements imposed by measure N. These vested
rights projects remain subject to the provisions of proposition R and all other
land use laws and regulations in effect in the city at the time of their
various required approvals. (Ord. 2031 § 1, 1988)
19.24.020: YEARLY LIMIT ON BUILDING PERMITS:
The council finds that based on the expressed will of the citizenry as set
forth in measure N in 1987, it is in the best interests of the city of Redlands
that new dwelling units be limited to as near four hundred (400) per year as
possible. City staff is hereby instructed to take all reasonably necessary
steps to carry out this dwelling unit limit. (Ord. 2031 § 1, 1988)
19.24.030: INTERIM ALLOCATION OF BUILDING PERMITS:
In order to assure full use of vested rights under measure N and California
law, building permits should be available when projects deemed by the city
council to be vested are otherwise legally ready to obtain them. However, it is
not appropriate to hold up all other development projects in case those vested
projects might come forward and use up the full four hundred (400) building
permits available under measure N in any given calendar year. The council finds
that some minimal number of building permits should be made periodically
available for qualified but nonvested development projects to assure a
continuous supply of housing for our citizens and to protect the reasonable
development expectations of landowners filing for land use approvals and
entitlements within the city. Therefore, on an interim basis, a number of
building permits per month to be set by council resolution pursuant to this
section shall be made available to otherwise qualified but nonvested projects.
This number may be changed or deleted entirely by subsequent council resolution
if the pace of development so requires, or if the four hundred (400) unit
yearly cap imposed by measure N shows danger of being exceeded or is actually
exceeded by a combination of vested and nonvested projects. (Ord. 2031 § 1,
1988)
19.24.040: STANDARD AGREEMENT WITH VESTED RIGHTS PROJECTS:
During this interim period the city attorney is instructed to develop a
standard agreement and begin negotiating with those projects deemed by this
council to have vested rights to determine the rate and number of building
permits needed by those projects. Once the total need and pace is known, the
council shall reexamine the monthly limits it has set by resolution and revise
those units as required to meet insofar as is possible the yearly limit of four
hundred (400) new dwelling units within the city. (Ord. 2031 § 1, 1988)
 
